THE UNICORN CHRONICLES

BRUCE COVILLE

SCHOLASTIC
HARDCOVER

Scholastic Inc.
New York

Copyright © 1994 by Bruce Coville.
All rights reserved.
Published by Scholastic Inc.
SCHOLASTIC HARDCOVER is
a registered trademark
of Scholastic Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced
in whole or in part, or stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without written permission of the publisher.
For information regarding permission,
write to Scholastic Inc.,
555 Broadway, New York, NY 10012
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Coville, Bruce.
Into the land of the unicorns / Bruce Coville
p.
cm.
(The Unicorn chronicles: bk. 1)
Summary: Having jumped into the fantasy land of Luster,
Cara joins Lightfoot the unicorn in the search
for Queen Arabella Skydancer.
ISBN 0-590-45955-4
•s/[\. Unicorns — Fiction. 2. Fantasy]
I. Title. II. Series. Coville, Bruce
Unicorn chronicles: bk. 1.
PZ7.C8344ln 1994
[Fie] — dc20
94-16892
CIP
AC
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

4 5 6 7 8 9/9

Designed by Dawn Antoniello
Printed in the U.S.A.
First printing, September 1994

37

For Cara

CONTENTS
1. The Hunter
2. Leap of Faith
3. Luster
4. In the Cave
5. Lightfoot
6. The Queen's Amulets
7. Journey
8. Delvers
9. The Hunted
10. The Tinker
11. The Cart
12. Dragonpath to Grimwold
13. Grimwold
14. The Story Room
15. A Tale of Blood and Sorrow
16. The Scrying Pool
17. Upward
18. In Firethroat's Cave
19. Family Matters
20. Three Drops of Blood
21. Things Broken, Things Mended

1
8
15
24
30
38
48

55
63
70
79
88
97
103
110
118
124
132
139
148

155

THE HUNTER
ramma, is that man following us?"
Cara's grandmother glanced over her
shoulder, toward the library. When she
turned back, her face was twisted in a look
that Cara had never seen before. Tightening
her grip on the girl's hand, the old woman began to
walk faster.
Cara felt a sudden knot in her stomach. She had
expected Grandmother Morris to say, "Don't be silly,
child!" — as she usually did when Cara expressed
some unlikely fear. She certainly hadn't expected her
to act as if she took that fear seriously.
Stretching her legs to keep up, Cara asked, "Where
are we going?" She tried not to whine.
"I'm not sure," muttered Grandmother Morris.
1

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

"Are we in danger?"
"Yes."
Cara's stomach grew even tighter. "How do you
know?"
"Hush, child! I don't have breath to waste on
talking."
Clutching her new library books, Cara bumped
against bundles and packages as they scurried
through the crowds of last-minute shoppers. A light
snow had started to fall a little while ago, and it had
had just enough time to cover the bright holiday
decorations, making everything look crisp and white.
Though it was hard to imagine any harm coming to
them in this time of good cheer and fellowship, her
grandmother's fear was unmistakable — unmistakable, and catching.
"In here," said Grandmother Morris suddenly,
pulling Cara's arm to steer her to the right. They
went down a narrow street — little more than an
alley, really — and turned in through the side entrance of St. Christopher's.
Cara knew the church well. They had come here
often with Simon, her grandmother's gentleman
friend.
The building was dark and quiet inside. Grandmother Morris led the way to a pew near the back
of the sanctuary, where they huddled together while
the old woman caught her breath.
"I don't think he saw us come in," said Cara softly.
The statement had more of hope than reality in it.

THE HUNTER

She actually had no idea whether their pursuer had
seen them enter.
After a moment, Grandmother Morris removed a
chain from around her neck. "Put this on," she said,
handing it to Cara.
Cara's eyes widened. "Your special?" she asked.
This was almost more frightening than the problem
of the man who was following them. Grandmother
Morris's "special," as Cara had always referred to the
locket that dangled from the chain, had been offlimits for as long as she could remember. Despite
the times she had coveted the gold and crystal amulet, she could barely bring herself to take it from her
grandmother's hand. She felt accepting it would
somehow confirm that the world was twisting out of
shape.
"Take it," said her grandmother sternly. "Put it on.
You may need it before this is over."
"Before what is over?"
"No time to talk," hissed her grandmother. 'Take
it!"
Trying not to make a sound, Cara placed her books
on the pew. Then, reluctantly, she closed her hand
over the bauble. Her fingers began to tingle.
Beneath the amulet's crystal lid lay a tightly coiled
strand of white hair. "It came from a unicorn's
mane," her grandmother had told her when she was
little, and Cara had believed her until sometime
around second grade, when she finally understood
that unicorns were imaginary.

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

"What will I need it for?" she asked as she slipped
the chain over her head.
Grandmother Morris leaned forward and rubbed
her brow with her fingertips. "Do you think I'm
crazy?" she whispered.
Cara felt another twinge of fear. What kind of question is that? she wondered. Before she could decide
how to answer, they heard a step in the hall, followed
by the creak — ever so slight — of a door swinging
open. It was the same door, Cara was sure, that they
themselves had come through when they entered
the sanctuary.
Silence.
Was their hunter standing there, waiting for them?
To Cara's astonishment, her grandmother slid to
the floor, ducking her head so that it was hidden by
the pew in front of her. She tugged at Cara to indicate
she should do the same. When Cara had joined her,
the old woman began to move toward the center
aisle of the church. Cara followed. The pews were
too close together for them to drop to their knees
and crawl. They moved instead by a sort of scooting
method, until they came to the end of the pew. Then
her grandmother did drop to her hands and knees.
No sound yet from the open door where their
pursuer stood waiting. And no chance for Cara to
question her grandmother as to what was going on.
When they reached the back of the church, they
huddled together behind the last pew. Six or seven
feet ahead of them loomed a pair of large wooden
4

THE HUNTER

doors, impossible to open without drawing the attention of the pursuer. Cara stared at them the way
a traveler in the desert might stare at an unclimbable
glass wall behind which lay a pool of clear water.
They waited.
No sound from the front of the church. Was the
man still there? Or had he closed the door so silently
they hadn't heard and gone on to search elsewhere?
How long would they have to stay like this? Who was
he, anyway?
Cara trembled and tried not to cry as the questions
and the fear swept through her. Raising her hand to
her neck, she clutched the special. The feel of it
brought back an old memory, something she could
glimpse only in tatters and fragments. It was from
just before she had lost her parents. She had been
two, maybe three, years old, and very ill. Her grandmother had stayed by her bed for many hours. When
she had finally been forced by another emergency
to leave, she had acceded to Cara's pleading and left
the amulet behind.
It was the first and only time Cara had had the
special to herself. She had clutched it tightly as she
drifted in and out of fever dreams. And in that time,
as she tossed and moaned on the bed, something
had come to her. She remembered only a glimpse
of white and a sense of peace. Then something had
touched her, a touch that was fierce and hard, both
hot and cold at once. In that moment the fever had
broken.

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

That was all that remained to her of a memory
that had tugged and teased in the years that followed,
slowly fading from the surface, yet never leaving
altogether.
As she grew older, she told herself that it had been
a hallucination, a side effect of the fever. Yet whenever she thought of the incident, she had a sense of
something altogether unearthly having brushed her
life. At times she had even longed to be ill again, in
the hope that she might once more experience the
strange mystery of that night. She could certainly use
a little magic right now....
She blinked. How long had she been sitting here,
lost in memories? With some discomfort she realized
that her leg was going to sleep beneath her.
Grandmother Morris leaned close. In a voice so
soft that Cara could barely hear it, even though the
old woman's lips were brushing against her ear, she
wkLpered, "We have to get out of here. We're going
to crawl to those doors as silently as we can. I will
push one open. You go through first. Be ready to
run if I give the word."
Cara nodded. Hoping that her sleeping leg
wouldn't betray her, she tipped herself forward and
began to crawl. The beating of her heart seemed to
pound in her ears, the sound so loud she wondered
that it alone did not alert their pursuer.
Grandmother Morris was close behind her.
And what of the man who was stalking them? Was

THE HUNTER

he still here — or had he given up, leaving them to
fear nothing but shadows?
The smooth floor was cold beneath Cara's hands.
The door was warmer and carved with designs that
her fingertips couldn't quite decipher.
"Be ready," whispered Grandmother Morris.
Kneeling beside Cara, she began to push on the door.
Cara wedged her way into the opening, scarcely
daring to breathe. She was halfway across the threshold when her grandmother cried, "Run, Cara! Run!"
Springing to her feet, Cara bolted for the next set
of doors, the ones leading to the outside. She
grabbed the handles, then cried out in despair.
The doors were locked.

LEAP OF FAITH
ara turned, frantic with fear.
"This way," cried Grandmother Morris,
grabbing her hand.
They hurried through a small door at the
side of the foyer. Inside, a set of narrow
stairs spiraled up in a tight curve. Turning, Grandmother Morris shot the bolt in an old-fashioned latch.
They started upward.
They had gone about ten steps when Cara heard
someone slam into the door. The hunter! He
slammed into it again, and she realized he was not
just venting his anger; he was trying to break it down.
She didn't need her grandmother's urging to
move faster. Heart pounding, she climbed as fast as
she could, spiraling up into the darkness, ignoring
8

LEAP OF FAITH

the prickling of the pins and needles that tingled
along her leg.
They came to a small landing. Cara heard a click
as a dim light came on overhead. Her grandmother
was leaning against the wall, one hand still on the
light switch, the other pushing back loose strands of
her long gray hair.
A thick rope ran through the center of the room,
entering through a hole in the ceiling, leaving
through a hole in the floor.
Another crash below. This time they could hear
wood splintering. The door was not yet down, but
it was clear that it was not going to last much longer.
"Do you have the amulet?" asked her grandmother.
Cara nodded.
"Good. Hold fast to it, and listen to me. I am going
to ring the bell. It may bring help, but we can't be
sure that it will come in time to save the amulet."
The amulet? thought Cara. What about us?
"Here is what you must do," continued her grandmother. "Climb to the top of the tower. The roof is
flat, with a low wall surrounding it. Count the tolling
of the bell. On the twelfth stroke, press the amulet
tight to your chest and whisper, 'Luster, bring me
home.' Then..." The old woman faltered, closed her
eyes. Across her face moved a strange mixture of
fear and longing, joy and loss.
Cara shivered again, with a new kind of fear, unlike
that brought on by the pursuer.

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
"And then ... ?" she prompted.
Her grandmother flinched at the sound of another
crash from below. Turning to Cara, she looked her
full in the eyes. "Then," she whispered, "you must
jump."
Cara stared at her grandmother in disbelief. The
question the old woman had asked in the sanctuary— "Do you think I'm crazy?"—took on a new
and terrifying meaning. Before she could think of
what to say, they heard another crash from below.
"That door won't last much longer," whispered
Grandmother Morris. "He must not find the amulet.
Climb, Cara, for your life, and for more than you can
imagine. I have been there, my love, and it is wonderful. Do not be afraid. Hold the special. Count the
chimes. Throw yourself to the wind, and this I promise: You will see unicorns."
"But..."
Another crash from below.
"Climb!" urged her grandmother, flinging herself
on to the rope and pulling it down with all the weight
of her slender body. "Climb! The amulet must not
fall into his hands!"
"Who is he?" asked Cara.
The look of pain and sorrow that lanced through
her grandmother's eyes was heartstopping. The old
woman shook her head, as if driving away some
unwelcome thought. "There's no time for talk," she
replied, shouting to be heard above the tolling of
the bell. Suddenly the rope surged up, pulling her
10

LEAP OF FAITH

with it, lifting her feet from the floor. "Remember,"
she cried, "you must jump on the twelfth chime of
the bell! Don't lose track! Now go. Go!"
Cara turned and ran.
Another chime. And then her grandmother's
voice, calling one last request: "Cara! Find the Old
One. Tell her... tell her, 'The Wanderer is weary.' "
What Cara heard after that might have been a sob,
but it was lost in the third toll of the bell, and she
could not be certain.
Three strokes already. Cara ran faster, fearing she
might not reach the top of the tower before the
twelfth chime. At the thought, her footsteps faltered.
She was running as if she actually intended to jump.
Did she?
Could she?
Hand on the rail, she spiraled up through the
darkness, counting off the fourth and fifth chimes.
And their pursuer — was he running up the stairs
now, too? Running toward Grandmother Morris?
What if he caught her before she could toll the bell
the twelfth time? What then?
She was breathing in great gasps. The back of her
legs felt as if they were on fire. She heard the sixth
chime — or was it the seventh? No, it was the sixth;
it had to be the sixth. She mustn't lose count!
Her free hand, the one not on the rail, clutched
the amulet hanging from her neck. It felt warm. She
opened her fingers. To her astonishment, the amulet
was starting to glow.
11

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
The seventh chime. Seventh? It had to be the seventh, not the eighth.
The glow of the amulet grew brighter. She loosened her grip on it and light flowed from between
her fingers, bright enough to light her way as she
scurried up the worn, wooden stairs, spiraling, spiraling toward the top of the tower.
At the eighth toll of the bell — she was sure it was
the eighth — she came to a ladder. As she stepped
on the first rung, she heard a scuffle break out below
her, cries of anger from her grandmother and from
a deep male voice. She wanted to turn back, to help,
but her grandmother's urgent instructions had been
to keep the amulet away from the man.
Clambering up the ladder, she pushed with all her
might at the trapdoor on the top.
It wouldn't budge.
For a terrified moment she thought she would be
trapped. But a sudden cry of pain from her grandmother filled her with such rage that without realizing what she was doing she flung the door open.
Footsteps from below. He was coming after her!
And what of Grandmother Morris? What had he done
to her?
The bell tolled again. Cara smiled grimly. Whatever
had happened, her grandmother still had the
strength to work the rope. Cara couldn't let the old
woman down now.
She scrambled onto the roof of the tower, then

12

LEAP OF FAITH

stopped as a heavy male voice called from below,
"Wait! Cara Diana, wait!"
Terror froze her limbs. She had heard that voice
before. Where? Where?
A cold wind whipped around her. The snow had
turned from flakes to icy chips that stung her cheeks.
She stumbled to the edge of the roof. Her senses
reeled as she saw the white-covered world spread
out beneath her.
The tenth chime sounded.
Again her grandmother's question, "Do you think
I'm crazy?" caromed through her brain. The old
woman had to be crazy, telling her to throw herself
from the tower. Yet the amulet, casting its fierce glow
through the storm, said otherwise, said there was
magic afoot.
The next chime — the eleventh? — sounded as
she climbed onto the chest-high wall that circled the
roof.
Far below her, tiny dots were racing to get out of
the storm. Were any of them racing to the church,
racing to help her and her grandmother?
She braced herself, ready to jump — or at least
try — at the twelfth chime.
Silence.
Fear clutched her heart. Had she miscounted? Had
she missed the moment? If she jumped now would
she simply fall to her death? Racked by confusion,
she tottered on the wall, staring at the world so far

13

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

below. Cold fear wound its way through her body.
A sound behind her. The pursuer had made it to
the top of the stairs. Then the bell tolled once more,
the twelfth and final time, and ahead of her a ball of
light blossomed in the sky, its color the same spring
green as the light flowing from between her fingers.
Clutching the amulet, Cara whispered, "Luster,
bring me home!"
"Wait!" cried the man.
Snow whirled around her. The wind whipped
through her hair. Leaning forward, Cara threw herself from the tower.

14

3
LUSTER

I

he first rush, as she plummeted toward the
sidewalk, was terrible. But before she could
force a scream through her tightened
throat, she fell into the green light, which
^
swirled and twisted around her.
Then her fall was slow and strange, and though it
seemed to take a long time, it was a time like dreaming. Afterward, she could no more have said how
long the fall actually lasted than she could have numbered the stars in the sky.
Her landing was sudden but soft. She lay still for
a moment, staring at the sunny sky above her, wondering where it had come from. After another moment she closed her eyes, as if to shut out the

15

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

strangeness. Where was her grandmother? Where
the hunter, the church, the snow-covered city?
Where was she?
She took seven deep breaths, trying to calm herself. After a moment she realized she was lying on
something soft — moss, from the way it felt beneath
her fingers.
Moss?

She turned her head to the side. She was indeed
lying on a thick cushion of something that, if not
moss, was close to it. Ahead of her loomed huge
silver-barked trees, unlike any she had ever seen
before.
She cried out in fear at the sight. Though she knew
she had left her own world far behind, the proof of
that journey offered by the strange trees jolted her
like an electric shock. Only the fact that her grandmother had told her this would happen — at least,
told her she was going to fall into another world —
kept the wild panic fluttering in her chest from overwhelming her completely.
How was she to get home?
The thought surprised her. The truth was, home
itself would not have mattered much, were it not for
her grandmother. She had lived alone with Grandmother Morris since her parents, Ian and Martha
Hunter, had abandoned her. She had been three at
the time, and in the years that followed, she had
suffered her way through a series of humiliations in
school, picked on for everything from her deep red
16

LUSTER

hair to the fact that she had no parents — as if she
could do anything about either situation!
Many were the nights when, after crying herself
to sleep, she had dreamed of leaving her own world
behind and disappearing into the one she found in
books, particularly the collections of fairy tales —
The Blue Fairy Book, The Red Fairy Book, and
others — that she had dug out of her grandmother's
attic.
She looked around. Was that the kind of world
she had entered now?
Remembering the tales, she wondered if she
would find an old woman here in the woods. If so,
would she be a cruel witch, or a magical helper?
The question made her remember her grandmother's request: "Find the Old One. Tell her, 'The Wanderer is weary'"
Well, if that's what her grandmother wanted, then
the Old One, whoever she was, must not be too bad.
Now if she only had some idea of how to go about
looking for her!
After a moment, she realized she was hot. Standing, she shucked her winter coat. Still hot, she peeled
off the blue sweater Grandmother Morris had knit
for her the year before.
"That's better," she said, more to hear her own
voice than anything else.
It was better, she realized. Not only because she
was down to her preferred jeans and T-shirt, but
because the air itself was better, far purer and cleaner
17

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

than she was used to breathing. After several deep
breaths she found herself almost giddy with the
sweetness of it.
"I'm herel" she shouted.
Immediately she regretted the action. She had
hoped perhaps her grandmother had friends here
who were looking for her. But it suddenly occurred
to her that someone else, someone not so friendly,
might be seeking her as well.
With a sudden shiver, she wondered if the Hunter
would be able to cross to this world. Was he seeking
her even now? Biting her lip, she turned in a slow
circle. Save for a soft breeze rippling through the
leaves of the trees, she saw no sign of movement.
She repeated the circle, seeking a path, a sign,
anything that might show her the way she should
go next.
Nothing.
Fear began to rise in her again — fear not simply
of being lost, but of everything that had happened
this night. Or was it this day? Though it had been
dark when she had leaped from the tower, it was
now full light.
Part of her wanted to believe that the whole thing
was a dream; that she would soon wake, snug in her
bed, in her familiar, if somewhat nasty, world. Part
of her quaked with astonishment at what she knew
in her heart was real.
That astonishment increased as she began to look
more closely at the world into which she had fallen.
18

LUSTER

At her feet grew something that was clearly a flower.
Yet when she bent to examine it, the swollen purple
blossoms, covered with a fine silvery fuzz, were so
unlike anything she had ever seen that they sent a
shiver along her spine.
Draping her coat and sweater over her arm, she
walked around the edge of the clearing, searching
for a path.
The silvery bark of the trees had a blue undertone
that gave her the same kind of shiver the purple
flower had. The deep green leaves hanging from
their branches were round, smooth-edged, and
nearly the size of her hand — not really strange, yet
too different from any she had ever seen before to
feel comfortably familiar. Cara ran her fingers over
the smooth, peeling bark of a tree. To her surprise,
a smell like cinnamon filled the air.
She began to circle the clearing a second time,
feeling a growing sense of panic. If she could not
find a way to determine which direction to go, she
would have to enter the forest aimlessly.
Or should I just stay here, she wondered, and see
if anyone comes to get me?
She shook her head. She knew that staying in one
place if you were lost was the standard advice. But
it only made sense if you could assume someone
would be looking for you. She could hardly count
on that in this situation; more likely no one in this
world even knew she was here. Under the circumstances, waiting in one place to be found would be
19

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
nothing more than relying on luck. And if there was
one thing Grandmother Morris had taught her, it was
that you had to make your own luck if you were
going to survive in the world.
Halfway through her second circuit of the clearing
she heard a faint, crystalline sound. She paused, held
her breath, listened more carefully. Yes, there was
no mistaking it: running water.
She smiled. That would give her something to
head for. If she was going to find a path anyplace in
this forest, it would most likely be near a stream.
People always needed water.
With that thought, she struck off through the trees.
The soft forest floor smelled richly of leaves turning into soil. The forest itself was thick and deep,
and once out of the clearing she saw a great variety
of trees, many with gnarled trunks nearly as wide as
her bed was long. Fortunately the undergrowth was
sparse, so it was easy to wind her way among it. A
mossy substance, mostly green, but with patches of
brown, orange, and red, grew thickly on many of the
trunks. Other mosslike things hung like streamers
from the trees' lower limbs. Above them the weaving
of branch and leaf was so dense that only an occasional shaft of light pierced the gloom. Something
with bright wings fluttered past her.
She had often gone for walks in the woods with
her grandmother, but none of the places they had
visited had the sense of age that this one did; in no
place had the trees seemed so old, s o . . . dignified.
20

LUSTER

It was not long before she came to a laughing
stream. At once, she felt something begin to ease
inside her. Her grandmother had always told her that
if she was troubled she should find a place to sit by
the water, and this was about the most perfect "sit
by the water" spot she had ever seen. The stream,
about four feet wide, was so clear she could see
every leaf and pebble that lay beneath its surface.
Gurgling and chuckling to itself, it rolled between
mossy banks, here and there splashing around a polished brown stone that thrust above the surface.
She sat down on the bank. After a moment, she
took off her boots and socks and dangled her feet
in the water, which was cool, but not too cold for
comfort.
/ wish Grandmother Morris was here.
The thought threw her mind back to those last
moments in St. Christopher's. What had happened
after she jumped? Had help arrived? Was her grandmother all right? Or had the Hunter managed to hurt
her, even —
Cara clamped down on the thought, forcing it from
her mind. Her grandmother had to be all right.
Lifting the amulet over her head, she looked at it
again. Had the white hair coiled inside really come
from a unicorn's mane? Her mind reeled with the
thought, and again the strangeness of all that had
happened made her feel as if she were adrift on
some strange sea, with no shore in sight.
21

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Wiping away the single tear that rolled down her
cheek, she looked at the amulet.
"What is going on?" she asked, speaking as if it
could answer.
So intent was she on her fears that she didn't
notice the slender figure that slipped from the shadows and began to slink toward her. She continued
to stare at the amulet until a pale hand darted over
her shoulder and tried to snatch it from her fingers.
She spun in anger, then screamed at what she saw.
Standing before her, clutching at the amulet, trying
to tear it from her hand, was a manlike creature
slightly more than three feet tall. He had an enormous head, and eyes that were large even for that.
A few strands of brownish hair straggled over a scalp
the color of a mushroom. His small nose turned up
so sharply that it looked like little more than a pair
of holes in the middle of his face.
The creature wore a dark green tunic, belted at
the center, and brown boots that reached almost to
his knobby knees. His lean arms rippled with
muscles.
"Skraxis!" he shrilled. He grabbed at the amulet
again, this time managing to tangle his fingers in the
chain.
"Let go!" cried Cara desperately. The amulet was
her only link to her own world. If the creature managed to steal it, she might never find her way back.
For a moment, the two of them struggled over the

22

LUSTER

amulet, the pale creature hissing and shrieking, Cara
grim and silent.
Finally she yanked so hard that she managed to
wrench the chain from the monster's grasp. The sudden release caused her to topple backward. Still
clutching the amulet, she smashed against a sharp
rock. Pain washed over her like a wave as she fell
into the rushing stream.
Shrieking with rage, the creature came splashing
after her. Dazed by pain, Cara was unable to fight
back as he grabbed her by the neck and began slowly
forcing her head below the surface.
The cold water kept her alert, even as blackness
began to swim before her eyes. Give him the amulet!
screamed a voice in her brain. If you don't, you're
going to die!
But some other part of her, aware that her grandmother had sent her here to keep the amulet from
falling into the wrong hands, forced her to cling to
the golden chain.
The darkness grew deeper, more solid around her.
Suddenly the fire in her lungs drove her to a final
burst of energy. Thrashing wildly, she tried to break
free.
Her efforts made no difference; the creature continued to hold her down. At last there was no energy
left, and she felt herself sinking into oblivion.

23

4
IN THE CAVE
hen Cara woke, she was in a cave. Almost instantly, as if by reflex, her fingers
flew to her throat.
>-. iMPWV A The amulet was gone!
V V
The horror of that discovery distracted her for a moment from the hot patch of pain
throbbing in her side. She would be trapped here
forever. Even worse, she had let her grandmother
down.
She clamped down on the panic. She was alive,
and that was the first thing. Grandmother Morris
always said if you were alive, you had a chance. Suddenly she remembered her battle with the goblinlike
creature in the forest. How in heaven's name had
she gotten from there to here?
24

IN THE CAVE

Where was "here," for that matter?
Trying to stay calm, she forced herself to start
taking stock of her surroundings. Dim light from a
single torch showed her that she was lying on a bed
made of moss and leaves. She turned sideways, her
movement causing the "mattress" to release a faint
odor of flowers. It was pleasant. Unfortunately, moving also caused a wave of dizziness.
She closed her eyes, counted to ten, then opened
them again. Slowly. Trying not to cry, she began to
look about the cave.
The rocky walls were bare, save for a large decoration made from the boughs of a flowering bush
or tree. Below the boughs stood a huge, rough-hewn
chair. Its seat was rounded up on the edges, and the
depression in the center was filled with moss and
leaves, much the same as her bed.
Then her eyes fell upon the occupant of the cave.
She gasped, her reaction an equal mixture of surprise and fear.
More than anything, he looked like a bear that
had started to become a man but hadn't finished
the process. Tall and broad shouldered, he had a
shaggy coat of fur that covered most of his body,
and a short, broad muzzle that ended in a black
nose.
He started toward Cara. She gasped, and if she had
had the strength, she would have bolted from her
bed. Lacking that, she tried to convince herself that
if the creature had wanted to hurt her he would
25

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

already have done so. But was he her rescuer or
simply a jailer?
He bent over to peer into her face, and the unexpected intelligence in his large black eyes made
her shiver. Broad nostrils quivering, he put a rough,
fur-covered paw against her cheek. In a voice only
a half tone from a growl he said, "Garzim?"
"What?"
"Garzim?" he repeated. Then, with a look of frustration, he turned away.
Cara pushed herself to her elbows, trying desperately to think of some way to communicate with
the creature. Always eager to help, she had been
upset by the look of disappointment on his face when
he realized he could not speak to her.
He returned a moment later, carrying the base of
a thick branch. When he held it in front of her she
saw that it had been hollowed out to hold liquid.
The manbear grunted and thrust it toward her.
She hesitated, then took the crude cup and drank
from it.
The manbear smiled — a somewhat frightening
sight, given the large, sharp teeth he thus displayed — and grunted approval.
Cara smiled, too, partly because she felt she had
made positive contact with the creature, partly because what she had expected to be water was actually
a tea of some sort. It tasted quite wonderful. Even
better, it soon made her feel good enough that she
tried to get to her feet.
26

IN THE CAVE

That movement was a mistake. A wave of dizziness
overwhelmed her and with a groan she sank back
against the bed.
The creature made a sound of distress and bent
over her.
"Don't worry," she mumbled. "I'm all right."
The absurdity of claiming she was all right when
she couldn't even stand made her remember her
grandmother's frequent claim that she, Cara, would
claim she was all right even if she belonged in a
hospital. Though she tried to hold it in, the thought
of her grandmother caused a tear to trickle down
her cheek. Where is grandmother now? she
wondered.
"Guh-izz glack?" growled her new friend.
Though his voice was rough, and Cara had no idea
what the words meant, she could tell they expressed
sympathy. Hardly thinking about it, she reached out
and put her hand on the creature's thick, furry arm.
"Guh-izz glack," he repeated, more gently this
time.
Then — so quickly that she later decided it must
have been an effect of the drink the creature had
given her — she fell back to sleep.
When the pain in her side woke her again, the
cave was even darker than before. The silvery light
filtering in at what she now realized was the entrance
of the cave made her think it must be night.
How long had she slept? And where was her new
27

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

friend? The moment of loneliness that overwhelmed
her was quickly replaced by a tremor of fear. With
her protector gone, could the goblinlike creature
that had attacked her in the woods trace her here
and try again?
Her fear doubled when she heard something
move at the front of the cave. She prepared to leap
from the bed, hoping that her legs would hold her.
At the same time she tried to stay calm, telling herself
it was probably only her host, returning from whatever he had been doing.
Then fear and hope and all attempts at calm were
washed away in a tide of wonder, as a creature of
such exquisite loveliness that the very sight of him
brought tears to her eyes stepped into the moonlight.
In shape, he was much like a horse, though somewhat smaller and more finely built. His hooves were
cloven, like a goat's, rather than solid like those of
a horse. Mane and flowing tail seemed spun of silver
cloud and moonlight. From between his enormous
dark eyes thrust a spiraled horn, three feet long at
the least, that glowed as if lit from within.
Except for the trembling that had overtaken her,
Cara sat without moving as the unicorn began to
walk to her. The sound of his hooves against the
stony floor of the cave was like distant silver bells.
She wanted to cry out to him, tell him how beautiful he was, but worried that if she spoke he would
turn and go. Not from fear; his grace and power were
such that she could not imagine him being afraid of
28

IN THE CAVE

her — or of anything, for that matter. It was simply
that the moment was so fragile she feared anything
might shatter it.
She held out her hands.
The unicorn continued to walk toward her. When
he was about five feet away, he lowered his horn and
pointed it directly at her chest.
Cara caught her breath. What was he going to do?
Unsure whether she had even enough strength to
stand, she braced herself to try to run.
Yet, as if enchanted, she could not bring herself
to move.
The horn drew closer. Still she did not flinch, not
even when it pressed against her shirt. Only when
it pierced her flesh and began driving on toward her
heart did she cry out.

29

5
LIGHTFOOT
he moment of pain was brief but intense.
When it faded, a tingling spread over Cara's
skin, as if she were being shocked by a
thousand tiny batteries.
The unicorn stepped back in surprise.
Cara looked down at her chest. The fabric of her
shirt was torn where the horn had pierced it. Yet the
flesh beneath was unbroken, bloodless, the only sign
of what had just happened a tiny, star-shaped scar.
The unicorn laid his horn gently upon her shoulder. Then, to her astonishment, he spoke to her: "I
see I am not the first of my kind that you have met.
Alas, you have a wound that not even I can heal."
The puzzling message came not in words as Cara
knew them, sounds made in the throat and carried
30

LIGHTFOOT

on the air. Instead, the silvery creature spoke inside
her head, his meaning carried to her in a strange
internal combination of images, sounds, feelings —
even smells — that she could not have explained, yet
that was so perfectly clear she understood even the
note of surprise that underlay his thought.
"I'm not going to hurt you," he added. "I just
wanted to make it possible to communicate with you.
It will be easier for me to heal you if we can speak."
"What do you mean?" she asked, trying to keep
her voice from quavering.
"Don't speak out loud! I can't understand you that
way. Just form the thought and send it to me. You'll
need to stay in contact with me, at least for now."
Though the horn was already resting on her shoulder, she gingerly set her hand on it for good measure.
It was as smooth as the inside of an oyster shell, and
pleasantly warm.
"Where am I?" she asked.
She sensed him receiving the message. I'm talking
to a unicorn! she thought, so excited she almost
missed his answer.
"You are in the Cave of the Dimblethum," he told
her. "In the Forest of the Queen, on the edge of the
wild, in the world of Luster."
"Luster?"
"The home of the unicorns."
For a moment, Cara felt as if she could not think
at all. Then the questions came in a flood. "What has
happened to me? Who are you? Who is the creature
31

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
that lives in this cave? How can I get home? Do you
know my grandmother? Why did you —"
"Wait, wait!" interrupted the unicorn. "I can't possibly answer all those at once. Let's start with some
of the easier ones. My name is Lightfoot. And yours?"
"Cara."
"What has brought you here, Cara? Very few humans can cross the borders of Luster these days." He
paused, then looked at her oddly and repeated, "Very
few." This time the underlying tone of his message
was not surprise, but concern.
She started to tell her story, but found herself
lapsing into speech without realizing it. She started
again. It was surprisingly hard to only think what she
wanted to tell him, and not say it out loud.
"You'll get better at it," he said reassuringly. "Try
again."
Concentrating, she managed to get through the
whole story without slipping into speech more than
three or four times. The unicorn looked startled, and
somewhat worried, when she mentioned her grandmother's request that she "Find the Old One."
"What's the matter?" she asked.
"Nothing," he replied. "Go on with your story."
She looked at him suspiciously, but continued the
tale. When she was done he said, "This is more serious than I realized when the Dimblethum came to
fetch me."
"The Dimblethum?"
"Your host and rescuer. You're resting in his bed
32

LIGHTFOOT

right now. He's a gruff beast, and generally a loner,
so he is somewhat disturbed at having you here —
though to tell you the truth I think he rather likes
you. It's good for him, if you ask me. Shake him up
a bit."
"Where is he now?"
"Gathering some herbs to help you regain your
strength. I can heal any serious wounds you might
have suffered when you were attacked, but recovery
involves more than just healing. Crossing from your
world to Luster probably took its toll on you as well.
You'll need to rest for a few days. As to the healing —
do you have specific wounds I can tend to?"
In the excitement of meeting the unicorn, she had
nearly forgotten the pain in her side. But his question
reminded her of the wound, and at once she felt it
stab through her.
"Here," she said, pointing.
She realized that she should have thought it rather
than said it, but the pointing got the message across.
Lightfoot stepped back. Returning his horn to her
shoulder, he thought, "Show me."
She pulled up her shirt. The raw wound underneath was so ugly it made her gasp to see it. The
pain suddenly increased, as if her being aware of the
injury made it somehow worse.
Lightfoot turned his head to get a better look at
the problem. Whatever he thought of it, the information did not reach Cara, because she was no
longer in contact with him.
33

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

After a moment he turned his head back and
placed his horn on the wound. She cried out at
the flash of pain that accompanied the healing.
Then the flesh drew together and all pain vanished.
"You fixed it!" she cried in delight.
He nodded, but turned away from her. He took
three steps. Then, to her horror, his legs buckled
and he crumpled to the floor of the cave.
"Are you all right?" she cried. Realizing he could
neither understand nor answer her, she threw aside
the covers and stood. Instantly she fell back to the
bed. Closing her eyes, she took a deep breath then
slid to the floor. She made her way to the unicorn
on her hands and knees. Placing one hand on his
silky flank, she repeated desperately, "Are you all
right?"
She had barely formed the question before he was
reassuring her. "Sorry! I should have warned you. A
healing takes a great deal out of me — and this healing was more complicated than I expected."
"Why is that?" she asked, feeling worried.
He hesitated, then said, "You have an old wound,
very deep. It is a wound of the spirit, not the flesh,
and not something that can be quickly cured, even
by the power of my horn."
She flinched and drew her hand back from him.
A lump of unexpected pain lodged itself in her throat.
The unicorn waited a moment, then leaned against

34

LIGHTFOOT

her. "I do not know the source of the wound," he
said gently. "I cannot read your mind — I only understand what you send me."
"I want to rest now," she responded, her voice
sharper than she intended. She started to crawl back
toward the bed, then thought better of it. Moving
closer to Lightfoot, she lay her head on his side and
sighed. The loss of her parents was something she
did not talk about. Never. Not with anyone.
With a skill born of long practice, she pushed her
secret sorrows to the back of her mind and slept.
She was woken by something pulling her hair.
Before she could force her eyes open she heard
Lightfoot whicker. A small voice chattered an indignant reply.
Now she did manage to open her eyes.
Crouching near her was a creature just over a foot
high. It looked like a cross between a monkey and
a squirrel. It had thick fur that grew in two shades
of gray, dark on its head and back, lighter on its face,
limbs, and stomach. Its bushy tail flicked back and
forth as it stared at her from enormous eyes that
seemed much too large for its face. Those eyes —
dark, with bright blue pupils — were lively and
intelligent.
Cara was accustomed to small animals being timid
around humans, so she was startled when the gray
creature skittered up to her face. Extending a three-

35

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

fingered hand, it touched her cheek, then rubbed it
with its thumb.
"Don't be frightened," Lightfoot told her. "He's
harmless. Annoying, but harmless."
"What... who is he?" she thought.
"The Squijum."
Cara reached toward the little creature. When her
hand made contact with him, he blinked but did not
run. His fur was soft and warm.
"The Squijum?" she thought to Lightfoot. "Does
that mean he's the only one?"
"As far as I know."
"If he's the only one, where did he come from?"
"I don't have the slightest idea," replied the unicorn. "And I'm sure I don't care," he added pointedly.
The Squijum turned his head and chittered at
Lightfoot. Even without her connection to Lightfoot,
his indignation would have been clear to Cara. With
the connection, she understood him to be saying
something along the lines of, "Mean hornhead not
love good Squijum phooey bad hotcha!"
Lightfoot snorted in response.
Suddenly a shadow stretched over them. With a
screech the Squijum scrambled over Cara's side and
cowered behind her.
Cara turned to look over her shoulder. For a moment her heart leaped in horror. Almost as quickly,
she felt a surge of relief. The creature standing at
the entrance of the cave was the one she had seen

36

LIGHTFOOT

the first time she woke here — the Dimblethum. She
wondered if he, too, was the only one of his kind.
He appeared to be smiling, though it wasn't easy
to tell, given his bearlike face. Holding up a big,
furry paw, he said, "The Dimblethum has something
that belongs to you."

37

6
THE QUEEN'S
AMULETS
he amulet!" cried Cara. "Where did you
find it?"
_
The Dimblethum looked at Lightfoot,
w
» *) ^ ° ma< ^ e s o m e noises in his throat. With
^ff^r a shock, Cara realized that he was repeating her words, translating them for the Dimblethum.
But it made sense; just because her connection to
Lightfoot let her understand the Dimblethum, there
was no reason to expect that he would be able to
understand her.
When Lightfoot was done translating, the Dimblethum made a sound deep in his throat that she took
to be a chuckle. "Old Dimblethum has his ways," he
said. Crossing to where she sat beside Lightfoot, he
dropped the amulet into her lap.
38

THE QUEEN'S AMULETS

She picked it up with her free hand, then cried
out in sorrow when she realized that the golden
chain had been broken.
"Peace," said Lightfoot. "Chains can be mended.
It is enough that we have it back."
Blushing at the rebuke, Cara turned to the Dimblethum and said, "Thank you." Lightfoot translated
for her. The manbear nodded and made a growl of
acceptance.
"How did you get it back from the delver?" the
unicorn asked, echoing Cara's earlier-question. He
spoke aloud for the Dimblethum's sake, at the same
time sending the message to Cara. From the picture
that formed in her mind, she understood that by
"delver" he meant the creature that had attacked her
in the woods.
The Dimblethum chuckled again. "Friends of the
Dimblethum followed delver through the forest.
Friends of the Dimblethum kept watch, kept track,
kept hot on trail. Friends of the Dimblethum showed
the way. Easy to follow delver. Easy to crunch delver,
bring back amulet."
Now the creature scowled and held out his big
hand in a gesture that Cara understood to mean that
he wanted her to hand him the amulet. Broken chain
dangling over his furry fingers, he held it up and
said, "What is not easy is what to do next. This cannot
stay here."
"Why not?" asked Lightfoot.
"Look carefully. This is one of the five."
39

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

"Hotcha!" cried the Squijum, running up the Dimblethum's side as if he were climbing a tree. "Let's
see, let's see!"
The Dimblethum plucked the Squijum from his
side and dropped him to the floor.
"Want to see!" he sputtered. But he stayed where
he had landed — at least until the Dimblethum held
the amulet before Lightfoot. Then he scurried underneath the larger creature and looked up eagerly.
After a moment the unicorn sighed. "You're right,
it is one of the five."
"What are you talking about?" asked Cara.
Lightfoot closed his eyes. "Many centuries ago the
Queen ordered the creation of five amulets to be
used as rewards for those who had given great service to Luster. The wisdom of this decision is still
much argued, for the special property of these amulets was that under the right circumstances they
would let the bearer pass between Earth and Luster
without going through one of the main gates. This
is a great power. Like most great powers, it carries
the possibility for great mischief. How did you come
by this amulet, anyway?"
"My grandmother gave it to me."
"Who is your grandmother?" asked the unicorn
curiously.
"Her name is Ivy Morris."
"That sounds familiar," he said after a moment. "I
suppose I should have paid more attention in
history."
40

THE QUEEN'S AMULETS
Cara was trying to take in the idea that her grandmother had done something important in the history
of this world when the Dimblethum growled, "The
amulet must go to the Queen."
"Wait a minute," Cara objected. "My grandmother
told me to find the 'Old One.' That's where I want
to go. And the amulet stays with me!"
At once she wondered if she would make the others angry. But Lightfoot actually laughed — a beautiful, bell-like sound.
"What's so funny?" she demanded.
"One of the Queen's many names is the 'Old One.'
So the Dimblethum is suggesting the same thing your
grandmother wanted." He sighed, then added, "Unfortunately, I think the Dimblethum is right."
"Of course the Dimblethum is right!" growled that
creature. "If this amulet falls into the wrong hands — "
He broke off, shaking his head at the thought.
"I can help; I can guide!" chittered the Squijum.
Lightfoot's response to the little creature's claims
was a derisive snort.
"Small and fast!" the squijum chittered, scampering around the Dimblethum's feet. "Small and fast,
can look and find! Want to go! Hotcha!"
"If I say no, I suppose you'll follow us anyway,"
said Lightfoot.
"Yes! Yes! Glorious yes!" he cried, hugging his tail.
"How about you?" Lightfoot asked, turning to the
Dimblethum. "If we go to the Queen, will you accompany us?"
41

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

The creature made a series of whuffles and growls
that translated to: "The Dimblethum will come part
of the way with you. But despite your friendship with
him, you know he has little love for your kind, invaders that you are. He will not enter the court of
the Queen."
"Invaders?" Cara thought to Lightfoot.
"I will explain later," he replied.
Once it was decided that they were to carry the
amulet to the Queen, the conference quickly ended.
It was clear that the Dimblethum was not the sort to
sit around and chat; decision made, he was ready to
leave. And since there was nothing to pack, no relatives to notify, no mail to cancel, there was not much
for it but to get up and go. However, therein lay the
problem: Both Cara and Lightfoot were still too weak
to travel.
"Tomorrow morning, at first light," promised the
unicorn. "I'll be ready then."
The Dimblethum made an unhappy noise deep in
his throat. "The longer we stay here, the more apt
the delvers are to come for us. They will be mad
that the Dimblethum took the amulet back. The Dimblethum is more than a match for three or four of
them. If they send more, the Dimblethum and his
friends could be in trouble."
"We'll be in as much trouble if we try to travel too
soon," replied Lightfoot. "Both the child and I will
slow things down, and make us easy targets. By
42

THE QUEEN'S AMULETS

morning I will be at full strength, and can even carry
her if necessary."
The Dimblethum grumbled but admitted the
sense in this. Scooping Cara into his great arms, he
deposited her in the bed once more. He roamed
restlessly about the cave for a while and finally went
back out into the night.
Once he was gone, Lightfoot knelt beside Cara's
bed. She placed her hand on his shoulder.
"I have so many questions!" she thought to him.
"My mother says I have an answer for everything,"
he replied, sounding amused. "Of course, she also
claims most of them are neither right nor wise. But
I'll do what I can."
"Where is your mother?" asked Cara. She had a
thousand other questions, all of them more pressing.
But her sudden sense that the unicorn was perhaps
not as old as she had first thought, combined with
her own interest in missing mothers, pushed the
other questions aside.
"She is at Summerhaven," said Lightfoot. "With the
Queen."
Cara detected a note of uneasiness beneath his
light tone. Remembering his earlier comment about
it being unfortunate that the Dimblethum was right,
she said, "You don't really want to go there, do you?"
"I don't want to talk about it," he replied sharply.
"When you said you had questions, I didn't realize
they were all going to be about me!"
Cara lifted her hand from his shoulder, a little
43

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

surprised that he could be so testy. After a moment
she tried again. "Why did the Dimblethum call you
invaders?"
Lightfoot sighed. "My friend does not like it that
we unicorns came here from Earth. Actually, I don't
think he minds us so much as the fact that in opening
gates between Earth and Luster we made it possible
for others to enter here as well. He holds the unicorns responsible for everyone who has come here
as a result — including the delvers." He paused, then
said, "Also, I think something happened between the
Dimblethum and the Queen. Unfortunately, I've
never been able to get that story."
"Is the Queen a unicorn or a human?" asked Cara.
Lightfoot snorted at the idea that the Queen might
be a human. "Her name is Arabella Skydancer," he
said, "and she is the oldest and the wisest of our
kind. Unfortunately, she is thinning now. Sometimes
you can see right through her."
"Thinning?"
An uncomfortable silence fell between them. After
a moment Lightfoot muttered, "I have said more than
I should."
Cara clenched her jaw. She hated that kind of half
secret.
"How far away is the Queen?" she asked, looking
for a question that Lightfoot would answer.
"Many days. How many depends partly on how fast
you can travel — that, and how much trouble we
have along the way."
44

THE QUEEN'S AMULETS

"Are you expecting trouble?"
"It depends on what the delvers are up to."
"Tell me about the delvers."
"Nasty creatures," replied Lightfoot. She could feel
his flesh shiver beneath her fingers. "They live underground, and they are the sworn enemies of the
unicorns."
His message didn't come precisely in words, of
course; part of it was an image of a delver.
"Why are they your enemies?" asked Cara.
"Many reasons," replied Lightfoot. He paused, then
added, "Our path will take us to Grimwold's Cavern.
Perhaps he will tell you more about them."
"Grimwold?"
"He is the Keeper of the Unicorn Chronicles, and
he knows more stories than anyone in the world.
However, right now I am only interested in one story,
and that is the one in which we are caught. In that
story, the only clever thing for either of us to do is
get some rest so we will be ready to travel in the
morning."
Cara began to protest. Her mind was spinning with
a thousand more questions. But she had already
pushed herself further than she should, and her body
was insisting that she sleep. No amount of curiosity
was able to overcome that need.
Lying back, she quickly fell into a deep slumber,
waking only when the Dimblethum returned with
leaves and berries. She watched as he brewed some
tea, which he brought to her in one of his wooden
45

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
cups. Remembering the last drink he had served her,
she took an eager sip.
"Gack!" she cried. "This is terrible!"
Making a face, she tried to hand the cup back to
him.
He growled, which made her flinch, even though
by now she understood that the sound was more
likely to be the Dimblethum's version of speech than
an actual danger sign.
Resting his horn on her shoulder, Lightfoot said,
"Drink it. It will help you regain your strength —
which you're going to need."
Cara grimaced but took the cup back from the
Dimblethum and downed the entire brew. When she
was finished she rubbed her hand over her mouth
and said bitterly, "That's worse than the stuff Grandmother Morris gives me when I'm sick."
The thought of her grandmother sent a wave of
worry washing through her. Again — as she would
often in the days to come — she wondered if the old
woman had escaped the man who had been chasing
them.
"Go back to sleep," Lightfoot told her. "We travel
at first light, and you need all the rest you can get."
She closed her eyes but did not sleep. Now that
the edge of her exhaustion had been dulled, the
questions and fears that filled her mind came to the
fore again. She was impossibly far from home, from
her grandmother, from everything she had ever
known and loved, and she had no idea whether she
46

THE QUEEN'S AMULETS

would ever see any of them again. A tear trickled
from the corner of her eye.
She lay still in the darkness, looking into the darkness inside, fighting back the memory of her earliest
loss, the most painful one of all. The hurt was still
strong, after all these years. After a time it merged
in her mind with her last afternoon on Earth and
the terrifying pursuit in the church. She slipped into
a fever dream as her imagination kept struggling and
failing to form the face of the man who had chased
them. She cried out into the darkness, certain that if
she could only see that face, it would solve a great
riddle for her.

47

7
JOURNEY
he Forest of the Queen, Cara decided, must
go on forever. They had been traveling
_ _' since first light, and nothing seemed to have
\ l A changed. The trees still stretched as far as
^ ^ J she could see in every direction — not that
she could see very far.
It didn't bother her, really. She loved being in the
woods, and now that she had Lightfoot, the Dimblethum, and the Squijum for company, she felt neither
as lonely nor as frightened as she had the day before.
Her mood was helped by the forest itself, which was
deeply beautiful, filled with great trees, mossy boulders, and babbling brooks. Brightly colored birds
flew overhead, and butterflies floated in the few

48

JOURNEY

shafts of sunlight that managed to pierce the forest
canopy.
Oddly, her worst moments came when she saw
the most beautiful sights. Before she could block the
thought, she would think, / wish Gramma could see
this! — which would immediately make her aware
of how far from home she was and of her concern
for her grandmother.
At those times she would wrap her hand around
the amulet, and holding it tight, think, /'// come back
to you, Grandmother! I won't leave you! She meant
it; she knew too well what it was like to be
abandoned.
Though the Dimblethum appeared to be lumbering along, he moved with a speed and silence that —
given his size — was astonishing to Cara. As for the
Squijum, he kept scampering ahead, disappearing
from sight, then racing up from behind them. He
was forever skittering up the trunk of one tree and
zipping back down another, and twice Cara saw him
make a long leap from one branch to another. She
caught her breath at the sight. Though it was no more
than she had seen squirrels do at home, watching a
creature she had actually spoken to do it made the
stunt seem vastly more daring.
Cara had started out walking, but after an hour
she found herself stumbling and dizzy. The second
time she tripped over a root, Lightfoot knelt and told
her to climb on his back. She was thrilled at the

49

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

thought of riding a unicorn but a little worried as
well. It felt not properly respectful — a little like
blowing bubblegum in church.
"It would certainly astonish Moonheart to hear you
say that," Lightfoot responded, when she expressed
her concern.
"Who is Moonheart?"
Lightfoot snorted. "My uncle. He's also one of the
crankier unicorns you are apt to meet. I don't think
he can imagine anyone feeling a need to show me
respect."
This talk of uncles and respect prompted Cara to
ask something else she had been wondering: "How
old are you, anyway?"
"Old by your terms, quite young by ours."
"What does that mean?"
"Specifically? It means that even though I am
slightly over a hundred years old, Moonheart and
the others treat me as if I were what you would call
'a teenager.'"
"How do you know about things like teenagers?"
she asked in surprise.
"Oh, we watch your world fairly carefully. Look
out — low branch coming up."
Cara ducked as they passed under the branch. Her
long red hair spilled forward so that it draped across
Lightfoot's shoulder, looking like wine on white silk.
Since she was not speaking aloud, it was perfectly
easy to carry on the conversation while she was bent

50

JOURNEY

low to his neck. "How do you watch our world?"
she asked. "And why?"
"You make us nervous," he replied. "The unicorn
hunters — who drove us from Earth to begin with —
have not forgotten us. They are forever trying to find
a way to come here. That is one reason the amulets
are so dangerous."
"There are still people on Earth who hunt unicorns?" she asked in surprise. "I thought everyone
believed you were imaginary." She blushed, wondering if she had insulted him.
"That's what we would like them to think," he
replied. "But there are some who know the truth,
some friends, some enemies."
She felt a sense of embarrassment at coming from
a species that had hunted unicorns, and wished that
she could separate herself from the brutality of the
idea. She decided to change the subject.
"What did you mean when you said that you were
not the first of your kind that I had met?" she asked.
"Don't you remember?" he asked in surprise.
"Maybe I do," she said slowly. "Was it when I was
very little?"
"I don't know. I simply know that I could tell that
I was not the first unicorn to heal you."
"I knew it!" she cried. "I always thought I had been
visited by a unicorn when I was little. But after a
while people convinced me that I must have been
imagining it."

51

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

"It's just as well," he replied. "As I said, we prefer
people to believe we don't exist."
She had more questions, but just then their path
led them by a narrow waterfall that wavered down
the face of a cliff towering at least a thousand feet
above them. At the base of the fall was a pool, from
which ran a stream that crossed their path.
"Hold tight," said Lightfoot. Before Cara had a
chance to ask why, he started to run, then leaped
nimbly over the stream. The Dimblethum splashed
through, grumbling to himself as he went. The Squijum crossed by climbing a tree and leaping from its
branches to those of a tree on the other side.
A clearing bordered the pool on this side of the
stream, and they decided to stop for a rest. Lightfoot
nibbled pale green flowers from a vine that grew at
the edge of the trees. The Dimblethum pointed to
some berries and with a nod indicated that Cara
should eat them. She was more than happy to oblige
and even happier when they exploded in her mouth
with a burst of flavor sweeter and tangier than any
she had experienced at home.
The Dimblethum started to pick berries from a
spot close by her side. Looking up at his towering
presence, Cara wondered if he was standing so close
to be sociable, or if he was there to protect her.
Either way, she was glad of his presence. She wished
very much that she could talk to him.
Having eaten her fill, she found herself thirsty. She
looked at the stream, wondering if it was safe to drink
52

JOURNEY

from it. Unable to ask the Dimblethum, she went to
Lightfoot and placed her hand on his shoulder.
"I'm thirsty."
"Wait until I clear the water."
"What do you mean?"
"It's one of our tricks," he replied, and this time
she felt a bit of a chuckle beneath the answer. Walking
lightly across the grass, he knelt at the edge of the
pool and lowered his horn so that the tip was immersed in the water.
Cara hurried over to stand beside him.
The surface of the pond seemed to tremble as rays
of silver extended from Lightfoot's horn across the
water — though whether they were a reflection of
the horn, or something stranger, Cara could not say
for sure.
In the center of the pond a large fish broke the
surface, leaped twisting and golden into the air, then
returned to the water with a loud smack!
A moment later Lightfoot stood and shook his
head, spattering silver water in all directions.
Cara put her hand on his shoulder.
"Safe to drink," he thought to her. "Actually, it was
all right before I did that, though I couldn't have
been certain until I tried it. Anyway, it will taste better
now."
"Thank you," she replied.
Kneeling, she cupped her hands in the water,
which was crystal clear, and lifted some to her lips.
It was like drinking diamonds. She drank more, dip53

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

ping her hands greedily into the stream. When she
was full, more than full, she rinsed her face and
turned to Lightfoot to ask him what he had done to
the water.
Before she could speak, the Squijum began to
shriek.
Lightfoot spun, reared on his hind legs, trumpeted
in anger. The Dimblethum began to roar. Cara
slipped her hand into her pocket and clutched the
amulet.

54

8
DELVERS
band of delvers — at least a dozen of
them — stood in the shadows at the edge
of the clearing. Each was holding a spear
topped by a wicked-looking metal point.
Cara held her breath. Even if her friends
managed to stand against these numbers — which
seemed unlikely — she could not imagine them
coming through the battle unscathed. She began to
tremble. Though she had only known them for a day,
the idea of any of them being hurt was more than
she could bear. She tried to force her mind to erase
the terrible images it was creating, images of Lightfoot being speared by a delver, falling, bleeding
Stop it! she told herself. You have to be ready to
help.
55

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

The thought astonished her. How could she help
in the fight that seemed to be brewing? Yet she realized that she had no choice. If battle came, she
would join in.
The two groups stood staring at each other for a
long moment. Then, to Cara's astonishment, three
of the delvers carefully placed their spears on the
ground. Holding their empty hands before them,
they took ten steps into the clearing.
Cara edged closer to Lightfoot and laid her hand
on his flank.
"What's happening?"
"I don't know. Just listen. I can't talk to you now,
I have to pay attention to the enemy."
She made no response but kept her hand in place.
One of the delvers spoke. His voice was harsh,
and the words Cara heard held no meaning at all.
But through Lightfoot she understood the delver to
be asking if they could talk rather than fight.
Lightfoot dipped his horn in response to the delver's request. The Dimblethum growled suspiciously. The Squijum seemed to have disappeared
altogether.
Cara wondered how the unicorn would communicate with the delvers. Would he have to pierce their
hearts, as he had her own? To her surprise, he was
able to approximate their language with sounds
made deep in his throat.
"What business do the Children of the Earth have

56

DELVERS

with Lightfoot, son of Dancing Heart, son of Arabella
Skydancer?"
She blinked in surprise. Was Lightfoot the Queen's
grandson?
"My name is Nedzik," replied the delver spokesman, his huge eyes shifting from side to side as if
he was expecting trouble at any moment. "I come
to you on business that is shameful, but necessary."
The other delvers muttered nervously.
"Go on," said Lightfoot.
"Though there is no love lost between unicorn
and delver, we live in the same world— "
"Through treachery," growled the Dimblethum.
Lightfoot shot him a warning glance. The Dimblethum fell silent, though Cara could see it was an
effort for him. Lightfoot turned back to the delver.
"Go on," he said again.
Nedzik hesitated. He looked as if he was considering dropping the matter or simply fighting instead.
The others shifted uneasily. Finally he spoke again.
"Though we live in the same world, many of my
people hate the unicorns so violently that they would
do anything to strike at them. They would do this
even if such a blow might bring great damage, even
destruction, to all of Luster." He paused, looked behind him to the others, then continued. "That is the
way things stand now. That is why we have come to
speak to you, though doing so means we are betraying our king."

57

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

He was blinking rapidly, and Cara realized that the
sunlight hurt his enormous eyes.
"What does the Delverking plan?" asked Lightfoot.
Though it was not in his words, Cara could sense
the confusion and fear that the delver's message had
created in him.
Nedzik took a step back and the other two weaponless delvers gathered around him. After a moment
of whispering, he stepped forward again.
"The king wishes to open a door to the world of
men so that they can enter Luster and hunt the
unicorns."
The shock that ran through Lightfoot caused Cara
to momentarily lift her hand from his flank. When
she put it back, the delver was still speaking.
" . . . a thought long in his mind. But until now, he
did not have a way to implement it. That changed
when Gamzil came upon the human child that stands
next to you and tore from her the amulet she was
wearing."
The Dimblethum growled at the memory, causing
the delver spokesman to flinch.
"Gamzil is a fool and did not recognize the amulet
for what it is. He tried to steal it only because it is a
pretty bauble. Not long after he came crying back
to our caves without it, a man came to us, a human,
who had just crossed here from Earth."
Cara caught her breath. The delver was almost
certainly speaking of the man who had chased her
and her grandmother into St. Christopher's. How had
58

DELVERS

he made it through? Did he have an amulet of his
own — or had he somehow managed to jump
through the opening she had created? A wave of guilt
washed through her, and she was glad that Lightfoot
could not read her thoughts unless she sent them
to him.
"This man began to ask questions," continued
Nedzik, "and it was not long before King Gnurflax,
who is smarter than he is wise, may the rocks not
crush my feet, realized what he was seeking. When
he also realized that Gamzil had had this very amulet
in his hands and then lost it, his rage was mighty
indeed." Nedzik shook his enormous head. "Alas,
poor Gamzil. Even a fool does not deserve such a
fate. Anyway, the king has sent out many groups in
search of the child and the amulet. It was only luck
that let us find you first."
The Dimblethum's growl grew deeper. The delvers looked profoundly embarrassed.
"What the king plans to do with the amulet has
not been made widely known," continued the delver.
"Those among us who do know his intentions are
disturbed but for the most part willing to go along.
My cousins and I think this is madness. We believe
that flinging open the doors will mean death and
destruction for all of us.
"Make no mistake: What we do now is treason.
Should the king discover us, should word of this
reach his ears, it will mean our lives. But so, we
believe, will the success of his plan. He seeks the
59

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
child and the amulet. You must flee, flee with all
speed, flee with one eye before you and one eye
watching behind. If you let the amulet fall into the
hands of my people, the madness of our king will
bring doom to us all."
He began to back away from them.
"Wait!" said Lightfoot.
Nedzik took another step back, then paused. "We
must go. Every moment we talk with you rather than
fight you we risk our lives."
"You have our gratitude," said Lightfoot, bowing
his head. He hesitated, then said, "Will you travel
with us? Should we meet others of your kind the
battle may go against us. If you truly believe your
king's plan will cause such disaster, help us avert it."
"That we cannot do," said Nedzik, and Cara could
sense a note of regret in his words. "We have done
more than we should as it is." He paused, then added,
"We can do this much more. We will point the chase
in another direction. That should give you some
time. Use it wisely."
With that, the creatures faded into the forest so
swiftly and completely it was as if they had never
been there at all.
The Squijum came racing down a tree. "Nasty
phooey strange hotcha no-good trustem?" he chattered, his lush gray tail twitching violently.
Lightfoot shook himself, a shudder that ran from
his shoulders through his flank, and muttered, "This
is enough to make me wish my uncle were here."
60

DELVERS

"What do you think we should do?" growled the
Dimblethum.
"Head for Grimwold's Cavern as fast as we can.
It's the closest safe haven. Besides, we may be able
to get a message to the Queen from there."
"How?" asked Cara.
"Talk later!" cried the Squijum. "Now now shake
butts move feet hotcha get going!"
"The Squijum is right," said Lightfoot. "The sooner
we're away from this place the better. And we have
at least a seven-day journey ahead of us."
"Not necessarily," said the Dimblethum. "There is
a shorter way...."
Lightfoot snorted. "Shorter, certainly — unless she
catches us. In that case, we will never get there at
all."
"She?" asked Cara nervously.
"Firethroat, Firethroat!" squeaked the Squijum. He
began to run in circles around Lightfoot's hooves,
crying, "Run run hide hide cover butts not safe
hotcha!"
Lightfoot sighed. "Of Luster's seven dragons, Firethroat is the oldest and wisest. She is also the one
least to be trifled with. She guards her territory well,
does not take trespass lightly, and has no use for
fools — a fact my uncle says would make it particularly dangerous for me to come in contact with her."
"The choice is simple," said the Dimblethum,
backing up to a tree and rubbing his shoulders
against it. "The Dimblethum and his friends take the
61

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
long way and spend seven or eight days trying to
avoid the delvers. Or they take the short route and
spend a day and a half hoping Firethroat is not angered by them walking the edge of her territory."
He pushed against the tree harder, sighed, then
added, "The Dimblethum does not think the delvers
will expect anyone to go that way. Even if they do,
they will not follow unless King Gnurflax is more
desperate than the Dimblethum thinks. So the Dimblethum says take the short route. If Firethroat is in
a bad mood and eats the Dimblethum and his friends,
at least the amulet is saved from the delvers."
For that there was no answer. So it was decided
that they would take the dragonpath to Grimwold's
Cavern.
"It's just as well, in a way," Lightfoot said to Cara
later on. "It's a much prettier route, and you will see
some amazing things. Still and all..."
He left the sentence unfinished. She could tell he
was contemplating the fate of a fool in the claws of
a dragon.

62

THE HUNTED
hey set off through the forest and did not
stop when darkness fell. Lightfoot, putting
all his energy into finding the way — and
avoiding detection — was distracted and
unwilling to talk.
Cara began to stumble again. After a bit the Dimblethum picked her up and carried her in his arms.
She fell asleep nestled against his warm and furry
breast. When she woke, she gestured to him that she
wanted to walk. He hesitated, then set her gently on
her feet. She wished she could speak to him; she
wanted to thank him for the ride.
By the nearly full moon that shone through the
drooping trees she saw that they had entered a
swamp. Ahead of her, the Squijum was riding on
63

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
Lightfoot's back as the unicorn picked his way along
a trail that led between large stretches of brackish
water.
Strange dark things fluttered through the night air
above them. Occasionally one would swoop close
to Cara, and the whir of its rapidly beating wings
would give her a start. The first time this happened
she cried out in fear, but after that she kept her
silence — partly because the Dimblethum had laid
a heavy paw on her shoulder and scowled at her,
indicating that such outbursts were a bad idea.
So eager was she to please, to prove she was fit
for this adventure, that when something snakelike
slithered across their path she stopped short but
managed to hold in her cry of fear. The serpent
stared at her for a moment. Suddenly, without warning, it reared up and hissed at her, spreading a vivid
red hood that actually glowed in the darkness. Then
she did scream, and jump backward as well.
She bumped into the Dimblethum, who seemed
as startled as she was, for he, too, let out a sound of
surprise. Then, leaning over her, he roared at the
serpent. The sound hurt Cara's ears. The serpent
hissed again, more softly. The Dimblethum made a
menacing growl deep in his throat. Cara's heart
pounded, and her skin grew cold as she stared at
the serpent, wondering whether it would strike at
her. The Dimblethum continued his low growl until
the serpent finally dropped to its belly. Slithering
forward, it slipped silently into the murky water.
64

THE HUNTED

Cara didn't object when the Dimblethum picked
her up and carried her again.
In this way, passing through swamp and field and
forest, along the edges of low cliffs, beside swiftly
running crystal streams, they arrived in two days at
the edge of Firethroat's territory.
They had stopped to sleep twice, at which times
Cara had been fed nuts and berries and a kind of
root the Squijum dug up.
"What is it?" she had asked the first time he came
scampering up with one of the dark brown roots in
his paws and handed it to her.
"We call it tarka," replied Lightfoot, resting his
horn on her shoulder. "Twist it and see what
happens."
When she did as he directed, the root's nubbly
husk popped open, revealing a crisp, white interior.
"Try it," said the unicorn.
To her surprise, it tasted like sweet almonds.
"Good!" she said, smiling at the Squijum.
"Yah, yah hotcha like it," he replied, dashing off
into the darkness. He returned a few minutes later
with another of the roots. Stopping three or four feet
in front of her, he chittered something she could not
understand, then tossed her the root. She caught it
before it landed in her lap, prompting an enthusiastic
burst of chatter from the Squijum.
Acting on impulse, she picked up a nut and tossed
it to him. Leaping into the air, the little creature
caught the nut a foot and a half above the ground.
65

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Then he bounded over to her, dropped the nut in
her lap, and ran about twenty feet away.
"You like to play catch!" she cried in delight, tossing him the nut again.
The Squijum caught it handily, and Cara spent
another fifteen minutes tossing him various objects she found on the forest floor. He caught almost
all of them, missing only if her throws were absurdly
wide of the mark. The leaps, twists, and turns he
made in accomplishing these catches were so wild
that she found herself laughing out loud, the first
time she had done so in longer than she could
remember.
Lightfoot and the Dimblethum took turns watching
at night. Feeling safe in their care, Cara slept soundly.
Yet she found herself tormented by strange dreams
in which she was hunted by some faceless horror.
The second night she was woken from one of these
dreams by the Dimblethum, who placed a huge paw
gently over her mouth to keep her from crying out.
After a moment, when he was sure she was awake
and calm, he uncovered her mouth.
Soon after, Lightfoot came to her. His horn looked
as if it had been carved from the bright and shining
moon. Placing it across her shoulder, he said, "We're
being trailed."
Fighting down her fear, she replied, "How do you
know?"

66

THE HUNTED

"The Squijum was out hunting and spotted a camp.
We need to move ahead as fast as possible while its
owner is still resting."
Cara furrowed her brow. "Just one of them? I
thought the delvers would be hunting us in packs."
"It's not a delver," replied Lightfoot. "It's the man."
Fully awake now, she rose quickly, silently, and
followed Lightfoot out of their camp. The Dimblethum lagged behind. When she turned to look back,
she saw him moving about the spot, trying to erase
all signs that they had been there.
The Squijum was nowhere to be seen.
Digging her hand in her pocket to make sure the
amulet was in its place, she trudged on through the
darkness.
So obsessed were they with the danger behind
that they did not remember Nedzik's warning to flee
with one eye watching before them.
Thus it was that they did not see the delver camp
until they had nearly stumbled into it.
Lightfoot stopped so abruptly that Cara bumped
into him. Only the effort she had spent training herself not to cry out when they were traveling through
the swamp kept her from betraying their presence
with a shout.
Moving cautiously up beside Lightfoot, she froze
when she saw not far ahead a low fire, little more
than a bed of glowing coals. It was surrounded by
dark forms that she took to be sleeping delvers. The

67

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
reason she assumed they were delvers was that the
two figures keeping watch by the fire most definitely
were.
More than ever, she was glad of the ability to communicate with Lightfoot without speaking. "What do
we do now?" she asked.
"I believe a quiet retreat is in order," he replied
silently, beginning to back away.
Cara had long ago noticed the unicorn's ability to
move through the forest without making a single
sound. She, alas, possessed no such skill. Despite her
best efforts, she stepped on a dry twig that broke
beneath her foot. It was a tiny sound, yet in the
silence of the forest it exploded against her horrified
ears like a firecracker.
Lightfoot froze where he stood. She did the same
until the delver guards leaped to their feet and, with
a bloodcurdling scream, started after them.
"On my back!" ordered Lightfoot.
She obeyed without hesitation. No sooner had she
scrambled onto his shoulders than he was off like a
rocket, hurtling into the darkness. Hunched low over
his shoulders, Cara wrapped her hands in his silky
mane and prayed that she would be able to hold on.
Branches whipped against her as they careened
wildly through the forest. Dark shapes rose before
them, then vanished to the side as Lightfoot veered
around them.
So tightly were Cara and Lightfoot connected that
for a moment she felt as if she were the unicorn, as
68

THE HUNTED

if it were her legs doing the running, her aching
lungs and hammering heart fueling the flight from
the delvers.
They plunged through a misty hollow, up a steep
bank, in and out of patches of moonlight, until suddenly Lightfoot stopped, flanks heaving, and stood
silent, listening.
In the distance they could hear delvers crying out
in anger and frustration.
"We've lost them," he said triumphantly.
It was only then that Cara realized how terrified
she had been. Trying to stop the trembling that suddenly overtook her, she said, "You must be able to
see in the dark. I had no idea where we were going."
"Half the time, neither did I," confessed the
unicorn.
Cara caught her breath in surprise, then started to
laugh.
Their moment of triumph was short-lived. From
the dark and the distance they heard a terrible roar,
followed by angry battle cries. The sounds were confusing, jumbled together, and muted by distance. But
when silence fell, there was no question what they
meant.
"They've got the Dimblethum," whispered Cara in
horror.

69

10
THE TINKER
ara and Lightfoot stood about a hundred
feet from the delver camp. They had debated fiercely about who should go back to
study the situation. When Lightfoot claimed
he could move more silently, Cara pointed
out that he was also more likely to be seen because
of his white coat and luminous horn.
"Actually, I can dim the horn," he told her. "It
would be a dangerous thing if I couldn't."
"That doesn't change the fact that it's a lot easier
to see that white coat of yours than it would be to
spot me. I mean look at me — I practically blend
into the forest!"
Indeed, her jeans and T-shirt were so stained and

70

THE TINKER

mud spattered that they looked like the camouflage
clothes the boys in her class sometimes wore.
"I can't let you go down there alone," said Lightfoot firmly. "If they heard you, how would you get
away?"
In the end they decided they would go together,
but Cara would make the closest approach to the
camp, with Lightfoot hiding nearby. She agreed solemnly not to get more than fifty feet away from him.
They also decided that it would be foolish to take
the amulet with them.
"You know, not all my relatives would approach
this the same way," said Lightfoot, resting his horn
on Cara's shoulder as she carefully hid the amulet
and its broken chain in a hollow tree. "I can think
of some that would insist we abandon the Dimblethum and head for Grimwold's Cavern as fast as
possible."
She thought about that for a minute. "It might be
the sensible thing to do," she said. "After all, the
most important thing is to keep the amulet from
falling into the wrong hands."
"That's true," said Lightfoot.
Cara paused, her hand still in the tree trunk. "But
leaving the Dimblethum doesn't feel right," she
continued.
"That's true as well."
She could feel confusion beginning to creep over
her. "So the question is, should we risk the mission,

71

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

and the safely of all the unicorns, in order to rescue
one friend?"
"Some of my relatives would say there is no question. We have a clear duty to keep the amulet away
from the enemy. This is not just our journey. The
safety of the unicorns, and possibly all of Luster, depends on defending the amulet against those who
would abuse it."
Cara slowly drew her hand from the tree. She
began moving her arm back and forth, as if she were
trying to decide whether to reach in and take back
the amulet. The choice seemed to be crushing
against her brain. "Are you trying to tell me we
shouldn't go back for the Dimblethum?" she asked.
"I'm just pointing out the questions involved. I
should probably also point out that most of my relatives don't think much of the Dimblethum." He
paused, then added, "Of course, most of them don't
think much of me, either."
Though she longed for Lightfoot to make the decision, Cara sensed that he was going to defer to her
in this matter — perhaps because he was confused
himself. But she was torn, too. Her mind was telling
her that for the good of all they should flee with the
amulet, taking it as far from this place as possible.
Her heart was screaming that they could not leave
their friend.
In the end, her heart made the choice. Asking
herself what her grandmother would do, she found
herself thinking instead about her parents. The pain72

THE TINKER

ful memory of the way they had abandoned her made
it impossible for her to do the same to anyone else.
"We're going to get him," she declared.
"That's a very immature decision," said Lightfoot.
The criticism stung like a slap. "Why do you say
that?" she asked sharply.
"Because it is what I would choose," he replied,
sounding amused. "And my uncle has assured me
many times that I am very immature."
"If your uncle wants to handle this, let him come
out here and wander around in the woods with the
delvers," said Cara. "In the meantime, we have to go
see what they're doing with the Dimblethum."
Creeping through the darkness, away from Lightfoot and toward the delvers, Cara could easily have
wished they had decided to press on in their journey.
Each movement was an agony of indecision as she
tried not to make a betraying sound. Each dew-wet
leaf that brushed her face, each twig that prodded
her side, seemed to her racing imagination the touch
of an enemy.
Finally she drew close enough to get a clear view
of the delver camp through the undergrowth. By the
flickering light of the low fire she saw that the Dimblethum had been bound to a tall pole. He sagged
against his ropes, as if weary and beaten. Even in the
low light she could see at least two hideous wounds.
The delvers stood in a circle around him, prodding him with their spears. They were speaking to
73

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

him, but without Lightfoot at her side, she heard only
rasping, guttural sounds. The Dimblethum spoke not
at all; whether he was refusing to answer or had
actually lost consciousness she could not tell in the
dim light.
Each time one of the delvers poked at the manbear
she wanted to scream at them to leave him alone.
Finally she could stand to watch no more. Moving
quietly, she returned to Lightfoot's side.
"What can we do?" she asked after describing the
hideous scene.
He shook his head mournfully. "I do not know."
They trailed the delvers for the better part of the
next day. It was a horrible, frustrating time, partly
because they were moving backward, away from
Grimwold's Cavern, but even more because in that
time they were not able to do anything to help the
Dimblethum.
To add to their worries, they had no idea what had
happened to the man who was hunting Cara. She
couldn't help but wonder if he was stalking them
even as they were following the delvers.
To top things off, the Squijum — who would normally have reappeared by this time — seemed to
have vanished altogether.
"You don't suppose anything happened to him, do
you?" asked Cara once when they were taking a
break.
"Hard to tell with that one," replied Lightfoot.
74

THE TINKER

"Something could have happened to him. Or he may
simply have lost track of us — though he is a very
good hunter. He may even have lost interest; his
attention span is not all that great. But there is nothing we can do about him now. We need to focus on
the Dimblethum. I'd suggest you rest while you can.
There's no telling when they'll start moving again."
Though she couldn't stop worrying, Cara did try
to relax. They were only taking a break because the
delvers had stopped for the same purpose. There
were an even dozen of the little monsters, about half
the group that had first captured the Dimblethum.
According to the snatches of conversation they had
been able to catch, the others had remained to continue looking for "the girl with the amulet," as they
referred to her.
Cara thought it was rather amusing that while they
were out looking for her she was trailing them. It
was the only amusing aspect of the situation. Her
heart ached for the poor Dimblethum. She had
caught glimpses of him stumbling along, his paws
bound behind him, delvers prodding him with their
spears should he falter or slow. Oddly, the delvers
seemed not to worry about anyone coming after
them. She decided that they were so used to being
the hunters that it never occurred to them that things
might go the other way.
The delver party got ready to start out again. It
was a noisy process, which made it easy for Cara and
75

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Lightfoot to keep track of them without getting too
close. Cara had noticed that while the delvers occasionally moved through unmarked forest, they
more often followed faint but definite paths. What
surprised her was that twice these paths crossed
wider paths defined by pairs of shallow ruts.
"Is this some kind of road?" she asked Lightfoot
the first time they crossed one.
"Yes. It was made by some of the humans."
"There are other humans in Luster?" she asked
excitedly.
"Not many."
She wanted to know more, but he was focused on
the problem of the delvers and the Dimblethum and
didn't want to be bothered talking about such things.
She did notice that though the delvers crossed these
roads, they did not follow them.
She and Lightfoot were crossing one of the roads
themselves, some minutes behind the delvers, when
they heard a horrible clatter to their right.
"There you are!" cried a friendly voice. "I've been
waiting for you!"
They turned. To their astonishment an oddly
dressed man was trotting toward them. He was drawing a cart behind him, which he pulled by means of
two wooden poles. Hanging from the roof of the cart
were all manner of things, including a number of
pots and pans, all of them clanging and clattering
like a cooking set being rolled down a stairway.
Cara was terrified that the racket would draw the
76

THE TINKER

delvers, but Lightfoot told her that it was more likely
they would stay away, since they did not care much
for humans, and only humans would make such a
racket.
Still, she would have insisted that they move on,
so that they not lose sight of the Dimblethum, had
she not seen what was sitting on top of the man's
wagon.
"The Squijum!" she cried.
"Oh, yes," said the man, slowing to a walk. "It was
he who brought me to you."
"Good Squijum! Happy good hotcha-gotcha!"
cried the little creature, leaping from the wagon to
an overhanging tree. He began swinging through the
branches, which let him reach Cara and Lightfoot
considerably ahead of the man. He leaped down to
her shoulder.
Cara stroked his fur as she stared at the approaching man.
Bald and bearded, with a roundish nose, he wore
high leather boots, loose trousers, and a remarkable
coat that seemed to be made almost entirely of
patches of various bright fabrics. The coat had an
astonishing number of pockets. Gold chains drooped
in graceful arcs from every one of them.
"Thank goodness I found you," he said, clattering
to a stop. Dropping the wooden poles of his wagon,
he wiped his high bald head with a handkerchief he
fished from his trousers.
The cart was like a tiny house on wheels, about
77

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
four feet wide and eight feet long. It had a pitched
roof, and high blue walls. Painted on its side in large,
old-fashioned letters, were the words:
THOMAS THE TINKER
I Mend What I Can
"Actually, you're right on schedule," he said, pulling one of the chains to reveal a large pocket watch.
He stared at the watch for a moment, then frowned.
"Or maybe you're not." He pulled an even larger
watch from another pocket and stared at it. "Oh, well,
never mind," he said, shoving both watches back
into pockets other than the ones from which they
had come. "You're here, and so am I, and that's what
matters. Shall we take a stab at rescuing your friend?"

78

11
THE CART
hree hours later, Cara crouched in the narrow aisle that ran down the center of the
1
Tinker's wagon. The Squijum sat next to her,
nearly bursting with the effort of keeping
still. With Thomas hauling the cart, they
were heading for the delvers' camp.
Cara was surprised at how smoothly the cart traveled. She had expected to be bounced and jolted for
the entire journey.
The inside of the cart had also surprised her.
Rather than the hopelessly cluttered jumble she had
anticipated it was so tidy as to be almost stark. Whatever Thomas carried here was packed behind rows
and rows of small doors, tiny ones at the top of the
cart, larger ones at the bottom.
79

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Despite the need to remain silent, she had tried
to open a few of the little doors. When they had
proved to be locked, she had tried the others. Every
one of them (dozens in all, counting the smallest)
was locked.
It had been very frustrating.
In her hand she held the knife Thomas had given
her. "When the time comes, I want you to jump out
of the wagon," he had told her. "Cut the Dimblethum
free and guide him back inside. Then close the
door — quickly and tightly/ — and I'll get you out of
there."
The whole thing had been set up so fast it had left
her head spinning. But that was the first thing she
had noticed about the Tinker: He was fast. It didn't
make any difference what he was doing — walking,
talking, thinking, or planning — he did it rapidly.
Lightfoot had seemed alternately amused and disgusted by the man, but since they had no other way
of saving the Dimblethum, he had had little choice
but to accept the assistance.
Cara wished she were able to talk to the Squijum.
She wanted to know more details about how he had
found the Tinker.
Suddenly the cart stopped. Moving silently, she
pressed her eye to the secret hole Thomas had
showed her in the back wall. It took a moment for
her to make out the scene. It was fully dark now,
and they were in the delvers' camp, which was once
again lit by a low fire. The creatures, none of them
80

THE CART

any higher than Thomas's waist, had gathered around
the Tinker. Several were shifting their spears in a
menacing fashion.
Thomas spoke to them rapidly in their own language. His hands flying, he pointed first to their
spears, then to the cart.
For a terrifying moment, Cara wondered if he had
betrayed them and was sending the delvers to kill
her.
She beat down her suspicions and tried to spot
the Dimblethum. But the limited view offered by the
peephole made it impossible to see him. She hoped
she would be able to find him fast enough when the
time came!
As she watched, one of the delvers reluctantly
handed Thomas his spear. The Tinker took something from his pouch and made a series of swift
strokes over the spearhead. Then he tested it against
his thumb, and with a smile handed it back to the
delver, who did the same thing. His hideous face
broke into a wide grin and he nodded to the others.
Wonderful, Thomas, thought Cara. Sharpen their
weapons for them. That's going to do us a lot of
good!
But he only sharpened two more of the weapons.
When he took the third he examined it and made a
series of clucking noises that indicated big trouble.
Turning to the owner he said something to him, then
reached into one of his pockets and drew out a watch.
Cara braced herself. That was the sign.
81

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

But when Thomas opened the watch, nothing happened. He shook it in disgust, closed it, put it back
in his pocket. Then he dug out another one.
He motioned to the delvers and they gathered
closer.
Thomas opened the watch and, even though she
had been expecting it, Cara cried out at the flash of
blinding white light that filled the clearing. Her cry,
however, was nothing compared to the screams of
the delvers, who clamped their hands over their
enormous eyes and fell to the ground screaming in
pain.
Cara shot out of the cart. After the flash of light,
the clearing seemed extraordinarily dark, and it took
her a second to spot the Dimblethum. As the night
before, he was tied to a pole. Racing to his side, she
slashed the rough cords that held him.
The look of gratitude on his face made the risk
and the effort all worthwhile. He stumbled forward
and she feared that he would not be able to walk. If
that happened she didn't know what she would do,
for she surely could not carry him.
He did not fall, but he did need to lean on her
shoulder. Staggering under his weight, she guided
him back to the cart. Chaos surrounded them as the
still-blinded delvers, most of them not yet back on
their feet, groped their way about the clearing,
screaming and cursing. She could not understand
any of the words except Thomas's name, which they

82

THE CART

screamed over and over in tones that made her blood
run cold.
One delver nearly stumbled into them, but the
Squijum leaped at him from behind, causing him to
spin and fall to his knees. Hurrying past him, Cara
led the Dimblethum into the cart, turning him sideways so that his broad shoulders could fit into the
narrow aisle that ran down the center.
The Squijum leaped in behind her. Slamming the
door shut, she fastened the bolt and prayed.
Thomas was as good as his word. With her eye
pressed to the peephole, Cara could see the trees
flashing by as he pulled them through the forest to
the place where they were supposed to rendezvous
with Lightfoot. This time she decided that there must
be something magical about the cart, for no one
could pull it over the root-ribbed forest floor so
swiftly and easily without magic.
Lightfoot was waiting impatiently in a clearing
just off the side of the little road, about two miles
from the delver camp. He had wanted to come
on the mission, but the others had persuaded him
that there had to be at least one of them left should
things come to disaster, and he was the logical one
to stay behind.
"From what you've told me, we'll need you to heal
the Dimblethum when we get him back," Thomas
had said. He had paused, then added (not without

83

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
a note of jealousy), "I wish I could do that kind of
mending. Anyway, no sense in risking you at this
stage of the game."
Lightfoot had fussed and fumed but agreed to stay
behind, muttering that there were times when he
found it utterly annoying that he did not have hands.
However, once they pulled the Dimblethum out of
the cart, he was in his glory. Making the others step
aside, he used his horn to heal the numerous wounds
that split the manbear's pelt.
Cara noticed with some surprise that the horn
glowed brighter as it was doing the healing. What
did not surprise her was that as soon as Lightfoot
was done, his knees buckled and he fell to the
ground.
"We need to get farther away from here," said
Thomas nervously. "Let's get them into the wagon."
"They'll never fit!" said Cara.
"Oh, ye of little faith," laughed Thomas. "Watch
this."
Though she watched, Cara was never really sure
just what it was that the Tinker did to the cart. He
began pulling out rods and folding down slats. Humming to himself as he worked, he reminded her of
nothing so much as a kid playing with one of those
toys that, with the right motions, can be turned into
something altogether different. And indeed, when
Thomas was done, the blue cart was twice the size
it had been.
"How did you do that?" she asked in astonishment
84

THE CART

as the Squijum raced around the cart, chattering with
excitement.
"This is a very special wagon," said Thomas with
a chuckle.
How special became even clearer when he offered
to let Cara pull it, after they had loaded the Dimblethum and Lightfoot inside.
"You're joking!" she said, looking at the cart, which
was now the size of a large camper trailer.
"Give it a try," he replied gleefully.
Stationing herself between the poles, she grabbed
them firmly and tried to take a step forward.
The cart rolled easily behind her.
"Very special indeed," he said, giving the cart an
approving pat.
The only problem with having the cart so large
was it would not pass easily through the forest. They
were forced to follow the road instead, though
Thomas said that was just as well, since the delvers
would tend to avoid it.
"They won't be able to see well enough to follow
us for another few hours, anyway," he continued.
"Then they'll probably have a long fight about
whether they should follow us, or report back to the
king, or just run away and hide for a month or two.
So the odds are we won't need to worry about them
for a while."
"There's someone else hunting for us," said Cara
nervously. "Another human."
85

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
"I know," said Thomas with a nod. "The Squijum
and I met him on the road. Unfortunately, I was a
little confused at the time. I'm afraid I completely
bollixed the directions I gave him. In fact, now that
I think of it, I probably sent him the wrong way
altogether. I expect he's a long way away from us
now." He gave her a wink. "Silly of me," he said,
"but it's done now. Oh, well — I was pretty sure he
was no friend of the Queen's."
Cara smiled. Much as she had come to love Lightfoot, the Dimblethum, and the Squijum, they were
all very different from her. Thomas's presence made
her realize that she had missed human company
more than she would have thought possible.
"How did you get here?" she asked him now as
he strolled along beside her.
"Fell in by accident," he said. "Pretty silly of me,
now that I think about it. But then, I've done a lot
of silly things in my time."
"How long ago did it happen?"
"Oh, it's hard to say." He stopped and did some
calculations on his fingers. "About a hundred and
fifty years ago, give or take five years on either side."
"Right," she sneered. "And I'll be ninety-two on
my next birthday."
He chuckled, which he seemed to do fairly often.
"Such a cynic for one so young. I have drunk from
the Queen's Pool — a reward for a little something
I did when I first got here. Won't make me live
forever, which is a pretty frightening idea, anyway
86

THE CART

now that I think of it. But it does stretch things out
a bit."
She looked at him, wondering if he was teasing
her. The thing was, here in Luster such an outlandish
statement made almost perfect sense.
"Ah, here we go," he said before she could ask
another question. "This looks to me like a good place
to bed down for the night. And just in time, too," he
added, holding out his hand at the same time that
Cara felt the first drops of rain begin to spatter against
her forearms.
At Thomas's direction, she positioned the cart
about ten feet off the road. Rushing about with his
usual speed, he quickly blocked up the wheels,
folded out a side compartment complete with a bed,
unrolled a canopy from the back, and started a small
fire in its shelter.
"There we go," he said, settling on the steps that
he had flipped out from under the back of the cart.
"Cozy as a house and twice as easy to pick up and
move."
Cara went in the back of the cart to check on
Lightfoot and the Dimblethum, but both of them
were sleeping soundly. The Squijum, which had scurried in behind her, snuck onto the Dimblethum's
stomach. Covering his eyes with his tail, he sighed
softly and fell asleep.
"Now I know this cart is magical," muttered Cara,
climbing back down to sit beside the Tinker.

87

12
DRAGONPATH TO
GRIMWOLD
he next morning Lightfoot and the Dimblethum were still a little shaky. However, they
both pronounced themselves fit to travel.
"Mind if I come along?" asked the Tinker,
as he started to fold up his cart. To Cara's
astonishment, he continued folding until it was about
the size of a man's wallet.
"Convenient sort of a thing, isn't it?" he said with
a smile, slipping the cart into his pocket. "Only real
problem I have with it is when I want to get at my
tools. Then I have to unfold the silly thing all over
again."
The Dimblethum came to her while she was standing with Lightfoot, and said, "For what you did, the
88

DRAGONPATH TO GRIMWOLD
Dimblethum thanks you. Now the Dimblethum and
you are even, each rescuing the other."
Cara was startled. "I didn't come get you so we
would be even," she said, somewhat sharply. "I did
it because... oh, never mind."
Lightfoot translated her words for the Dimblethum, who looked truly puzzled, and a little hurt.
But later he gave Cara a flower, one of the fuzzy
purple ones. She tucked it over her ear and wore it
for the rest of the day.
Most of this day was given over to retrieving the
amulet. They had to retrace their journey of the day
before, and it was late afternoon when they finally
reached the area where Cara had hidden it. For a
little while they were not able to find the specific
tree. Cara was beginning to panic when the Squijum
located it, working by scent.
"See, see!" he cried triumphantly. "Can look and
find!" Emerging from the hollow tree with the amulet and its broken chain, he crooned to himself,
"Hotcha good finder guy!"
That accomplished, they needed to plan what to
do next.
"If we press on, we can reach the edge of Dragon
Territory tonight," said Thomas. "That will give us an
extra bit of safety if the delvers are still patrolling the
area; it is unlikely they will enter Firethroat's domain."
"Which makes them smarter than us," muttered
Lightfoot.
89

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Late in the evening they stopped to rest. The Dimblethum built a small fire while Thomas unfolded
his cart. Later, after they had eaten, he asked Cara if
she would let him examine the amulet.
"Well, now I see what the fuss is all about," he
said, as he turned it over and over in his hands. "It's
not every day that one of the Queen's Five turns up
out in the open. Would you like me to fix this silly
chain?" he asked.
"That would be nice," said Cara.
"I like fixing things," he said as he worked. "The
world is always breaking, here and there, this way
and that. Fix a bit of it, and I feel like I'm helping."
Reaching into his jacket, he pulled out a ridiculously tiny tool.
"Funny thing about chains," he said. "They're
everywhere, once you know how to look for them.
I like chains."
When Cara laughed at this, he shook his chest,
causing the hundreds of golden links that hung there
to sparkle in the firelight.
"There's lots of kinds of chains," he continued.
"You can't see most of them, the ones that bind folks
together. But people build them, link by link. Sometimes the links are weak, snap like this one did. That's
another funny thing, now that I think of it. Sometimes
when you mend a chain, the place where you fix it
is strongest of all."

90

DRAGONPATH TO GRIMWOLD

As he spoke, he held up the chain, which was
whole again. Passing the amulet to Cara, he said,
"Never was a chain that couldn't be broken. Sometimes it's even a good idea."
Putting away his tools, he crawled under the wagon
and slept.
Despite her worries about her grandmother, Cara
found herself beginning to fall deeply in love with
the world into which she had fallen.
"It's so lovely here," she marveled as they stood
on top of a high hill, gazing over a spread of green
territory dotted with small lakes, friendly rivers, and
patches of forest.
"Earth used to be like this," replied Lightfoot. "Not
all green, of course; it always had its mountains and
deserts. Luster does, too, for that matter. But Earth
was once clean and bright and beautiful."
"How do you know about that?" she asked.
"It's in our stories. It's where we came from, after
all. Grimwold can tell you more."
"Who is this Grimwold, anyway?"
"A friend of the unicorns," said Lightfoot. "He
came here long ago and stayed, as friends sometimes
do. More than that I had best not say. He is very
possessive and does not like others to tell his
stories."
"Is he human?"
"Close enough. Scratch right there, please."

91

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

She obliged, scratching his shoulder where she
had been resting her hand. She was about to ask
him about Summerhaven when he whispered,
"Look!"
To their left stood a range of snowcapped mountains. Cara had been eyeing it nervously as they traveled and had been relieved when her companions
had assured her that they were not going to have to
cross it. Now she looked at it again, wondering what
Lightfoot wanted her to see.
Suddenly she caught her breath. Far away, soaring
above the highest of the peaks, was the form of a
dragon. It was tiny to the eye, but given its distance
from them, she could tell it must be enormous.
"Firethroat?" she asked without opening her
mouth.
"None other," replied the unicorn.
Even the Squijum was quiet as they watched the
great creature swoop and soar above the mountains.
Suddenly she turned and sailed in their direction.
Cara felt her heart leap in a strange combination of
wonder and fear as the dragon opened her mouth
and shot forth a column of flame nearly as long as
she was herself.
"She's beautiful!" thought Cara, even as she wondered if they were about to die. Then, to Lightfoot:
"Should we run?"
"No! If she hasn't seen us — which is unlikely —
it will only attract her. If she has, it will anger her,
make her think we are up to no good. Our best
92

DRAGONPATH TO GRIMWOLD

choice is to stand still and hope she is in a quiet
mood."
The dragon continued to spiral and weave through
the air. As she drew closer, Cara could see that she
was red, a deep red, like blood and fire. Just when
Cara thought that she couldn't hold still for another
moment, the dragon banked to the left, flapped her
wings, and — moving faster than Cara would have
thought possible — returned to the mountain. A moment later she had vanished.
"Yowee hotcha yipes!" squeaked the Squijum,
vaulting onto Lightfoot's back. "Big eater make me
supper gone gone good yipe now!"
Cara laughed in spite of herself. "Since she didn't
attack, do you think she approves of us?"
"I wouldn't go so far as to say that," replied Lightfoot. "Just that she doesn't disapprove. Madame Firethroat does not dislike unicorns. It is uninvited
company she disapproves of. I suspect she found our
little group odd enough that she would rather watch
us than eat us. Likely she guesses that we're heading
for Grimwold's Cavern. As long as we don't do anything to annoy her, I think she'll let us alone."
"What would annoy her?" asked Cara nervously.
"Hunting on her territory, mostly," said Thomas.
"She guards it jealously and considers anything that
lives here to be hers. That, and anything that might
hurt the land. She has no use for delvers, of course,
with all their digging and changing things."
Lightfoot translated the comment for the Dimble93

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
thum, who replied, "No one has much use for
delvers, except delvers. The Dimblethum and his
friends should move on. They may have passed inspection, but Lady Firethroat has been known to
change her mind. They should not press her
tolerance."
They picked their way down the hillside, which
was rocky but easy to walk on. Lower down, the
waving grass was as high as Cara's waist, and Lightfoot
invited her to ride on his back. The grassland was
rife with flowers that grew on spikes so tall she could
pluck them simply by stretching out her hand. She
started weaving them into Lightfoot's mane until he
shook his head and told her to stop.
Sometimes the Squijum rode on the Dimblethum's shoulders, sometimes with Cara. Sometimes
he simply scampered off through the grass. Once he
disappeared for a long, silent time. Cara started to
worry, but finally he reappeared, smiling to himself.
"Don't do that again!" said Lightfoot harshly.
"Hungry small quiet! Not good not eat! Feed
good!" protested the Squijum. But his voice was
quiet, and he sounded abashed, even ashamed.
"Nothing that happens here is too small for Firethroat to notice," replied Lightfoot. "Nothing. Take a
meal and you may make a meal, if you know what I
mean."
The Squijum sulked and did not talk for several
hours, while Cara scanned the sky nervously, won-

94

DRAGONPATH TO GRIMWOLD
dering if Firethroat would now return for them. She
continued to scan the sky as it grew dark, and myriads
of twinkling stars began to appear above her. Their
strange patterns and unusual brightness made her
feel farther from home than ever.
They slept that night in the shelter of a low cliff.
When the sun woke them they continued their journey. After the first hour, they veered to the right.
"We're leaving Firethroat's territory," said Lightfoot, and Cara felt both relief and regret to be turning
away from the mighty dragon.
The region they traveled through now was one of
high hills and rocky valleys. Late in the day they
picked their way down the side of a hill to a valley
through which ran a particularly lively stream. Halfway along the valley they started up the side of the
hill again. After a moment, Cara realized that they
were following a path. It led to a wooden door, set
in the side of the hill.
"Grimwold's Cavern," said Lightfoot.
The Dimblethum stepped forward and banged on
the door.
"Are you sure it's safe?" asked Cara nervously.
"Of course it's safe," said Lightfoot. "It's Grimwold's job to be here when we want to talk to him."
"His job?"
"I told you, he's the Keeper of the Chronicles.
That's how he earns the right to be here. Anyone
who wants to stay in Luster — "

95

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
His words were interrupted by the door swinging
open. "All right, all right," said a gruff voice.'! hear
you! What is it you want?"
Cara took one look at the strange little man standing before her and cried out in astonishment, "It's
you!"

96

13
GRIMWOLD
ho did you think it would be?" replied
I // the little man sharply. "My cousin
MAS'Droopwillow? He doesn't live here.
l \ * Never did." He paused, then added,
'( "Don't think he lives anywhere now,
for that matter."
"But I've seen you before," Cara stammered, too
surprised to notice that he was speaking to her in
English. She stared at him to be sure that it was true.
Yes, it had to be. The dark brown skin; the huge eyes,
just this side of being so big they were grotesque;
the thick, bushy brows that sprouted over them like
silver waterfalls; the rounded pug nose — they all
added up to the face she had seen every day on her
grandmother's dresser.
97

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
Of course, there it had been surrounded by an
ornate wooden frame. The image had not been a
photograph like all the others on the dresser, but a
painting, one her grandmother had done herself.
Whenever Cara had asked about the painting,
Grandmother Morris had laughed and said, "Oh,
him\ an old friend from a long time ago — another
life, almost. I painted that back when I was about
fourteen."
Cara blinked at the memory. If her grandmother's
words were true, then the little man standing in front
of her had been a little old man for at least fifty years.
Lowering his extravagant eyebrows, Grimwold
stared at her and said, "What do you mean, you've
seen me before?"
" I . . . I think my grandmother must have met you.
She has a picture of you on her dresser."
Grimwold smiled. "The ladies always did fancy
me. What did you say your name was?"
"Cara. And how can you understand me without
Lightfoot telling you what I'm saying?"
"It's my job. I take it you're Lightfoot," he added,
turning to the unicorn. "Son of Dancing Heart, if I
remember correctly, which I'm certain I do. Still
breaking your mother's heart?"
Lightfoot blew air through his nostrils in a sign of
anger. "We come seeking shelter and information.
We also need to contact the Queen, if at all possible."
"Certainly, delighted, wonderful," grumbled the
dwarf. "As if I don't have enough sorting and filing
98

GRIMWOLD

and figuring without you starting.a new story on me.
Well, come in, come in; you're outside now, and
we're not going to get anywhere with you standing
on the doorstep. I suppose the other three have to
come in as well. I don't have their stories, you know,
or at least not much of them. Not in the job, not in
the job. Enough to do without keeping track of the
likes of them."
The Squijum chittered angrily, but Cara had taken
her hand from Lightfoot's shoulder, so she couldn't
make out his words.
The door was wide enough for Cara and Lightfoot
to enter side by side. The Squijum scampered in
with them, racing around Lightfoot's cloven hooves.
The Dimblethum lumbered through behind them.
Thomas came last. Grimwold stood by the door until
they were all inside. Then he slammed it shut and
lowered a huge wooden crossbar to secure it.
They had entered a long tunnel. It was lit by softly
glowing lanterns. To Cara's surprise, the walls were
of wood rather than stone — a rich, dark wood that
reminded her of the paneling in the old library
where she and her grandmother had spent the afternoon that had ended with them being chased into
St. Christopher's. How long ago had that been? She
had lost count of the days.
Again she felt a stab of worry about her
grandmother.
Mounted between the lanterns were beautiful
paintings in intricately carved frames. Most of the
99

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

images were of breathtaking landscapes populated
by unicorns. Sometimes the unicorns were galloping, sometimes rearing and pawing the air, sometimes simply gazing out over their world. The
remaining pictures were portraits, mostly of unicorns. Cara was amazed at how their faces varied, so
that each displayed a distinct personality.
A handful of the portraits were of humans, or nearhumans, since one was of a mermaid and another
of a centaur. Cara wanted to stop to study the paintings, but Grimwold was hurrying them down the
stone-paved hall. She was scurrying along, trying to
keep up, when suddenly she did stop, so abruptly
that the Dimblethum bumped into her.
"What is it?" asked Lightfoot, coming back and
resting his horn on her shoulder.
Cara pointed to a small portrait of a beautiful redhaired girl in her early teens. "That's my grandmother!" she said, accidentally speaking aloud.
"It is?" asked Grimwold, sounding nearly as surprised as Cara. "Why didn't you tell me so in the first
place? How is dear Ivy?"
"I don't know," said Cara desperately. "She was in
terrible trouble when I left her."
Grimwold didn't look surprised. "I knew there
was a tale in all this," he said. "Well, come along. We
had best get on to the Story Room. I'm going to have
to make notes. From the sound of it, I'm going to
be part of this one, at least in a small way. Earth and
sky, but I hate it when that happens."
100

GRIMWOLD

Cara could have sworn she heard the Dimblethum
chuckle. She glanced at him. His mouth was set in
a straight line. Even so, he could not hide the twinkle
in his eyes. She wished she knew what he was
thinking!
The wood-paneled hall opened into a high cavern
where the light came not from lanterns but from a
single stone basin as wide as Cara was tall. Multicolored flames leaped from its center, sending shadows flickering and dancing across the walls. The path
wound between stalagmites that thrust upward from
the floor and stalactites that hung down like huge
stone fangs. A few pairs of stalactites and stalagmites
had met, fusing into stone columns. Their smoothly
shifting contours made them look as though muscles
rippled beneath their slick surfaces.
The cavern was so large the bowl of fire could not
clearly light its perimeter. Even so, the shifting flames
revealed numerous doors and tunnel openings.
/ wonder if you can get lost in here? thought Cara
as Grimwold led them past the bowl of fire. To her
surprise, it was cool — a witchfire that cast light only.
She noticed then that it was smokeless as well.
Beyond the stone basin ran a stream about ten
feet wide. Reflections of the firelight danced on the
surface of the dark water. The stream was easily
crossed by means of a number of wide, flat stepping
stones. The Squijum bounded over ahead of them,
then came leaping back. An angry gesture from the
Dimblethum sent him scampering away again. Cara
101

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

guessed that the manbear wanted no interference
while trying to cross the stones.
Another wooden door, another wood-paneled
corridor; this time the walls were broken on one
side by doors, on the other by wood-framed openings that stretched into the darkness. The passage
ended at a large door carved with strange designs.
When Cara put her hand on Lightfoot's shoulder, she
realized they said, "Story Room." It took her another
moment to realize that if she could read them while
in contact with Lightfoot, he must be able to read
them as well.
"Let's get to work," said Grimwold.
Swinging wide the door, he invited them into what
was, without doubt, the most wonderful room Cara
had ever seen.

102

14
THE STORY ROOM

I

-t was clearly a room made for writing. Books,
scrolls, stacks of paper, notebooks, pens, and
pots of ink seemed to cover every available surface— of which there were many, since the
room held five long, low tables. The dark
wooden walls were lined with maps, pictures, and
intricately woven tapestries. Unlike the portraits in
the first hall, these pictures seemed to illustrate specific events.
The walls (of which there were also many, for the
room was full of nooks and crannies) were made of
stone and wood. Natural outthrusts of stone had been
carved into seats; some were even padded with cushions. Three of the larger indentations in the cavern
walls had been transformed into lantern-lit reading
103

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

nooks featuring shelves carved right into the stone.
The shelves held pens, papers, and some little
wooden figures.
In one wall a merry fire blazed in a huge fireplace.
Unlike the cavern's witchfire, this one cast a lovely
warmth. A broad shallow pit carved in front of the
hearth provided a spot to sit and gaze into the flames.
It took Cara a moment to realize that the chairs
were of many sizes. She suddenly suspected that the
rugs scattered about the floor were, in fact, resting
places for guests.
To the left of the fireplace a little stream sprang
from an opening about five feet above the floor,
creating a tiny waterfall. At its base was a pool about
three feet in diameter. No stream ran out of the pool,
so Cara assumed the water must somehow drain
from the bottom.
Next to the little fall stood a rack that held a collection of cups and noggins of many sizes and shapes.
/ want to live here! thought Cara.
"Find a place and settle in," said Grimwold as he
scurried behind one of the tables. Mounting a stool,
he spread a piece of curling paper before him, then
set a polished rock at each corner to hold it down.
Muttering to himself, he began trying to select a pen.
Lightfoot folded his legs and curled up on a deep
purple rug. The Dimblethum and Thomas each
picked up a wooden chair and moved it closer to
the fire. After running about for a moment, the Squijum finally leaped into Thomas's lap; wrapping his
104

THE STORY ROOM

tail around himself, he settled down with a sigh.
(Three minutes later, however, he was climbing onto
shelves and examining things.)
Cara hesitated, then positioned herself beside
Lightfoot. Though she had wanted to sit with him all
along, she had been afraid he would think she was
clinging to him. Then she realized that if she didn't
sit with him, she would not be able to understand
anything the Dimblethum or the Squijum said.
"All right, what's your story?" asked Grimwold,
looking directly at Cara.
"I beg your pardon?"
"Your story, your story," he said impatiently.
"That's my job, to collect all the stories that involve
the unicorns."
"Not only to collect them," said Lightfoot sharply.
"To record them and make them accessible. You'll
have the story in good time. Right now, we need the
story behind what is happening to this child. Cara,
show him the amulet."
Rising, Cara pulled the amulet from beneath her
T-shirt. Lifting the chain over her head, she carried
it to Grimwold. He gasped. "One of the Queen's
Five," he muttered as he examined it. After a moment
he looked up at her. "Did Ivy give this to you?"
Cara nodded.
"Why?"
She took a breath, then told him what had happened the evening she and her grandmother had
been pursued into St. Christopher's. Grimwold made
105

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
notes as she spoke, his pen scratching across the
paper. When she was finished, he picked up the
amulet and let it dangle from his fingertips. He stared
at it with an expression that Cara found strange and
terrible. After a moment he looked at Lightfoot and
said, "I fear that the Hunters have returned."
"Who are the Hunters?" asked Cara.
Before Grimwold could answer, Lightfoot came to
stand beside her. She placed her hand on his
shoulder.
"Use the common tongue," the unicorn said to
Grimwold. "The others must hear this as well."
To Cara's shock, she felt an undertone of fear in
Lightfoot's message, a fear so strong it frightened her
as well.
"Certainly," said Grimwold, "though much of it
will be things that you already know."
"That is all right," said Lightfoot. "Cara, come sit
with me while Grimwold tells of what has been, of
the enemy that drove us from Earth so long ago."
They returned to the purple rug. Cara knelt with
her hand on Lightfoot's neck and stared at the old
man expectantly. The Dimblethum growled and
shifted in his seat. The Squijum left off his explorations and returned to Thomas's lap.
Looking directly at Cara, Grimwold said, "This is
the story of the hunting of the unicorns, and how it
began. At least, it is the short version of that tale, for
I could tell it in a way that would take many evenings

106

THE STORY ROOM

and let you know the deeds of many heroes, both
human and unicorn."
He lowered his voice, speaking more intensely.
"Their sacrifices led to the creation of the first door
between Earth and Luster, the path the unicorns followed to safety and freedom. This is the story behind
that story, the story from which springs all other
stories gathered here in the Unicorn Chronicles, all
other songs sung on this world. It is a tale woven
from greed and loss, lies and truth, bravery and sacrifice, ending and beginning."
As Grimwold continued, Cara felt herself moving
into the trance of the story. The power of his telling
brought the tale to life inside her, drawing her back
to a time long gone....
"Back in the morning of your world [said Grimwold] when things were sweeter rougher stranger
cleaner and more savage than they are today, the
unicorns came forth. No one knows from whence
they came. No one knows why. They just were. Their
numbers were few, as if the world could only hold
so much of their magic. And magic they were, for in
their horns, in their hooves, in their very being, they
carried the power to transform things.
"At first even the unicorns did not know the extent
of their powers. But as time went on they found that
they could clear water, heal wounds, quicken growth.
"In that early time the unicorns lived in harmony

107

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

with the world, bringing it sweetness and guarding
some of the small animals for whom they took a
fondness. They gathered much wisdom, which they
stored in their heads, as they had no means of writing
it down. Of course, in the newness of the world,
there was less to know, and among them the unicorns
could hold all that they had learned. Because they
can communicate so easily, the knowledge was accessible to all.
"Eventually another creature came to power. That
was man. And though your species has many virtues,
child, there is a strain of savagery running through
it that has driven much of the best and most beautiful
that your world once offered into extinction, or —
as in the case of the unicorns — exile."
The Dimblethum growled softly, as if remembering some old anger. Grimwold nodded toward him,
acknowledging his right to complain, then continued
his story.
"Man hunted. He hunted for food, for skins to
warm himself and his family, even for sport. But he
did not hunt the unicorns.
"Now death comes for all things, even unicorns,
though they are remarkably long-lived. When the
first of their kind died, a great mourning overtook
the unicorns. The twelve oldest came to her body
and with their horns changed her flesh to soil, her
bones to water, her mane and tail to flowers. But
they could not change her horn, for it was too powerful. The horn stayed as it was.
108

THE STORY ROOM

"From its perfect beauty flowed inestimable
tragedy."
Cara felt Lightfoot shiver.
"A man found the horn and brought it back to his
people," continued Grimwold. "But to make himself
seem braver and more honorable, he did a dishonorable thing. He told a great lie about the ferocity
of the unicorn from which he had taken the horn,
claiming that she had attacked him in the wood, and
that he had battled it to the death. In that falsehood
lay the seeds of the tragedy that followed."

109

15
A TALE OF BLOOD
AND SORROW
he story of the fierce unicorn was repeated
often, and the wide-eyed children who
_ _ heard it had no reason to disbelieve. Yet
)m *) ^ e P o w e r °f t n e horn w a s s u c n that it
'^=J began to transform the man who had
found it. The lies retreated from his heart and with
them the need to feel higher than his fellows. Slowly
he learned to use the horn to heal, to help, to protect.
"Eventually he even tried to take back the story
of how he had obtained it. But lies have a life of
their own and are harder to kill than either men or
unicorns.
"People began to come from great distances to be
touched by the horn. But since the horn was no
longer part of a living being, the magic it held could
110

A TALE OF BLOOD AND SORROW

not be replenished. Over the years its power was
slowly drained, until at last it was empty of everything
save beauty.
"Now, even before the horn had lost its magic,
other men had desired one of their own, longing
for the power and prestige that would come to
whoever possessed such a miracle. With the horn
drained, the dream of owning one became even
more intense, for no healer who walked the Earth
at that time had the certain power of the horn.
"Even so, only the bravest went seeking unicorns.
For while the horn had lost its power, the lie told
by its finder had grown in strength. Men now believed the story of fierce and deadly unicorns as if
they had experienced it firsthand."
"We can be fierce if need be," said Lightfoot
proudly.
"It is something you learned in the terrible years
that followed," replied Grimwold. He paused, then
turning to Cara said, "It started with a girl about your
age. She was the child of a great hunter, a man both
ferocious and determined. His wife had died giving
birth to the girl, and thereafter he had lived alone
in the forest with only his child for company. He
called her 'Beloved,' for he had given all his heart
to her.
"Beloved fell ill. On the first day of her sickness,
the hunter tended her himself. But on the second
day she was much worse, so he went to the village
and brought the healer back to their forest home.
Ill

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
"But the healer could do nothing. 'Alas that we no
longer have a unicorn's horn,' he muttered as he left
the hut.
"The father's quick ears heard these words.
"With each passing day, Beloved's condition grew
worse. On the third day after the healer's failure, the
hunter said to himself. 'I shall find me a unicorn. I
care not for its ferocity. I care not for my own life,
should Beloved die. I will hunt, and I will find, and
I will tear the horn from its head.' "
Cara could feel Lightfoot shudder. Horrible as the
story was, she wondered what it would be like to
have a father who loved her like that.
"Such was the hunter's love for his daughter," continued Grimwold, "that he never questioned
whether his vow was good or evil, wise or foolish.
The child alone was in his mind and his heart as he
went a-hunting.
"His quest carried him far and wide. But each night
he returned to the cottage to care for Beloved and
tend her needs. He was a solitary man, and even had
he known someone who could come and help with
the child, he would not have known how to ask. Alas,
each night when he returned to the cottage, the child
was worse than when he had left her. The days drew
on. She begged him to stay by her side until she
died, as she was sure now that she must do.
"But the hunter had become obsessed with the
quest for the horn. Wild-eyed, he refused his daughter's pleas and instead strapped her to his back and
112

A TALE OF BLOOD AND SORROW

carried her with him on his hunt. It was not hard,
for her illness had wasted her and she weighed but
little. Nor did she complain, for she loved her father
and longed to be with him."
Cara sighed, thinking what that must have been
like. Grimwold glanced at her, but made no
comment.
"In the forest," he continued, "the hunter left Beloved in a place he deemed safe, a place his hunter's
skills told him was not visited by great cats or other
fierce beasts. Then he began circling out, searching
for a unicorn, haunted by the fear that he would
come back and find his daughter dead from her
illness.
"Late that afternoon a breeze caught and carried
Beloved's scent to a unicorn named Whiteling, who
was wading in a stream some miles away. The smell
of her pain and need, of her approaching death,
touched his heart. He began seeking the child even
as her father was returning from his hunt.
"Whiteling reached the clearing first. He did not
enter at once, for unicorns were wary around humans. But something about the child drew him in —
her innocence, perhaps, or her pain, or simply the
knowledge that he could heal her. Silently, on feet
that could cross a field of flowers without crushing
a petal, he began to walk toward the girl.
"She lay equally silent, eyes closed, breathing
shallow.
"Lowering his horn, Whiteling pointed it at Be113

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

loved's breast even as her father drew near the clearing. The hunter's heart filled with terror when he
saw the very beast he had been seeking, the beast
he had been taught from boyhood was ferocious
beyond all others, heading for his daughter. He
reached into his quiver, drew forth an arrow, nocked
it to his bow."
Cara drew a sharp breath. She could feel Lightfoot
grow tense beside her.
"The unicorn bent to heal the child. The father
loosed his arrow. It flew straight and true, piercing
Whiteling's heart at the very moment that his horn
pierced the heart of the ailing girl. He screamed and
reared, trumpeting his pain.
"Bellowing with rage, the hunter raced into the
clearing. Whiteling turned on him and the two began
to fight.
"The battle was brief, but bloody. When it was
done, both man and beast lay dead on the forest
floor. The only living thing in the clearing was Beloved, who had watched the tragedy through wide
and terrified eyes.
"Whiteling had cured her illness. Yet her heart was
filled with an icy pain. Here is the reason: When the
arrow struck Whiteling, he had snapped up his head
so fast that the tip of his horn caught beneath Beloved's breastbone and broke off there. That piece
of horn was now lodged in her heart, which was
doomed to be forever wounded, forever healing,
both in the same instant."
114

A TALE OF BLOOD AND SORROW

Cara put her hand to her chest, trying to imagine
the feeling.
"Though it took seven days, Beloved buried her
father in that clearing, digging his grave with the
broken horn that she had hacked from Whiteling's
head with her father's knife. When she was done,
she stood atop her father's grave. Holding the alicorn
with both hands, afire with pain, she swore that she
and her children, her children's children, and all the
generations that followed would be foes of all unicorns, and hunt them and kill them until the last days
and the ends of the Earth.
"Only then did she return to the cottage that she
had shared with her father. Eventually she found
another hunter and married him, and gave birth to
seven sons. Each son was trained in the ways of the
wood, and the trail, and the hunt; each sought unicorns to slay, which they did by acting out their mother's story and placing a young woman in the woods.
"The hunters believed this lured the unicorns because they wanted to savage the innocent girl. But
the real reason was even stranger. In the moment of
Whiteling's death, the unicorns had been taken by a
kind of madness. He was the first of their kind to be
killed, and each unicorn had felt the moment when
his horn had been broken. Each had seen, for an
instant, through his eyes. And what they had seen
was a young girl, lost in pain and fear. These two
things, the girl and the broken horn, were fused in
their minds, and they sought ever and again to find
115

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

the missing bit of horn and to bring peace to young
maidens — usually to the unicorns' own grief and
sorrow.
"The sons of Beloved grew old and died. But Beloved herself did not, for the piece of horn lodged
in her heart kept her alive, ever wounded, ever healing. Grandsons she had, and great-grandsons after
that. And as is true for many families in your world,
they came to be known by what they did; they came
to be called the Hunters. Of course, many are known
as Hunter who do not come from this clan. And there
are many born to the clan who do not know its true
past. But from each generation Beloved herself selects a handful to carry on the family quest: to seek
and to slay unicorns."
Grimwold paused and shook himself, as if coming
out of a trance. Looking directly at Cara, he said,
"After a time the unicorns opened the first door to
Luster. They fled here to have a world of their own,
where they would be safe from the Hunters, and the
curse of Beloved. But that is another story and a long
one at that. What you need to know now is that for
centuries the Hunters sought to enter this world, in
order to carry on their quest for revenge. Then
something happened, and for a long time we did
not hear anything of them. We even dared hope that
the line had finally died out or given up.
"We were wrong. I am sure that the man chasing
you is one of the clan. His goal is to gain the amulet
so he can open a door to Luster to others of his
116

A TALE OF BLOOD AND SORROW

kind. Perhaps the Hunter and the delvers are in
league. Even if they are not, should the delvers succeed in opening a door, the Hunters will be ready.
The slaughter will begin again."
Cara felt a cold terror in her heart — partly because of what Grimwold had just said, but even more
because she finally knew the identity of the man who
had chased her grandmother and her into St.
Christopher's.
She knew, but she dare not tell.

117

16
THE SCRYING POOL
W/£) ightfoot shifted uneasily beside her. "I do
• I not like that story," he said. "It makes me
I ^.unhappy."
"I did not tell it to brighten your day,"
replied Grimwold sharply. "I told it because
you have become part of it."
"But how do you know that the man who is chasing
us is a Hunter?" asked Cara.
"Who else would seek the amulet? Someone else
might have heard of it, I suppose. But when you add
the amulet to the tracking, the pursuit of you and
your grandmother, it smacks to me of Hunters."
"Do you think he would have hurt my grandmother?" she asked.

118

THE SCRYING POOL

Grimwold frowned. "It is hard to say. Though their
quarrel is only with the unicorns, they can be ruthless in their pursuit."
Cara groaned. "What should we do now?"
"Let us try to contact the Queen," said Grimwold.
"How do we do that?"
"Through the scrying pool," he said.
Cara wrinkled her brow. "What's that?"
Rather than answering directly, Grimwold said,
"Follow me." He rose and led them to a door in the
side of the Story Room.
When they stepped through it, Cara caught her
breath in wonder and desire. If the Story Room was
the best room she had ever seen, the contents of this
next room were — especially for someone who
could think of little better than to live in a library —
overwhelming.
It was a room of books, shelves and racks and
rows of books. And every one of them looked old
and mysterious, as if it held secrets too fascinating
to be put in more modern-looking volumes. Scrolls
there were as well, and four or five polished wooden
stands where thick books lay open with ribbons
marking their pages.
"What are all these?" she asked.
"The Unicorn Chronicles," replied Grimwold.
"They hold the history of all that has happened since
the unicorns first came to Luster."
"But where did they come from?"

119

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Grimwold shrugged. "From me. From the unicorns. The unicorns bring me their stories and I
write them down."
"You wrote all of these?" she asked in
astonishment.
"I have been here a long time," he replied, as if
that explained everything. "And please remember, I
do not invent the stories — I simply record what the
unicorns tell me. You will be in here, too, before
long, because you are part of one of their stories as
well. Though should things go wrong with this
one..." He trailed off, as if the possibility was too
horrible to contemplate.
"But where do the things to make them come
from?" she asked. "The paper and the ink and the
pens and — well, everything]" she finished, waving
her hands in a gesture that took in not only this room,
but the one they had just left, and the hall beyond
that, with its paintings and portraits.
"You are not the only human who has come to
Luster," said Lightfoot gently.
"More's the pity," growled the Dimblethum.
They had reached an arched door at the far side
of the library. Grimwold paused with his hand on
the thick metal latch and said, "The unicorns have
lived here for a long time now. In the time since
they first opened the passage to this world, humans
have stumbled, fallen, lied, cheated, bought, magicked, and hoped their way here. Whether or not

120

THE SCRYING POOL

they are allowed to stay is a complicated matter. But
any who do are expected to serve the Queen. My
job is to chronicle the days of the unicorns. Others
there are who make paper, who bind books, who
fashion things of beauty and worth."
"Or fix things," said Thomas cheerfully.
"Where do the other humans live?" Cara asked.
"Here and there," said Grimwold with a shrug.
"Usually in clumps and clusters, the way humans tend
to, though some are solitary, and live in cottages built
far from the beaten path.'.'
"Some just travel," added Thomas.
Grimwold, who clearly did not like to be interrupted, shot him a nasty look. Thomas took out one
of his watches and looked at it as if it contained
important information.
"The people who find their way here often tend
to be loners," continued the dwarf. "So some do not
live any place at all but wander the paths of Luster,
doing errands when the Queen summons them."
Thomas smiled and nodded.
Grimwold snorted and opened the door he had
been holding. The others followed him out of the
library into a cave that had been left in its natural
form. In its center three tripods supported small
cauldrons filled with something that glowed a soft
orange. By this dim light, Cara saw irregular stone
walls, and a scattering of stalactites and stalagmites.
Centered between the tripods was a stone basin

121

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

much like the one that had held the cold fire in the
main cavern. However, rather than fire, this basin
held dark, cold-looking water.
"The scrying pool," said Grimwold. Then he ordered Lightfoot to dip his horn in the basin.
The unicorn nodded and stepped forward. When
he bent his horn to the water, silver shimmered
across the surface of the basin.
"Stand beside me," the dwarf said to Cara, positioning himself at the edge of the basin.
She stood where he indicated.
"Look into the water."
Again, she complied. To her surprise, the surface
of the water began to shimmer. Slowly an image
began to appear. It was not her reflection, nor a
reflection of the cavern, but an entirely different
place, green and pleasant looking.
"Summerhaven," said Lightfoot, who was standing
behind them. He backed up a step or two. "I'd just
as soon you not tell the Queen I'm here," he said
to Grimwold.
The Squijum had jumped onto the rim of the basin
and was looking into the pool with fascination. "Very
much good pretty," he said, reaching out to touch
the water.
Cara expected Grimwold to snap at the little creature and shoo him away. But before the dwarf could
move, the water roiled and darkened.
"Yikes!" squealed the Squijum, leaping onto Cara's
shoulder.
122

THE SCRYING POOL

Grimwold cursed in astonishment.
"What is it?" asked Cara. "What's happening?"
"Something has interfered with the connection,"
he said. He shivered, and the look in his eyes sent
a chill down Cara's spine as well. "This has never
happened before," he continued. "The pool is a powerful magic. The Queen herself set it up for me. I
cannot imagine what could—"
"Look!" said Lightfoot.
All eyes turned to the pool. A message had appeared on the surface of the troubled water, written
in large, flowing letters, as if from some great pen.
It said: "Surrender the Amulet."
It was signed, "Beloved."

123

17
UPWARD
;

ou must leave this place at once," said
Grimwold.
p. « n "Why?" asked Cara, who was still shaking
\W( I with the shock of the message.
<^£r
"Because she knows that you are here."
They had returned to Grimwold's writing room.
The old dwarf was pacing back and forth in front of
the fireplace, chewing his lips.
"This is worse than anything I could have imagined," he said. "Beloved has not been heard from
for years. I had even dared hope she might finally
have died. Now you arrive with this amulet, a Hunter
hot on your trail, and the ancient enemy tracing your
path. I do not like this. I do not like it at all."
Cara shifted nervously in her seat, feeling vaguely
124

UPWARD
guilty, as if the entire situation were somehow her
fault. She started to say something, then stopped
herself.
"Why not destroy the amulet?" growled the
Dimblethum.
"Be my guest," said Grimwold. Gesturing toward
the fireplace, he nodded to Cara and said, "Throw
it in, if you wish."
"Won't the Queen be angry?" she asked, at the
same time wondering what such an action would
mean for her own chances of getting home.
Grimwold shrugged. "Probably not. I suggested it
merely for the sake of demonstration. If you throw
it in, it will not melt. Hammer it, it will not bend.
To destroy it would take a magic more powerful than
can be found in this cave."
"Things that cannot be broken are generally a bad
idea," said Thomas.
Cara shivered. "Where is Beloved now?" she
asked. "On Earth — or here in Luster?"
"I do not know," said Grimwold, "though I dearly
hope that she is still in your world. Bad enough that
she has some agent in this world — probably one of
the Hunters, which is even worse — without her
being here herself."
"If she knows where we are, knows to send a
message here saying she wants the amulet, isn't it
likely that she will have someone in place to steal it
as soon as we leave here?" asked Lightfoot.
"Absolutely," replied Grimwold. "Which is why
125

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

you must leave in secret. I will take you to one of
the back tunnels. It will let you out in Firethroat's
territory."
"Yikes!" squealed the Squijum.
"She should not bother you," said Grimwold. "I
have long since made peace with the Great Lady. In
fact, she herself suggested this emergency exit."
"What do we do after we leave?" asked Cara.
"Make for Summerhaven and the Queen with all
the speed that you can manage. I had hoped to summon help, an honor guard to take you and the amulet
safely to court. Now you will need to travel as swiftly
and secretly as you can. The amulet must not fall
into Beloveds

hands! If it

does..."

He shook his head, as if the magnitude of the
catastrophe was beyond his power to describe.
The trip through the tunnels was longer than Cara
had expected, mostly because it had not occurred
to her that Grimwold could have such a lengthy passage underground. They traveled first through a corridor lined with wood, then for a long way through
natural rock, crossing underground streams, traversing caves so huge she wasn't sure they would
find the other side, and narrow places so small the
Dimblethum could barely squeeze through them.
Finally they left the caverns and entered an earthen
tunnel supported by beams.
Man-made! Cara thought to herself, then realized

126

UPWARD

that here on Luster handmade was the most she
could say and be sure that she had the truth.
The Squijum rode on her shoulder for most of the
journey, nervously crooning nonsense syllables in
her ear. His fluffy tail curled around her neck felt as
friendly and safe as the stuffed animals that lined her
bed at home.
Home. The thought nearly stopped her in her
tracks. She could not think of home without thinking
of her grandmother. And she could not think of her
grandmother without a pang of fear, wondering what
had happened to her in the tower of St. Christopher's — though now that she knew who had chased
them there, she was even more confused.
Aside from the Squijum's chatter, they traveled in
silence. Once or twice Lightfoot made a point of
stepping beside her. When she put her hand on his
shoulder he thought to her, "I just wanted to see if
you were all right."
Eventually they reached a set of five earthen steps.
The steps led up to a wooden door. The door slanted
toward them. The angle was so sharp that when Cara
pressed her forehead to the door, its base was still
some five feet ahead of her, level with her knees.
Grimwold said something to the Dimblethum. The
creature put a pawlike hand on Cara's shoulder to
draw her back. Stepping past her, he pressed his
shoulder against the door. It opened into twilight,
revealing a sky just starting to blossom with stars.

127

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Cara now saw that the reason for the door's angle
was that it was set in the side of a hill. Once outside,
she saw that the door's exterior had been disguised
with grass and wildflowers and rocks that she
guessed must somehow have been glued in place.
(Or, she realized, held there by some sort of magic.)
Grimwold pointed ahead of them and began to
speak to Lightfoot — giving the unicorn directions,
Cara assumed.
The dwarf turned to her. "It was a great pleasure
to meet you, Miss Cara," he said with such obvious
sincerity that she suddenly felt somehow more at
home here. "Not all stories are good, not all endings
are happy. May your story, on which may ride the
fate of us all, be both good and happy. Give my
regards to the Queen, and to your grandmother, if
you are lucky enough to see them."
"I will," replied Cara, somewhat confused by the
combination of gloom and hope in the dwarf's
words.
Grimwold turned and stepped into the hillside.
When he closed the door, it was almost as if he had
never been there.
The Dimblethum made some growling noises.
Cara put her hand on Lightfoot's shoulder, too late
to understand the meaning of the growls, but in time
to catch the unicorn's response, which was basically,
"As fast as possible." Turning his attention to Cara,
he added, "Would you like to ride?"
She scrambled onto his back, twining her fingers
128

UPWARD

in the spun silk of his mane, pressing her knees to
his sides. No need to urge this steed to speed, or for
a bridle to guide him. She merely held on as he
sped through the grassland, straight into the domain
of the dragon.
The Squijum and the Dimblethum traveled beside
them, the Dimblethum usually on his hind legs, but
occasionally dropping to all fours. Thomas ambled
along behind, seeming not to hurry, yet never falling
very far back.
They were nearing the foothills. A full moon had
risen, painting the entire landscape with silver light.
Suddenly the Squijum screeched and leaped onto
the Dimblethum's back. "Look see look look look!"
he cried, pointing moonward.
Cara looked up and gasped. Dark against the darkness of the night, Firethroat was flying. She crossed
the moon once, and then again, her great and terrifying shape stark against the silver orb. On the
second pass Cara realized that the dragon was getting
closer. For a moment she tried to convince herself
it was mere coincidence, but too soon it became
obvious that Firethroat was heading straight for
them.
"Run!" she cried to Lightfoot, forgetting that her
spoken words carried no meaning for him. It didn't
make any difference; the thought was so strong in
her that she didn't need to try to send it to him. It
flowed from her in a wash of panic so powerful that
he reared back and pawed at the air.
129

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Cara slid from his back, landing with a thump on
the soft grass. Part of her remembered Lightfoot's
warning that to run would only anger the dragon.
But with that great, bat-winged form swooping toward them from the darkness, such advice was hard
to heed. Scrambling to her feet, she shot off through
the grass. Something grabbed her neck. She
screamed before she realized it was the Squijum,
who had leaped onto her shoulders and was gibbering with a fear that matched her own.
To her astonishment, Lightfoot held his ground.
He stood in the moonlight, wind streaming through
his mane, staring up at the dragon as if daring her
to take him.
Cara caught her breath as Firethroat swooped low
above the unicorn. The creature was enormous, her
head the size of a car, the span of her wings wider
than a house. Lightfoot, even the Dimblethum, suddenly seemed tiny in comparison.
Raising her head, the dragon shot a column of fire
into the sky. Then she flapped those enormous wings
a single time and swooped over Cara. Closing her
right claw around the girl, the dragon turned and
headed upward.
Cara screamed and kicked as she was lifted from
the ground. But the talon that had closed around her
waist was like a band of iron: smooth, hard, unbreakable. Her stomach lurched as the world fell
away below her. Her legs dangled uselessly, and with
nothing supporting her she was terrified that she
130

UPWARD

would fall. At the same time, irrationally she was
struggling to escape the dragon's grip, even though
success would have sent her tumbling to the ground,
increasingly far below. The Squijum, which still clung
to her neck, was screeching in terror.
The dragon wheeled, and, almost as an afterthought, veered toward the ground again and
snatched up Lightfoot with her other claw. Then into
the air she rose. As Cara watched the land fall away
below them she spotted Thomas and the Dimblethum, the latter roaring and stretching his fists toward the sky. Slowly they dwindled, until they were
nothing but specks.
The dragon flew on.

131

18
IN FIRETHROAT'S
CAVE
irethroat flew higher and higher, until Cara
felt that all of Luster was spread below them,
a world of forests and plains, broad swamps
and great rivers. In the distance, sparkling in
the moonlight, a vast body of water stretched
on farther than she could see, some huge lake, or
inland sea, perhaps even an ocean.
Cara looked to her right, where Lightfoot dangled
from the dragon's other claw, which held him around
the middle. She wanted to speak to him, but it was
impossible without direct contact.
To her surprise she was quite warm. She soon
realized that the warmth emanated from the dragon's
belly.
The Squijum, muttering in terror, had burrowed
132

IN FIRETHROATS CAVE
between her body and Firethroat's claw. Cara worried that he might tickle the dragon into dropping
them. But once he stopped squirming she realized
it was almost comforting to have the little fellow
snuggled against her.
They were above the mountains now, rising higher
with the beating of Firethroat's great wings. The land
below them, marked with cliffs and crags, grew
wilder and rockier the higher they flew.
Was Firethroat planning to eat them? Perhaps she
was simply going to drop them from some great
height. Why was she angry with them? Simply for
invading her territory? Or had they committed some
other crime? She remembered Lightfoot saying that
Firethroat had no patience with fools. She also remembered Grandmother Morris asking if anyone
could be sure that he was not a fool.
The dragon banked to the right, and Cara felt dizzy
as the world tipped beneath her. Then they swooped
toward the side of a mountain. For a moment her
heart leaped with new fear as she thought the dragon
was going to dash them against the cliffs. At the last
moment Firethroat flapped her wings just enough to
lift them above the edge of the cliff onto a broad
shelf of rock that fronted an enormous cave. After
depositing them on the flat surface, the dragon settled in herself. She had no need to fear her prey
would run away; the only possible routes were over
the cliff or past herself.
On wobbly legs Cara stumbled to Lightfoot and
133

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

placed a hand on his shoulder. Are you all right? she
thought.
Better than I'm likely to be in a few moments, he
replied.
Suddenly the Squijum bolted from her shoulder
and attempted to race past Firethroat. The dragon
put out one enormous claw to block the little creature's path. Squeaking with distress, the Squijum
scrambled over the claw and disappeared on the
other side.
Firethroat made a dangerous noise deep in her
throat. Cara wondered if the dragon would now cook
her and Lightfoot out of mere annoyance. Instead,
Firethroat simply looked at them, which was almost
as frightening. Indeed, after a few moments in the
dragon's gaze Cara felt as if she had been cooked.
The dragon did not move. After a time Cara forced
herself to look back. She realized, with some surprise, that Firethroat was quite beautiful — if astonishingly large. The eyes that stared at her were nearly
the size of her bedroom windows. Tendrils of smoke
curled from flared nostrils so big that you could
easily have roasted a turkey in either of them.
Reddish scales that had the appearance of burnished metal covered her massive head. Her long
neck disappeared into the darkness of the cave,
though the end of her tail looped forward again so
that its pointed tip lay only a few feet from Cara.
Finally Firethroat said, "So. You are the one for whom
I have suffered so much humiliation."
134

IN FIRETHROA T'S CAVE

Though Cara had her hand on Lightfoot's shoulder,
she didn't need the connection to understand the
dragon. The beast spoke in perfect English!
Cara was so surprised that she ignored the dragon's strange statement and asked, "How do you know
my language?"
"Each species has its gifts," replied Firethroat.
"The unicorns are healers. You humans have your
hands and your inventive brains, always thinking of
new things to make. We dragons have — among
other things — the gift of tongues."
This time Cara understood that the dragon was
whispering, and realized that if she spoke with her
full voice it would probably blow them off the
mountainside.
Cara paused. The next question felt dangerous, as
if once asked, it would open the door to a problem
that could overwhelm them all. And yet there was
no way back, no choice but to ask it. Realizing that
the very presence of the dragon seemed to demand
that she speak formally, she asked, "How have I
brought humiliation upon you?"
Firethroat made that terrifying noise in her throat
again. The smoke curling from her nose became
thicker, darker.
"I am very old," she whispered. "It has been many
hundreds of years since anyone dared trifle with me.
Yet two days ago a man came to this cave while I
was out flying. Few men there are in Luster and even
fewer that would dare come here. This man dared
135

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
to come, and much more. He went to the store of
my treasures, which no man on Luster has ever done.
Worse still, he disturbed that store, rummaging
through it for the greatest prize of the lot, which he
stole from me, to my shame and humiliation, and to
your great sorrow."
"What was it that he stole?" asked Cara nervously.
Firethroat snorted twice. Little gouts of flame
licked around the edges of her enormous nostrils.
"One does not become as old as I am without
being wily as well. Before I came to Luster, many a
man wished to kill me for the sake of impressing
some fair lady whose span of days would be no more
to me than the mayfly is to you. Most of these men
were easily defeated. Yet I knew the day would come
when some man would catch me while I was contemplating the poetry of the sky and the messages
written in the clouds and not thinking about men
and their treachery. I knew that in that moment I
would die.
"So I wove a great enchantment. It took the help
of many, for many were the magic makers, witches
and wizards and sorcerers of all sorts, who were in
my debt. Together we took my heart from my body
and placed it in a golden casket. So long as my heart
was in that casket it was safe, and I could not be
harmed.
"The man who came to my cave yesterday did what
no man has ever dared to do, or even thought of

136

INFIRETHROAT'S CAVE

doing. He stole my heart, and told me he would not
return it until I did his bidding."
The dragon closed her eyes for a moment, and
Cara felt a flash of pain and embarrassment so overwhelming that she almost wished she could fling
herself from the cliff.
"He who holds the casket holds my heart. He
who holds my heart, holds me, and can command
me as he wishes. This was the price of the magic,
the geas that is laid on me. I have no quarrel with
you or your companions. But the man who holds
my heart asked for you, and I had no choice but to
obey."
"Who is it that holds your heart?" asked Cara, sickeningly sure that she knew the answer already.
Firethroat did not speak. From behind the dragon
a clear strong voice said, "I do."
Footsteps echoed across the floor of the cave as
the man stepped from the darkness, stood beside
the dragon's head. He was tall, with red hair. His
eyes were dark, his face hard and lean. In his hands
he held a large casket made of gold. Placing it on
the ground, he put one foot on top of it, triumphant,
confident.
Firethroat groaned.
Cara's heart was beating like a captured bird, and
something thick seemed to have lodged itself in her
throat.
The man turned to her and spoke. She did not

137

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

need to hear his voice to know he was the man who
had pursued her into St. Christopher's — to know
he was that man, and so much more.
"Hello, Cara," he said.
She closed her eyes and swallowed. Then she
whispered, "Hello... Daddy."

138

19
FAMILY MATTERS

E

ightfoot cried out and flinched away from
her as if he had been burned. In the instant
before he moved, she could sense the feeling
of betrayal that washed through him. Fire, throat closed her eyes, like someone pulling
the shade over a window. It was a gesture of understanding, of resignation, of defeat.
As for Cara, her heart was running wild with so
many emotions that she simply could not move. She
stared at the man she had longed for for so long, a
deep and indefinable ache stretching through her
body. At last she saw the face for the voice in the
tower, the secret face that had haunted her dreams
since she entered Luster.
Trying to keep her voice from breaking, she whis139

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

pered, "Where have you been all this time, Daddy?"
"I have been doing the family's business. Your
business, Cara Diana. I have been guarding our
world against the intrusion of murdering beasts like
the one that stands beside you. Even more, I have
been seeking a way to enter this world, so that the
hunt can end at last, and we can rest."
"Is that why you left me?" she asked. It was hard
to force the words past the pain in her throat.
He shook his head sadly. "I never left you,
sweetheart."
She blinked in astonishment, her heart leaping.
Of all the things he might have said, this is the one
she would most have longed to hear. But she did
not know what to make of it, whether to trust it.
"What do you mean?" she asked at last.
"I didn't leave you. Your grandmother stole you
from me."
A wave of coldness, filled with terror and sorrow,
washed over her. "What do you mean?" she asked
again weakly.
He sighed. "Do you remember that once when
you were little you became very sick?"
She nodded. "And a unicorn came and healed me.
I stopped believing that for a long time. But now I
know it's true."
"Your grandmother summoned that unicorn," said
her father. "She was always a friend of unicorns, and
they would do as she asked. But in saving you, she
had created a problem." He sighed. "That problem
140

FAMILY MATTERS

was me. I swear I do not know why I fell in love
with your mother, Cara, don't know if Grandmother
Beloved set me on that path to get to your grandmother. I did know, though I never understood why,
that it broke Ivy Morris's heart when her daughter
married a man named Hunter." He sighed again. "At
the time I didn't know the secret of our family. But
after the unicorn had come, Beloved called me, and
I was initiated. You have to believe me, Cara. I did
not abandon you. Your grandmother took you from
me because she was afraid I would use you to get
at the unicorns."
"And would you have?" she asked.
Her father hesitated. "Yes," he said at last.
Cara felt as if her heart was being torn in half.
How could her grandmother have done such a thing
to her? Yet how could she not? She had been to
Luster, been a friend of unicorns. Knowing what her
son-in-law's family would do if they could enter this
world, she would have been forced to take action.
Cara wondered whose pain had been greater —
her own or her grandmother's?
Or maybe even her father's?
She wondered if there was anyone in the world
that she could trust.
She wondered if the hurt would ever go away
again.
"Is Grandmother Morris all right?" she asked. "Did
you hurt her in the tower?"
The question caused her father's face to twist with
141

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
pain. "What kind of a man do you think I am?" he
cried.
"I don't know!" she screamed. "I don't know anything anymore!"
A horrible silence filled the cave.
Ian Hunter knelt, careful to keep one knee on the
casket, and looked directly at her. Spreading his arms
to welcome her in, he whispered, "I have missed
you so, my Cara, my dear one." His eyes were large
and dark with sorrow. "You don't know yet what it
means to be part of our family, Cara, don't know the
burden we carry, protecting Earth from his kind.
Since you fell through here ahead of me I have been
terrified that one of them would kill you before I
could save you."
"Lightfoot has been kind to me," she said,
confused.
"They are cunning," her father replied with a
sneer. "They knew I was coming and wanted you on
their side. But you were born to help bring an end
to them. Give me the amulet, sweetheart. Once I
have it, we can go home."
"And then what?" she asked, her voice, her body,
trembling.
"Then the final hunt will begin. After a time the
unicorns will be gone and our family's task will be
ended. Beloved will be able to rest at last and so
will I. Then you and I can be together again. You
don't know how I've longed for that day, Cara, how
much I regret the lost time. But Grandmother Be142

FAMILY MATTERS

loved called, and I had no choice but to answer. And
you — you had disappeared. I wanted to hunt for
you, but first I had to be trained for our great mission.
Yet I always knew that one day I would find you
again."
Cara closed her eyes, imagining it.
"What about Mommy?" she asked.
She had meant to say, "my mother," but it had
been eight years since she had last seen the woman
she called by that name, and when she thought of
her, thought of the night she had disappeared, it was
the word "Mommy" that forced its way through her
throat.
"Mommy is waiting for you," said her father.
Cara heard the dragon shift behind her, but it was
a momentary noise, and then the great beast was
quiet once more.
Her father held out his hand. "Bring me the amulet, Cara Diana."
Still she stood without moving, as if frozen by
hearing once more the name he had called her when
she was but a toddler, the name he called her when
he threw her in the air, and played peekaboo, and
tucked her in at night.
"Bring me the amulet," he said again, his voice
strong.
Slowly she stepped forward. Raising her hands to
her neck, she lifted the mended chain that held the
amulet.
Lightfoot whickered, and even though she was not
143

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

connected to him, she could hear in that sound fear,
and sorrow, and his sense of betrayal.
Tears in her eyes, she took another step forward,
studying her father's face, uncertain if she would be
able to do what she had to do.
"I'm waiting, Cara," he said, voice gentle, eyes
hard.
Cara ran toward him, raising her arms as if to
embrace him. But just before she reached him she
stopped and threw the amulet. It soared above his
head.
"What... ?" he cried, then he turned to scramble
for it.
But the Squijum was faster; it had already caught
the amulet and was racing into the darkness. Ian
Hunter lunged for the little creature, then suddenly
twisted back, a look of fear on his face.
He was too late. Cara had seized the golden casket
that held Firethroat's heart and was backing away
from him, toward the unicorn and the dragon.
"Cara!" he screamed. "What are you doing?"
She said nothing.
"Cara, give that back to me. You don't know what
kind of catastrophe you could create. Give it back to
me/"
"I'm sorry, Daddy," she said softly. "I can't do that."
"Cara, I'm your father. I demand that you give it
to me."
She laughed, but it was a painful sound, a laugh
that held eight years of sorrow and loss.
144

FAMILY MATTERS

He spoke again, more calmly. "Cara, you are a
Hunter, one of the clan. You were born to this. It is
the final chapter of our story, the chance to end the
hunt forever. Your blood binds you — my blood, the
blood of Beloved that runs in our veins. It's family,
Cara Diana, Cara Diana Hunter. Family. You belong
to us, to Beloved."
"Family isn't blood," she said bitterly, continuing
to back away. "Family is who loves you, who takes
care of you."
"I wanted to take care of you!" he cried, his words
pouring out in a howl of pain. "You were stolen from
me!"
The sorrow in his voice pierced her, and she
wanted to run to him. But she saw that even as he
mourned her loss, he was judging the distance between them, preparing to leap.
She took another step back, then turned and ran.
She wanted to call on Firethroat for help, but
feared that if she unleashed the dragon's wrath, the
beast would destroy her father. She didn't want to
destroy him, merely wanted him sent back to Earth,
far from her and the unicorns. She hadn't thought
further ahead than keeping the amulet out of his
grasp.
His leap brought him within inches of her. She
ran faster, heading for the front of the cave, uncertain
where she would go after that.
"Come back here!" he roared, scrambling to his
feet, sprinting after her.
145

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Firethroat, freed from Ian Hunter's hold on her
heart, was stirring.
"Don't hurt him!" cried Cara, and, because she
held the dragon's heart, Firethroat was bound by her
command.
Her father tackled her. They fell together, near the
edge of the cliff. He would have wrenched the casket
from her then, but Lightfoot trumpeted and began
to pelt the man with his hooves. Hunter drew back.
Then, as if invincible to the pain, he lunged forward
again. Stretching his arms, he tried to tear the golden
casket from his daughter's hands. Lightfoot struck his
hands away just before they closed on the casket.
Cara scrambled to her feet. Her father, intent on
the casket, grabbed her legs. She fell again, closer
to the edge. They began to wrestle. Lightfoot bugled
a warning, but it went unheeded. They rolled over
once and then were gone over the edge of the cliff.
It was different from the leap from the tower of
St. Christopher's. Then, she had leaped into light,
with a glimmer of hope that she might come to
something better. Now, she only fell, through the
night in the mountains, toward not a street but a
heap of snow-covered rock so far below it made the
distance from tower to street seem like a baby step.
She fell with no hope, only primal terror ripping
through her.
Her father was near but no longer holding her.
She could barely see him, falling, falling, just a few
feet away. Some small part of her brain registered
146

FAMILY MATTERS

with interest that they were falling at the same speed,
though he was so much heavier.
She had heard the old story that when someone
is drowning their whole life flashes before them. But
drowning would be a slow death compared to this.
Their speed was breathtaking. The cliffside flashed
by. She couldn't breathe, couldn't think, as she saw
oblivion racing toward her and then — Snatch! Firethroat plucked her from the air and soared upward
again.
Her father was still falling.
Cara was still clutching the casket that held Firethroat's heart. Without thinking, she commanded the
dragon to do her will.
"Save him!" she screamed.

147

20

THREE DROPS
OF BLOOD
ara sat, trembling, at the edge of the cliff,
holding the golden casket against her chest.
The Squijum crouched on her shoulder,
crooning nonsense into her ear. Lightfoot
stood behind her. She wondered what he
was thinking.
Ahead of them dawn was creeping over the mountains. Suddenly, Firethroat burst into the light, appearing as if from nowhere. Her claws were empty.
Cara and her friends scrambled back from the cliff
edge as the dragon returned to her cave.
"It is done," she murmured, folding her wings.
"What did you do with him?" asked Cara
nervously.
The dragon regarded her with one enormous eye.
148

THREE DROPS OF BLOOD

"I returned him to Earth," she said at last. "Not an
easy thing to do, I assure you. But flying between
worlds is another gift that dragons possess."
"Where?" Cara asked. "Where did you leave him?"
"Someplace empty," said the dragon with maddening vagueness. "I cannot go where there are people, of course. I left him safe, dry, and alive. What
he does next is up to him. I care only that he does
not return to Luster."
"Thank you," said Cara. "I know it was not easy
for you." Stepping forward, she placed the casket on
the cave floor, not far from the dragon. "Here," she
whispered, pushing it forward. "Your heart is your
own again."
She watched a great claw reach forward and draw
the golden casket away.
Then the last of her strength left her, and the pain
and the loss came flooding in. Turning from the
dragon, from her friends, Cara bolted into the darkness at the back of the cave. When she stumbled and
fell, she made no move to get up, simply lay on the
floor, sobbing her grief and pain, until a welcome
darkness blanketed her mind.
When she woke, it was dark again. The only light
came from a sprinkling of stars behind her, and —
to her right — a faint glow from the dragon's fiery
nostrils.
Whimpering, she curled into a ball, trying to blot
the memory of the previous night from her mind.
149

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
After a while she realized that someone was standing over her. Opening her eyes, she saw the glow
of Lightfoot's horn. A look of gentle concern filled
his eyes. He knelt beside her and she wound her
arms around his neck, burying her face in the clean
perfection of his mane.
"Do you hate me?" she thought.
"Why?" he asked, seeming startled by the question.
"Because I am a Hunter."
"You are Cara," he replied, "and you are not
chained by blood. You are a friend of unicorns."
Though she tried to hold it in, another sob tore
out of her. Clinging to Lightfoot, she wept until her
lungs were sore, her face a soggy mess, whispering,
"Daddy, Daddy, Daddy."
"I have no way to heal a wound such as this," said
Lightfoot sadly, when she was done.
She said nothing, only tightened her grip on him,
holding him as if she were tottering on the edge of
an abyss far deeper and more terrifying than the one
from which Firethroat had saved her.
"Are you all right?" he asked after a while.
She shook her head. "How can I be all right? I
missed him so much for so long. And then ..."
"Family ties are strange," he replied. "I have
thought about them often, but never — "
He was interrupted by the Squijum. The little creature had been sitting in front of them, holding the
amulet. Suddenly he darted forward and placed the
golden bauble on Cara's knees. As Lightfoot stepped
150

THREE DROPS OF BLOOD

back, the Squijum chittered something, then scrambled up Cara's arm to her shoulder and kissed her
on the cheek. As if startled by his own boldness, he
scampered back down and raced to the mouth of
the cave, where he sat on his haunches, chattering
incomprehensibly.
"I wish I could understand you," she said, halfamused, half-irritated.
"An interesting thought, young human," said Firethroat, interrupting the Squijum's chatter. "And perhaps the solution to a vexing problem."
"What problem?" asked Cara.
The dragon sighed, sending a wave of warmth in
Cara's direction. "I owe you a great boon for what
you have done."
"A boon?"
"It is something like a reward," explained Lightfoot. "Dragons do not like to be in anyone's debt,
and you have done this lady a great service. It would
be wise to accept whatever she offers with as much
grace as you can manage."
"But you already saved my father," whispered Cara.
"It was commanded of me," said Firethroat. "But
my heart was freely returned, and the boon must be
freely given."
Cara paused, feeling the world was moving too
fast for her. After a moment she said, "I would be
most grateful to accept your boon, Lady Firethroat."
The dragon made a sound of approval. "Come with
me," she said. "I would prefer to do this in private."
151

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

Cara followed Firethroat deep into the cave, then
into a separate chamber. Here the darkness was complete, save for the dim light that came from the dragon's nostrils. Suddenly, Firethroat opened her mouth
and shot forth a brief gout of flame.
Cara gasped in wonder, for at once the chamber
came to life with a thousand colors, as piles of gold
and jewels reflected back the burst of flame. For a
moment Cara thought the purpose of the flame had
been to show her what was in the room. She wondered if this was to be Firethroat's boon, some piece
of fabulous treasure.
She was wrong, on both counts. Firethroat had
used her flame to light a torch mounted in the wall.
Now its low, flickering light danced on the gems,
some as big as Cara's fist, that littered the floor.
The dragon cast her eye over a pile, then reached
into it and pulled forth a jeweled chalice. "This
should do," she said, passing it to Cara.
"Thank you."
The dragon chuckled. "That is not the boon."
Cara blinked.
"You didn't want it to be the boon, did you?" asked
Firethroat.
She shook her head, hoping she wasn't getting
herself into more trouble.
Firethroat stared at her. "You held my heart in your
hands and returned it to me, when you could have
made me your slave."

152

THREE DROPS OF BLOOD

Cara shivered. The thought had never occurred to
her. She found it repulsive.
"I want you to understand the granting of this
boon," said the dragon. "This is only the third time
in more thousands of years than I care to remember
that I have done this for a human. Come here — step
close."
Hesitant, nervous, Cara did as the dragon asked.
As she watched, Firethroat ran the first talon of her
right front foot up and down the scales of her neck.
"Here!" she said at last. Grasping one of the scales,
she wrenched it from her neck. Blood welled from
the wound, steaming hot.
"Catch it!" she ordered.
Cara held the chalice beneath Firethroat's neck.
Three large drops of blood fell, steaming and smoking, into the chalice.
"Now drink them."
"What?" cried Cara.
"Drink them. Quickly, while they are still hot and
the magic is strong."
Cara stared into the steaming chalice. Lightfoot's
words about accepting the boon with grace sounded
in her head. Closing her eyes, she lifted the chalice
to her lips. Then she threw back her head and drank.
Fire scalded her throat, raced along her veins. The
chalice fell from her hands. She closed her eyes,
stiffened, nearly fell, straightened, stood firm.
"Are you all right?" asked Firethroat, not in Cara's

153

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
language, but in the ancient tongue of the dragons,
a language of fire that came from deep in the belly.
And Cara understood.
"This is my boon," said Firethroat, "the best I have
to offer. It is the gift of tongues, of knowledge of the
languages of all creatures. Now there are none in
Luster to whom you cannot speak, none to whom
you must be a stranger."
"It is a great gift, and I am deeply honored," said
Cara.
"Small return for the return of my heart," said
Firethroat.
With a flick of her wing, she extinguished the
torch. Then she led the way from the chamber.

154

21
THINGS BROKEN,
THINGS MENDED
nee again Cara dangled from Firethroat's
foot. But this time there was no fear, only
wonder, as — safely wrapped in the dragon's claw — she looked out on the world
spread wide below them.
Firethroat had agreed to return Cara, Lightfoot, and
the Squijum to the place from which she had first
snatched them, with the hope that they might be able
to rejoin Thomas and the Dimblethum and continue
their journey.
"I would take you all the way to Summerhaven,"
the dragon had said, "but even I cannot fly that far
carrying both a unicorn and a human."
They had discussed the matter for a while, Cara
joying in her ability to talk to her friends with ease
155

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS
and freedom. Finally they had decided that their wisest course would be to return to Grimwold's Cavern
and try once more to contact the Queen.
"After all," said Lightfoot, "with the Hunter gone,
Beloved's connection to this world may be severed."
He paused for a moment when he noticed the
tremor of grief that twisted Cara's face at the memory
he had stirred up.
"He would have destroyed us all, you know," he
said softly.
She nodded. "I know. Even s o . . . "
"Even so," agreed Lightfoot.
As they retraced their flight of the night before,
Cara tried to pick out some of the landmarks Lightfoot had told her they would pass on the last leg of
their journey to Summerhaven: the River Mallow,
Chiron's Tor, Spirit Lake. Each, he said, had a story
attached. And each story, of course, was stored in
Grimwold's Cavern.
She longed to know them all.
It was because she was looking so hard for the
landmarks that she was the first to spot the surprise
awaiting them. "Look!" she cried to Lightfoot, pointing into the distance.
He stared for a moment, uncomprehending, then
threw back his head and bugled his delight.
"Oh yeah much good hotcha!" burbled the Squijum, who was clinging to her neck.

156

THINGS BROKEN, THINGS MENDED

The Dimblethum and Thomas were waiting for
them when they landed.
"You're back, you're back!" roared the manbear,
waving his arms in delight. Then he stood still, embarrassed at his own outburst.
"We are!" cried Cara, throwing her arms around
him, at least, as far as they would reach.
He looked at her, astonished that she could speak
to him. "How did... ?" He paused, then looked at
the dragon and nodded. "The Dimblethum sees that
you have a story to tell," he said.
"Well, I'm the one she'll have to tell it to," said
Grimwold, stepping up beside them.
Cara was not surprised to see him there. But her
attention was focused beyond him. There, standing
in a rough circle, were at least a dozen unicorns,
dazzling in the sunlight, dazzling in their beauty and
perfection.
You should not be hunted, she thought to herself.
The largest of the unicorns stepped forward.
"It's my uncle," whispered Lightfoot. He did not
sound happy.
"I bring you greetings from Queen Arabella Skydancer," said the unicorn. "She commends you on
your courage and thanks you for your efforts on
behalf of Luster. I am commanded to escort you and
your friends to the court at Summerhaven, where
you will be presented to the Queen."
"Wonderful," muttered Lightfoot bitterly. "I've

157

INTO THE LAND OF THE UNICORNS

spent the last three years trying to get out of doing
just that. Some reward!"
A week later, after a journey filled with marvels
and wonders, Cara entered the court at Summerhaven. It was a place of green splendor, grown, not
built, and at its center was a unicorn so old and so
beautiful that words could not describe her. She was
small and slender, as luminous as a rainbow, as fragile as a promise. You could see through her, as if
you were seeing tomorrow.
To Cara's sorrow, neither Lightfoot nor the Dimblethum was with her when she entered the court.
Both had come to her late in the night before they
reached Summerhaven and bid her farewell.
"The Dimblethum is not really welcome there,"
said the manbear, putting his huge paw against her
cheek, where it lay as delicately as a butterfly.
"And I am not ready to return there," said Lightfoot. "But I will see you again, I promise."
She wondered if it was true as she watched them
slip into the night. She wiped a tear from her cheek.
"Chains," said the Tinker, coming up behind her.
"They bind us, whether we want them to or not. But
a heart without chains would have nothing to hold
it, might simply blow away."
Then he held her in his arms while she wept
and wept, for her father, for her grandmother, and
even for the ever-wounded, ever-healing Beloved,

158

THINGS BROKEN, THINGS MENDED

chained to her rage for longer than anyone could
imagine.
Together, Thomas, Cara, and the Squijum went to
stand before the Queen. When Arabella Skydancer
laid her horn across Cara's shoulder in blessing, the
girl whispered, "Are you the Old One?"
"I am," said the Queen.
"Then I have a message for you. I have carried it
from another world, through danger and heartbreak
across this world to you. I am to tell you that the
Wanderer is weary."
"Then it is time to bring her home," said the
Queen. "Would you like to be the one to fetch her?"
"I would," whispered Cara. "Very much."
"Then so it shall be."
And so it was.
But that, of course, is another story altogether.
It is recorded, like all such stories, in the Unicorn
Chronicles.

159

About the Author

Bruce Coville grew up in a rural area, around the
corner from his grandparents' dairy farm. He considers himself especially lucky to have had a swamp
and a forest behind his home.
His writing for children was affected by his own
early reading, which included lots of pulp fiction
and comic books, but also had a healthy dose of
myths and legends — a taste he first developed
when one of his teachers read aloud the story of
Odysseus.
He has been reading fantasy ever since, and has
long dreamed of creating an epic series like THE
UNICORN CHRONICLES.
He lives in an old brick house in Syracuse, New
York, along with his wife, illustrator Katherine Coville; an assortment of children; two cats (Spike and
Thunder); and a dog named Booger.

