OceanofPDF.com



MORE FROM REBECCA YARROS

THE EMPYREAN SERIES

Fourth Wing Iron Flame

OceanofPDF.com






OceanofPDF.com



 
 

PIATKUS

First published in the United States in 2023 by Red Tower Books,
an imprint of Entangled Publishing, LLC

First published in Great Britain in 2023 by Piatkus

Copyright © 2023 by Rebecca Yarros

Interior art by Elizabeth Turner Stokes

Interior World map art by Melanie Korte


Interior design by Toni Kerr

Interior endpapers by Amy Ross


Instagram: @Literalamy

The moral right of the author has been asserted.

All characters and events in this publication, other than those clearly in the public domain, are
fictitious and any resemblance to real persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.

All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of the publisher, nor be otherwise
circulated in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a

similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN: 978-0-349-43704-0
TPB 978-0-349-43703-3

Piatkus
An imprint of

Little, Brown Book Group
Carmelite House

50 Victoria Embankment
London EC4Y 0DZ

An Hachette UK Company
www.hachette.co.uk

www.littlebrown.co.uk

OceanofPDF.com



 

To my fellow zebras. Not all strength is physical.

OceanofPDF.com



 

Iron Flame is a nonstop-thrilling adventure fantasy set in the brutal and
competitive world of a military college for dragon riders, which includes

elements regarding war, psychological and physical torture, imprisonment,
intense violence, brutal injuries, perilous situations, blood, dismemberment,

burning, murder, death, animal death, graphic language, loss of family,
grief, and sexual activities that are shown on the page. Readers who may be

sensitive to these elements, please take note, and prepare to join the
revolution…



OceanofPDF.com






OceanofPDF.com



The following text has been faithfully transcribed from Navarrian into the
modern language by Jesinia Neilwart, Curator of the Scribe Quadrant at

Basgiath War College. All events are true, and names have been preserved
to honor the courage of those fallen.


May their souls be commended to Malek.

OceanofPDF.com



Contents

Part One
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve
Chapter Thirteen
Chapter Fourteen
Chapter Fifteen
Chapter Sixteen
Chapter Seventeen
Chapter Eighteen
Chapter Nineteen



Chapter Twenty
Chapter Twenty-One
Chapter Twenty-Two
Chapter Twenty-Three
Chapter Twenty-Four
Chapter Twenty-Five
Chapter Twenty-Six
Chapter Twenty-Seven
Chapter Twenty-Eight
Chapter Twenty-Nine
Chapter Thirty
Chapter Thirty-One
Chapter Thirty-Two
Chapter Thirty-Three
Chapter Thirty-Four
Chapter Thirty-Five
Chapter Thirty-Six
Part Two
Chapter Thirty-Seven
Chapter Thirty-Eight
Chapter Thirty-Nine
Chapter Forty
Chapter Forty-One
Chapter Forty-Two



Chapter Forty-Three
Chapter Forty-Four
Chapter Forty-Five
Chapter Forty-Six
Chapter Forty-Seven
Chapter Forty-Eight
Chapter Forty-Nine
Chapter Fifty
Chapter Fifty-One
Chapter Fifty-Two
Chapter Fifty-Three
Chapter Fifty-Four
Chapter Fifty-Five
Chapter Fifty-Six
Chapter Fifty-Seven
Chapter Fifty-Eight
Chapter Fifty-Nine
Chapter Sixty
Chapter Sixty-One
Chapter Sixty-Two
Chapter Sixty-Three
Chapter Sixty-Four
Chapter Sixty-Five
Chapter Sixty-Six



Acknowledgments

OceanofPDF.com



PART ONE

OceanofPDF.com



In this, the 628th year of our Unification, it is hereby recorded that
Aretia has been burned by dragon in accordance with the Treaty

ending the separatist movement. Those who fled, survived, and those
who did not remain entombed in her ruins.

—PUBLIC NOTICE 628.85

TRANSCRIBED BY CERELLA NIELWART



CHAPTER ONE

R evolution tastes oddly…sweet.
I stare at my older brother across a scarred wooden table in the

enormous, busy kitchen of the fortress of Aretia and chew the honeyed
biscuit he put on my plate. Damn, that’s good. Really good.

Maybe it’s just that I haven’t eaten in three days, since a not-so-
mythological being stabbed me in the side with a poisoned blade that
should have killed me. It would have killed me if it hadn’t been for
Brennan, who won’t stop smiling as I chew.

This might go down as the most surreal experience of my life. Brennan
is alive. Venin, dark wielders I’d thought only existed in fables, are real.
Brennan is alive. Aretia still stands, even though it was scorched after the
Tyrrish rebellion six years ago. Brennan is alive. I have a new, three-inch
scar on my abdomen, but I didn’t die. Brennan. Is. Alive.

“The biscuits are good, right?” he asks, snagging one from the platter
between us. “Kind of remind me of the ones that cook used to make when
we were stationed in Calldyr, remember?”

I stare and chew.
He’s just so…him. And yet he looks different from what I remember.

His brownish-red curls are cropped close to his skull instead of waving over
his forehead, and there’s no lingering softness in the angles of his face,



which now has tiny lines at the edges of his eyes. But that smile? Those
eyes? It’s really him.

And his one condition being me eating something before he takes me to
my dragons? It’s the most Brennan move ever.

Not that Tairn ever waits for permission, which means—
“I, too, think you need to eat something.” Tairn’s low, arrogant voice

fills my head.
“Yeah, yeah,” I reply in kind, mentally reaching out for Andarna again

as one of the kitchen workers hurries by, offering a quick smile to Brennan.
There’s no response from Andarna, but I can feel the shimmering bond

between us, though it’s no longer golden like her scales. I can’t quite get a
mental picture, but my brain is still a little groggy. She’s sleeping again,
which isn’t odd after she uses up all her energy to stop time, and after what
happened in Resson, she probably needs to sleep for the next week or so.

“You’ve barely said a word, you know.” Brennan tilts his head just like
he used to when he was trying to solve a problem. “It’s kind of creepy.”

“Watching me eat is creepy,” I counter after I swallow, my voice still a
little hoarse.

“And?” He shrugs shamelessly, a dimple flashing in his cheek when he
grins. It’s the only boyish thing left about him. “A few days ago, I was
pretty sure I’d never get to watch you do, well, anything again.” He takes a
huge bite. Guess his appetite is still the same, which is oddly comforting.
“You’re welcome, by the way, for the mending. Consider it a twenty-first-
birthday present.”

“Thank you.” That’s right. I slept right through my birthday. And I’m
sure my lying in bed on the brink of death was more than enough drama for
everyone in this castle, house, whatever it’s called.

Xaden’s cousin, Bodhi, strides into the kitchen, dressed in uniform, his
arm in a sling and his cloud of black curls freshly trimmed.

“Lieutenant Colonel Aisereigh,” Bodhi says, handing a folded missive to
Brennan. “This just came in from Basgiath. The rider will be here until
tonight if you want to reply.” He offers me a smile, and I’m struck again at



how closely he resembles a softer version of Xaden. With a nod to my
brother, he turns and leaves.

Basgiath? Another rider here? How many are there? Exactly how big is
this revolution?

Questions fire off in my head faster than I can find my tongue. “Wait.
You’re a lieutenant colonel? And who is Aisereigh?” I ask. Yeah, because
that is the most important inquiry to make.

“I had to change my last name for obvious reasons.” He glances at me
and unfolds the missive, breaking a blue wax seal. “And you’d be amazed
at how fast you get promoted when everyone above you continues to die,”
he says, then reads the letter and curses, shoving it into his pocket. “I have
to go meet with the Assembly now, but finish your biscuits and I’ll meet
you in the hall in half an hour and take you to your dragons.” All traces of
the dimple, of the laughing older brother are gone, and in their place is a
man I barely recognize, an officer I don’t know. Brennan may as well be a
stranger.

Without waiting for me to respond, he scrapes his chair back and strides
out of the kitchen.

Sipping my milk, I stare at the empty space my brother left across from
me, chair still pulled out from the table as though he might return at any
moment. I swallow the remaining biscuit stuck in the back of my throat and
lift my chin, determined not to ever sit and wait on my brother to return
again.

I push up from the table and head after him, out of the kitchen and down
the long hall. He must have been in a hurry, because I can’t see him
anywhere.

The intricate carpet muffles my footsteps along the wide, high-arched
hallway as I come to— Whoa. The sweeping, polished double staircases
with their detailed banisters rise three—no, four—more floors above me.

I’d been too focused on my brother to pay attention earlier, but now I
blatantly gawk at the architecture of the enormous space. Each landing is
slightly offset from the one below, as though the staircase climbs toward the
very mountain this fortress is carved into. The morning light streams in



from dozens of small windows that provide the only decoration on the five-
story wall above the massive double doors of the fortress’s entrance. They
seem to form a pattern, but I’m too close to see the whole of it.

There’s no perspective, which pretty much feels like a metaphor for my
entire life right now.

Two guards watch every step I take but make no move to stop me when I
pass by. At least that means I’m not a prisoner.

I continue to stride through the main hall of the house, eventually
picking up the sound of voices from a room across the way, where one of
two large, ornate doors is pitched open. As I approach, I immediately
recognize Brennan’s voice, and my chest tightens at the familiar timbre.

“That’s not going to work.” Brennan’s deep voice echoes. “Next
suggestion.”

I make it through the massive foyer, ignoring what look to be two other
wings off to the left and right. This place is astounding. Half palace, half
home, but entirely a fortress. The thick stone walls are what saved it from
its supposed demise six years ago. From what I’ve read, Riorson House has
never been breached by any army, even during the three sieges that I know
of.

Stone doesn’t burn. That’s what Xaden told me. The city—now reduced
to a town—has been silently, covertly rebuilding for years right under
General Melgren’s nose. The relics, magical marks the children of the
executed rebellion officers carry, somehow mask them from Melgren’s
signet when they’re in groups of three or more. He can’t see the outcome of
any battle they’re present for, so he’s never been able to “see” them
organizing to fight here.

There are certain aspects of Riorson House, from its defensible position
carved into the mountainside to its cobblestone floors and steel-enforced
double doors in the entryway, that remind me of Basgiath, the war college
I’ve called home since my mother was stationed there as its commanding
general. But that’s where the similarities end. There’s actual art on the walls
here, not just busts of war heroes displayed on stands, and I’m pretty sure



that’s an authentic Poromish tapestry hanging across the hall from where
Bodhi and Imogen stand in the open doorway.

Imogen puts her finger to her lips, then motions at me to join in the
empty place between her and Bodhi. I take it, noticing Imogen’s half-
shaved hair has been recently dyed a brighter pink while I’ve been resting.
Clearly she’s comfortable here. Bodhi, too. The only signs that either has
been in a battle are the sling cradling Bodhi’s fractured arm and a split in
Imogen’s lip.

“Someone has to state the obvious,” an older man with an eyepatch and
a hawkish nose says from the far end of a table that consumes the length of
the two-story room. Tufts of thinning gray hair frame the deep lines in his
lightly tanned, weathered skin, his jowls hanging down like a wildebeest.
He leans back in his chair, placing a thick hand on his rounded belly.

The table could easily accommodate thirty people, but only five sit along
one side, all dressed in rider black, perched slightly ahead of the door, at an
angle where they’d have to turn fully to see us—which they don’t. Brennan
paces in front of the table but not at an angle he can easily spot us, either.

My heart lurches into my throat, and I realize it’s going to take some
time to get used to seeing Brennan alive. He’s somehow exactly the same as
I remember—and yet different. But here he is—living, breathing, currently
glaring at a map of the Continent on the long wall, the map’s size only
rivaled by the one in the Battle Brief lecture hall at Basgiath.

And standing in front of that map, one arm leaning against a massive
chair as he stares down the table at its occupants, is Xaden.

He looks good, even with bruises marring the tawny-brown skin under
his eyes from lack of sleep. The high slopes of his cheeks, the dark eyes that
usually soften whenever they meet mine, the scar that bisects his brow and
ends beneath his eye, the swirling, shimmering relic that ends at his jaw,
and the carved lines of the mouth I know as well as my own all add up to
make him physically fucking perfect to me, and that’s just his face. His
body? Somehow even better, and the way he uses it when he has me in his
arms—



Nope. I shake my head and cut off my thoughts right there. Xaden may
be gorgeous, and powerful, and terrifyingly lethal—which shouldn’t be the
turn-on it is—but I can’t trust him to tell me the truth about…well,
anything. Which really hurts, considering how pathetically in love with him
I am.

“And what is the obvious thing you need to state, Major Ferris?” Xaden
asks, his tone completely, utterly bored.

“It’s an Assembly meeting,” Bodhi whispers to me. “Only a quorum of
five is required to call a vote, since all seven are almost never here at one
time, and four votes carry a motion.”

I file that information away. “Are we allowed to listen?”
“Meetings are open to whoever wants to attend,” Imogen replies just as

quietly.
“And we’re attending…in the hallway?” I ask.
“Yes,” Imogen answers with no other explanation.
“Returning is the only option,” Hawk Nose continues. “Not doing so

risks everything we’re building here. Search patrols will come, and we
don’t have enough riders—”

“It’s a little hard to recruit while trying to stay undetectable,” a petite
woman with glossy black hair like a raven counters, the umber skin at the
corners of her eyes crinkling as she glares down the table at the older man.

“Let’s not get off topic, Trissa,” Brennan says, rubbing the bridge of his
nose. Our father’s nose. Their resemblance is uncanny.

“No point increasing our numbers without a working forge to arm them
with weapons.” Hawk Nose’s voice rises above the others. “We’re still short
a luminary, if you haven’t noticed.”

“And where are we in negotiations with Viscount Tecarus for his?” a
large man asks in a calm, rumbling voice, his ebony hand tugging at his
thick silver beard.

Viscount Tecarus? That isn’t a noble family in any Navarrian records.
We don’t even have viscounts in our aristocracy.

“Still working on a diplomatic solution,” Brennan answers.



“There’s no solution. Tecarus isn’t over the insult you delivered last
summer.” An older woman built like a battle-ax locks her gaze on Xaden,
her blond hair brushing just past her square alabaster chin.

“I told you, the viscount was never going to give it to us in the first
place,” Xaden replies. “The man only collects things. He does not trade
them.”

“Well, he’s definitely not going to trade with us now,” she retorts, her
gaze narrowing. “Especially if you won’t even contemplate his latest offer.”

“He can fuck right off with his offer.” Xaden’s voice is calm, but his
eyes have a hard edge that dares anyone at the table to disagree. As if
showing these people they aren’t worth his time, he steps around the arm of
the massive chair facing them and settles into it, stretching his long legs and
resting his arms on the velvet armrests—like he doesn’t have a care in the
world.

The quiet that falls on the room is telling. Xaden commands as much
respect from the Assembly of this revolution as he does at Basgiath. I don’t
recognize any of the other riders besides Brennan, but I’d bet Xaden is the
most powerful in the room, given their silence.

“For now,” Tairn reminds me with the arrogance only a hundred years
of being one of the most formidable battle dragons on the Continent can
provide. “Instruct the humans to bring you up to the valley once the politics
are finished.”

“There had better be a solution. If we can’t supply the drifts with enough
weaponry to really fight in the next year, the tide will shift too far to ever
hope of holding the venin advance at bay,” Silver Beard notes. “This all will
have been for nothing.”

My stomach pitches. A year? We’re that close to losing a war I knew
nothing about a few days ago?

“As I said, I’m working on a diplomatic solution for the luminary”—
Brennan’s tone sharpens—“and we’re so wildly off topic I’m not sure this is
the same meeting.”

“I vote we take Basgiath’s luminary,” Battle-Ax suggests. “If we’re that
close to losing this war, there’s no other option.”



Xaden shoots Brennan a look that I can’t decipher, and I breathe deeply
as it hits me—he probably knows my own brother better than I do.

And he kept him from me. Of all the secrets he hid, that’s the one I can’t
quite swallow.

“And what would you have done with the knowledge had he shared it?”
Tairn asks.

“Stop bringing logic into an emotional argument.” I fold my arms
across my chest. It’s my heart that won’t fully let my head forgive Xaden.

“We’ve been over that,” Brennan says with finality. “If we take
Basgiath’s forging device, Navarre can’t replenish their stores at the
outposts. Countless civilians will die if those wards fall. Do any of you
want to be responsible for that?”

Silence reigns.
“Then we agree,” Hawk Nose says. “Until we can supply the drifts, the

cadets have to return.”
Oh.
“They’re talking about us,” I whisper. That’s why we’re standing out of

their direct sight.
Bodhi nods.
“You’re uncharacteristically quiet, Suri,” Brennan notes, glancing at the

wide-shouldered brunette with olive skin and a single streak of silver in her
hair, her nose twitching like a fox, sitting next to him.

“I say we send all but the two.” Her nonchalance skates a chill down my
spine as she drums her bony fingers on the table, a giant emerald ring
catching the light. “Six cadets can lie as well as eight.”

Eight.
Xaden, Garrick, Bodhi, Imogen, three marked ones I’d never gotten a

chance to know before we were thrown into battle, and…me.
Nausea rises like a tide. The War Games. We’re supposed to be finishing

the last competition of the year between the wings of the Riders Quadrant at
Basgiath, and instead, we entered deadly battle with an enemy I’d thought
were only folklore last week, and now we’re…well, we’re here, in a city
that isn’t supposed to exist.



But not all of us.
My throat tightens, and I blink back the burn in my eyes. Soleil and

Liam didn’t survive.
Liam. Blond hair and sky-blue eyes fill my memory, and pain erupts

behind my ribs. His boisterous laugh. His quick smile. His loyalty and
kindness. It’s all gone. He’s gone.

All because he promised Xaden he’d guard me.
“None of the eight are expendable, Suri.” Silver Beard leans on the back

two legs of his chair and examines the map behind Xaden.
“What do you propose, Felix?” Suri counters. “Running our own war

college with all our spare time? Most of them haven’t finished their
education. They’re of no use to us yet.”

“As if any of you has a say in if we return,” Xaden interrupts, earning
everyone’s attention. “We will take the advice of the Assembly, but it will
be taken as only that—advice.”

“We cannot afford to risk your life—” Suri argues.
“My life is equal to any of theirs.” Xaden gestures toward us.
Brennan’s gaze meets mine, then widens.
Each head in the room turns toward us, and I fight the instinct to retreat

as almost every set of eyes narrows on me.
Who do they see? Lilith’s daughter? Or Brennan’s sister?
I lift my chin because I’m both…and I feel like neither.
“Not every life,” Suri says as she looks straight at me. Ouch. “How

could you have stood there and let her overhear the conversation of the
Assembly?”

“If you didn’t want her to hear, you should have closed the door,” Bodhi
responds, stepping into the room.

“She cannot be trusted!” Anger might color her cheeks, but that’s fear in
Suri’s eyes.

“Xaden has already taken responsibility for her.” Imogen sidesteps,
moving slightly closer to me. “As brutal of a custom as it may be.”

My gaze whips to meet Xaden’s. What the hell is she talking about?
“I still don’t understand that particular decision,” Hawk Nose adds.



“Decision was simple. She’s worth a dozen of me,” Xaden says, and my
breath catches at the intensity in his eyes. If I didn’t know better, I’d think
he means it. “And I’m not talking about her signet. I would have told her
everything discussed here anyway, so an open door is a moot point.”

A spark of hope flares to life in my chest. Maybe he really is done
keeping secrets.

“She’s General Sorrengail’s daughter,” Battle-Ax points out, frustration
clear in her voice.

“And I’m the general’s son,” Brennan argues.
“And you’ve more than proven your loyalty over the last six years!”

Battle-Ax shouts. “She hasn’t!”
Anger heats my neck, flushing up to my face. They’re talking about me

like I’m not even here.
“She fought at our side at Resson.” Bodhi tenses as his voice rises as

well.
“She should be confined.” Suri’s face turns downright ruddy as she

pushes away from the table and stands, her gaze jumping to the silver half
of my hair that forms my coronet braid. “She can ruin us all with what she
knows.”

“Agreed.” Hawk Nose joins her with palpable loathing aimed in my
direction. “She’s too dangerous not to keep prisoner.”

The muscles of my stomach tense, but I mask my expression like I’ve
seen Xaden do countless times and leave my hands at my sides, close to my
sheathed daggers. My body might be frail, my joints undependable, but my
aim with a knife is lethally accurate. There’s no fucking way I’m going to
let them cage me here.

I scan each of the Assembly members, assessing which is the biggest
threat.

Brennan rises to his full height. “Knowing that she’s bonded to Tairn,
whose bonds get deeper with each rider and whose previous bond was
already so strong that Naolin’s death nearly killed him? Knowing we fear
he’ll die if she does now? That because of that, Riorson’s life is tied to
hers?” He nods toward Xaden.



Disappointment tastes bitter on my tongue. Is that all I am to him?
Xaden’s weakness?

“I alone am responsible for Violet.” Xaden’s voice lowers in pure
malice. “And if I’m not enough, there are not one but two dragons who
have already vouched for her integrity.”

Enough is enough.
“She is standing right here,” I snap, and an unflattering amount of

satisfaction courses through me at the number of jaws that drop in front of
me. “So stop talking about me and try talking to me.”

A corner of Xaden’s mouth rises, and the pride that flashes through his
expression is unmistakable.

“What do you want from me?” I ask them, striding into the room. “Want
me to walk Parapet and prove my bravery? Done. Want me to betray my
kingdom by defending Poromish citizens? Done. Want me to keep his
secrets?” I gesture toward Xaden with my left hand. “Done. I kept every
secret.”

“Except the one that mattered.” Suri lifts an eyebrow. “We all know how
you ended up in Athebyne.”

Guilt clogs my throat.
“That was not—” Xaden starts, rising from his chair.
“Through no fault of her own.” The man nearest us with the gray beard

— Felix—stands, blocking Suri from my sight as he turns toward her. “No
first-year could withstand a memory reader, especially one considered a
friend.” He pivots to face me. “But you have to know that you have
enemies at Basgiath, now. Should you return, you must know that Aetos
will not be among your friends. He will do everything he can to kill you for
what you’ve seen.”

“I know.” The words are thick on my tongue.
Felix nods.
“We are done here,” Xaden says, his gaze catching and holding Suri’s

and then Hawk Nose’s, their shoulders drooping in defeat.
“I’ll expect an update on Zolya in the morning,” Brennan says.

“Consider this Assembly meeting adjourned.”



The council members push in their chairs and file past the three of us
once we step out of the way. Imogen and Bodhi stay at my sides.

Eventually, Xaden starts to walk out but pauses in front of me. “We’ll
head up to the valley. Meet us when you’re done.”

“I’ll go with you now.” This is the last place on the Continent I want to
be left behind.

“Stay and talk to your brother,” he says quietly. “Who knows when
you’ll get another chance.”

I glance past Bodhi to see Brennan standing in the middle of the room,
waiting for me. Brennan, who always took the time to help wrap my knees
when I was a child. Brennan, who wrote the book that helped me through
my first year. Brennan…who I’ve missed for six years.

“Go,” Xaden urges. “We won’t leave without you, and we’re not going
to let the Assembly dictate what we do. The eight of us will decide what to
do together.” He gives me a long look that makes my traitorous heart
clench, and then he walks away. Bodhi and Imogen follow.

Which leaves me to turn toward my brother, armed with six years of
questions.

OceanofPDF.com



It is the valley above Riorson House, heated by natural thermal energy,
that is its greatest asset. For there lie the original hatching grounds of
the Dubhmadinn Line, from which two of the greatest dragons of our

time—Codagh and Tairn—descend.

—COLONEL KAORI’S FIELD GUIDE TO DRAGONKIND



CHAPTER TWO

I shut the tall door behind me before moving toward Brennan. This
meeting is definitely not open to the public.
“Did you eat enough?” He rests on the edge of the table like he used to

when we were kids. The move is so…him, and as for the question, I ignore
it entirely.

“So this is where you’ve been the last six years?” My voice threatens to
break. I’m so glad he’s alive. That’s all that should matter. But I can’t forget
the years he’s let me grieve for him, either.

“Yes.” His shoulders drop. “I’m sorry I let you believe I was dead. It
was the only way.”

Cue awkward silence. What am I supposed to say to that? It’s all right,
but not really? There’s so much I want to say to him, so much I need to ask,
but suddenly the years we’ve been apart feel…defining. Neither of us is the
same person.

“You look different.” He smiles, but it’s sad. “Not in a bad way. Just…
different.”

“I was fourteen the last time you saw me.” I grimace. “I think I’m still
the same height. I used to hope I’d get a last-minute growth spurt, but alas,
here I am.”

“Here you are.” He nods slowly. “I always pictured you in scribe colors,
but you look good in black. Gods…” He sighs. “The relief I felt when I



heard you’d survived Threshing is indescribable.”
“You knew?” My eyes flare. He has sources at Basgiath.
“I knew. And then Riorson showed up with you stabbed and dying.” He

looks away and clears his throat, then takes a deep breath before continuing.
“I’m so damned glad you’re healed, that you’ve made it through your first
year.” The relief in his eyes takes some of the sting out of my anger.

“Mira helped.” That’s putting it mildly.
“The armor?” he guesses correctly. There’s something to be said for the

delicate weight of my dragon-scale armor under my flight leathers.
I nod. “She had it made. She gave me your book, too. The one you wrote

for her.”
“I hope it was useful.”
I think back to the naive, sheltered girl who crossed the parapet, and

everything she survived in the crucible of her first year to forge me into the
woman I am now. “It was.”

His smile falters, and he glances out the window. “How is Mira?”
“Speaking from experience, I’m sure she’d be a lot better if she knew

you’re alive.” There’s no point mincing words if we only have a short time.
He flinches. “Guess I deserve that.”
And I guess that answers that question. Mira doesn’t know. But she

should.
“How exactly are you alive, Brennan?” I shift my weight to one leg,

crossing my arms. “Where is Marbh? What are you doing here? Why didn’t
you come home?”

“One at a time.” He holds up his hands like he’s under attack, and I
glimpse a rune-shaped scar on his palm before he grips the edge of the
table. “Naolin… He was—” His jaw flexes.

“Tairn’s previous rider,” I suggest slowly, wondering if he was more
than that to Brennan. “He was the siphon who died trying to save you,
according to Professor Kaori.” My heart sinks. “I’m sorry your rider died
saving my brother.”

“We will no longer speak of the one who came before.” Tairn’s voice is
rough.



A corner of Brennan’s mouth lifts. “I miss Kaori. He’s a good man.” He
sighs, lifting his head to hold my gaze. “Naolin didn’t fail, but it cost him
everything. I woke up on a cliffside not far from here. Marbh had been
wounded, but he was alive, too, and the other dragons…” His amber-
colored eyes meet mine. “There are other dragons here, and they saved us,
hid us in the network of caves within the valley, then later with the civilians
who survived the city being scorched.”

My brow furrows as I try to make sense of his words. “Where is Marbh
now?”

“He’s been in the valley with the others for days, keeping watch on your
Andarna with Tairn, Sgaeyl, and—since you woke up—Riorson.”

“That’s where Xaden has been? Guarding Andarna?” That makes me a
little less pissed that he’s blatantly avoided me. “And why are you here,
Brennan?”

He shrugs as though his answer is obvious. “I’m here for the same
reason you fought at Resson. Because I can’t stand by, safe behind the
barriers of Navarre’s wards, and watch innocent people die at the hands of
dark wielders because our leadership is too selfish to help. That’s also the
reason I didn’t come home. I couldn’t fly for Navarre knowing what we’ve
done—what we’re doing—and I sure as hell couldn’t look our mother in the
eye and listen to her justify our cowardice. I refused to live the lie.”

“You just left Mira and me to live it.” It comes out a little angrier than I
intend, or maybe I’m angrier than I realize.

“A choice I’ve questioned every single day since.” The regret in his eyes
is enough to make me breathe deeply and center myself. “I figured you had
Dad—”

“Until we didn’t.” My throat threatens to tighten, so I turn to look at the
map, then walk closer to take in more of the details. Unlike the one at
Basgiath, which is updated daily with gryphon attacks on the border, this
one reflects the truths Navarre is hiding. The region of the Barrens—the
dry, desert-covered peninsula in the southeast that all dragonkind
abandoned after General Daramor ruined the land during the Great War—is



completely painted in crimson. The stain stretches into Braevick, over the
Dunness River.

What have to be newer battle sites are marked with an alarming number
of bright red and orange flags. The red ones mar not only the oceanic
eastern border of the Krovlan province along the Bay of Malek but are
heavily concentrated north into the plains as well, spreading like a disease,
even infecting dots of Cygnisen. But the orange ones, those are heavily
concentrated along the Stonewater River, which leads straight to Navarre’s
border.

“So the fables are all true. Venin coming out of the Barrens, sucking the
land dry of magic, moving city to city.”

“You’ve seen it with your own eyes.” He moves to my side.
“And the wyvern?”
“We’ve known about them for a few months, but none of the cadets did.

Until now, we’ve limited what Riorson and the others have known for their
own safety, which in retrospect may have been a mistake. We know they
have at least two breeds, one that produces blue fire and a faster one that
breathes green fire.”

“How many?” I ask him. “Where are they making them?”
“Do you mean hatching them?”
“Making,” I repeat. “Don’t you remember the fables Dad used to read to

us? They said wyvern are created by venin. They channel power into
wyvern. I think that’s why riderless ones died when I killed their dark
wielders. Their source of power was gone.”

“You remember all of that from Dad reading?” He glances at me,
bewildered.

“I still have the book.” It’s a good thing Xaden warded my room at
Basgiath so no one will discover it while we’re here. “Are you telling me
you not only didn’t know they’re created but have no clue where they’re
coming from?”

“That’s…accurate.”
“How comforting,” I mutter as electricity prickles my skin. I shake my

hands, pacing in front of the large map. The orange flags are awfully close



to Zolya, the second most populous city in Braevick, and where Cliffsbane,
their flier academy, is located. “The one with the silver beard said we have a
year to turn it around?”

“Felix. He’s the most rational of the Assembly, but personally I think
he’s wrong.” Brennan waves his hand in the air in a general outline of
Braevick’s border with the Barrens along the Dunness River. “The red flags
are all from the last few years, and the orange are the last few months. At
the rate they’ve been expanding, not only in their numbers of wyvern, but in
territory? I think they’re headed straight up the Stonewater River and we
have six months or less until they’re strong enough to come for Navarre—
not that the Assembly will listen.”

Six months. I swallow the bile fighting to rise in my throat. Brennan was
always a brilliant strategist, according to our mother. My bet is on his
assessment. “The general pattern is moving northwest—toward Navarre.
Resson is the exception, along with whatever that flag is—” I point to the
one that looks to be an hour’s flight east of Resson.

The desiccated landscape around what had been a thriving trading post
flashes in my memory. Those flags are more than outliers; they’re twin
splotches of orange in an otherwise untouched area.

“We think the iron box Garrick Tavis found at Resson is some kind of
lure, but we had to destroy it before we could fully investigate. A box like it
was found in Jahna, already smashed.” He glances my way. “But the
craftsmanship is Navarrian.”

I absorb that information with a long breath, wondering what reason
Navarre would have to build lures besides using one to kill us in Resson.
“You really think they’ll come for Navarre before taking the rest of
Poromiel?” Why not take the easier targets first?

“I do. Their survival depends on it as much as ours depends on stopping
them. The energy in the hatching grounds at Basgiath could keep them fed
for decades. And yet Melgren thinks the wards are so infallible that he
won’t alert the population. Or he’s afraid that telling the public will make
them realize we aren’t entirely the good guys. Not anymore. Fen’s rebellion



taught leadership it’s a lot easier to control happy civilians than disgruntled
—or worse, terrified— ones.”

“And yet they manage to keep the truth hidden,” I whisper. Sometime in
our past, one generation of Navarrians wiped the history books, erasing the
existence of venin from common education and knowledge, all because we
aren’t willing to risk our own safety by providing the one material that can
kill dark wielders—the same alloy that powers the farthest reaches of our
wards.

“Yeah, well, Dad always tried to tell us.” Brennan’s voice softens. “In a
world of dragon riders, gryphon fliers, and dark wielders…”

“It’s the scribes who hold all the power.” They put out the public
announcements. They keep the records. They write our history. “Do you
think Dad knew?” The idea of him structuring my entire existence around
facts and knowledge, only to withhold the most important of it, is
unfathomable.

“I choose to believe he didn’t.” Brennan offers me a sad smile.
“Word will get out the closer those forces come to the border. They can’t

keep the truth hidden. Someone will see. Someone has to see.”
“Yes, and our revolution has to be ready when they do. The second the

secret is out, there’s no reason to keep the marked ones under supervision of
leadership, and we’ll lose access to Basgiath’s forge.”

There’s that word again: revolution.
“You think you can win.”
“What makes you say that?” He turns toward me.
“You call it a revolution, not a rebellion.” I lift my brow. “Tyrrish isn’t

the only thing Dad taught us both. You think you can win—unlike Fen
Riorson.”

“We have to win, or we’re dead. All of us. Navarre thinks they’re safe
behind the wards, but what happens if the wards fail? If they’re not as
powerful as leadership thinks they are? They’re already extended to their
max. Not to mention the people living outside the wards. One way or
another, we’re outmatched, Vi. We’ve never seen them organize behind a
leader like they did at Resson, and Garrick told us that one got away.”



“The Sage.” I shudder, wrapping my arms around my middle. “That’s
what the one who stabbed me called him. I think he was her teacher.”

“They’re teaching each other? Like they’ve set up some sort of school
for venin? Fucking great.” He shakes his head.

“And you’re not behind the wards,” I note. “Not here.” The protective
magical shield provided by the dragons’ hatching grounds in the Vale falls
short of the official, mountainous borders of Navarre, and the entire
southwestern coastline of Tyrrendor—including Aretia—is exposed. A fact
that never quite mattered when we thought gryphons were the only danger
out there, since they’re incapable of flying high enough to summit the cliffs.

“Not here,” he agrees. “Though funnily enough, Aretia has a dormant
wardstone. At least, I think that’s what it is. I was never let close enough to
Basgiath’s to compare the two in any detail.”

My eyebrows rise. A second wardstone? “I thought only one was created
during the Unification.”

“Yeah, and I thought venin were a myth and dragons were the only key
to powering wards.” He shrugs. “But the art of creating new wards is a lost
magic, anyway, so it’s basically a glorified statue. Pretty to look at, though.”

“You have a wardstone,” I murmur, my thoughts spinning. They
wouldn’t need as many weapons if they had wards. If they could generate
their own protection, maybe they could weave extensions into Poromiel,
like we’ve expanded our wards to their max. Maybe we could keep at least
some of our neighbors safe…

“A useless one. What we need is that godsdamned luminary that
intensifies dragonfire hot enough to smelt alloy into the only weapons
capable of defeating venin. That’s our only shot.”

“But what if the wardstone isn’t useless?” My heart races. We’d only
ever been told there was one wardstone in existence, its boundaries
stretched as far as possible. But if there’s another… “Just because no one
knows how to create new wards today doesn’t mean the knowledge can’t
exist somewhere. Like in the Archives. That’s information we wouldn’t
have wiped. We would have protected it at all costs, just in case.”



“Violet, whatever you’re thinking? Don’t.” He rubs his thumb along his
chin, which has always been his nervous tell. Amazing the things I’m
remembering about him. “Consider the Archives enemy territory. Weapons
are the only thing that can win this war.”

“But you don’t have a working forge or enough riders to defend yourself
if Navarre realizes what you’re up to.” Panic crawls up my spine like a
spider. “And you think you’re going to win this war with a bunch of
daggers?”

“You make it sound like we’re doomed. We’re not.” A muscle ticks in
his jaw.

“The first separatist rebellion was crushed in under a year, and up until a
few days ago, I thought it took you, too.” He doesn’t get it. He can’t. He
didn’t bury his family. “I’ve already watched your things burn once.”

“Vi…” He hesitates for a second, then wraps his arms around me and
pulls me into a hug, rocking slightly like I’m a kid again. “We learned from
Fen’s mistakes. We’re not attacking Navarre like he did or declaring
independence. We’re fighting right under their noses, and we have a plan.
Something killed off the venin six hundred years ago during the Great War,
and we’re actively searching for that weapon. Forging the daggers will keep
us in the fight long enough to find it, as long as we can get that luminary.
We might not be ready now, but we will be once Navarre catches on.” His
tone isn’t exactly convincing.

I take a step back. “With what army? How many of you are there in this
revolution?” How many will die this time?

“It’s best if you don’t know specifics—” He tenses, then reaches for me
again. “I’ve already put you in danger by telling you too much. At least
until you can shield Aetos out.”

My chest constricts, and I sidestep from his embrace. “You sound like
Xaden.” I can’t help the bitterness that leaches into my tone. Turns out,
falling in love with someone only brings that blissful high all the poets talk
about if they love you back. And if they keep secrets that jeopardize
everyone and everything you hold dear? Love doesn’t even have the



decency to die. It just transforms into abject misery. That’s what this ache in
my chest is: misery.

Because love, at its root, is hope. Hope for tomorrow. Hope for what
could be. Hope that the someone you’ve entrusted your everything to will
cradle and protect it. And hope? That shit is harder to kill than a dragon.

A slight hum tingles under my skin, and warmth flushes my cheeks as
Tairn’s power rises within me in answer to my heightened emotions. At
least I know I still have access to it. The venin’s poison didn’t take it from
me permanently. I’m still me.

“Ah.” Brennan shoots me a look I can’t quite interpret. “I wondered why
he ran out of here like his ass was on fire. Trouble in paradise?”

I flat-out glare at Brennan. “It’s best if you don’t know that.”
He chuckles. “Hey, I’m asking my sister, not Cadet Sorrengail.”
“And you’ve been back in my life all of five minutes after faking your

death for the last six years, so excuse me if I’m not going to suddenly open
up about my love life. What about you? Are you married? Kids? Anyone
you’ve basically lied to for the entirety of your relationship?”

He flinches. “No partner. No kids. Point made.” Shoving his hands into
the pockets of his riding leathers, he sighs. “Look, I don’t mean to be an
ass. But details aren’t anything you should know until you master keeping
your shields up at all times against memory readers—”

I cringe at the thought of Dain touching me, seeing this, seeing Brennan.
“You’re right. Don’t tell me.”

Brennan’s eyes narrow. “You agreed entirely too easily.”
I shake my head and start for the door, calling over my shoulder, “I need

to leave before I get someone else killed.” The more I see, the bigger of a
liability I am to him, to all of this. And the longer we’re here… Gods. The
others.

“We have to go back,” I tell Tairn.
“I know.”
Brennan’s jaw flexes as he catches up to me. “I’m not sure going back to

Basgiath is the best plan for you.” He pulls the door open anyway.
“No, but it’s the best plan for you.”



…

I ’m nervous as hell by the time Brennan and his Orange Daggertail,
Marbh, as well as Tairn and I, reach Sgaeyl—Xaden’s enormous, navy-

blue daggertail, who stands under the shade of several even taller trees as
though guarding something. Andarna. Sgaeyl snarls at Brennan, baring her
fangs and taking one threatening step in his direction, her claw fully
extended in a series of sharp talons.

“Hey! That’s my brother,” I warn her, putting myself between them.
“She’s aware,” Brennan mutters. “Just doesn’t like me. Never has.”
“Don’t take it personally,” I say right to her face. “She doesn’t like

anyone but Xaden, and she only tolerates me, though I’m growing on her.”
“Like a tumor,” she replies through the mental bond that connects the

four of us. Then her head swings, and I feel it.
The shadowy, shimmering bond at the edge of my mind strengthens and

pulls gently. “In fact, Xaden’s walking this way,” I tell Brennan.
“That’s really fucking weird.” He folds his arms across his chest and

looks behind us. “Can you two always sense each other?”
“Kind of. It has to do with the bond between Sgaeyl and Tairn. I’d say

you get used to it, but you don’t.” I walk into the copse, and Sgaeyl does me
a solid favor and doesn’t make me ask her to move, taking two steps to the
right so I’m in between her and Tairn, directly in front of…

What. The. Fuck?
That can’t be… No. Impossible.
“Stay calm. She’ll respond to your agitation and wake in a temper,”

Tairn warns.
I stare at the sleeping dragon—who is almost twice the size she had been

a few days ago—and try to get my thoughts to line up with what I’m seeing,
what my heart already knows thanks to the bond between us. “That’s…” I
shake my head, and my pulse begins to race.

“Wasn’t expecting that,” Brennan says quietly. “Riorson left out some
details when he reported in this morning. I’ve never seen such accelerated
growth in a dragon before.”



“Her scales are black.” Yeah, saying it doesn’t help make it feel any
more real.

“Dragons are only gold-feathered as hatchlings.” Tairn’s voice is
uncharacteristically patient.

“‘Accelerated growth,’” I whisper, repeating Brennan’s words, then
gasp. “From the energy usage. We forced her to grow. In Resson. She
stopped time for too long. We—I—forced her to grow.” I can’t seem to stop
saying it.

“It would have happened eventually, Silver One, if at a slower pace.”
“Is she full-grown?” I can’t take my eyes off her.
“No. She’s what you would call an adolescent. We need to get her back

to the Vale so she can enter the Dreamless Sleep and finish the growth
process. I should warn you before she wakes that this is a notoriously…
perilous age.”

“For her? Is she in danger?” My gaze swings to Tairn for the length of a
terrorizing heartbeat.

“No, just everyone around her. There’s a reason adolescents don’t bond,
either. They don’t have the patience for humans. Or elders. Or logic,” he
grumbles.

“So, the same as humans.” A teenager. Fabulous.
“Except with teeth and, eventually, fire.”
Her scales are so deeply black they glimmer almost purple—iridescent,

really—in the flickering sunlight that filters through the leaves above. The
color of a dragon’s scales is hereditary—

“Wait a second. Is she yours?” I ask Tairn. “I swear to the gods, if she’s
another secret you kept from me, I’ll—”

“I told you last year, she is not our progeny,” Tairn answers, drawing up
his head as if offended. “Black dragons are rare but not unheard of.”

“And I happened to bond to two of them?” I counter, outright glaring at
him.

“Technically, she was gold when you bonded her. Not even she knew
what color her scales would mature to. Only the eldest of our dens can



sense a hatchling’s pigment. In fact, two more black dragons have hatched
in the last year, according to Codagh.”

“Not helping.” I let Andarna’s steady breathing assure me that she really
is fine. Giant but…fine. I can still see her features—her slightly more
rounded snout, the spiral twist carved into her curled horns, even the way
she tucks her wings in while sleeping is all…her, only bigger. “If there’s a
morningstartail on her—”

“Tails are a matter of choice and need.” He huffs indignantly. “Don’t
they teach you anything?”

“You’re not exactly a notoriously open species.” I’m sure Professor
Kaori would salivate over knowing something like that.

That shadowy bond wrapped around my mind strengthens.
“Is she awake yet?” The deep timbre of Xaden’s voice makes my pulse

skip like always.
I turn around to see him standing beside Brennan, with Imogen, Garrick,

Bodhi, and the others flanking him in the tall grass. My gaze catches on the
cadets I don’t know. Two men and one woman. It’s more than awkward that
I went to war with them and yet I’ve only seen them in passing in the halls.
I couldn’t even chance a guess at their names without feeling foolish. It’s
not like Basgiath is made to foster friendships outside our squads, though.

Or relationships, for that matter.
I’ll spend every single day of my life earning back your trust. The

memory of Xaden’s words fills the space between us as we stare at each
other.

“We have to go back.” I fold my arms across my chest, preparing for a
fight. “No matter what that Assembly says, if we don’t go back, they’ll kill
every cadet with a rebellion relic.”

Xaden nods, as though he’d already come to the same conclusion.
“They’ll see right through whatever lie you’re going to tell, and they’ll

execute you, Violet,” Brennan retorts. “According to our intelligence,
General Sorrengail already knows you’re missing.”

She wasn’t there on the dais when War Games orders were handed out.
Her aide, Colonel Aetos, was in charge of the games this year.



She didn’t know.
“Our mother won’t let them kill me.”
“Say that again,” Brennan says softly. He tilts his head at me and looks

so much like our father that I blink twice. “And this time try to convince
yourself that you mean it. The general’s loyalties are so crystal-fucking-
clear that she might as well tattoo Yes there are venin, now go back to class
on her forehead.”

“That doesn’t mean she’ll kill me. I can make her believe our story.
She’ll want to if I’m the one telling it.”

“You don’t think she’ll kill you? She threw you into the Riders
Quadrant!”

Fine, he has me there. “Yeah, she did, and guess what? I became a rider.
She may be a lot of things, but she won’t let Colonel Aetos or even
Markham kill me without evidence. You didn’t see her when you didn’t
come home, Brennan. She was…devastated.”

His hands curl into fists. “I know the atrocious things she did in my
name.”

“She wasn’t there,” one of the guys I don’t know says, putting up his
hands when the rest turn to glare at him. He’s shorter than the others, with a
Third Squad, Flame Section patch on his shoulder, light-brown hair, and a
pinkish, round face that reminds me of the cherubs usually carved at the
feet of statues of Amari.

“Seriously, Ciaran?” The brunette second-year lifts a hand to her
forehead, shielding her fair skin from the sun and revealing a First Squad,
Flame Section patch on her shoulder, then lifts a pierced eyebrow at him.
“You’re defending General Sorrengail?”

“No, Eya, I’m not. But she wasn’t there when orders were handed out
—” He cuts off the sentence as two eyebrows slash down in warning. “And
Aetos was in charge of War Games this year,” he adds.

Ciaran and Eya. I look to the lean guy, who pushes his glasses up his
pointed nose with a dark-brown hand, standing next to Garrick’s hulking
build. “I’m so sorry, but what is your name?” It feels wrong to not know
them all.



“Masen,” he replies with a quick smile. “And if it makes you feel
better”— he glances at Brennan—“I don’t think your mom had anything to
do with the War Games this year, either. Aetos was pretty loud about his
dad planning the whole thing.”

Fucking Dain.
“Thank you.” I turn toward Brennan. “I would bet my life that she didn’t

know what was waiting for us.”
“You willing to bet all of ours, too?” Eya asks, clearly not convinced,

looking at Imogen for support and not getting any.
“I vote we go,” Garrick says. “We have to risk it. They’ll kill the others

if we don’t return, and we can’t cut off the flow of weapons from Basgiath.
Who agrees?”

One by one, every hand rises but Xaden’s and Brennan’s.
Xaden’s jaw flexes, and two little lines appear between his brows. I

know that expression. He’s thinking, scheming.
“The second Aetos puts hands on her, we lose Aretia and you lose your

lives,” Brennan says to him.
“I’ll train her to shut him out,” Xaden responds. “She already has the

strongest shields of her year from learning to shut out Tairn. She only has to
learn to keep them up at all times.”

I don’t argue. He has a direct link to my mind through the bond, which
makes him the most logical choice to practice on.

“And until she can shield out a memory reader? How are you going to
keep his hands off her if you’re not even there?” Brennan challenges.

“By hitting him in his biggest weakness—his pride.” Xaden’s mouth
curves into a ruthless smile. “If everyone is sure about going, we’ll fly as
soon as Andarna’s awake.”

“We’re sure,” Garrick answers for us, and I try to swallow the knot
forming in my throat.

It’s the right decision. It could also get us killed.
A rustling behind me catches my attention, and I turn to see Andarna

rise, her golden eyes blinking slowly at me as she clumsily gains her newly



taloned claws. The relief and joy curving my mouth are short-lived as she
struggles to stand.

Oh…gods. She reminds me of a newborn horse. Her wings and legs
seem disproportionate to her body, and everything wobbles as she fights to
keep upright. There’s no way she’s making the flight. I’m not even sure she
can walk across the field.

“Hey,” I say, offering her a smile.
“I can no longer stop time.” She watches me carefully, her golden eyes

judging me in a way that reminds me of Presentation.
“I know.” I nod and study the coppery streaks in her eyes. Were those

always there?
“You are not disappointed?”
“You’re alive. You kept us all alive. How could I be disappointed?” My

chest tightens as I stare into her unblinking eyes, choosing my next words
carefully. “We always knew that gift would only last as long as you were
little, and you, my dearest, are no longer little.” A growl rumbles in her
chest, and my eyebrows shoot up. “Are you…feeling okay?” What the hell
did I say to deserve that?

“Adolescents,” Tairn grumbles.
“I am fine,” she snaps, narrowing her eyes at Tairn. “We will leave

now.” She flares her wings out, but only one fully extends, and she
stumbles under the uneven weight, careening forward.

Xaden’s shadows whip out from the trees and wrap around her chest,
keeping her from face-planting.

Well. Shit.
“I…uh…think we’re going to have to make some modifications on that

harness,” Bodhi remarks as Andarna struggles to maintain her balance.
“That’s going to take a few hours.”

“Can you fly her back to the Vale?” I ask Tairn. “She’s…huge.”
“I’ve killed lesser riders for that kind of insult.”
“So dramatic.”
“I can fly myself,” Andarna argues, gaining her balance with the aid of

Xaden’s shadows.



“It’s just in case,” I promise her, but she eyes me with deserved
skepticism.

“Get the harness done quickly,” Xaden says. “I have a plan, but we have
to be back in forty-eight hours for this to work, and a day of that is needed
for flight time.”

“What’s in forty-eight hours?” I ask.
“Graduation.”

OceanofPDF.com



There is no moment as rewarding, as stirring, as…anticlimactic as a
Riders Quadrant Graduation. It’s the only time I’ve ever envied the
Infantry Quadrant. Now those cadets know how to hold a ceremony.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER THREE

The flight field at Basgiath is still dark and appears deserted when we
approach in the hour before sunrise, hugging the landscape of the

mountains, the riot doing what they can to stay out of sight.
“That doesn’t mean someone won’t spot us landing,” Tairn reminds me,

his wings beating steadily despite having flown the last eighteen hours
nearly straight through from Aretia. The window of time we have to get
Andarna to the Vale without her being spotted is slim, and if we miss it,
we’ll put every hatchling in danger.

“I still don’t understand why the Empyrean would ever agree to let
dragons bond human riders, knowing they’d have to guard their own young
not only against gryphon fliers but the very humans they’re supposed to
trust.”

“It’s a delicate balance,” Tairn replies, banking left to follow the
geography. “The First Six riders were desperate to save their people when
they approached the dens over six hundred years ago. Those dragons
formed the first Empyrean and bonded humans only to protect their
hatching grounds from venin, who were the bigger threat. We don’t exactly
have opposable thumbs for weaving wards or runes. Neither species has
ever been entirely truthful, both using the other for their own reasons and
nothing more.”

“It never occurred to me to hide anything from you.”



Tairn does that weird thing that makes his neck appear boneless,
swinging his head around to level slightly narrowed eyes at me for a
heartbeat before turning his attention back to the terrain. “I can do nothing
to remedy the last nine months besides answer your worthwhile questions
now.”

“I know,” I say quietly, wishing his words were enough to cut through
the acrid taste of betrayal I can’t seem to wash out of my mouth. I’m going
to have to let it go. I know that. Tairn was bound by his mating bond to
Sgaeyl, so at least he had a reason to keep everything he did from me, and
it’s not like I can blame Andarna for being a kid who followed his lead.
Xaden is another matter entirely, though.

“We’re approaching. Get ready.”
“Guess we should have worked on rolling dismounts earlier in the

year,” I joke, gripping the pommel of my saddle tight as Tairn banks, my
weight shifting right with him. My body is going to punish me for the hours
in the saddle, but I wouldn’t trade the feel of the summer wind against my
face for anything.

“A rolling dismount would tear you limb from limb on impact,” he
retorts.

“You don’t know that,” Andarna counters with what seems to be her new
default form of conversation—telling Tairn he’s wrong.

A growl rumbles through Tairn’s chest, vibrating the saddle beneath me
and the harness that holds Andarna to his chest.

“I’d watch it,” I tell her, biting back a smile. “He might get tired and
drop you.”

“His pride would never allow it.”
“Says the dragon who spent twenty minutes refusing to put on her

harness,” Tairn fires back.
“All right, kids, let’s not argue.” My muscles tighten, and the strap

across my thighs digs in as Tairn dives, skimming the edge of Mount
Basgiath, bringing the flight field into view again.

“Still deserted,” Tairn notes.



“You know, rolling dismounts are a second-year maneuver.” Not
necessarily one I want to master, but that doesn’t change the requirements.

“One you won’t be participating in,” Tairn grumbles.
“Maybe I’ll take her if you won’t,” Andarna chimes in, the last word

ending in a dragon-size yawn.
“Maybe you should work on your own landings before taking our

bonded on a flight to meet Malek?”
This is going to be a long year.
My stomach plummets as he drops into the box canyon known as the

flight field.
“I will drop Andarna in the Vale and then return and circle nearby.”
“You need rest.”
“There will be no rest if they decide to execute the eight of you on the

dais.” The worry in his voice clogs my throat. “Call out if you even suspect
it will not go your way.”

“It will,” I assure him. “Do me a favor and tell Sgaeyl that I need to talk
to Xaden on the walk in.”

“Hold on tight.”
The ground rushes to meet us, and I reach for the strap across my thighs,

my fingers working the buckle as Tairn flares his wings to rapidly slow our
descent. My momentum throws me forward as he touches down, and I force
my ass back in the seat before yanking the belt off.

“Get her out of here,” I tell him as I scramble for his shoulder, ignoring
every muscle that dares to ache.

“Do not take unnecessary risk,” he says as I slide down his foreleg at
the steep incline Andarna’s position forces him to keep.

My feet slam into the ground and I stumble forward, catching my
balance. “Love you, too,” I whisper, turning long enough to pat his leg and
Andarna’s before running forward to get the hell out of their way.

Tairn whips his head to the right, where Sgaeyl lands with brutal
efficiency, her rider dismounting in the same manner. “The wingleader
approaches.”



He’ll only be my wingleader for another few hours if we live through
this.

Xaden gives Tairn a wide berth to launch as he walks toward me.
Sgaeyl takes off next, followed by the rest of the riot. Guess we’re on

our own now.
I lift my goggles to the top of my head and unzip my jacket. July at

Basgiath is muggy as hell, even this early.
“You actually told Tairn to tell Sgaeyl that you wanted to talk to me?”

Xaden asks as the sun’s first rays color the tips of the mountains purple.
“I did.” I run my hands across my sheaths, checking to make sure my

daggers weren’t displaced during flight as we walk out of the flight field
slightly ahead of the others, heading toward the steps that will bypass the
Gauntlet and lead us back to the quadrant.

“You remember that you can…” He taps the side of his head and walks
backward in front of me. I clench my fists to keep from brushing a lock of
dark, windblown hair off his forehead. A few days ago, I would have
touched him without reservation. Hell, I would have threaded my fingers
through his hair and pulled him in for a kiss.

But that was then, and this is now.
“Talking that way feels a little too…” Gods, why is this so hard? It feels

like every inch I sacrificed for in the last year when it comes to Xaden has
been erased, putting us back at the starting line of an obstacle course I’m
not sure either one of us ever chose to run. I shrug. “Intimate.”

“And we’re not intimate?” He lifts his brows. “Because I can think of
more than one occasion that you’ve been wrapped around—”

I jolt forward and cover his mouth with my hand. “Don’t.” Ignoring the
explosive chemistry between us is hard enough without him reminding me
what we feel like together. Physically, our relationship—or whatever we are
—is perfect. Better than perfect. It’s hot as hell and more than addictive.
My entire body warms as he kisses the sensitive skin of my palm. I drop my
hand. “We’re walking into what’s certainly going to be a trial, if not an
execution, and you’ve got jokes.”



“Trust me—not joking.” He turns as we reach the steps and heads down
first, glancing back over his shoulder at me. “Surprised that you’re not icing
me out, but definitely no jokes.”

“I’m angry with you for keeping information from me. Ignoring you
doesn’t solve that.”

“Good point. What did you want to talk about?”
“I have a question I’ve been thinking about since Aretia.”
“And you’re only now telling me?” He reaches the bottom of the steps

and shoots an incredulous look at me. “Communication is not your strength,
is it? Don’t worry. We’ll work on it along with your shielding.”

“That’s…ironic coming from you.” We start up the path to the quadrant
as the sun steadily rises on our right, the light catching on the two swords
Xaden has strapped to his back. “Does the movement have any scribes it
can count as friends?”

“No.” The citadel looms ahead of us, its towers peeking over the edge of
the ridgeline the tunnel runs through. “I know you grew up trusting a lot of
them—”

“Don’t say anything else.” I shake my head. “Not until I can protect
myself from Dain.”

“Honestly, I’ve considered scrapping the plan and just throwing him off
the parapet.” He means it, and I can’t blame him. He’s never trusted Dain,
and after what happened during War Games, I’m about ninety-nine percent
sure I can’t trust him, either. It’s that one percent, constantly screaming at
me that he used to be my best friend, that’s the kicker.

The one percent that makes me question if Dain knows what was
waiting for us at Athebyne. “Helpful, but I’m not sure it will have the trust
us effect we’re going for.”

“And do you trust me?”
“You want the uncomplicated answer?”
“Given our limited alone time, that’s preferable.” He stops at the tall

doors that lead into the tunnel.
“With my life. After all, it’s your life, too.” The rest depends on how

open he is with me, but now probably isn’t the time for a state-of-our-



relationship talk.
I swear there’s a flash of disappointment in his eyes before he nods, then

looks back for the other six, who are quickly catching up. “I’ll make sure
Aetos keeps his hands to himself, but you might have to play along.”

“Give me a shot at handling it first. Then you can do whatever it is you
think will work.” The bells of Basgiath interrupt, announcing the hour. We
have fifteen minutes until formation will be called for graduation.

Xaden’s shoulders straighten as the others reach us, his expression
shifting into an unreadable mask. “Everyone clear on what’s about to
happen?”

This isn’t the man who begged my forgiveness for keeping secrets, and
it sure as hell isn’t the one who vowed to earn back my trust in Aretia. No,
this Xaden is the wingleader who slaughtered every attacker in my bedroom
without breaking a sweat or losing a minute of sleep over it afterward.

“We’re ready,” Garrick says, rolling his neck like he needs to warm up
before combat.

“Ready.” Masen nods, adjusting the glasses on his nose.
One by one, they agree.
“Let’s do it.” I lift my chin.
Xaden stares long and hard at me, then nods.
My stomach twists when we enter the tunnel, mage lights flickering on

as we pass. The other door is already open when we make our way through,
and I don’t argue when Xaden plasters himself to my side. There’s every
chance we’ll be arrested as soon as our feet touch the quadrant, or worse,
killed, depending on what everyone knows.

Power rises within me, thrumming beneath my skin, not quite burning
but ready if I need it, but no one appears as we cross into the rock-filled
courtyard. We have minutes until this space fills with riders and cadre.

The first riders we encounter walk out of the dormitory and into the
courtyard with cocky swaggers and Second Wing patches on their uniforms.

“Look who’s finally here? Bet you thought you had the games locked
down, didn’t you, Fourth Wing?” a rider with hair dyed forest green says



with a smirk. “But you didn’t! Second Wing took it all when you didn’t
show!”

Xaden doesn’t bother looking their direction as we pass.
Garrick lifts his middle finger from my other side.
“Guess this means no one knows what really happened,” Imogen

whispers.
“Then we have a shot of this working,” Eya replies, and the sunlight

glints in the piercing in her eyebrow.
“Of course no one fucking knows,” Xaden mutters. He looks up to the

top of the academic building, and I follow his line of sight, my heart
clenching at the image of the fire blazing in the pit on top of the farthest
turret. No doubt waiting for offerings to Malek—belongings of the cadets
who didn’t make it through War Games. “They’re not going to out
themselves over us.”

At the entrance to the dorms, we all exchange a look, then break apart
wordlessly according to the plan. Xaden follows me down the corridor and
into the little hallway I’ve called home for the last nine months, but it’s not
my room I’m interested in.

I glance left and right to be sure no one sees us as Xaden opens Liam’s
door. He motions at me, and I slip under his arm and into the room,
triggering the mage light overhead.

My chest threatens to cave with the weight of grief as Xaden shuts the
door behind us. Liam slept in that bed a matter of nights ago. He studied at
that desk. He worked on the half-finished figurines on the bedside table.

“You have to be quick,” Xaden reminds me.
“I will,” I promise, going straight for his desk. There’s nothing there

besides his books and a selection of pens. I check his wardrobe, the dresser,
and the chest at the foot of his bed, coming up empty-handed.

“Violet,” Xaden warns me quietly, standing guard at the door.
“I know,” I say over my shoulder. The second Tairn and Sgaeyl arrived

in the Vale, every dragon would know they’d returned, which means every
member of the quadrant’s leadership knows we’re here, too.



I lift the corner of the heavy mattress and sigh with relief, snatching the
twine-bound stack of letters before letting the bedding fall back into place.

“Got them.” I will not cry. Not when I still have to hide them in my
room.

But what will happen if they come to burn my things next?
“Let’s go.” Xaden opens the door, and I walk into the hallway at the

same moment Rhiannon—my closest friend in the quadrant—walks out of
her room with Ridoc, another of our squadmates.

Oh. Shit.
“Vi!” Rhi’s mouth drops open and she lunges, grabbing onto me and

pulling me into a hug. “You’re here!” She squeezes tight, and I let myself
relax into the embrace for the length of a heartbeat. It feels like forever
since I’ve seen her, not six days.

“I’m here,” I assure her, gripping the letters in the crook of one arm and
wrapping the other around her.

She squeezes my shoulders, then pushes me back, her brown eyes
scanning my face in a way that makes me feel like complete shit for the lie
I’m going to have to tell. “With what everyone was saying, I thought you
were dead.” Her gaze rises over my head. “Thought you both were.”

“There was also the rumor that you got lost,” Ridoc adds. “But
considering who you were with, we were all betting on the dead theory. I’m
glad we were wrong.”

“I promise I’ll explain later, but I need a favor now,” I whisper as my
throat closes.

“Violet.” Xaden’s tone drops.
“We can trust her,” I promise, looking back at him. “Ridoc too.”
Xaden looks anything but pleased. Guess we really are home.
“What do you need?” Rhi asks, concern furrowing her brow.
I step back, then push the letters into her hands. Her family doesn’t

always obey the custom of burning everything, either. She’ll understand. “I
need you to keep these for me. Hide them. Don’t let anyone…burn them.”
My voice breaks.



She glances down at the letters, and her eyes widen before her shoulders
curve inward and her face crumples.

“What are tho—” Ridoc starts, looking over her shoulder and falling
silent. “Shit.”

“No,” Rhiannon whispers, but I know she’s not denying me the favor.
“Not Liam. No.” Her gaze slowly rises to meet mine.

My eyes burn but I manage to nod, clearing my throat. “Promise you
won’t let them have these when they come for his things if I’m not—” I
can’t finish.

Rhiannon nods. “You’re not hurt, are you?” She scans me again,
blinking at the line of stitchwork on my flight jacket, where the hole from
the venin’s blade was repaired in Aretia.

I shake my head. I’m not lying. Not really. My body is perfectly healthy
now.

“We have to go,” Xaden says.
“I’ll see you guys at graduation.” I give them a watery smile but take a

step toward Xaden. The more space my friends have from me, the safer
they’ll be for the foreseeable future.

“How do you do it?” I whisper at Xaden as we turn the corner into the
crowded main corridor of the first-year dorms.

“Do what?” His arms hang loose at his sides as he continuously scans
the people around us, and he puts his hand on my lower back like he’s
worried we might get separated. We’re in the thick of the rush, and for
every person too busy to notice us, there’s another who does a double take
when we cross paths. Every marked one we see gives Xaden a subtle nod,
signaling that they’ve been warned by the others.

“Lie to the people you care about?”
Our gazes collide.
We pass one of the busts of the First Six and follow the flow of the

crowd past the wide spiral staircase that connects the higher-years’ dorms.
Xaden’s jaw clenches. “Vi—”
I lift my hand and cut him off. “It’s not an insult. I need to know how to

do it.”



We break away from the crush of cadets headed out the door to the
courtyard, and Xaden strides purposefully for the rotunda, yanking open the
door and ushering me through. I step away from the hand he places on my
lower back.

Zihnal must be smiling on us, because the room is blessedly empty for
the second it takes Xaden to tug me behind the first pillar we come to. The
red dragon hides us from anyone who might pass through the space that
connects all wings of the quadrant.

Sure enough, voices and footsteps fill the vaulted chamber a moment
later, but no one sees us behind the massive pillar, which is exactly why this
is our chosen meeting place. I glance around Xaden, noting the emptiness
behind the pillars that flank us. Either everyone else is on the other side of
the rotunda, or we’re the first to arrive.

“For the record, I don’t lie to the people I care about.” Xaden lowers his
voice as he faces me, the intensity in his eyes pinning my back to the
marble pillar. He leans in, consuming my field of vision until he’s all I see.
“And I sure as hell have never lied to you. But the art of telling selective
truths is something you’re going to have to master or we’ll all be dead. I
know you trust Rhiannon and Ridoc, but you can’t tell them the truth, as
much for their sakes as for ours. Knowing puts them in danger. You have to
be able to keep the truth compartmentalized. If you can’t lie to your friends,
you keep your distance. Understand?”

I tense. Of course I know that, but hearing it said so blatantly drives the
situation home like a knife to my stomach. “I understand.”

“I never wanted you put in this position. Not with your friends and
especially not with Colonel Aetos. That was one of the many reasons why I
never told you.”

“How long did you know about Brennan?” It might not be the right time,
but suddenly it’s the only time.

He exhales slowly. “I’ve known about Brennan since his death.”
My lips part and something heavy shifts, easing a weight in my chest

that’s been there since Resson.
“What?”



“You didn’t dodge the question.” Have to admit, I’m a little surprised. “I
promised you some answers.” He leans forward. “But I can’t promise you’ll
like what you hear.”

“I’ll always prefer the truth.” Some answers?
“You say that now.” A wry smile twists his lips.
“I always will.” The sounds of boots shuffling behind us as students

report for formation reminds me that we’re not entirely alone, but I need
Xaden to hear this. “If the last few weeks have shown you anything, it
should be that I don’t run from truth, no matter how hard it is or what it
costs.”

“Yeah, well, it cost me you.” My whole body tenses and his eyes slam
shut. “Shit. I shouldn’t have said that.” He opens them again, shaking his
head, and the abject misery there makes my heart clench. “I know it was the
not telling you. I get it. But when the lives of everyone around you depend
on how well you can lie, it’s not easy to realize it’s the truth that will save
you.” A sigh moves his shoulders. “If I could do it all again, I’d do it
differently, I promise, but I can’t, so here we are.”

“Here we are.” And I’m not even sure where here is. I shift my weight.
“But as long as you meant what you said about telling me everything—”

He flinches, and my heart sinks.
“You are going to tell me everything once I can properly shield, right?”

It’s all I can do not to grab onto him and start shaking. Hard. “That’s what
you promised in your bedroom.” He is not doing this to me. “‘Anything you
want to know and everything you don’t.’ Those were your words.”

“Everything about me.”
Oh, fuck me, he is doing this to me. Again.
I shake my head. “That is not what you promised.”
Xaden starts to take a step toward me, but I lift my chin, daring him to

touch me right now. Smart man that he is, he keeps his feet planted.
He runs a hand through his hair and sighs. “Look, I will answer any

question you want to ask about me. Gods, I want you to ask, to know me
well enough to trust me even when I can’t tell you everything.” He nods
like those words had been included in the original promise when we both



know damn well they weren’t. “Because you didn’t fall for an ordinary
rider. You fell for the leader of a revolution,” he whispers, the sound so soft
it barely carries to my ears. “To some degree, I’m always going to have
secrets.”

“You have to be kidding me.” I let anger rush to the surface in hopes it
will burn away the heartrending pain of his words. Brennan’s been lying to
me for six years, letting me mourn his death when he’s been well-the-fuck
alive the whole time. My oldest friend stole my memories and possibly sent
me to die. My mother built my entire life on a lie. I’m not even sure what
parts of my education are real and which are fabricated, and he thinks I’m
not going to demand total, complete honesty from him?

“I’m not kidding.” There’s zero apology in his tone. “But that doesn’t
mean I won’t let you in like I promised. I’m an open book when it comes to
—”

“Whatever you want.” I shake my head. “And that’s not going to work
for me. Not this time. I can’t trust you again without full disclosure.
Period.”

He blinks as though I’ve actually managed to stun him.
“Full. Disclosure,” I demand like any rational woman staring down the

man who kept her brother’s life a secret from her, let alone an entire war. “I
can forgive you for keeping me in the dark before today. You did it to save
lives, possibly even mine. But it’s complete and total honesty from now on,
or…” Gods, am I going to have to say it?

Am I really about to issue an ultimatum to Xaden-fucking-Riorson?
“Or what?” He leans in, his eyes sharpening.
“Or I’ll get busy unfalling for you,” I spit out.
Surprise flares in his eyes a second before a corner of his mouth lifts into

a smirk. “Good luck with that. I tried it for a good five months. Let me
know how it works out for you.”

I scoff, at a complete loss for words as the bells chime, announcing the
beginning of formation.

“It’s time,” he says. “Keep your shields up. Block everyone out like we
practiced on the way here.”



“I can’t even keep you out.”
“You’ll find I’m harder to block than most.” His smirk is so infuriating, I

ball my hands just to give my fists something else to do.
“Hey, I hate to interrupt what’s obviously a moment,” Bodhi whispers

loudly from my left. “But that was the last bell, so that’s our cue to get this
nightmare started.”

Xaden shoots a glare at his cousin, but we both nod. He doesn’t do his
friends the dishonor of asking if they accomplished their missions as all
eight of us walk into the center of the rotunda.

My stomach jumps into my throat as the death roll sounds from the
courtyard. “I will not die today,” I whisper to myself.

“I really fucking hope you’re right about this,” Garrick says to Xaden as
we face the open door. “It would be unfortunate to make it all three years
and then die on graduation day.”

“I’m right.” Xaden walks out and we all follow, stepping into the
sunlight.

“Garrick Tavis. Xaden Riorson.” Captain Fitzgibbons’s voice carries
over the formation as he reads from the death roll.

“Well, this is awkward,” Xaden calls out.
And every head in the courtyard turns our direction.

OceanofPDF.com



As dragons ferociously guard both their young and any information
regarding their development, only four facts are known about the

Dreamless Sleep. First, it is a critical time of rapid growth and
development. Second, the duration varies from breed to breed. Third,

as the name suggests, it is dreamless, and fourth, they wake up hungry.

—COLONEL KAORI’S FIELD GUIDE TO DRAGONKIND



CHAPTER FOUR

My heart beats fast enough to keep time with a hummingbird’s wings as
we walk across the courtyard toward the dais, Xaden two steps ahead

of the rest of us. He moves without fear, his shoulders straight and head
high, anger manifesting in every purposeful stride, every tight line of his
body.

I lift my chin and focus on the platform ahead as gravel crunches
beneath my boots, the sound muffling more than one gasp from the cadets
on my left. I might not have Xaden’s confidence, but I can fake it.

“You’re…not dead.” Captain Fitzgibbons, the scribe assigned to the
Riders Quadrant, stares with wide eyes beneath his silver brows, his
weathered face turning the same pale cream of his uniform as he fumbles
with the death roll, dropping it.

“Apparently not,” Xaden replies.
It’s almost comical how Commandant Panchek’s mouth hangs open as

he turns toward us from his seat on the dais, and within seconds, my mother
and Colonel Aetos stand, blocking his view.

Jesinia steps forward, her brown eyes wide under her cream hood as she
fetches the death roll for Captain Fitzgibbons. “I’m happy you’re alive,” she
signs quickly before grabbing the roll.

“Me, too,” I sign back, a sick feeling taking hold. Does she know what
her quadrant is really teaching her? Neither of us had a clue during the



months and years we studied together.
Colonel Aetos’s cheeks grow increasingly red with every step we take,

his gaze skimming our party of eight, no doubt taking note of who’s here
and who isn’t.

My mother locks eyes with me for one heartbeat, a side of her mouth
tilting upward in an expression I’m almost scared to call…pride, before she
quickly masks it, resuming the professional distance she’s maintained
impeccably for the last year. One heartbeat. That’s all it takes for me to
know that I’m right. There’s no anger in her eyes—no fear or shock, either.
Just relief.

She wasn’t in on Aetos’s plan. I know it with every fiber of my being.
“I don’t understand,” Fitzgibbons says to the two scribes behind him,

then addresses Panchek. “They aren’t dead. Why would they have been
reported for the death roll?”

“Why were they reported for the death roll?” my mother asks Colonel
Aetos, her eyes narrowing.

A cold breeze blows past, and though it’s a momentary relief from the
stifling heat, I know what it really means—the general is pissed. I glance
skyward, but there’s only blue as far as I can see. At least she hasn’t
summoned a storm. Yet.

“They’ve been missing for six days!” Aetos seethes, his voice rising
with each angry word. “Naturally we reported them dead, but obviously we
should have reported them for desertion and dereliction of duty instead.”

“You want to report us for desertion?” Xaden walks up the stairs of the
dais, and Aetos backs up a step, fear flashing across his eyes. “You sent us
into combat, and you’re going to report us for desertion?” Xaden doesn’t
need to shout for his voice to carry across the formation.

“What is he talking about?” my mother asks, looking between Xaden
and Aetos.

Here we go.
“I have no idea,” Aetos grinds out.
“I was directed to take a squad beyond the wards to Athebyne and form

the headquarters for Fourth Wing’s War Games, and I did so. We stopped to



rest our riot at the nearest lake past the wards, and we were attacked by
gryphons.” The lie rolls off his tongue as smoothly as the truth, which is
both impressive…and infuriating, because he doesn’t have a single fucking
tell.

My mother blinks, and Aetos’s thick brows furrow.
“It was a surprise attack, and they caught Deigh and Fuil unaware.”

Xaden pivots slightly, as though he’s telling the wings and not leadership.
“They were dead before they ever had a chance.”

An ache unfurls in my chest, stealing my breath. The cadets around us
murmur, but I stay focused on Xaden.

“We lost Liam Mairi and Soleil Telery,” Xaden adds, then looks over his
shoulder at me. “And we almost lost Sorrengail.”

The general pivots and, for a second, looks down at me like she’s not
just my commanding officer, with worry and a touch of horror in her eyes.
She looks at me like she’s just…Mom.

I nod, the pain in my chest intensifying.
“He’s lying,” Colonel Aetos accuses. The certainty in his voice makes

my head swim with the possibility that we might not pull this off, that we
might be killed where we stand before we have the chance to convince my
mother.

“I’m only behind the ridgeline,” Tairn tells me.
“Breathe,” Garrick whispers. “Or you’ll pass out.”
I inhale and focus on steadying my heartbeat.
“Why the hell would I lie?” Xaden tilts his head and looks down at

Colonel Aetos with pure disdain. “But surely if you don’t believe me, then
General Sorrengail can discern the truth from her own daughter.”

That’s my cue.
Step by step, I ascend the stairs of the thick, wooden platform to stand at

Xaden’s left side. Sweat drips down the back of my neck as the morning
sun beats against my flight leathers.

“Cadet Sorrengail?” My mother folds her arms and looks at me with
expectation.



The weight of the quadrant’s attention makes me clear my throat. “It’s
true.”

“Lies!” Aetos shouts. “There’s no way two dragons were brought down
by a drift of gryphons. Impossible. We should separate them and interrogate
them individually.”

My stomach pitches.
“I hardly think that’s necessary,” the general responds, an icy blast

blowing back the flight-loosened tendrils of my hair. “And I would
reconsider your insinuation that a Sorrengail isn’t truthful.”

Colonel Aetos stiffens.
“Tell me what happened, Cadet Sorrengail.” Mom cocks her head to the

side and gives me the look—the one she used all throughout my childhood
to unravel the truth when Brennan, Mira, and I would join ranks to hide any
mischief.

“Selective truth,” Xaden reminds me. “Tell no lies.”
He makes it sound so fucking easy.
“We flew for Athebyne, as ordered.” I look her straight in the eyes. “As

Riorson said, we stopped at the lake about twenty minutes out so we could
water the dragons and dismounted. I only saw two of the gryphons appear
with their riders, but everything happened so damned fast. Before I could
even get a grasp on what was happening…” Hold it together. I brush my
hand over my pocket, feeling the ridges of the little carving of Andarna
Liam had been working on before he died. “Soleil’s dragon was killed, and
Deigh was gutted.” My eyes water, but I blink until my vision clears. Mom
only responds to strength. If I show any sign of weakness, she’ll dismiss my
account as hysterics. “We didn’t stand a chance beyond the wards,
General.”

“And then?” Mom asks, completely unemotional.
“Then I held Liam as he died,” I state, quick to hide the quiver in my

chin.
“There was nothing we could do for him once Deigh passed.” It takes

me a second to shove the memories, the emotion, back into the box they



have to stay in for this to work. “And before his body was even cold, I was
stabbed with a poison-tipped blade.”

Mom’s eyes flare, and she jerks her gaze away.
I turn my focus to Colonel Aetos. “But when we sought help in

Athebyne, we found the entire outpost deserted and a note that Wingleader
Riorson could choose to keep watch over a nearby village or race to
Eltuval.”

“Here’s the missive.” Xaden reaches into his pocket and pulls out the
orders from War Games. “Not sure what the destruction of a foreign village
had to do with War Games, but we didn’t stick around to find out. Cadet
Sorrengail was dying, and I chose to preserve what remained of my squad.”
He hands the crumpled orders to Mom. “I chose to save your daughter.”

She snatches the orders and stiffens.
“It took us days to find someone capable of healing me, though I don’t

remember being healed,” I tell them. “And the second my life was out of
danger, we flew back here. We arrived about half an hour ago, as I’m sure
Aimsir can verify.”

“And the bodies?” Aetos asks.
Oh shit. “I…” I have no fucking clue other than Xaden telling me they’d

buried Liam.
“Sorrengail wouldn’t know,” Xaden answers. “She was delirious from

the poison. Once we knew there was no help to be found at Athebyne, half
the riot flew back to the lake and burned the bodies of both riders and
dragons while I took the other half to find help. If you’re looking for proof,
then you can find it either about a hundred yards from the lake, in the
clearing to the east, or in the fresh scars on our dragons.”

“Enough.” Mom pauses, no doubt confirming with her dragon, then
turns slowly toward Colonel Aetos, and though he has a few inches on her,
he suddenly appears smaller. Frost blooms on the surface of the dais. “This
is your handwriting. You emptied a strategically invaluable outpost beyond
the wards for War Games?”

“It was only for a few days.” He has the good sense to retreat a step.
“You told me the games were at my discretion this year.”



“And clearly your discretion lacks common fucking sense,” she retorts.
“I’ve heard everything I need to hear. Correct the death roll, get these cadets
into formation, and commence graduation so the new lieutenants can get to
their wings. I expect to see you in my office in thirty minutes, Colonel
Aetos.”

Relief nearly takes my knees out from under me. She believes me.
Dain’s dad stands at attention. “Yes, General.”
“You survived a knife wound after being thrown into combat as a first-

year,” she says to me.
“I did.”
She nods, a satisfied half smile curving her mouth for all of a heartbeat.

“Maybe you’re more like me than I gave you credit for.”
Without another word, Mom walks between me and the edge of the dais,

leaving us with Colonel Aetos as she heads down the stairs. The frost
dissipates instantly, and I hear her footsteps on the gravel behind us as the
colonel turns on Xaden and me.

More like her? That’s the last thing I want to be.
“You will not get away with this,” Aetos hisses but keeps his voice low.
“Get away with what, exactly?” Xaden responds, equally quiet.
“We both know you weren’t taken off-mission by gryphons.” Spit flies

from his mouth.
“What else could have possibly delayed us and slaughtered two dragons

and their riders?” I narrow my eyes and let all my rage shine through. He
got Liam and Soleil killed. Fuck him. “Surely, if you think there’s another
threat out there, you’d want to share that information with the rest of the
quadrant so we could adequately train to face it.”

He glares at me. “You’re such a disappointment, Violet.”
“Stop,” Xaden orders. “You gambled and you lost. You can’t expose

what you think the truth is without…well, exposing it, can you?” A cruel
smile tilts Xaden’s lips. “But personally, I think this is all easily solved by a
missive to General Melgren. Surely he saw the outcome of our battle with
the gryphons.”



Satisfaction courses through me at the way the colonel’s features
slacken.

Thanks to their rebellion relics, Melgren can’t confirm anything when
there are three or more marked ones involved, and Aetos apparently knows
it.

“I assume we’re dismissed?” Xaden asks. “Not sure if you’ve noticed,
but the entire quadrant is watching rather intently. So unless you’d like me
to keep them entertained by retelling what happened to us—”

“Get. In. Formation.” He grinds the words out through clenched teeth.
“Gladly, sir.” Xaden waits for me to descend the steps, then follows.

“It’s settled,” he tells Garrick. “Get everyone back in formation.”
I glance over my shoulder and see Fitzgibbons shaking his head in

confusion as he adjusts the death roll, and then I walk over to my squad
between Imogen and Xaden.

“You don’t have to escort me back,” I whisper, ignoring the stares of
every cadet we pass.

“I promised your brother I’d handle the other Aetos.”
“I can handle Dain.” A swift kick to the balls wouldn’t be uncalled for,

would it?
“We tried your way last year. Now we try mine.”
Imogen lifts her eyebrows but doesn’t say anything.
“Violet!” Dain breaks formation, moving toward us as we reach Second

Squad, Flame Section. The worry and relief that etch the lines of his face
make power prickle in my hands.

“You cannot kill him here,” Xaden warns.
“You’re alive! We’d heard—” Dain reaches for me, and I recoil.
“Touch me and I swear to the gods, I’ll cut your fucking hands off and

let the quadrant sort you out in the next round of challenges, Dain Aetos.”
My words earn more than a couple of gasps, but I don’t give a shit who
hears me.

“Violence, indeed.” The hint of amusement in Xaden’s tone doesn’t
reach his face.



“What?” Dain stops dead in his tracks, his eyebrows shooting up into his
hairline. “You don’t mean that, Vi.”

“I do.” I rest my hands alongside the sheaths at my thighs.
“You should take her at her word. In fact…” Xaden doesn’t bother to

lower his voice. “If you don’t, I’ll take personal offense. She made her
choice, and it wasn’t you. It will never be you. I know it. She knows it. The
whole quadrant knows it.”

Oh, just kill me now. Heat flushes my cheeks. Getting caught in his
flight jacket before War Games is one thing. Outing us in public—when I’m
not sure there is an us—is another.

Imogen grins, and I consider the merits of elbowing her in the side.
Dain glances left and right, his face flushing so scarlet I can see the

color under the scruff of his light-brown beard as everyone looks on. “What
else? You going to threaten to kill me, Riorson?” he retorts, the disgust on
his face so similar to his father’s that my stomach sours.

“No.” Xaden shakes his head. “Why should I, when Sorrengail is
perfectly capable of doing that herself? She doesn’t want you to touch her.
Pretty sure everyone in the quadrant heard her. That should be enough for
you to keep your hands to yourself.” He leans in, his whisper barely
reaching my ears. “But in case it’s not, every time you think of reaching for
her face, I want you to remember one word.”

“And what is that?” Dain seethes.
“Athebyne.” Xaden pulls back, and the pure menace in his expression

sends a shiver along my skin.
Dain’s spine stiffens as Colonel Panchek calls the formation to attention.
“No response? Interesting.” Xaden’s head tilts to the side as he studies

Dain’s face. “Get back in formation, squad leader, before I lose all pretense
of civility on behalf of Liam and Soleil.”

Dain pales and has the decency to look away before stepping back into
his place at the head of our squad.

Xaden’s gaze meets mine for a heartbeat before he walks to the front of
Fourth Wing.

I should have known going for Dain’s pride would include a spectacle.



The squad shuffles, making room for Imogen and me in our usual
places, and my face heats at the blatant stares from my friends.

“That was…interesting,” Rhiannon whispers at my side, her eyes puffy
and red.

“That was hot,” Nadine comments from in front of us, standing beside
Sawyer.

“Love triangles can get so fucking awkward, don’t you think?” Imogen
says.

I shoot a glare over my shoulder at her for going along with Xaden’s
implication—or assumption, but she shrugs unapologetically.

“Gods, I missed you.” The blue streak in Quinn’s short blond curls bobs
as she shoulder-bumps Imogen. “War Games sucked. You didn’t miss
much.”

Captain Fitzgibbons steps forward on the dais, sweat dripping down his
face as he continues from where we interrupted, reading names from the
death roll.

“Seventeen so far,” Rhiannon whispers. The final test for War Games is
always deadly, ensuring only the strongest riders move on to graduation—
but Liam was the strongest of our year, and that didn’t save him.

“Soleil Telery. Liam Mairi,” Captain Fitzgibbons calls out.
I struggle to force air through my lungs and fight the sting in my eyes as

the rest of the names blur together until the scribe finishes the roll,
commending their souls to Malek.

None of us cry.
Commandant Panchek clears his throat, and though there’s no need to

magically amplify his voice over the small numbers we’ve been whittled
down to over the last year, he can’t seem to help himself. “Beyond military
commendations, there are no words of praise for riders. Our reward for a
job well done is living to see the next duty station, the next rank. In keeping
with our traditions and standards, those of you who have completed your
third year will now be commissioned as lieutenants in the army of Navarre.
Step forward when your name is called to receive your orders. You have
until morning to depart for your new duty stations.”



Starting with First Wing, the third-years are named section by section,
and each collects their orders before leaving the courtyard.

“It’s kind of underwhelming,” Ridoc whispers from my other side,
earning a glare from Dain as he looks over his shoulder from two rows
ahead.

Fuck him.
“Just saying, surviving three years of this place should come with a

lifetime supply of ale and a party so good you can’t remember it.” He
shrugs.

“That’s for tonight,” Quinn says. “Are they…handwriting those orders?”
“For the third-years they thought were dead,” Heaton says from the back

row.
“Who do you think is going to be our new wingleader?” Nadine

whispers from behind me.
“Aura Beinhaven,” Rhiannon answers. “She was instrumental in Second

Wing’s win for War Games, but Aetos didn’t do too badly filling in for
Riorson, either.”

Heaton and Emery are called up from our squad.
I glance at the others, remembering the first-years who started with us

but won’t finish. The first-years who either lie buried at the foot of Basgiath
in endless rows of stones or were taken home to be put to rest. The second-
years who will never see a third star on their shoulders. The third-years like
Soleil who were certain they’d graduate only to fall.

Maybe this place is exactly what the gryphon flier had called it—a death
factory.

“Xaden Riorson,” the commandant calls out, and my pulse leaps as
Xaden strides forward to take his orders, the last third-year in formation.

Nausea grips my stomach, and I sway. He’ll be gone by morning. Gone.
Telling myself that I’ll see him every few days because of Tairn and
Sgaeyl’s mating bond doesn’t quell the panic quickening my breaths. He
won’t be here. Not on the mat, testing and pushing me to be better. Not in
Battle Brief or on the flight line.

I should be happy for the space, but I’m not.



Panchek resumes his place at the podium, running his hands down the
trim lines of his uniform as though smoothing away any wrinkles.

“I’ll find you before I go.” Xaden’s voice cuts through my shield and
spiraling thoughts, then fades as he walks out of the courtyard and into the
dormitory.

At least we’ll get to say goodbye. Or fight our goodbyes. Whatever.
“Congratulations to the new lieutenants,” Panchek says. “The rest of you

will report to central issue to turn in your uniforms—yes, you may keep
your earned patches—and pick up your new ones. From this moment,
seconds are now third-years and firsts are now second-years, with all the
privileges that entails. New command designations will be posted in
commons this evening. You are dismissed.”

A resounding cheer goes up in the courtyard, and I’m grabbed into a hug
by Ridoc, then Sawyer, then Rhiannon, and even Nadine.

We made it. We’re officially second-years.
Out of the eleven first-years who came through our squad during the

year, both before and after Threshing, the five of us are the only ones left
standing.

For now.

OceanofPDF.com



After three consecutive deaths of prisoners during his interrogations, it
is this command’s opinion that Major


Burton Varrish should be reassigned from an active wing until further
notice.

—MISSIVE FROM LIEUTENANT COLONEL DEGRENSI, SAMARA OUTPOST, TO
GENERAL MELGREN



CHAPTER FIVE

R iders party as hard as we fight.
And we fight pretty damned hard.

The gathering hall is more raucous than I’ve ever seen it by the time the
sun begins to set that evening. Cadets gather around—or in Second Wing’s
case, on top of—tables overflowing with food and pitchers of sweet wine,
frothy ale, and a lavender lemonade that clearly has its fair share of distilled
liquor.

Only the dais table is empty. For this one moment, there are no
wingleaders, no section leaders, not even a squad leader in sight. Other than
the stars on the fronts of our shoulders that denote our years at Basgiath,
we’re all equal tonight. Even the newly anointed lieutenants who wander in
to say their goodbyes aren’t in our chain of command.

There’s a pleasant buzz in my head, courtesy of the lemonade and the
two silver stars on my shoulder.

“Chantara?” Rhiannon asks, leaning forward to look past me and lifting
her brows at Ridoc, who is seated on my other side. “Out of every privilege
that comes with being a second-year, that’s what you’re looking forward to?
It’s only a rumor.”

The village that supplies Basgiath has always been open to second-years
from the Healer Quadrant, Scribe Quadrant, and Infantry Quadrant, but not



ours. We’ve been banned for nearly a decade after a fight led to a local bar
burning down.

“I’m just saying I heard they might lift the ban finally, and we’ve been
stuck with this dating pool for the last year,” Ridoc states, using his cup to
motion around the hall, which is mostly behind us. “So even the possibility
of getting leave to spend a few hours in Chantara every week is definitely
what I’m looking forward to the most.”

Nadine grins, her eyes sparkling as she gathers the hair she dyed purple
this evening in one hand so it doesn’t fall into the pitcher, and leans over the
table to clink her glass against Ridoc’s cup. “Hear, hear. It is getting a
little…” She wrinkles her button nose, glancing past Sawyer at the other
squads in our wing. “Familiar around here. I bet by third year it will feel
downright incestuous.”

We all laugh, none of us stating the obvious. Statistically speaking, a
third of our class won’t survive to see our third years, but we’re this year’s
Iron Squad, having lost the fewest cadets between Parapet and Gauntlet, so
I’m choosing to think positively tonight and every night of the next five
days, during which our only duty will be to prepare for the arrival of the
first-years.

Rhiannon pulls one of her braids under her nose and furrows her brow
like Panchek as she mock-lectures, “You do know that trips to Chantara are
for worship only, cadet.”

“Hey, I never said I wouldn’t stop by the temple of Zihnal to pay the
God of Luck my respects.” Ridoc puts his hand over his heart.

“And not because you’re praying to get a little lucky while the other
cadets are in town,” Sawyer comments, wiping the foam from his ale off his
freckled upper lip.

“I’m changing my answer,” Ridoc says. “Being able to fraternize with
other quadrants anywhere in our downtime is what I’m looking forward to.”

“What is this downtime you speak of?” I joke. We might have a few
more empty hours here and there compared to first-years, but there’s a slew
of harder courses headed for us.



“We have weekends now, and I’ll take whatever time we get.” His grin
turns mischievous.

Rhiannon leans forward on her elbows and winks at me. “Like you’ll be
using every second you can get with a certain Lieutenant Riorson.”

My liquor-flushed cheeks heat even more. “I’m not—”
A resounding boo sounds around the table.
“Pretty much everyone saw you show up to formation in his flight jacket

before War Games,” Nadine says. “And after this morning’s display?
Please.” She rolls her eyes.

Right. The display after he told me that he’d always keep secrets from
me.

“Personally, I’m looking forward to letters,” Rhiannon says, clearly
jumping in to save me as Imogen and Quinn arrive, sliding in next to
Nadine. “It’s been way too long since I’ve been able to talk to my family.”

We share a small smile, neither of us mentioning that we snuck out of
Montserrat to see her family a few months ago.

“No chore duty!” Sawyer adds. “I will never scrub another breakfast
dish again.”

I’ll never push another library cart with Liam.
“I’m going with his answer,” Nadine agrees, sliding the pitchers of

alcohol toward Imogen and Quinn.
A couple of months ago, Nadine wouldn’t even acknowledge Imogen’s

presence because of her rebellion relic. It gives me hope that the new
lieutenants who bear the same mark might not face discrimination at their
new duty stations, but I saw firsthand at Montserrat how the wings look at
marked ones—like they were the officers who perpetuated the rebellion, not
their parents.

Then again, given what I know now, everyone is right not to trust them.
Not to trust me.

“Second year is the best,” Quinn says, pouring ale from the pitcher into
a pewter mug. “All the privileges and only some of the responsibility of the
third-years.”



“But fraternizing between quadrants is definitely the best perk,” Imogen
adds, forcing a smile and wincing before touching her finger to the split in
her lip.

“That’s what I said!” Ridoc fist pumps the air.
“Did your lip get split while you guys…” Nadine asks Imogen, her voice

trailing off as the table goes quiet.
I lower my eyes to my lemonade. The alcohol doesn’t numb the ache of

guilt that sits heavily on my shoulders. Maybe Xaden’s right. If I can’t lie to
my friends, maybe I should start keeping my distance so I don’t get them
killed.

“Yeah,” Imogen says, glancing my way, but I don’t look up.
“I still can’t believe you guys saw action,” Ridoc says, all playfulness

dying. “Not War Games—which were already scary as shit with Aetos
stepping in for Riorson—but real, actual gryphons.”

I grip my glass tighter. How am I supposed to sit here and act like I’m
the same person when what happened in Resson has changed every single
thing about what I believe?

“What was it like?” Nadine inquires softly. “If you guys don’t mind us
asking?”

Yes, I fucking mind.
“I always knew gryphon talons were sharp, but to take down a

dragon…” Sawyer’s voice drifts off.
My knuckles whiten and power simmers beneath my skin as I remember

the angry red veins beside that dark wielder’s eyes as she came for me on
Tairn’s back, the look in Liam’s when he realized Deigh wasn’t going to
make it.

“It’s natural to wonder,” Tairn reminds me. “Especially when your
experience could prepare them for battle in their eyes.”

“They should mind their own business,” Andarna counters, her voice
gruff as though settling into sleep. “They’re all better off not knowing.”

“Guys, maybe now isn’t—” Rhiannon starts.
“It fucking sucked,” Imogen says before throwing back her drink and

slamming her glass on the table. “You want the truth? If it wasn’t for



Riorson and Sorrengail, we’d all be dead.”
My gaze jerks to hers.
It’s the closest thing to a compliment she’s ever given me.
There’s no pity in her pale green eyes as she stares back, but there’s no

defensive snark, either. Just respect. Her pink hair falls away from her
cheek as she tilts her head at me. “And as much as I wish none of it had
happened, at least those of us who were there truly know the horror of what
we’re up against.”

My throat tightens.
“To Liam,” Imogen says, lifting her glass and defying the unwritten rule

that we don’t speak of the dead cadets after their name is read from the roll.
“To Liam.” I lift mine, and everyone at the table does the same, drinking

to him. It’s not enough, but it has to be.
“Can I offer a word of advice going into your second year?” Quinn says

after a quiet moment. “Don’t get too close to the first-years, especially not
until Threshing tells you how many of them might actually be worth getting
to know.” She grimaces. “Just trust me.”

Well, that’s sobering.
The shimmering shadow of my connection with Xaden strengthens,

curling around my mind like a second shield, and I glance over my shoulder
to see him across the hall, leaning against the wall next to the door, his
hands in the pockets of his flight leathers. Garrick is talking to him, but his
eyes are locked on mine.

“Having fun?” he asks, pushing through my shields with annoying ease.
A shiver of awareness rushes over my skin. Mixing alcohol and Xaden

is definitely not a good idea.
Or is it the best idea?
“Whatever is going through that beautiful mind, I’m here for it.” Even

from this distance, I can see his gaze darken.
Wait. He’s in flight leathers, dressed to leave. My heart slumps, taking a

little of my buzz with it.
He nods toward the door.



“I’ll be right back,” I say, setting my cup on the table and wobbling a
little as I stand. No more lemonade for me.

“I certainly hope not,” Ridoc mutters. “Or you’ll destroy all my fantasies
when it comes to that one.”

I roll my eyes at him, then make my way across the chaotic room to
Xaden.

“Violet.” His gaze rakes over my face, lingering on my cheeks.
I love the way he says my name. Sure, it’s the alcohol overruling my

logic, but I want to hear him say it again.
“Lieutenant Riorson.” There’s a silver line at his collar showing his new

rank, but no other markings that could give away his identity in case he falls
behind enemy lines. No unit designation. No signet patches. He could be
any lieutenant in any wing if not for the relic that marks his neck.

“Hey, Sorrengail,” Garrick says, but I can’t peel my eyes from Xaden
long enough to glance his way. “Good job today.”

“Thanks, Garrick,” I respond, moving closer to Xaden. He’ll change his
mind and let me all the way in. He has to.

“Gods, you two.” Garrick shakes his head. “Do us all a favor and figure
your shit out. I’ll meet you at the flight field.” He smacks Xaden’s shoulder
and walks off.

“You look…” I sigh, because it’s not like I’ve ever been successful lying
to him, and the fuzziness in my head isn’t helping. “Good in officer flight
leathers.”

“They’re almost exactly like cadet ones.” A corner of his mouth lifts, but
it’s not quite a smile.

“Didn’t say you didn’t look good in those, too.”
“You’re…” He tilts his head at me. “Drunk, aren’t you?”
“I’m pleasantly fuddled but not entirely sloshed.” That makes exactly no

sense, but it’s accurate. “Yet. But the night is young, and I’m not sure if
you’ve heard, but we have nothing to do for the next five days except
prepare for the first-years and party.”

“I wish I could stay to see what you do with all that time.” He looks me
over lazily, his gaze heating as though he’s remembering what I look like



naked, and my pulse leaps. “Walk out with me?”
I nod, then follow him into commons, where he grabs his rucksack from

beside the wall and slings it over his shoulders casually, as if there aren’t
two swords hanging from the back of it.

A group of cadets hovers around the announcements board like the new
leadership list is going to appear at any second and they might be erased
from it if someone discovers they’re not watching.

Yep, there’s Dain in the center of them.
“You aren’t waiting for tomorrow morning to leave?” I ask Xaden,

keeping my voice low as we cross the stone floor of the expansive space.
“They prefer wingleaders to vacate their rooms first, since the new guys

like to move in quickly.” He glances at the crowd around the announcement
board. “And since I’m guessing you’re not offering a place in your bed—”

“I’m not nearly drunk enough to make that lapse in judgment,” I assure
him as he opens a door to the rotunda. “I told you, I don’t sleep with men I
don’t trust, and if you’re not offering full disclosure…” I shake my head
and immediately regret it, nearly losing my balance.

“I’ll earn your trust as soon as you realize you don’t need full disclosure.
You only have to have the guts to start asking the questions you actually
want answers to. Don’t worry about the bed. We’ll get back there. The
anticipation is good for us.” He smiles—really fucking smiles—and it
almost makes me rethink my decision.

“I tell you we’re not together because you won’t give me the one thing I
need—honesty—and you counter with ‘it’s good for us’?” I scoff and walk
down the stairs and past two of the marble pillars in the rotunda. “The
arrogance.”

“Confidence is not arrogance. I don’t lose the fights I pick. And we’re
both allowed to have boundaries. You’re not the only one who gets to set
the rules in this relationship.”

I bristle at the implication that I’m the problem here. “And you’re
picking a fight with me?” The world tips slightly when I look up at him.

“Picking a fight for you. There’s a difference.” His expression hardens
as his gaze jerks left, toward the approach of Colonel Aetos and a rider



wearing the rank of major.
“Riorson. Sorrengail.” The colonel’s mouth quirks into a sarcastic smile.

“So lovely to see you both tonight. Leaving for the Southern Wing so soon?
The front will be lucky to have such a capable rider.”

My chest tightens. Xaden isn’t going to a mid-guard wing like most
lieutenants. He’s being sent to the front?

“I’d say I’ll be back before you can miss me,” Xaden replies, his hands
loose at his sides, “but word has it you pissed off General Sorrengail
enough to be reassigned to a coastal outpost.”

The colonel’s face blotches. “I might not be here, but you won’t be as
often, either. Only once every fortnight, according to your new orders.”

What? My stomach pitches, and it takes every ounce of control I have
not to reach out and steady myself.

The major slides his hand into the breast pocket of his perfectly pressed
dress uniform and pulls out two folded missives. His black hair is perfectly
combed, his boots perfectly shined, his smile perfectly cruel.

Power rises within me, responding to the threat.
“Where are my manners?” Colonel Aetos says. “Violet, this is your new

vice commandant, Major Varrish. He’s here to tighten the ship, as they say.
We seem to have gotten a little lax with what we allow around here.
Naturally the quadrant’s current executive commandant will still see to
operations, but Varrish’s new position only answers to Panchek.”

“Cadet Sorrengail,” I correct the Colonel. Vice commandant? Fucking
great. “The general’s daughter,” Varrish responds, looking me over in clear
appraisal, his attention snagging on every dagger I have within reach.
“Fascinating. I’d heard you were too fragile to survive a year in the
quadrant.”

“My presence would suggest otherwise.” What a dick.
Xaden takes both missives, careful not to touch Varrish’s hands, then

gives me the one that has my name scrawled across the front. We crack
Melgren’s personal wax seals at the same moment, then unfold the official
orders.



Cadet Violet Sorrengail is hereby given two days of leave once
every fourteen days to be used only to fly with Tairn directly to and
from Sgaeyl ’s current duty station or location. Any other absence
from classes will be considered a punishable offense.

I grit my teeth to keep from giving the colonel the reaction he so
obviously wants and carefully fold the orders, slipping them into the pocket
at my hip. My guess is Xaden’s say the same, and rotating our leaves puts
us at every seven days. Tairn and Sgaeyl are never apart for more than three
days. A week? They’ll be in a near-constant state of pain. It’s unfathomable.

“Tairn?” I reach out for him.
He roars so loudly it rattles my brain.
“Dragons give their own orders,” Xaden says calmly, pocketing his

papers.
“Guess we’ll see.” Colonel Aetos nods, then turns his gaze to mine.

“You know, I was worried about our earlier conversation until I
remembered something.”

“And what is that?” Xaden asks, clearly losing patience.
“Secrets make for poor leverage. They die with the people who keep

them.”

OceanofPDF.com



What no one openly says is that while all four quadrants obey the Code
of Conduct, a rider’s first responsibility is to the Codex, which often

overrules the regulations other quadrants live by.

By definition: the riders make their own rules.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER SIX

The churning in my stomach has nothing to do with the lemonade. I’m
pretty sure Colonel Aetos just insinuated he’d kill us.

“Good thing we’re not keeping secrets,” Xaden retorts.
Aetos’s smile shifts to the softer one I’ve seen all my life, and the

transformation is eerie. “Do be careful who you share your war stories with,
Violet. I’d hate to see your mother lose either of her daughters.”

What the fuck? Energy crackles in my fingertips.
He stares at me for a moment, making sure I get his point, then turns and

walks into commons without another word, Varrish following.
“He just threatened your life,” Xaden growls, shadows whipping out

from behind the pillars.
“And Mira’s.” If I tell anyone what really happened, he’ll target her, too.

Message delivered. Power burns through my veins, seeking an outlet. Anger
only fuels the energy that swiftly surges to an overwhelming wave,
threatening to rip me apart.

“Let’s get you outside before you bring the place down,” Xaden says,
reaching for my hand.

I give it to him, focusing on keeping the lightning at bay as we walk into
the courtyard, but the harder I fight to tame it, the hotter it becomes, and
once we’re in the darkness of the courtyard, I rip my hand from Xaden’s as
power tears from me, scalding every nerve on the way out.



Lightning illuminates the night sky, striking the courtyard about forty
feet away. Gravel flies.

“Shit!”
Xaden throws up a shield of shadow, catching the rocks before they can

hit any of the nearby cadets. “Guess alcohol doesn’t dampen your signet,”
he says slowly. “Good news is it’s all stone out here.”

“Sorry!” I call out to the others as they scatter, grimacing at my utterly
embarrassing lack of control. “Forget protecting me. The quadrant needs
protection from me.” Taking a deep breath, I turn to face Xaden. “Southern
Wing? Is that what you chose?” Wingleaders always get their choice of duty
station.

“There was no other choice by the time they handwrote our orders. I’ll
be at Samara. I spent today packing and shipping most of my things.”

It’s the easternmost outpost of the Southern Wing, where the borders of
Krovla and Braevick provinces intersect, and a day’s flight away. “They’ll
only have hours together every time they make the flight.”

“Yeah. She’s pretty pissed.”
“Tairn, too.” I reach out for Andarna in case she hasn’t drifted off yet.
“You’ve lost all touch with reality if you think I’m getting close to him

right now,” she responds, her voice gritty from sleep. “He’s in a mood.”
“You should be sleeping.” She’s supposed to be settling in for the

Dreamless Sleep. I still don’t know exactly what that means, nor is Tairn
open to questions on the parenting secrets of dragons, but he insists that
sleeping away the next two months is critical to her growth and
development. Part of me can’t help wondering if it’s simply a clever way to
avoid a majority of the teenage years of moody dragons.

As if on cue, Andarna replies with a yawn, “And miss all the drama?”
“We’ll only have hours to…” I whisper, looking away from Xaden’s

intense gaze. “You know. To pass information.” The courtyard reminds me
of a ballroom about two hours after everyone reasonable has left the party,
full of drunkards and bad decisions. How the hell are Xaden and I going to
fix whatever we are without time together?



“Pretty sure that’s precisely the idea. They’ll split us up for as long and
as often as possible. We’ll have to make the most of what time we get.”

“I don’t hate you as much tonight,” I whisper.
“It’s the alcohol. Don’t worry, you’ll despise me again tomorrow.” He

reaches out, and I don’t retreat when he cradles the nape of my neck.
Warmth spreads over every inch of my body. The affect he has on me is

as infuriating as it is undeniable.
“Listen to me.” He lowers his voice and gently tugs me toward him,

shooting a glance at a group of tipsy cadets watching nearby. “Play along.”
I nod.
“I’ll be back in seven days,” he says for the benefit of the people passing

by. “Sgaeyl and Tairn won’t be able to talk over the distance. They’ll sense
emotions, but that’s it. Remember that leadership will read any missive we
send.” He leans down, making it look to everyone else like we’re locked in
some kind of farewell embrace, which isn’t far from the truth.

“A lot can happen in seven days.” I understand what he’s telling me
mentally. “What am I supposed to do while you’re gone?”

“Nothing that matters will change,” he assures me for the benefit of
onlookers. “Don’t involve yourself in anything Bodhi and the others are
doing.” He has that look—the steely one he gets when he’s sure he’s right.

“You really aren’t going to change, are you?” I whisper, my chest
tightening.

“This isn’t about us. Every eye will be on you, and you don’t have a
rebellion relic to hide your actions from Melgren if you’re caught alone.
Involving yourself endangers everything we’re working for.” Another group
of cadets wanders closer, heading toward the rotunda.

It’s hard to argue against that, especially when what I have planned
requires being left to my own devices.

“I’m going to miss you.” His hand flexes on the back of my neck as a
couple of riders from Third Wing get a little too close. “You can only fully
trust those who were with us at Resson.”

“Think of all the spare time you’ll have without having to constantly
train me on the mat.” I give in to the ceaseless urge to touch him, lifting my



hands to his chest so I can feel the steady beat of his heart under my
fingertips, and blame the alcohol for the utter lapse in judgment.

“I’d much rather have you under me on the mat than spare time.” His
arm wraps around my waist, tugging me closer. “When it comes to the other
marked ones, don’t risk trusting them. Not yet. They know they can’t kill
you, but some of them would be happy to see you hurt given who your
mother is.”

“Back to that, are we?” I try to smile, but my lower lip trembles. I’m not
actually upset about him leaving. That’s the lemonade talking.

“Never left that,” he reminds me, keeping his voice low even though the
others in the courtyard are now giving us more than enough privacy. “Keep
yourself alive, and I’ll be back in seven days.” His hand slides to the side of
my neck, and his thumb grazes my jawline as he lowers his mouth to only a
breath above mine. “We managed to keep each other alive today. Trust me
yet?”

My heart jolts. I can almost taste his kiss, and gods, I want it.
“With my life,” I whisper.
“That’s all?” His mouth hovers above mine, all promise and no delivery.
“That’s all.” Trust is earned, and he isn’t even trying.
“Too bad,” he whispers, lifting his head. “But like I said, anticipation is

a good thing.”
Common sense crashes through the fog of lust with embarrassing ease.

For fuck’s sake, what did I almost do?
“No anticipation.” I outright glare, but my words lack bite. “We aren’t

happening, remember? That’s your choice. I have every right to walk right
back into the gathering hall and pick whomever I want to warm my bed.
Someone a little more ordinary.” It’s a bluff. Maybe. Or alcohol. Or maybe
I just want him to feel the same uncertainty I do.

“You absolutely have every right, but you won’t.” He gives me a slow
smile.

“Because you’re impossible to replace?” It does not come out as a
compliment. At least that’s what I tell myself.



“Because you still love me.” The certainty in his eyes pricks every inch
of my temper.

“Fuck off and leave, Riorson.”
“I would, but you’ve got a death grip on me.” He glances between our

bodies.
“Ugh!” I drop my hands from his waist and step back. “Go.”
“See you in seven days, Violence.” He backs away, moving toward the

tunnel that leads to the flight field. “Try not to burn the place down while
I’m gone.”

I glare in his general direction until I know he’s far beyond my sight.
And then I stand there another couple minutes, breathing slowly until I’m
certain I have my emotions under some semblance of control. What the hell
is wrong with me? How can I want someone who refuses to tell me his
whole truth? Who makes a game out of it with his ridiculous ask me
anything act? Like I’d have the first clue what to ask?

“He’ll be back,” Rhi says, coming up behind me, holding a missive of
her own, excitement shining in her eyes despite the somber tone of her
words.

“I shouldn’t care.” Yet I’m still wrapping my arms around my
midsection like I need to be held together. “What has you fighting a smile?”

“Did something happen between you two?” She moves the letter to her
pocket.

“What’s the letter?” I counter. “Did you get orders?” Orders usually only
mean one thing. I grab onto her shoulders and grin. “Did you?”

She grimaces. “I have good news and bad news.”
“Bad news first.” That’s my new motto.
“Aetos is our new wingleader.”
My face falls. “Should have expected that. What’s the good news?”
“Cianna, our executive officer, moved up to being executive officer of

the section.” Her smile is brighter than any mage light. “And you’re looking
at our new squad leader.”

“Yes!” I outright squeal in absolute delight and yank her into a hug.
“Congratulations! You’re going to be amazing! You already are!”



“Are we celebrating?” Sawyer asks loudly from the edge of the
courtyard.

“Abso-fucking-lutely!” Ridoc shouts, ale sloshing over the sides of his
mug as he rushes toward us. “Squad Leader Matthias!”

“What’s your first order, squad leader?” Sawyer asks, Nadine racing to
catch up to his long strides.

Rhi glances over each of us and nods as though coming to a decision.
“Live.”

I smile and wish it was that simple.

OceanofPDF.com



All tome requests at the Archives of Basgiath must be recorded and
filed. Any cadet who fails to do so will be reported for dereliction of

duty, as well as punished for the loss of any text they failed to
accurately track.

—COLONEL DAXTON’S GUIDE TO EXCELLING IN THE SCRIBE QUADRANT



CHAPTER SEVEN

“I ’ve never seen this room before,” Ridoc says five days later, dropping
into the seat next to me as the U-shaped amphitheater-style classroom

on the third floor fills for Orientation. We’re grouped in our sections and
squads within our wings, putting us in the second row on the right-hand
side, staring across the recessed floor at First Wing.

The noise outside is growing to a steady hum as civilians arrive for
Conscription Day tomorrow, but it’s still quiet within the walls of the
quadrant. We’ve spent this week preparing for the first-years’ arrival,
learning our roles at Parapet, and drinking entirely too much at night. It
definitely makes walking the hallways in the early morning interesting.

“We’ve never been second-years before,” Rhiannon replies from my
other side, her supplies perfectly aligned on her desk.

“Good point.” Ridoc nods.
“Made it!” Nadine slides in next to Ridoc, shoving errant strands of her

purple hair out of her face with a braced and wrapped hand. “How have I
never been in this room before?”

Rhiannon just shakes her head.
“We’ve never been second-years before,” I tell Nadine.
“Right. Makes sense.” She grabs her things out of her bag, then drops it

at her feet. “I guess none of our classes were this far down the hallway last
year.”



“What happened to your hand?” Rhiannon asks.
“It’s embarrassing.” She lifts the brace so we can see it. “I slipped and

sprained it on the steps last night. Don’t worry, the healers think Nolon
might have an opening for me tomorrow before Parapet. He’s been run
ragged since War Games.”

“That man needs a break,” Rhiannon says, bobbing her head.
“I wish we had a break like the other quadrants.” Ridoc taps his pen on

the desk. “Even five or six days to just get away.”
“I’m still recovering from the last six-day break I had away from here,” I

try to joke.
Rhi’s face falls, and the rest of our squad quiets.
Shit. That was not the right thing to say, but I’m exhausted. There’s no

point trying to sleep when I can’t quit dreaming about Resson.
“I’m around if you want to talk.” Rhi’s kind smile makes me feel like

I’m two inches tall for not letting her in.
Do I want to talk? Absolutely. Am I able to? Not after Aetos made it

clear not to share my war stories. He’s already targeting Mira—I’m not
putting my best friend in that situation, too. Maybe Xaden is right. If I can’t
lie, all my friends would be safer if I kept my distance.

“Good afternoon, second-years,” a tall rider says, his voice booming as
he strides to the center of the floor, quieting the room. “I am Captain”—he
winces, scratching the trim beard that’s a shade darker than his light golden
skin— “Professor Grady. And, as you can tell, I’m new this year and
getting used to the whole professor title, as well as being around twenty-
one-year-old kids again. It’s been a while since I’ve been in the quadrant.”

He turns toward the end of the classroom—the one section where there
are no seats—and crooks his fingers at the heavy wooden desk there. Lesser
magic makes it screech across the floor until Professor Grady puts his palm
out. Then it stops. He turns toward us and leans back against the edge of the
desk. “That’s better. Congratulations on living through your first year.” He
turns his head slowly, his gaze raking over each and every one of us. “There
are eighty-nine of you in this room. From what the scribes tell me, you are
the smallest class to walk this hall since the First Six.”



I glance at the empty rows of seats above First Wing. We knew last year
that we had the fewest number of dragons willing to bond, but to see how
few of us there really are is…disconcerting.

“Fewer dragons are bonding,” I say toward Tairn, knowing Andarna
drifted into the Dreamless Sleep a few days ago. “Is that because the
Empyrean knows about the venin?”

“Yes.” I can almost hear the exasperated sigh in Tairn’s voice.
“But we need more riders. Not fewer.” It doesn’t make sense.
“The Empyrean remains divided on whether or not we should get

involved,” Tairn grumbles. “Humans aren’t the only ones keeping secrets.”
But Andarna and Tairn have already made their choice—of that, I’m

sure.
“…But the second year brings its own challenges,” Professor Grady

continues as I focus on class. “Last year, you learned how to ride the
dragons who chose you. This year, you’ll learn what to do if you fall off.
Welcome to Rider Survival Course, or RSC for short.”

“What the hell is that?” Ridoc mutters.
“I don’t know,” I whisper, writing the letters RSC in the blank book in

front of me.
“But you know everything.” His eyes widen.
“Clearly not.” Seems to be the theme lately.
“Don’t know what it is?” Professor Grady asks with a grin, staring

straight at Ridoc. “Good—our tactics work.” He crosses one boot in front of
the other. “RSC is kept classified for a reason, so we get your genuine
reactions to the situations at hand.”

“No one wants my genuine reactions,” Ridoc murmurs.
I bite back a smile and shake my head.
“RSC will teach you how to survive if you become separated from your

dragon behind enemy lines. It’s a staple of your second year, culminating in
two full evaluations you must pass in order to continue at Basgiath—one in
a few weeks…and the other around mid-year.”

“What the hell do they do with a bonded rider who doesn’t pass?”
Rhiannon asks quietly.



Every member of my squad looks at me. “I have no clue.”
Caroline Ashton raises her hand from her seat in First Wing across the

room. A chill races down my spine as I remember how close she’d been to
Jack Barlowe—the rider who’d been intent on killing me until I killed him
instead.

“Yes?” Professor Grady asks.
“What precisely does ‘around mid-year’ mean?” Caroline asks. “Or ‘in

a few weeks’?”
“You won’t know the precise date,” he answers, lifting his brows.
She huffs, sitting back in her seat.
“And I won’t tell you, no matter how many times you roll your eyes. No

professor will because quite simply—we want you surprised. But we do
want you to be prepared. In this room, I will instruct you in navigation,
survival techniques, and how to withstand interrogation in case of capture.”

My stomach turns over, and my heartbeat goes double-time. Torture.
He’s talking about being tortured. And now I carry information worth being
tortured over.

“And you’ll face trials on those at any time,” Professor Grady continues,
“taken from any place in the quadrant.”

“They’re going to abduct us?” Nadine gasps, fear lacing her tone.
“Sounds like it,” Sawyer mutters in response.
“Always something around here,” Ridoc adds.
“The other assessors and I will give you feedback during those trials, so

by the time your full evaluations come around, you’ll be able to withstand
—” He cocks his head to the side as if choosing his words carefully. “Well,
be able to withstand the hell we’re going to put you through. Take it from
someone who has survived it: as long as you don’t break during the
interrogation portion, you’ll do just fine.”

Rhiannon puts her hand up, and Professor Grady nods at her.
“And if we break?” she asks.
All traces of amusement leave his face. “Don’t.”

 
 



 

W ith my pulse still racing an hour after Orientation, I head to the one
place that used to calm my fraying nerves—the Archives.

As I walk through the doorway, I inhale the scent of parchment, ink, and
the unmistakable tang of book-binding glue and let out a long, calming
breath. Row upon row of bookshelves span the massive chamber, each taller
than Andarna but not quite up to Tairn, filled with countless volumes on
history, mathematics, politics—what I’d trusted to be all the knowledge on
the Continent. And to think, at one point in my life, I’d thought climbing
their ladders would be the scariest thing I’d ever do.

Now, I’m simply existing with the ever-present danger of Vice
Commandant Varrish, Aetos’s threat hanging over my head, a secret
revolution that could get us all killed at any moment, and now imminent
torture from RSC. Kind of miss the ladders.

After five days of watching, Jesinia’s name finally appeared on the
scribes’ schedule posted outside this morning, which means it’s time to get
started.

Fuck not getting involved. I’m sure as hell not going to sit around and do
nothing while my brother and Xaden risk their lives. Not when I’m certain
the answer to protecting both Aretia and Poromish civilians is right here at
Basgiath. The revolution might not have a scribe in its ranks, but it has me,
and if there’s even a shot that we can win this war without the weapons the
revolution hasn’t made or found, then I’m taking it. Or at least investigating
the possibility.

Only scribes may continue past the long oak table near the doorway, so I
stand at its edge and trail my fingers across its familiar grain and scars as I
wait. If training to be a scribe taught me anything, it was patience.

Gods, I miss this place. I miss what I thought my life would be. Simple.
Quiet. Noble. But I don’t miss the woman I was, the one who didn’t know
her strength. The one who believed everything she read with unfailing
confidence, as if the simple act of writing something on a blank page made
it gospel.



A slight figure wearing a cream tunic, pants, and hood approaches, and
for the first time in my life, I’m nervous to see Jesinia.

“Cadet Sorrengail,” she signs, smiling when she reaches me and flipping
back her hood. Her hair is longer now, the brown braid nearly reaching her
waist.

“Cadet Neilwart,” I sign back, grinning at the sight of my friend. “We
must be alone to warrant such an enthusiastic greeting.” Scribes are
strongly discouraged from showing emotion. After all, their job isn’t to
interpret but to record.

“We are,” she signs, then leans to look past me. “Well, except Nasya.”
“He’s sleeping,” I assure her. “What are you up to back there?”
“Fixing a few bindings,” she signs. “Most everyone is off preparing for

the new cadets coming tomorrow. Quiet days are my favorite.”
“I remember.” We’d spent nearly every quiet day at this table, preparing

for the exam or helping Markham…or my father.
“I heard about…” Her face falls. “I’m sorry. He was always really nice

to me.”
“Thank you. I really miss him.” I squeeze my hands into fists and pause,

knowing that what I say next will either lead us closer to the truth…or get
me killed.

“What is it?” she signs, biting her lip.
She’s first in her year. That means she’s probably trying for the adept

path, the hardest of all degrees for scribes, and the one every Curator of the
Scribe Quadrant has to have. It means not only does she spend more time
with Markham than other scribes, but she’ll almost never leave the
Archives.

Nausea grips my stomach at the very real possibility that I can’t trust
her. Maybe there are no scribes within the movement for a reason.

“I was wondering if you had any older books about the founding of
Basgiath? Maybe something about why they chose this location for the
wards?” I sign.

“The wards?” she signs slowly.



“I’m prepping a defense for a debate in history about why Basgiath is
here, instead of being built in Calldyr.” And there it is, my first real lie.
There’s nothing selectively true in that statement. Nor any way to take it
back. For better or worse, I am committed now to my own cause—saving as
many people as I can from this war.

“Sure.” She smiles. “Wait here.”
“Thank you.”
Ten minutes later, she hands over two tomes written more than a

hundred years ago, and I thank her again before leaving. The answer to
protecting Aretia is in the Archives. It has to be. I just have to find it before
not even the wards can save us.

OceanofPDF.com



It is one thing to cross the parapet your first year.

But watching countless candidates lose their life to it feels a little like

dying, too.

Don’t watch if you can help it.

—PAGE EIGHTY-FOUR, THE BOOK OF BRENNAN



CHAPTER EIGHT

Conscription Day looks a little different on this side of it. I lean over the
crenelations of the tower in the main war college and take note of the

length of the line as the bells ring the ninth hour, but I avoid noticing the
features of the individual candidates as they file in, starting up the long,
winding staircase that will bring them to the parapet.

I don’t need any more faces in my nightmares.
“They’re starting up the stairs,” I tell Rhiannon, who stands poised with

a quill and the roll.
“They look nervous,” Nadine says, leaning recklessly far over the edge

of the tower to see the candidates lined up stories below.
They aren’t the only ones. I’m four steps away from Dain and his

memory-stealing hands that could pluck every secret from my head.
I lock my shields in place just like Xaden taught me and fantasize about

shoving Dain off the tower.
He’s made one attempt to talk to me, which I quickly shut down. And

the look on his face? What the hell kind of right does he have to look…
heartbroken?

“Weren’t you nervous?” Rhiannon asks Nadine. “Personally, I wouldn’t
have made it across without Vi here.”

I shrug and hop onto the wall, taking a seat to the left of Rhi. “I only
gave you a little more traction. You had the courage and balance to make it



across.”
“It’s not raining like it was during our Parapet.” Nadine looks up at the

cloudless July sky and wipes the sweat off her forehead with the back of her
hand. “Hopefully more of them make it across.” She glances my way.
“You’d have thought your mother would have held off the storm last year,
considering you were crossing.”

“Clearly you don’t know my mother.” She wouldn’t call the storm to kill
me like a coward, but she sure as hell wouldn’t stop it to save me, either.

“Only ninety-one dragons have agreed to bond this year,” Dain says,
leaning back against the wall beside the entrance to the parapet. He’s in the
exact position Xaden was in last year and has the same exact insignia on his
shoulder— wingleader. The asshole gets Liam and Soleil killed and is
promoted as a reward. Go figure. “More candidates making it across isn’t
going to equal more riders.” He glances my way but quickly averts his gaze.

Nadine opens the wooden door at the top of the turret and glances down
the stairwell. “They’re about halfway up.”

“Good.” Dain pushes off the wall. “Remember the rules. Matthias and
Sorrengail, your jobs are only to take the final roll before Parapet. Don’t
engage—”

“We know the rules.” I brace my hands on the wall beside my thighs and
wonder for the tenth time since I woke up this morning when Xaden will
arrive today.

Maybe then I can address the three books on the craft of weaving fabric
into traditional Tyrrish knots he left for me—strips of fabric included—on
the desk of my new room on the second-year floor. It’s not like I need a
hobby.

But the note Xaden left on the stack of books? The one that read I meant
what I said on the parapet. Even when I’m not with you, there’s only you.
That needed no explanation.

He’s fighting.
“Fine,” Dain says, drawing out the word as he stares at me. “And Nadine

—”



“I don’t have a job.” Nadine shrugs and picks at the strings of her
uniform where she cut the sleeves off. “I was just bored.”

Dain frowns at Rhiannon. “Running a tight ship there, squad leader.”
What an ass.
“There are no regulations about four riders on the turret during Parapet,”

she counters. “Don’t even get me started this morning, Aetos.” She looks up
from her perfectly numbered scroll and raises a finger. “And if you even
think about telling me to call you wingleader, I’ll remind you that Riorson
did a hell of a job without needing everyone to supplicate themselves to
him.”

“Because he scared the shit out of everyone,” Nadine mutters. “Well,
everyone except Violet.”

I fight my smile and lose as Dain tenses, clearly at a loss for words.
“Since it’s only us,” Rhiannon says, “what do you know about the new

vice commandant?”
“Varrish? Nothing besides the fact that he’s a complete hard-ass who

thinks the quadrant has gone soft in the years since he graduated,” Dain
answers. “He’s friends with my father.”

Figures.
“Yeah, it’s a real daydream around here,” Rhiannon responds

sarcastically.
After Resson, I’m starting to realize that there’s a purpose to pushing us

to the point of breaking. Better to shatter in here than get your friends killed
once we leave.

“Here they come,” Nadine says, moving out of the way as the first
candidates reach the top, their chests heaving from the climb.

“They look so young,” I tell Tairn, shifting my weight on the wall and
wishing I’d been a little more careful wrapping my left knee this morning.
Sweat has already loosened the brace, and the slipping fabric annoys the
shit out of me.

“So did you,” he replies with a low growl. He’s been pissy for the past
two days, and I can’t blame him. He’s torn between doing exactly what he
wants— flying to Sgaeyl—and seeing me punished for his actions.



The first candidate’s gaze swings from Nadine’s purple hair to the crown
of mine, showing all its silver in my usual coronet braid. “Name?” I ask.

“Jory Buell,” she says, struggling to catch her breath. She’s tall, with
good boots and what looks to be a balanced pack, but her exertion is going
to work against her on the parapet.

“Step up,” Dain orders. “Once you’re on the other side, you’ll give your
name to the roll keeper.”

The girl nods as Rhiannon jots her name down in the first slot.
All of the advice Mira gave me last year races through my mind, but I’m

not allowed to give it. This is a whole other kind of challenge, to stand by
and do nothing while these candidates risk their lives trying to become…us.

For many of them, we’ll be the last faces they see.
“Good luck.” That’s all I’m allowed to say.
She starts across the parapet, and the next candidate steps up to take her

place. Rhiannon takes down his name, and Dain waits until Jory is a third of
the way across before letting the boy start.

I watch the first few candidates, my heart in my throat as I remember the
terror and uncertainty of this day last year. When a candidate slips at the
quarter mark and falls, the ravine below swallowing the last of his screams,
I stop watching to see if they make it to the other side. My heart can’t take
it.

Two hours in, I’m asking their names with zero intention of
remembering them, but I take note of the especially aggressive ones, like
the bull of a guy with a deeply cleft chin who charges across, tossing the
scrawny red-haired candidate struggling at the midway point without
hesitation.

A little piece of me dies watching the cruelty of it, and it’s a struggle to
remember that every single candidate is here by their own choice. They’re
all volunteers, unlike the other quadrants, which take conscripts who pass
the entrance exam.

“Jack Barlowe Junior,” Rhiannon notes under her breath.
I don’t miss the way Dain flinches and looks my way.



Blowing out a slow breath, I turn toward the next in line, trying to forget
how Barlowe put me into the infirmary last year. I shiver at the memory of
the way he forced pure energy into me through his hands that day on the
mat, rattling my bones.

“Nam—” I start, but the word dies on my tongue as I stare in shock at
the candidate standing far above me. He’s taller than Dain but shorter than
Xaden, with a muscular build and strong chin, and though his sandy-brown
hair is shorter than the last time I saw him, I’d recognize those features,
those eyes, anywhere. “Cam?”

What the hell is he doing here?
His green eyes flare with surprise, then blink with recognition. “Aaric…

Graycastle.”
His middle name I recognize, but the last? “Did you just make that up?”

I whisper at him. “Because it’s awful.”
“Aaric. Graycastle,” he repeats, his jaw flexing. He lifts his chin with the

same arrogance I’ve seen in every single one of his brothers and especially
his father. Even if I didn’t recognize him from the dozens of times our
parents’ lives have tossed us into the same room, those startling green eyes
mark him the same way my hair does me. He’s not going to fool anyone
who’s ever met his father or any of his brothers.

I glance over at Dain, who openly stares at Cam—Aaric.
“You sure about this?” Dain asks, and the concern in his eyes gives me a

glimpse of my Dain again, but it’s short-lived. That version of Dain, the one
I could always depend on, died the day he stole my memories and set us on
a collision course with venin. “You cross that parapet, and there’s no going
back.”

Aaric nods.
“Aaric Graycastle,” I repeat to Rhiannon, who writes it down but clearly

knows something is up.
“Does your father know?” Dain murmurs to Aaric.
“It’s none of his business,” he replies, stepping up to the parapet and

rolling his shoulders. “I’m twenty.”



“Right, because that’s going to make a difference when he realizes what
you’re doing,” Dain retorts, ripping his hand through his hair. “He’ll kill us
all.”

“Are you going to tell him?” Aaric asks.
Dain shakes his head and looks to me like I have an answer for any of

this when he’s the fucking wingleader.
“Good, then do me a favor and ignore me,” he says to Dain.
But not me.
“We’re Second Squad, Flame Section, Fourth Wing,” I tell Aaric. Maybe

I can convince the others to keep it to themselves if they recognize him.
Dain opens his mouth.
“Not today,” I tell him, shaking my head.
He snaps his mouth shut.
Aaric adjusts his pack and starts across the parapet, and I can’t bring

myself to watch.
“Who was that?” Rhiannon asks.
“Officially? Aaric Graycastle,” I tell her.
She lifts a brow, and guilt settles in my stomach.
There are too many secrets between us already, and this is something I

can give her. Something she deserves to know, since I just directed him to
our squad. “Between us?” I whisper, and she looks over at me with an
arched brow. “King Tauri’s third son.”

“Oh shit.” She looks over her shoulder at the parapet.
“Pretty much. And I can guarantee his father doesn’t know what he’s

doing.” Not with how he felt after Aaric’s older brother died during his
Threshing three years ago.

“Should make for an easy year,” Rhiannon says sarcastically, then
beckons the next person without missing a beat. “Name?”

“Sloane Mairi.”
My head whips in her direction, and my heart jumps into my throat.

Same blond hair, though it’s currently tangling in the breeze past her
shoulders. Same sky-blue eyes. Same rebellion relic winding around her
arm. Liam’s little sister.



Rhiannon stares.
Dain looks like he’s seen a specter.
“With an ‘e’ on the end,” Sloane says, moving toward the steps and

tucking her hair behind her ears nervously. It’s going to blow right back in
her face with the next gust of wind, temporarily blinding her on the parapet,
and I can’t let that happen.

I promised Liam I’d watch out for her.
“Stop.” I jump off the wall, then yank out the small leather band I keep

in the front pocket of my uniform and hand it to her. “Tie your hair back
first. Braid is best.”

Sloane startles.
“Vi—” Dain begins.
I glare over my shoulder at him. He’s the reason Liam isn’t here to

protect Sloane himself. Rage courses through my veins, heating my skin.
“Don’t you dare say another word, or I’ll blast you off this turret, Aetos.”
Power crackles through my hands without being called and erupts overhead,
streaking across the sky horizontally.

Oops.
He sits, muttering something about losing every fight today.
Sloane takes the leather from me slowly, then braids her hair—simple

and quick—tying it with the band and eyeing me the entire time with the
three inches she has on me.

“Arms out for balance,” I tell her, nausea rolling through me at the risk
she’s about to take. “Don’t let the wind sway your steps.” They were Mira’s
words, and now they’re mine. “Keep your eyes on the stones ahead of you
and don’t look down. If the pack slips, ditch it. Better you lose it than your
life.”

She glances up at my hair, then down at the two patches sewn onto my
summer uniform right above my heart. One is the Second Squad patch we
won during the Squad Battle last year and the other is a bolt of lightning
that branches off in four different directions. “You’re Violet Sorrengail.”

I nod, my tongue tying. I can’t think of the right words to say about how
sorry I am for her loss. Anything that comes to mind isn’t enough.



Her expression shifts, and something that looks a lot like hatred fills her
eyes as she leans down, her voice quieting so that I’m the only one who
hears her say, “I know what really happened. You got my brother killed. He
died for you.”

I can actually feel the blood drain from my face as I blink away the
memory of Deigh crashing into the wyvern who’d come for Tairn, sending
Liam flying across my saddle. He’d been so heavy that my shoulders had
almost dislocated trying to keep him from falling.

“Yes.” I can’t deny it and I don’t look away. “I’m so sorry—”
“Go straight to hell,” she whispers. “And I really mean that. I hope no

one commends your soul to Malek. I hope he rejects it. Liam was worth a
dozen of your kind, and I hope you spend eternity paying for what you cost
me, what you cost all of us.”

Yep, that look in her eyes is definitely hatred.
My heart abandons my body and lands somewhere in the vicinity of her

recommendation.
“It wasn’t your fault,” Tairn says.
“It was.” And if I don’t pull my shit together right now, I’ll fail Liam all

over again. “Feel free to hate me,” I say to Sloane, stepping aside and
clearing the way to the parapet. “Just do me a favor and put your fucking
arms out so you don’t see Liam before I do. Do it for him. Not me.” So
much for the caring, gentle mentor I’d hoped to be for her.

She jerks her gaze from mine and steps up.
The wind kicks up and she wobbles, sending my heart rate spiking.
“What in the angry-Mairi was that about?” Rhiannon asks.
I shake my head. I just…can’t.
Then the stubborn girl finally extends her arms and starts walking. I

don’t look away. I watch every damned step she takes like my future is tied
to hers. My breath freezes when she stumbles halfway across, and my lungs
don’t fully expand until I see her reach the other side.

“She made it,” I whisper up to Liam.
Then I take the next name.

 



 
 

S eventy-one candidates fall from the parapet, according to the rolls.
That’s four more than our year.

An hour after the numbers are calculated, the quadrant assembles in
typical formation—three columns per wing—and the roll keeper calls name
after name, dividing the first-years into squads.

Our squad is nearly full and there’s still no sign of Sloane.
I looked for her in the courtyard earlier, but either she’s hiding from

me… or she’s hiding from me. That’s the only logical answer.
Nadine, Ridoc, and I wait behind eight first-years shifting their weight,

the living embodiment of anxiety. Aaric stands with impossibly perfect
posture but keeps his head down next to a red-haired girl whose complexion
is full-on green in the row ahead.

The fear radiating off them is palpable. It’s in every drop of sweat
sliding down the stocky guy’s neck two rows ahead, in every bitten nail the
brunette spits out onto the gravel next to him. It’s coming out of their pores.

“Is it me, or is this fucking weird?” Ridoc asks from my right.
“Fucking weird,” Nadine agrees. “I kind of want to tell them that it’s

going to be okay—”
“It’s not polite to lie,” Imogen says from behind us, where she stands

with Quinn, who looks downright bored as she trims the ends of her blond
curls with a dagger. “Don’t get attached. They’re all dragon fodder until
Threshing.”

The stocky-looking guy with deep umber skin looks over his shoulder,
shooting a wide-eyed look at Imogen.

She stares him down and makes a circle with her forefinger, wordlessly
telling him to turn around. He does.

“Be nice,” I whisper at her.
“I’ll be nice once I think they might stick around,” she replies.
“I thought you said it’s not polite to lie,” Ridoc counters with a grin,

shaking his head in a way that makes the collar of his uniform move, but



not the tall spikes he’s somehow gelled his dark hair into today.
I blink, then lean closer to him, staring at the side of his neck. “What

is… Did you get a tattoo?”
He smiles and pulls at his collar, showing off the inked tip of a swordtail

on the warm brown skin of his neck, ending near the base of his collar. “It
wraps to my shoulder, to Aotrom’s relic. Badass, right?”

“Badass.” Nadine nods in appreciation.
“Absolutely,” I agree.
Visia Hawelynn is called to our squad. Her name is oddly familiar, and

when she appears, moving into formation two rows ahead, I remember why.
A burn scar sprawls from her collar to her hairline, curving along the right
side of her face. She’s a repeat. She survived angering an Orange Daggertail
at Threshing last year, but barely.

Sloane is called to First Wing.
“Shit,” I mutter. How the hell am I supposed to help her in an entirely

different wing?
“I’d consider that a blessing,” Nadine says quietly. “She didn’t seem to

be a fan.”
Dain steps forward on the dais to talk to Aura Beinhaven, the senior

wingleader, and the daggers she has strapped to her upper arms glimmer in
the sunlight as she nods her head in response. He glances my way, then
crosses over to the roll-keeper at the edge of the dais and she pauses, lifting
her pen to scribble something on the roll.

“Correction!” she calls out over the crowd. “Sloane Mairi to Second
Squad, Flame Section, Fourth Wing.”

Yes! My shoulders dip in pure relief.
Dain walks back to his position, ignoring the reproachful stare from Vice

Commandant Varrish, and his composure slips for the second it takes for
him to shoot me an indecipherable look. What? Is Sloane supposed to be
some kind of peace offering?

The roll-keeper moves on, placing the first-years in their squads.
Sloane appears a minute or two later, and my relief is short-lived when

she opens her mouth. “No. I refuse. Any squad but this one.”



Ouch.
Rhiannon moves from her place at the front of our squad and gives

Sloane a look that makes me glad I’m never on Rhi’s bad side. “Does it
look like I give a shit what you want, Mairi?”

“Mairi?” Sawyer looks back through the lines of first-years that separate
us, and a new patch on his shoulder makes me smile. He’s a fantastic choice
for Rhi’s executive officer.

“Liam’s sister,” I tell him.
His jaw slackens.
“No shit?” Ridoc glances between Sloane and me.
“No shit,” I respond. “Oh, and if you haven’t noticed, she already hates

me.”
“I cannot be in the same squad as her!” Sloane glares at me with pure

hate-fire in her eyes, but hey, her hair is still braided, so I’m calling that a
win. She might loathe me, but maybe she’ll listen at least enough to stay
alive.

“Stop disrespecting your squad leader and get in formation, Sloane,”
Imogen hisses. “You’re acting like a spoiled aristocrat.”

“Imogen?” Sloane startles.
“Get. In. Formation,” Rhiannon orders. “I’m not asking, cadet.”
Sloane pales and steps into line in front of Nadine, taking our last first-

year slot.
Rhiannon slides past Nadine and leans in close. “Pretty sure that girl

wants you dead,” she whispers. “Any particular reason I should know
about? Should I see if we can trade her to another squad?”

Yeah. I got her brother killed. He was sworn to protect me, and he lost
his dragon—and his life—keeping that promise. But I can’t say that any
more than I can tell her there are venin beyond our borders.

My stomach twists at the idea of having to lie to her.
Selective truths.
“She blames me for Liam’s death,” I say quietly. “Let her stay. At least if

she’s in the squad, Codex says she can’t kill me.”
“You sure?” Her brow furrows.



“I promised Liam I’d take care of her. She stays.” I nod.
“Between Aaric and Sloane, you’re collecting strays,” Rhiannon warns

quietly.
“We were strays once, too,” I answer.
“Good point. Now look at us. Alive and everything.” A slight smile

curves her lips before she returns to her place in formation.
The noon sun beats down on the courtyard, and it hits me how far back

we are from the dais, where the wingleaders wait with Commandant
Panchek. Tufts of his hair catch in the morning breeze as he takes in the
formation with wide, assessing brown eyes. This is the height of enrollment
this year. We’ll start dying pretty much immediately.

But not me. I’ve danced with Malek more than my fair share over this
last year and told him to fuck right off every single time. Maybe Sloane is
right and he doesn’t want me.

“You’re agitated.” There’s worry in Tairn’s tone.
“I’m fine.” That’s what we’re all supposed to be, right? Fine. Doesn’t

matter who dies next to us or who we kill during training—or war. We’re
fine.

The ceremony finally starts with Panchek’s ominous-yet-pompous
welcome to the first-years and our new vice commandant, and then Aura
delivers a surprisingly inspirational talk about the honor of defending our
people before Dain takes the lead, clearly trying to step into Xaden’s boots.

But he’s no Xaden.
The sound of wingbeats and the gasps of first-years fill the air, and I

breathe deeply as six dragons—five belonging to the wingleaders and a
one-eyed Orange Daggertail I don’t recognize—land on the courtyard walls
behind the dais.

That orange looks temperamental, his gaze darting over the formation as
his tail twitches, but none of them are as menacing as Sgaeyl or as terrifying
as Tairn. I glance down and pick a piece of stray lint off my dark uniform.

First-year shrieks echo off the stone walls as the dragons’ claws flex,
digging into the stonework. A heavy rock falls, missing the dais by a mere



matter of feet, and yet not a single rider up there flinches. Now I understand
how Dain was so blasé about all of this last year.

There’s not a single dragon up there who would risk Tairn’s wrath by
torching me. Are they beautiful to behold? Absolutely. Daunting? Sure.
There’s even a slight elevation in my pulse. And yeah, Aura’s Red Clubtail
is eyeing the cadets like lunch, but I know it’s mostly to see if she can weed
out the weak—

The redhead directly ahead of me vomits, puke splattering the gravel,
then Aaric’s boots, as she bends at the waist and heaves, emptying the
contents of her stomach.

Gross.
Sloane wobbles, and she shifts her stance like she’s about to bolt.
That’s a bad idea.
“Don’t move and you’ll be fine, Mairi,” I say. “They’ll torch you if you

run.”
She stiffens but her hands curl into fists.
Good. Pissed is better than scared right now. Dragons respect anger.

They exterminate cowards.
“Let’s hope the rest aren’t sympathetic pukers,” Ridoc mutters and

wrinkles his nose.
“Yeah, that one isn’t going to make it if she does that at Presentation,”

Imogen whispers.
These first-years would shit themselves if Tairn did so much as a fly-by.

He’s almost twice as big as any of the dragons perched on the wall.
“Didn’t feel like loaning your sheer intimidation skills to this show?” I

ask Tairn.
“I do not participate in parlor tricks,” he responds, his derision making

me smile as Dain prattles on about something. He’s trying desperately for
Xaden’s charisma and coming up woefully short.

“What do you know about Major Varrish’s orange? He looks…
unstable.” And hungry.

“Solas is there?” His tone sharpens.
“Is Solas a one-eyed Orange Daggertail?”



“Yes.” He doesn’t sound happy about it. “Do not take your eyes off
him.”

Weird, but all right. I can watch the orange glare at cadets out of his one
good eye.

“A third of you will be dead by next July. If you want to wear rider
black, then you earn it!” Dain shouts, his voice rising with each word. “You
earn it every single day!”

Cath digs his red claws into the masonry and leans over Dain’s head,
swinging his swordtail behind him in a serpentine motion as he blows a hot
breath of steam over the crowd that sours my stomach. Dain really needs to
check Cath’s teeth, because there has to be a bone stuck in there decaying or
something.

Cries sound in the courtyard, and a first-year to the right—Tail Section
— breaks out of formation and sprints back toward the parapet, racing
through the aisles between cadets.

No, no, no.
“We have a runner,” Ridoc mutters.
“Shit.” I cringe, my heart sinking as two others from Third Wing decide

to follow his example, their arms pumping wildly as they make a break for
it from First Squad of their Tail Section. This isn’t going to end well.

“Looks contagious,” Quinn adds as they race by.
“Fuck, they actually think they’ll make it.” Imogen sighs, her shoulders

drooping.
The trio nearly collides directly behind the center of our wing—our

section— then bolt toward the opening in the courtyard wall where the
parapet lies.

“Eyes on Solas!” Tairn shouts.
I look forward again, watching Solas narrow his one eye to a slit and

swivel his head as he draws a full, rumbling breath. Lead fills my chest as I
glance back over my shoulder and glimpse the runners nearing the parapet.
The dragons didn’t let them get that far last year.

He’s toying with them, and at this angle…
Oh shit.



Solas extends his neck, tilts his head horrifyingly low, and curls his
tongue, fire churning up his throat—

“Get down!” I shout, lunging for Sloane and tackling her to the ground
as fire blasts overhead, the flames so close that heat singes every patch of
exposed skin on my body.

To Sloane’s credit, she doesn’t cry out as I cover as much of her body as
I can, curling over her, but the soul-rending screams behind us are
unmistakable. I open my eyes long enough to see Aaric laying flat over the
redhead under the endless stream of fire.

Tairn’s roar fills my head as lava licks along my arched back.
A scream musters at the base of my throat, but I can’t breathe in this

inferno, let alone give it voice.
As quickly as it struck, the heat dissipates, and I fill my lungs with

precious oxygen, gasping for breath before shoving off the gravel to my
feet. I turn to face the aftermath as the other second- and third-years around
me rise.

Those at the back of our section who acted when I shouted are alive.
Those who didn’t, aren’t.
Solas took out the runners, one of our first-years, and at least half of

Third Squad.
Chaos erupts.
“Silver One!” Tairn demands.
“I’m alive!” I shout back at Tairn, but I know he can feel the pain my

adrenaline is masking. The smell—gods, the smell of sulfur and the burned
flesh of the dead cadets makes bile rise in my throat.

“Vi, your back…” Nadine whispers, reaching for me and withdrawing
her hand. “It’s torched.”

“How bad is it?” I tug at the front of my uniform, and it comes off in my
hand, the fabric burned clean through at my back. The armor beneath my
uniform stays in place at least.

Ridoc runs his hands over the flattened, singed peaks of his hair, and my
gaze darts around, checking on everyone else next. I note that Quinn and
Imogen are safe behind us, already rushing to help Third Squad.



Sawyer. Rhiannon. Ridoc. Nadine. We all exchange quick looks that ask
and answer the same question. We’re all intact.

I let out a long breath, my head dizzy with relief.
“It didn’t…it didn’t burn through your armor,” Nadine says.
“Good.” Thank gods for dragon scales.
“Are you hurt?” I ask Sloane as she stumbles, staring in shock at the

carnage of Third Squad as Aaric helps the redhead to her feet. “Sloane! Are
you hurt?”

“No.” She isn’t shaking her head as much as she is flat-out trembling.
“Get back into formation!” Panchek’s voice amplifies over the mayhem.

“Riders do not balk at fire!”
The fuck we don’t. Whoever didn’t balk is dead.
Dain’s wide eyes meet mine. He’s either as surprised by what happened

as I am or a really good actor. All the wingleaders must be, because they
look equally stricken.

Looking back at what remains of Third Squad, I see Imogen staring at a
pile of cinder. As if she can feel me staring, she slowly drags her numbed
gaze to mine.

“Now!” Panchek demands.
She staggers forward and I meet her halfway, grabbing hold of her

elbows. “Imogen?”
“Ciaran,” she whispers. “Ciaran’s dead.”
Gravity, logic, whatever it is that keeps me grounded shifts. There’s no

way that was…intentional, is there? “Imogen—”
“Don’t say it,” she warns, glancing around us.
We make it back into formation as Major Varrish moves to the front of

the dais, appearing completely unfazed that his dragon just took out riders
who hadn’t broken formation, some of them bonded.

“It is not only the first-years who earn their leathers at Basgiath!” he
shouts, and I swear he’s speaking directly to me. “The wings are only as
strong as their weakest rider!”

Rage overwhelms my senses, scalding hot and undeniably not mine.



A girl with blackish-blue hair two rows ahead makes a run for it,
running from our squad, and my heart stops when Solas leans forward again
despite a snap from Cath on the right, the orange’s mouth opening.

Oh. Gods.
I’m considering tackling her to the ground myself when a set of

wingbeats as familiar as my own heartbeat sounds behind me. And the
anger consuming my every breath, overruling my emotions, turns to
something deadlier—wrath.

Tairn lands on the wall behind us, his wings flaring so wide one nearly
touches the dormitory as he takes out the top row of stones next to the
parapet. First-years scream, running for their lives.

“Tairn!” I shout with more than a little relief, but there’s no breaking
through the absolute fury coursing through him. My attention whips back
and forth between Tairn and the dragons behind the dais.

The wingleaders’ dragons all rear back, including Cath, but Solas holds
his ground, his tongue curling when Tairn’s chest expands.

“You do not have the right to burn what is mine.” His words consume
all my mental pathways as Tairn lets loose an earth-shattering roar in
Solas’s direction. Everyone slams their hands over their ears, including me,
my entire body vibrating with the sound, hot air blasting the back of my
neck.

The wingleaders’ dragons take a step to the side of the wall as the roar
ends, away from the Orange Daggertail, but Solas stands firm, his eye
narrowing to a golden slit.

“Holy shit,” Nadine whispers.
That about sums it up.
Tairn extends his neck forward, high above our squad, then snaps his

teeth together loudly in Solas’s direction in a clear threat.
My heart races so fast it practically hums.
Solas lets loose a short, rasping snarl, then swings his head in a

serpentine motion. His claws grip and ungrip the edge of the wall, and I
hold my breath until he launches skyward, his wings beating quickly as he
retreats.



Tairn lifts his head, watching the flight before he turns his attention to
the dais and exhales a sulfur-laced gust of steam, blowing Varrish’s thick
black hair.

“I think he got the message,” I say to Tairn.
“If Solas comes near you again, he knows I will devour his human whole

and let him rot within me while his heart still beats, and then I’ll take the
eye I so graciously left him.”

“That’s…graphic.” I’m not touching the question of their history with
waves of anger still rolling off Tairn like a thunderstorm.

“The warning should be effective. For now.” He retracts, drawing back
for power before he leaps from the wall, his wingbeats kicking up the
gravel around us as he takes off.

Panchek returns to the podium, but his hand isn’t exactly steady as he
swipes at the thinning hair on his head, the medals on his chest. “Well then,
where were we?”

Varrish glares at me, his hatred a palpable taste in my mouth, and I know
that even if he hadn’t been an enemy before, he sure as Dunne is now.

OceanofPDF.com



And in the mountains of the Steelridge range, the green dragons of the
Uaineloidsig line, known for their keen intellect and rational

countenance, offered their ancestral hatching grounds for the good of
dragonkind, and the wards of Navarre were woven by the First


Six at what is now Basgiath War College.

—UNITED NAVARRE, A STUDY IN SURVIVAL BY GRATO BURNELL, CURATOR
OF THE SCRIBE QUADRANT



CHAPTER NINE

The next morning, I wake in a cold sweat, the sky pale with early light
through my east-facing window, my body flooded with adrenaline from

the nightmare. Like every morning since Xaden left, I wrap my knees tight
and dress quickly, pulling the flexible summer uniform meant for sparring
over my armor and plaiting my hair in a single, loose braid as I head out of
my room.

My heart still pounds as I jog down the spiral steps, my brain unable to
shake the nightmares that come so vividly while I sleep. When I sleep.

I swallow back the bile rising in my throat. One of the venin got away in
Resson, red veins spidering away from his malevolent eyes. Who knows
how many more there are, making their way toward our border while we
rest.

On the ground floor, first-years scurry to their newly assigned chore
duties, but the courtyard is blissfully empty, the air thick with humidity yet
mercifully cooler than yesterday thanks to the storm rolling in.

I hold the heel of my boot to the back of my thigh, stretching the muscle.
Despite copious amounts of Winifred’s ointment, the skin of my back is still
tender from yesterday’s burn, but it’s a hundred times better than it was last
night.

“Hasn’t anyone told you that a perk of being a second-year is the extra
hour of sleep you get to have without chores?” Imogen asks as she



approaches, her footsteps light on the gravel.
“Yeah, which I’m sure is great for people who can sleep.” I stretch the

other leg. “What are you doing?”
“Going with you.” She stretches, too, rolling her neck at the same time.

“But what I can’t figure out is why the hell you’ve been running every
morning.”

My stomach hollows. “How would you know that I’ve been running
every morning? If Xaden thinks I need someone watching out for me this
year…” I shake my head, unable to finish that sentence. He was supposed
to visit yesterday but never showed, much to Tairn’s aggravation…and my
worry.

“Relax. Xaden doesn’t know. My room is right above yours, and let’s
just say I’m not sleeping very well, either.” Her gaze darts toward the
rotunda as a group of cadets walks out.

Dain. Sawyer. Rhiannon. Bodhi. I recognize most as Fourth Wing
leadership.

Rhi and Sawyer spot us immediately and head our way.
“So, why are we running, Sorrengail?” Imogen asks, finishing her

stretches.
“Because I generally suck at it,” I answer. “I’m good in short bursts, but

anything longer than that—and I won’t make it.” Not to mention it’s hell on
my joints.

Imogen’s gaze snaps to mine, her eyes widening.
Bodhi’s farther back and starts our way. His walk is so similar to

Xaden’s stride that I almost do a double take.
“What are you doing up?” Rhiannon asks, tucking a notebook under her

arm as she and Sawyer reach us.
“I could ask you the same.” I force a smile. “But I’m guessing it’s a

leadership meeting.”
“Yes.” Concern creases her brow as she studies my face. “Are you all

right?”
“Absolutely. Good meeting?” It’s a pathetic attempt at normal

conversation, given the scenes from Resson still replaying through my head



from my nightmare.
“It was fine,” Sawyer answers. “They moved Bodhi Durran from Tail

Section to Flame.”
“We had to do some restructuring, seeing as most of Third Squad was

torched yesterday,” Rhiannon adds.
“Right. That makes sense.” I glance over her shoulder and gauge I have

about five seconds before Bodhi reaches us. If he knows I’m struggling,
there’s no doubt he’ll tell Xaden, and I really don’t need that conversation
right now. “Listen, I have to get going.”

“Going where?” Rhiannon asks.
“Running,” I answer truthfully.
She draws her head back, her brow furrowing deeper. “You never run.”
“Then it’s a good time to start,” I try to joke.
She glances between Imogen and me. “With Imogen?”
“Yep,” Imogen replies. “Apparently we’re runners now.”
Bodhi arrives in time to hear that, his eyebrows rising.
“Together?” Rhiannon’s gaze keeps bouncing—to Imogen, me, and back

again. “I don’t understand.”
If you can’t lie, you keep your distance.
“Nothing to understand. We’re just running.” My smile is so tight I think

my entire face might fracture with the effort it takes to keep it there.
Bodhi’s gaze narrows.
“But what if you don’t make it in time for breakfast?”
“We will,” Imogen promises. “If we leave right now.” She glances at

Bodhi. “I’ve got this.”
“Let them go,” Bodhi says.
“But—” Rhiannon starts, her gaze searching mine as if she can see right

through me. Imogen’s been training me since last year, but Rhi knows we
aren’t exactly friends.

“Let them go,” he repeats, and this time it’s not a suggestion but an order
from her section leader.

“I’ll see you later?” Rhi asks.



“Later,” I agree, unsure I mean it as I turn without another word and jog
across the courtyard toward the tunnel. The gravel is shit for traction,
making it harder, but that’s fine. I need harder.

Imogen catches me within a few strides. “What do you mean you won’t
make it?”

“What?” We pause at the doors.
“You said you won’t make it.” Imogen gets to the handle before I do and

holds the door shut. “When I asked you why you’re running. What did you
mean?”

For a second, I debate not telling her, but she was there, too. She’s not
sleeping, either.

“Soleil didn’t.” My gaze locks with hers, but her expression doesn’t
change. Swear to the gods, nothing fazes her. I envy that. “She was on the
ground when she killed her. The way she channeled…it drained everything
from the land. Everything touching the land. Including Soleil and Fuil. I
watched it happen. I watch it happen every night when I close my eyes. It
spread so quickly, and I know…I can’t outrun it. Not if I’m too far from
Tairn. I’m not fast enough for any considerable distance.” I try to swallow
the tightness in my throat, but the knot seems to live there lately.

“Yet,” Imogen says, yanking the door to the tunnel open. “We’re not fast
enough yet. But we will be. Let’s go.”

***

“I t’s weird as hell to be all the way up here,” Ridoc says from my left as
we sit in the first Battle Brief of the academic year later that day,

looking down at where the first-years take up more than a third of the room.
It’s standing-room only in the giant, tiered classroom for the third-years

behind us. This is the only place in the quadrant besides the gathering hall
designed to hold all the rider cadets, but it will take a few weeks of death
rolls before we can all sit in front of the stories-tall map of the Continent.

It reminds me of the one in Brennan’s briefing room in Aretia. He thinks
we only have six months until venin challenge the wards, and yet there’s



not a single indication on this map.
“View is a little better,” Nadine remarks from his other side.
“Definitely easier to see the higher portions of the map,” Rhiannon

agrees at my right, taking out her supplies and setting them on the desktop
before her. “Did you have a good run this morning?”

“I’m not sure I’d call it good, but it was effective.” I put my notebook
and pen on the table, wincing at the pain shooting up my shins, and
reinforce my shields. Keeping them up at all times is harder than I thought,
and Tairn loves to remind me when they slip.

“Look at all those first-years with their quills and ink,” Ridoc remarks,
leaning forward to look down at the underclassmen.

“There once was a time we didn’t have lesser magic to power ink pens,”
Nadine retorts. “Stop acting superior.”

“We are superior.” He grins.
Nadine rolls her eyes, and I can’t fight my smile.
Professor Devera walks down the narrow set of stone steps on our left

that follows the tiers of seats, her favorite longsword strapped to her back.
Her black hair is a little shorter since I saw her last, and there’s a fresh,
jagged wound along the rich mahogany skin of her biceps.

“I heard she spent last week with the Southern Wing,” Rhiannon says
quietly.

My stomach tenses and I wonder what, if anything, she saw.
“Welcome to your first Battle Brief,” Professor Devera announces. I

tune out as she gives the same speech as last year and warns the first-years
not to be surprised if the third-years are called into service early to man the
mid-guard posts or shadow the forward wings. Her gaze rakes over them
before she raises her attention to the seconds, her eyes crinkling for a
heartbeat as she flashes a proud smile at me before continuing upward as
she explains how necessary it is for us to understand the current affairs of
our borders.

“This is also the only class where you will not only answer to a rider as
your professor, but a scribe, as well,” she finishes, lifting her hand toward
the stairs.



Colonel Markham lifts the corner of his cream-colored robes as he
descends, heading for the recessed floor of the lecture hall.

My muscles lock, and I fight the urge to flick one of my daggers into his
traitorous back. He knows everything. He has to. He wrote the fucking
textbook on Navarrian history that all riders are taught from. And until last
year, I was his star pupil, the one he’d handpicked to succeed in the Scribe
Quadrant.

“You’ll respect Colonel Markham as you would any other professor,”
Professor Devera says. “He is the foremost authority at Basgiath when it
comes to all matters not only of our history but current events as well. Some
of you may not know this, but information from the front is actually
received at Basgiath before it’s sent to the king in Calldyr, so you’ll be
hearing it first here.”

I glance down the tiers to where Aaric sits beside Sloane in the row with
our squad’s first-years, and to his credit, he doesn’t flinch or even fidget in
his seat. One good look, and Markham will know who he is, but with that
haircut, if he keeps his head down, he’s got a shot at blending in.

At least until his father sounds the alarm that he’s missing from his gold-
plated bed in Calldyr.

“First discussion point,” Markham says when he reaches the floor of the
hall, his silver eyebrows knitting. “There were not one but two attacks on
our border by drifts of gryphons in the past week.”

A murmur goes through the hall.
“The first,” Professor Devera says as she lifts her hand and uses lesser

magic to move one of the flag markers from the side of the map to the
border we share with the Braevick province of Poromiel, “was near the
village of Sipene, high in the Esben Mountains.”

An hour’s flight from Montserrat.
The only sound is pen and quill against parchment as we take notes.
“Here’s what we can tell you,” Markham says, folding his hands behind

his back. “The drift attacked two hours past midnight, when all but a few
villagers were asleep. It was unprovoked, and because Sipene is one of the



villages that lies beyond the wards, the violence went undetected by the
Eastern Wing for some matter of hours.”

My shoulders dip, but I keep writing, pausing only to look up at the
map. That village is at eight-thousand feet, an altitude unpleasant for
gryphons. What were they looking for? Maybe I should have spent last
night reading about what’s in those mountains instead of six-hundred-year-
old political ramifications of establishing our war college here and not in
Calldyr to the west.

“The drift was routed by three dragons on patrol from the local outpost,
but by the time they arrived, most of the damage had been done. Supplies
were stolen, homes were burned. The last gryphon flier was found in some
of the local caves above the village, though neither he nor his gryphon
could tell us the motivation for attack, as they were both burned on sight.”

Hard for prisoners to talk about the venin they’ve been fighting if
they’re dead.

“That’s what they get,” Ridoc mutters, shaking his head. “Going after
civilians.”

But were they? Markham didn’t mention civilian casualties, only
destruction.

I look up over my shoulder at where Imogen stands with Bodhi and
Quinn, her arms folded over her chest. She glances down at me, her mouth
tightening before she gives her attention back to Markham.

Shit. I want to be standing up there with them, asking what they really
think, or even with Eya, who’s with her third-year squad up in the corner.
We might not be close, but at least she knows the truth. More than anything,
I want to talk to Xaden. I want answers he’s not willing to give me.

“As for the second,” Professor Devera continues, moving another flag,
this one to the south. My breakfast churns in my stomach when she puts the
flag in place. “The outpost of Athebyne was attacked three days ago.”

I gasp and the pen falls from my hand, hitting the desk loudly in the
quiet room.

“Are you all right?” Rhiannon whispers.



“Something you have to say, Cadet Sorrengail?” Markham asks, cocking
his head and looking at me in that characteristically unreadable expression
he’s so fond of. But the challenge I’ve often seen when he used to try and
dig a correct answer out of me is there in the simple lift of his brow.

I know he’s well aware of what is happening beyond our borders, but did
Colonel Aetos tell him that I know, too?

“No, sir,” I answer, grabbing my pen before it can roll off my desk. “I
was startled, that’s all. As far as I know from what you taught me in
preparation for the Scribe Quadrant, outposts are rarely ever attacked
directly.”

“And?” He leans back against the desk in the center of the floor, tapping
a finger along the side of his bulbous nose.

“And Montserrat was also directly attacked in the last year, so I can’t
help but wonder if this tactic is becoming more commonly used by our
enemy?”

“Interesting thought. It’s something we’re considering among scribes.”
The smile on his face is anything but friendly as he pushes off the desk,
clasping his hands behind his robes as he nods at me.

“We usually start with first-years,” Professor Devera says, cutting a look
at Colonel Markham. “Finishing the details we can give you about the
Athebyne attack, it occurred a little before midnight, while nine of the
twelve dragons stationed there were still out on their patrols. The enemy
totals were around two dozen from what we can tell, and they were defeated
by the three present dragons, with help from the infantry. Two gryphon
riders made it into the lower level of the outpost before being caught and
killed.”

“Shields,” Tairn growls, and I build them back up.
“I didn’t even notice they’d slipped.”
“They should be like clothes at this point,” he lectures, snapping a little

more than usual.
“I’m sorry?”
“Surely you’d feel a breeze were you to forget putting them on.”
Point made.



“Isn’t that where you guys were sent?” Rhiannon asks. “Athebyne?”
I nod, hoping none of those fliers were the ones who fought with us at

Resson.
The first-years start when it’s time for questions.
What was the gryphon’s chosen formation for the attack on Athebyne?
A typical V.
Are the two attacks connected?
We have no reason to believe so.
The questions go on and on, and none of them are getting to the heart of

the matter, which makes me look at the cadets below us with a healthy dose
of skepticism that they aren’t the critical thinkers they need to be. Then
again, maybe the other years felt that way about us last year.

Finally, Devera opens the floor to the other years.
Rhiannon’s hand shoots up, and Devera calls on her.
“Do you think it’s possible that the enemy knew the outpost had been

emptied for War Games and was trying to take advantage of the situation?”
she asks.

Exactly.
Professors Devera and Markham share a look. “We do,” Professor

Devera finally answers.
“But the delay would show a lag in the timing of their information,

correct?” Rhiannon continues. “The outpost was only empty for what? A
few days?”

“Five days, to be precise,” Markham answers. “And this attack occurred
eight days after it was reoccupied.” His gaze skates over mine, then lifts to
the rows above. “The Poromiel trading post nearby, Resson, was leveled by
Poromish unrest a couple of weeks ago, and we think that may be helping
disrupt their communication lines about our outpost.”

Poromish unrest?
Power rises within me so quickly that my skin heats.
Devera glances sideways at Markham. “We also don’t usually give you

the answers.”



Markham chuckles and dips his head. “My apologies, Professor Devera.
I must not be at my best today. Too little sleep in the last few days.”

“Happens to the best of us.”
I raise my hand, and Devera calls on me. “Where in the outpost were the

gryphon riders found?”
“Near the armory.”
Shit. I nod. They were raiding the outpost for weapons. Our wards might

not reach that far, but I’d bet my life a cache of daggers was moved there if
leadership knew venin were in the vicinity. Brennan can’t supply even a
fraction of the drifts. Of course they’re going to fight to steal weaponry. We
need to smuggle more out.

“What would you do were you in command of the riot at the Athebyne
outpost?” she asks the room, then calls on Caroline Ashton when she raises
her hand.

“I’d double the patrol for the next few weeks in a show of force, and
maybe consider razing a few Poromish border villages,” she suggests.

Rhiannon scoffs quietly.
“Remind me to never get on her bad side,” Ridoc mutters.
“In retaliation?” Dain interrupts. “That’s not our way. Read the Codex

about the rules of engagement, Ashton.”
Says the man who sent me to my death.
“He’s right,” Devera agrees. “We defend our borders with lethal force,

but we don’t take war to civilians.” We just don’t bother saving them,
either. But does she know that? Shit, can I trust anyone around here?

But…maybe the whole report is wrong. Maybe it was wyvern and venin
attacking, not gryphons. Maybe this entire presentation is a well-crafted lie.

“How many riders were wounded in the Athebyne attack, given that one
was killed?” I ask.

“Four of us,” Devera answers, pointing at her arm. “Including me. This
is courtesy of a rider with an excellent aim of her bow.”

So much for the not-gryphon idea.
We’re excused after another half hour of current events, and I ditch my

squad in the crowd, searching out Bodhi.



He’s nearly to the steps of the briefing room before I catch up to him.
“Sorrengail?” he asks after we make it through the bottleneck of the

doors.
“I want to help,” I whisper. Maybe I can do more than just read.
“For fuck’s sake.” He takes my elbow and pulls me into an alcove,

towering over me with a look of exasperation. “I have direct instructions to
keep you as far away from helping as possible.”

“He’s not even here, and he’s still giving you orders?” I adjust the strap
of my bag on my shoulder as most of the quadrant funnels past.

“That tactic isn’t going to work on me, because yes.” He shrugs and
scratches a pen into the cast on his arm.

“And I thought you were the most reasonable of the group.” I sigh.
“Look, if I can help, then maybe we can prevent what I’m assuming are…
supply runs.” Talking in code is ridiculous, but anyone could be listening.
“Give me a job.”

“Oh, I am the most reasonable in the group.” He flashes a grin, leaning
back on his heels. “I also don’t have a death wish. Survive second year and
strengthen your shields, Sorrengail. That’s your job.”

“She trying to talk you into letting her join the shenanigans?” Imogen
asks, stopping alongside us.

“‘Trying’ is the precise word,” Bodhi says. “Only trying.” He walks off
into the crowd.

“How are we expected to go back to class like nothing happened?” I ask
Imogen as we walk out into the flow of cadets headed for the main staircase
of the academic wing.

“You’re supposed to act like nothing happened,” Imogen says quietly,
waving at Quinn, who’s waiting ahead with Rhiannon. “That’s the deal we
all made when we came here.” She moves her bag, twisting her wrist so her
rebellion relic is front and center between us. “And like it or not, you’re one
of us now. Well, as close as you can get without one of these.”

I shift my heavy pack on my shoulder and nod, realizing I know too
little to actually help the marked ones and too much to speak frankly to my
friends.



“Hey,” Imogen says to Quinn. “Lunch?”
“Absolutely,” Quinn answers.
The two walk ahead while Rhiannon falls back to keep pace with me.
“Doesn’t Quinn usually eat lunch with her girlfriend?” Rhi asks.
“Yes, but she graduated.”
“Right.” She sighs and lowers her voice. “I wanted to talk to you before

breakfast but didn’t get a chance. I think the school is hiding something
from us.”

I nearly trip over my own boots but catch my balance before I can make
a fool out of myself. “I’m sorry?”

She can’t know. She just can’t. I barely survived losing Liam… I can’t
fathom anything happening to her.

“I think there’s something going on in the Healer Quadrant,” she says,
lowering her voice. “I tried to take a first-year to see Nolon yesterday after
formation turned into a firepit, and he looks like absolute shit. I mean, the
man could barely stand. And when I went to ask him if he was all right, the
new vice commandant said he had more important things to do than talk to
cadets and basically escorted him to that little door in the back of the
infirmary, which is now guarded. I think they’re hiding something back
there.”

I open and shut my mouth a couple of times, torn between confusion and
relief. “Maybe they brought some of the injured riders from one of the
outposts for mending,” I offer. The backlog would explain why Bodhi is
still in a cast.

She shakes her head. “Since when do a few broken bones wreck a
mender?”

“Maybe they brought in a prisoner from Poromiel.” Ridoc forces his
way in between us. “And Nolon keeps healing them as Varrish breaks them.
I heard one of the third-years say that’s what Varrish is known for—
torture.”

“And you’re known for eavesdropping.” Rhi shakes her head.
Instead of eating lunch with my friends, I make a quick excuse and take

my tray to the little library alcove in commons to finish reading United



Navarre, a Study in Survival.
Sadly, after an hour hunched over the tome, I realize I already know

most of the facts it regurgitates about the triumph of unification and the
sacrifices made by both humans and dragons to establish peace.
Disappointment stings like a paper cut. Naturally the secrets of ward-
building weren’t going to be in the first book I researched, but it would
have been a pleasant surprise for something to be easy.

I contemplate asking Jesinia for a volume more focused on the First Six
riders as I change for assessment back in my room, then head to the gym
and meet my squad on the edge of the mat.

“I hate assessment day,” I mutter, taking the spot between Rhi and
Nadine.

“Can’t blame you after the way yours went last year,” Ridoc teases as he
steps up next to Sawyer.

The first match begins between two of our first-years, and I can’t help
but notice Rhi glancing my way every few minutes. By the end, Visia—the
repeat— has trampled the brutish girl with shocking red curls who’d thrown
up on Aaric yesterday, and Rhi’s all but frowning at me.

And she’s not the only one. Sloane is staring like she might actually be
capable of glaring me to death as she shifts her weight continuously on the
left side of the mat.

“Baylor Norris and Mischa Levin!” Professor Emetterio, our squad’s
combat teacher, shouts at the first-years beside Sloane, then tilts his shaved
head down at the clipboard in his beefy hands.

Shit. I really didn’t want to know their names. The stocky guy with
nervous eyes faces off against the brunette who couldn’t stop biting her
nails yesterday.

“You all right?” I ask Rhi as the brunette somehow flips the muscly one
onto his back. Impressive.

“Should I be asking you that?” Rhi responds, lowering her voice to a
whisper. “Are you mad at me?”

“What?” I rip my attention from the way the girl is handing that guy his
ass to look at her. “Why would I be mad at you?”



“Between the running and not eating lunch with us, it kind of feels like
you’re avoiding me. And it’s ridiculous, but all I can think is that maybe
you’re pissed that I chose Sawyer as executive officer yesterday instead of
you, and if that’s the case, then let’s talk about it—”

“Wait. What? No.” I shake my head, my hand holding my stomach. “Not
at all. I am the worst possible choice for executive officer, considering I
have to fly off to Samara every two weeks so Tairn can see Sgaeyl.”

“Right?” She nods, relief softening her brown eyes. “That was exactly
my thought.”

“Sawyer is a great choice, and I have zero aspirations to leadership.” I’m
only trying to get by unnoticed over here. “Not mad in the least.”

“So you’re not avoiding me?” Rhi asks.
“I would have made a kick-ass executive officer,” Nadine interrupts,

saving me from having to answer. “But at least you didn’t choose Ridoc. He
would have seen the whole thing as a platform to crack more jokes.”

Guess we’re not being as quiet as we think we are.
Mischa firmly trounces Baylor, and Emetterio calls the next pair to the

mat. “Sloane Mairi and…” he reads from his roll. “Aaric Graycastle.”
“I want her instead,” Sloane says, pointing a dagger at me.
She has to be kidding. But she’s not. Sighing, I cross my arms and shake

my head at Liam’s little sister.
“Gods, Sloane.” Imogen snorts, laughing off to the right, where she

watches with Quinn. “You really feel like dying on your first day?”
“Did she compliment you?” Rhiannon whispers.
“Oddly enough, I think so.”
“I can take her,” Sloane fires back, white-knuckling her knife. “From

what your letter said last year, her joints pop right out. How hard can it be?”
“Seriously?” I shoot a reproachful look at Imogen.
“I can explain.” Imogen puts her hand over her heart. “You see, I didn’t

like you last year, remember? You’re kind of an acquired taste.”
“Great. I appreciate that,” I quip back sarcastically.
“I couldn’t care less about whatever grudge you think you hold against

Sorrengail, Mairi.” Emetterio sighs like this year has already exhausted



him. “I know who trained her, and I’m not unleashing her on a first-year.”
He lifts a dark brow at Imogen. “I, too, made an error last year.” He turns
back to Sloane, the corners of his mouth slashing down. “Now disarm and
take your place against Graycastle.”

Sloane hands off her weapons and faces Aaric, who easily has about five
inches and years of private combat tutoring on her. But she’s Liam’s sister,
so there’s a chance she’ll be able to hold her own.

“Did someone say Sorrengail?” a deep voice asks from behind us.
Our line of second-years all glance over shoulders at the bullish first-

year who threw the scrawny one off the parapet. There’s a Second Wing
patch on his shoulder as he lumbers forward, his hands at his sides.

“Popular today, aren’t you?” Nadine whispers with a smile, pivoting
playfully toward the first-year. “Hi. I’m Violet Sorrengail.” She points to
her purple hair. “See? Like my hair. Do you have a message for—”

He grabs hold of her head and twists, snapping her neck.

OceanofPDF.com



It is not unheard of that a candidate enters the Riders Quadrant having
been paid to assassinate a cadet. I’m sorry Mira was targeted but
proud to say she dispatched the threat quickly. You have enemies,

General.

—OFFICIAL NOTICE FROM COMMANDANT PANCHEK TO GENERAL
SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER TEN

I stare in shock for the length of a heartbeat as the first-year drops Nadine’s
body to the ground. It falls with a sickening thud, her head twisted at an

unnatural angle.
She’s dead.
No. Not again.
“Nadine!” Rhiannon yells, rushing to kneel at her side.
“Nadine?” the first-year asks, his thick eyebrows knitting into one.
“What the hell do you think you’re doing?” Emetterio barks.
“No one interferes,” I demand, and two of my daggers are in hand

before I even realize I’ve reached for them.
The giant jerks his gaze from Nadine’s body to my daggers, to my hair.
“I’m Violet Sorrengail.” My heart pounds, but no one else will die in my

name. Using a pinch grip, I don’t wait for his response, flinging both
daggers. But he’s fast for someone his size and throws up his arms—where
both my blades sink to the hilt.

Damn it.
“Violet!” Andarna shouts.
“Sleep!” I slam my shields up to block everything—everyone out.

Xaden’s gone. Protecting me is what killed Liam.
It doesn’t matter why this guy is trying to kill me right now. Either I’m

strong enough to survive or I’m not.



The first-year rips the bloodied daggers out of his forearms in quick
succession with an angry grunt, letting them clatter to the ground. His
mistake. He might be almost a foot taller, but he’ll need those blades if he
wants to kill me. His build, though…that’s going to be hard to overcome.

Stop going for bigger moves that expose you. Xaden’s words from last
year ring in my head as if he is standing right beside me. I have to use what
I have— my speed—to my advantage.

I charge toward him at a run, and he swings meaty fists at my head, but I
drop to my knees before they can make contact. Ignoring the shattering pain
in my legs from impact, I use my momentum to slide by, clipping the
tendons alongside his knee as I pass.

He yells and falls forward like a fucking tree, slamming into the floor.
“Violet!” Dain shouts from somewhere behind me.
I scramble to my feet and turn back to the giant, who has already flipped

himself onto his back as if impervious to pain, but he can’t stand with what
I’ve done to him. He can, however, reach for one of the daggers he dropped
and throw it at me.

Which he does.
“Shit!” I spin sideways to avoid my own blade, and he kicks out with the

leg I didn’t slice.
His boot catches me behind my thigh.
The blow cuts my feet out from under me, and all I see is ceiling as I fall

back, smashing my hip with the full force of my weight. Pain blinds me for
a heartbeat when my head smacks against the floor, white-hot and so sharp
my ears ring. But at least I haven’t stabbed myself with my blades. One is
still in my hand, but my eyes blur and tell me it’s really two.

The first-year grabs hold of my right thigh and pulls, dragging me with
the distinct squeaking sound of leather against the shiny floor. If I put my
dagger through his hand, I’ll strike my own muscle.

So I swipe out at his arm instead, my reach only catching him with a cut
across the forearm. My heart launches into my throat as people around me
yell my name, but they can’t interfere. I’m a second-year, and this asshole
isn’t in my squad.



His grip secure, he drags me feetfirst toward him, his puddled blood
soaking the back of my neck and wetting my hair.

If I don’t get free, I’m dead.
I bring up my left leg and kick as soon as I’m close enough, catching

him in the jaw, but he doesn’t let go. Tenacious bastard.
A crunch sounds with my next kick, breaking his nose. Blood flies, but

he shakes it off, lurching upward and rolling onto me, pinning me to the
floor with his incomprehensible weight.

Fuck, fuck, fuck.
I swing out with my knife, but he catches my right hand, pinning my

wrist to the ground. Then he wraps his other hand around my throat and
squeezes.

“Fucking die, already,” he seethes, his voice blending into the ringing in
my ears as he lowers his face to mine.

There’s no air as his grip tightens on my windpipe.
“Secrets die with the people who keep them,” he whispers, bringing his

nose an inch from mine. His eyes are light brown but rimmed in red as
though he’s on some kind of drug.

Aetos.
Fear floods my mind, breaking past my shields, but it’s not mine.
I can’t focus on Tairn’s fear. That way lies shock and death.
And I’m not about to die under some no-name first-year.
My vision tunnels as I grab one of the daggers sheathed along my ribs

with my free left hand, draw quickly, and plunge the blade into the giant’s
back, angling right where Xaden taught me. His kidney. Once. Twice.
Thrice. I lose count as I stab over and over and over, until the grip on my
throat releases, until the first-year sags on top of me.

He’s dead weight.
My lungs fight to expand as I put the last of my strength into shoving

him off of me. He’s heavier than an ox, but I manage to push him sideways
enough to slide out from under him.

Air—beautiful, precious air—fills my chest, and I gasp for it, breathing
past the fire in my throat, and stare up at the beams of the ceiling. Pain. My



entire body is nothing but pain.
“Violet?” Dain’s voice shakes as he crouches beside me. “Are you all

right?”
Secrets die with the people who keep them.
No, I’m not all right. His father just tried to have me assassinated.
I force myself to the familiar headspace beyond the pain and roll to my

hands and knees. Nausea sweeps through me in waves, and I breathe in
through my nose and out through my mouth until I can push it back down.

“Say something,” Dain begs in a frantic whisper.
I walk back on my hands until I’m kneeling, then arch my neck, wincing

as I pull breath after breath.
“Vi—” He stands and offers me a hand, and the worry in his familiar

eyes—
Fuck no.
I throw all my energy into my shields.
“Don’t. Touch. Me,” I grind out, my voice like sandpaper, and stand

slowly, more than aware of the number of eyes on me. My head spins, but I
fight the dizziness as I retrieve all five of my daggers. Everyone in the
nearby area watches as I bend over and use the dead first-year’s uniform to
wipe the blood off my blades before sheathing them.

The fear flooding my pathways changes to relief.
“I’m all right,” I tell Tairn and Andarna.
“Matthias and Henrick, take the bodies,” Dain orders. At least I think it’s

him. The ringing in my ears muffles everything farther than twelve inches
away.

Emetterio appears before me. “May I touch you?” he asks.
Clearly, I made that demand of Dain rather loudly.
I nod, making sure my shields are in place, and Emetterio grasps my

face, searching my eyes. He blocks the light, then lifts his hand. A fresh
wave of nausea churns in my stomach.

“You’re concussed. Want to skip the rest of the session?” He drops his
hand from my face and holds me steady by gripping my arms when I sway.

“No.” I’m not leaving assessment day the same way I did last year.



“I’ve got her,” Imogen says, taking my elbow.
Emetterio’s mouth purses, his dark eyes narrowing.
“I’m not going to try and kill her this year. Promise.” She draws me to

her side but doesn’t hold on to me, just lets me lean a little.
Fine, a lot.
“You were just strangled, Cadet Sorrengail,” Emetterio reminds me.
“Not the first time,” I respond, the razor blades in my throat making my

voice raspy. “I’ll heal. I’m staying.”
He sighs but eventually nods and heads back to his place at the head of

the mat, picking up the clipboard he’d apparently dropped.
“Aetos sent him,” I whisper to Imogen. “I think we’re being targeted.”

Gods, I hope that’s not why Xaden didn’t show yesterday.
Her green eyes flare a second before Ridoc appears at my other side, his

shoulder brushing mine.
“Damn, Sorrengail,” he mutters, offering me an arm I don’t take.
“It’s always something, isn’t it?” I try to smile as the two of them walk

slowly back to the edge of the mat, giving me enough support that I don’t
fall to either side.

“He was probably sent as a message to your mother,” Emetterio says,
shaking his head. “Same thing happened to your older sister during her
years.”

The first-years stare in wide-eyed horror as I glance around the bloody
mat, noting that Rhiannon, Dain, and Sawyer are missing. Right. Because
they have to take Nadine and the nameless first-year’s body.

Nadine is dead because she said she was me.
Heavy, eye-prickling sorrow threatens to take me out at my throbbing

knees, but I can’t allow myself to feel it. Can’t let it in. Not with everyone
watching. It goes into the box where I keep every other overwhelming
emotion.

Sloane and Aaric stand in the middle of the mat, watching me with
varying shades of shock on their face. There’s far more concern on Aaric’s
face than Sloane’s.



“Is someone going to clean up that mess and fight, or what?” I ask,
ignoring the drip of thick liquid down the back of my neck. Standing here
covered in his blood is better than lying there soaked in mine.

“And you wanted to take her on, Mairi.” One of the first-years scoffs
from across the mat. He has deep-set brown eyes under angular brows and a
wide square jaw, but I don’t know his name. I don’t fucking want to know
his name.

I already know Sloane’s and Aaric’s, and that’s too much.
I knew Nadine’s.
We stand shoulder to shoulder as the first-years mop up the blood then

finish their assessment, and I focus on cataloging every single thing that’s
wrong with Sloane’s fighting style, which is…a lot. In fact, she looks like
she’s spent nearly no time training for the quadrant.

That can’t be right. Liam was the best fighter in our year, and every
marked one knows they have to report to the Riders Quadrant when they’re
of age. Surely she’s trained.

“You sure she’s Liam’s sister?” Ridoc asks.
“Yep,” Imogen answers with a long sigh. “But she sure wasn’t fostered

with fighters, and it shows.”
Aaric puts her on her ass six times with little to no effort.
Well, shit. This complicates some things. Like keeping her alive.
An hour later, I make it through physics under Rhi’s watchful gaze, more

than aware of the first-year’s blood drying on my skin and holding my head
high when other cadets stare. It’s easier once the ringing in my ears lessens,
but I’m still nauseated as hell after class.

I beg off from dinner and turn down Rhi’s offer of help to get to my
room, slowly but surely taking the steps up to the second-years’ floor.
Every bone, every muscle, every fiber of my being aches.

A heartbeat before I reach for my door handle, I feel it, the familiar
midnight-tinted shadow wrapping around my mind.

Relief courses through me as I push open the door and see Xaden
leaning against the wall between my desk and my bed, looking ready to kill
someone as usual, his arms folded over his chest.



“It’s been eight days,” I croak, wincing.
“I know,” he counters, pushing off the wall and crossing the room in a

few steps. “And from what Tairn showed Sgaeyl, I should have told my
commander to fuck off and gotten here sooner.” He takes my face in his
hands in a way that feels completely different from the way Emetterio had
earlier, and the rage shining in his eyes is at odds with the gentleness of his
touch as he takes stock of my injuries.

“The blood is his.” My throat feels like I swallowed fire.
“Good.” His jaw flexes as his gaze drops to the bruises I know are

around my neck.
“I don’t even know what his name was.”
“I know.” His hands fall away, and I immediately mourn their loss.
“Colonel Aetos sent him.”
He nods, the motion curt. “I’m sorry I couldn’t kill him first.”
“The first-year? Or Aetos?”
“Both.” He doesn’t smile at my attempt at a joke. “Let’s get you clean

and wrapped up.”
“You can’t go around killing cadets. You’re an officer now.”
“Watch me.”

 
 
 

“What’s it like at Samara?” I ask him hours later as I sit cross-legged
on my bed, bathed and choking down the bowl of soup he brought

up for me from the mess in the main campus. Every swallow hurts, but he’s
right—I can’t afford to weaken myself by not eating.

“Look at you, asking questions.” A corner of Xaden’s mouth rises as he
leans back, taking over the armchair in the corner of my room, sharpening
his daggers on a strap of leather. He ditched the flight leathers while I was
in the bath, but he somehow looks even better in his new uniform. I can’t
help but notice he didn’t add patches to this one, either. He’d only ever
worn his wingleader insignia and wing designation while he was in the
quadrant.



“I’m not fighting with you about your question game tonight.” I shoot a
glare his way, spotting the two tomes Jesinia loaned me on the bookshelf
next to him. But any thought of telling him about my research disappeared
at his reminder that I’m not granted the full truth when it comes to him.

“Wanting you to ask what you want to know isn’t a game. You and me?
Not a game.” He drags his blade over the leather again and again. “And
Samara is… different.”

“The one-word answers aren’t going to cut it.”
He looks up from his work. “I have to prove myself all over again at

what’s arguably the cruelest outpost we have. It’s…annoying.”
I crack a smile. Leave it to Xaden to be annoyed. “Do they treat you

differently?”
“You mean because of this?” He taps the side of his neck with the flat of

his blade, touching the relic.
“Yes.”
He shrugs. “I think the last name does it more than the relic. The older

riders are easier on Garrick, which I’m thankful for.”
I set the spoon down in the bowl. “I’m sorry.”
“It’s nothing worse than what I expected, and my signet’s enough to give

most of them pause.” He puts the leather strap into his rucksack, then
sheaths his last blade as he stands. “You know what it’s like. People judge
you by your last name all the time.”

“I think it’s safe to say you have it worse.”
“Only within the borders.” He flips my armor over where it’s drying on

the back of my desk chair, then crosses the room to sit on the end of my
bed. It’s not as big as his was last year, but there’s room for both of us if I
ask him to stay. Which I won’t. It’s hard enough to be this close and not kiss
him. Sleeping next to him? I’d break for sure.

“Fair point.” I put the bowl on my nightstand and pick up my brush, my
gaze drifting to the door when I hear Rhiannon’s voice in the hallway a
second before she shuts her door. Which reminds me… “Did you ward my
room from visitors before you left?”



He nods. “It’s warded against sound, too.” He crosses his ankle over his
knee, keeping his boots off my bed. “One-way, of course. You can hear
what’s going on out there, but they can’t hear what’s going on in here.
Figured you might like your privacy.”

“For all the people I can’t bring in?”
“You can bring in whomever you want,” he counters.
“Really?” Sarcasm drips from my voice as I drag the brush through my

damp hair. “Because Rhiannon tried to walk in and ended up on the other
side of the hallway.”

The corners of his mouth lift into a glimpse of a smile. “Tell her to hold
your hand next time. The only way in here is by touching you.”

“Wait.” I pause, then finish pulling the brush through my snagged ends.
“So you didn’t ward it for only you and me?”

“It’s your room, Violet.” His eyes track the movement of the brush
through my hair, and the way his fingers curl in his lap makes me swallow.
Hard. “The room is warded to let in whomever you pull through.” He clears
his throat and shifts his weight as I finish another pass with the brush. “And
selfishly, me.”

I fucking love your hair. If you ever want to bring me to my knees or win
an argument, just let it down. I’ll get the point.

My breath catches at the memory. Has it really only been a few months
since he said that? It feels simultaneously like forever…and yesterday.

“You warded my room for complete privacy for me and anyone I want
to bring in?” I lift my eyebrows at him. “In case I feel like…”

“Doing whatever you want.” The heat in his gaze makes my breath
catch. “No one will hear a thing. Even if you wreck an armoire.”

I fumble the brush and it falls into my lap, but I quickly recover. Kind
of. “This particular one seems pretty solid. Nothing like the flimsy piece I
had in my room last year.” The one we accidentally turned into firewood
the first time we’d gotten our hands on each other.

“Is that a challenge?” He glances at the furniture. “Because I guarantee
we can take it down once you’re healed.”

“No one’s ever fully healed around here.”



“Good point. Just say the words, Violet.” The way he looks at me is
enough to raise my temperature a few degrees. “It only takes three.”

Three words?
Oh, like hell am I going to tell him that I want him. He already has too

much power over me.
“Can and should are two different things,” I manage to say. My

willpower when it comes to Xaden is pure shit. One touch, and I’ll be back
in his arms, accepting whatever he deems as enough of the truth instead of
the full access I deserve…no, need. “And we definitely shouldn’t.”

“Then tell me how your week was instead.” He changes topics smoothly.
“I couldn’t watch them all,” I admit. “At Parapet. I tried, but I…

couldn’t.”
“You were on the tower?” His brow furrows.
“Yes.” I shift, tucking my sore knees to the side. “I promised Liam I’d

help Sloane, and I couldn’t do that from the courtyard.” A sarcastic laugh
escapes my lips. “And she fucking hates me.”

“It’s impossible to hate you.” He stands and walks to where his rucksack
is leaned up against the wall. “Trust me. I tried.”

“Trust me. She does. She actually wanted to challenge me at
assessment.” I lean back against my headboard. “She blames me for Liam’s
death. Not that she’s wrong—”

“Liam’s death wasn’t your fault,” he interrupts, his body going rigid. “It
was mine. If Sloane wants to hate anyone, she can aim it all right here.” He
taps his chest as he turns, setting his rucksack on the desk.

“It wasn’t your fault.” It’s not the first time we’ve had the argument, and
something tells me it won’t be the last. I guess there’s enough guilt for two
to carry.

“It was.” He opens the top and rifles through the bag.
“Xaden—”
“How many candidates fell this year?” He pulls out a folded paper, then

closes the bag.
“Too many.” Even now I can hear some of their screams.



“It’s always too many.” He sits on my bed again, this time close enough
that my knees brush his thigh. “And it’s okay that you couldn’t watch the
younger ones die. It means you’re still you.”

“As opposed to turning into someone else?” My stomach twists at the
flat expression on his face, the wall mentioning Liam’s death put solidly
between us. “Because I feel like I am. I don’t even want to know the first-
years’ names. I don’t want to know them. I don’t want it to hurt when they
die. What does that make me?”

“A second-year.” He says it matter-of-factly, the same way he’d declared
that he couldn’t save every marked one last year, only the ones willing to
help themselves.

Sometimes I forget how ruthless he is.
How ruthless he can be on my behalf.
“I’ve seen death before,” I respond. “I was practically surrounded by it

last year.”
“It’s not the same. Seeing our friends—our equals—die on the Gauntlet,

at Threshing, in challenges, or even in battle is one thing. Everyone in here
is just fighting to survive, and it prepares us for what happens out there. But
when it’s the younger candidates…” He shakes his head and leans forward.

I grip my brush to keep from reaching for him.
“The first year is when some of us lose our lives,” he says softly, tucking

my damp hair behind my ear. “The second year is when the rest of us lose
our humanity. It’s all part of the process of turning us into effective
weapons, and don’t forget for a second that’s the mission here.”

“Desensitizing us to death?”
He nods.
A knock sounds at the door, and I startle but can’t help but notice Xaden

doesn’t. He sighs and stands, heading for the door.
“Already?” he asks after opening it, blocking me from view. Or blocking

the view from me.
“Already.” I recognize Bodhi’s voice.
“Give me a minute.” Xaden shuts the door without waiting for a

response.



“Let me come with you.” I swing my feet over the side of the bed.
“No.” He crouches in front of me, putting us at eye level, the parchment

from his bag still clutched in his fist. “Sleep is the fastest way to heal unless
you plan on seeking out Nolon, and from what I hear, he’s hard to come by
these days.”

“You need sleep, too,” I protest around the dread filling my throat. We
only have hours, and I’m not ready for him to go. “You flew for half a day.”

“I have a lot to get done before morning.”
“Let me help.” Shit, now I’m begging.
“Not yet.” He reaches out to cup my face, then drops his hand as if

rethinking the move. “But I need you to pay close attention to what happens
when you leave in seven days with Tairn.” He presses the paper into my
hand. “Until then…here.”

“What is this?” I spare a glance downward, but it only looks like folded
parchment.

“You told me once that I was scared you might not like me if you got to
really know me.”

“I remember.”
“Every time we’re together, we’re training or fighting. There’s not a lot

of time for long walks by the river or whatever passes for romance around
here.” He squeezes my hand gently, but I can feel every callus he’s built
from mastering his weaponry. “But I told you I’d find a way to let you in,
and right now, this is all I have.”

My gaze jerks to his and my heart flies into my throat.
“I’ll see you at Samara.” He stands and grabs his rucksack and the two

swords leaned up against the wall next to the door.
“How do I find you once I’m there?” My fingers clench the folded

parchment. I’ve never even seen Samara. Mom has never been stationed
there.

He turns at the door and looks back at me, holding my gaze. “Third
floor, south wing, second door on the right. The wards will let you in.”

His barracks room.



“Let me guess—warded for sound and to let in you, me, and anyone you
tug through?” The idea of him using that soundproofing for breaking
armoires with someone else is enough to curdle the soup in my stomach.

We might not be together, but jealousy’s not exactly a rational emotion.
“No, Violet.” He lifts both swords overhead, then slips them into the

sheaths on the pack behind him with practiced expertise and a hint of a
smirk. “Just you and me.”

He’s gone before I can even think of a reply.
With trembling hands, I unfold the paper—and smile.
Xaden Riorson wrote me a letter.

OceanofPDF.com



Garrick has always been my best friend. His father was my father’s
aide, which in a way makes him my Dain, except trustworthy. After

Liam, Bodhi was and still is the closest thing I have to a brother,
perpetually tagging along a step behind.

—RECOVERED CORRESPONDENCE OF LIEUTENANT XADEN RIORSON TO
CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER ELEVEN

A smile curving my lips, I brace my hands on the top of my head and
walk off the stitch in my side as Imogen and I finish our post-run

cooldown a few mornings later, entering the courtyard a full half hour
before breakfast is set to be served.

He wrote me a letter, and I’ve read it so many times I already have it
memorized. There’s nothing remotely dangerous in it, no secrets of the
revolution or clues on how to help, but it’s not like he can risk those by
putting them in writing. No, this is even better. It’s just about him. It’s little
details, like the fact that he used to sit on the roof of Riorson House during
the rebellion in hopes his father would come home and tell him it was all
over.

“You’ve been grinning like a drunkard for the last three mornings,”
Imogen complains, ducking to check under the dais as we pass by. “How is
anyone that happy at sunrise?”

Can’t blame her. I’ve been on edge since assessment day, too. So are
Bodhi and Eya.

“No nightmares the last few days, and no one’s up at this hour trying to
kill me.” My hands fall to my side. I made it a little farther between walking
breaks this time.

“Yeah, because that’s the reason.” She rolls her neck. “Why don’t you
take him back already?”



“He doesn’t trust me.” I shrug. “And I can’t really trust him. It’s
complicated.” But damn do I miss catching glimpses of him every day.
Saturday can’t get here soon enough. “Besides, even if two people have
unmatched chemistry, that doesn’t mean they should be in a relationship
beyond anything physical—”

“Oh, no.” She shakes her head, then tucks a strand of pink hair behind
her ear. “I was finishing a conversation. Not starting one. I’m down for
running and weight training with you, but you have friends to talk about
your sex life with. Remember? The ones I’m watching you actively avoid at
every opportunity?”

Not going there.
“And we aren’t friends?” I question.
“We’re…” Her face scrunches. “Coconspirators with a vested interest in

keeping each other alive.”
That only makes me smile bigger. “Oh, don’t go getting soft on me

now.”
Her gaze narrows as she looks past me, toward the outer wall. “What in

Dunne’s name would a scribe be doing in the quadrant at this hour?”
I startle at the sight of Jesinia waiting in one of the shaded alcoves,

tucked away like she’s trying to hide. “Relax. She’s a friend.”
Imogen dishes out a heaping dose of side-eye. “You’re pretty much

hiding from the second-years but befriending scribes?”
“I’m distancing myself so I don’t have to lie to them, and I’ve been

friends with Jes— You know what? I don’t owe you an explanation. I’m
going to see what my friend needs.” I increase my pace, but Imogen
matches it. “Hi,” I sign to Jesinia as we near the alcove. This particular one
has a tunnel that leads straight into the dormitory. “Everything all right?”

“I came to find you—” Her brow puckers under her hood as her gaze
shifts to Imogen, who’s sizing her up like she would an opponent.

“I’m fine,” I tell Imogen, signing at the same time. “Jesinia isn’t going
to try to kill me.”

Imogen tilts her head, her gaze dropping to the cream satchel Jesinia
carries.



“I’m not going to try to kill her,” Jesinia signs, her brown eyes widening.
“I wouldn’t even know how.”

“Violet knew how to kill just fine on a scribe’s education,” Imogen
replies, her hands moving quickly.

Jesinia blinks.
I lift my brows at Imogen.
“Fine,” she replies, signing as she backs away. “But if she comes at you

with a sharpened quill, don’t blame me.”
“Sorry about her,” I sign once Imogen turns her back to us.
“People are trying to kill you?” Jesinia’s brow knits.
“It’s Thursday.” I move into the alcove so my back isn’t to the courtyard.

“I’m always happy to see you, but what can I help you with?” Scribe cadets
almost never enter the Riders Quadrant unless they’re assisting Captain
Fitzgibbons.

“Two things,” she signs as we both sit on the bench, then reaches into
her satchel, pulls out a tome, and hands it to me. It’s a copy of The Gift of
the First Six and looks to be hundreds of years old. “You said you wanted
an early accounting of the first riders when you returned the other books,”
she signs. “This is one of the earliest I could find that’s allowed to be
removed from the Archives. Preparing for another debate?”

I set it on my lap and choose my words carefully. My gut tells me I can
trust her, but after Dain, I’m not sure I can depend on my intuition, and
knowing isn’t safe for her, anyway. “Studying. And thank you, but you
didn’t have to bring it. I would have come to you.”

“I didn’t want you to have to wait for me to be on Archives duty, and
you told me you run every morning…” She takes several deep breaths,
which usually means she’s composing her thoughts. “And I hate to admit it,
but I need help,” she signs before pulling a ragged tome out of the bag and
handing it to me.

I take it to free up her hands, noting the worn edges and loose spine.
“I’m trying to translate this for an assignment, and I’m struggling with a

couple of sentences. It’s in Old Lucerish, and from what I remember, it’s
one of the dead languages you can read.” Her cheeks flush pink as she



glances back over her shoulder at the mage-lit tunnel, as if another scribe
might see us. “I’ll be in trouble if anyone knows I’m asking for help.
Adepts shouldn’t ask.”

“I’m good at keeping secrets,” I sign, my face falling as I remember
using the language to pass secret messages with Dain when we were kids.

“Thank you. I know almost every other language.” Her motions are
sharp, and her mouth tenses.

“You know far more of them than I do.” We share a smile, and I flip
open the tome to the bookmark, taking in the swirling strokes of ink that
make up the logosyllabic language.

Jesinia points to a sentence. “I’m stuck there.”
I quickly read from the beginning of the paragraph to be sure I have it

right, then sign the sentence she’s looking for, spelling out the last word—
the name of an ancient king who lived a thousand years before Navarre
existed.

“Thank you.” She writes the sentence down in the notebook she’s
brought with her.

Ancient king. I flip to the first page of the book, and my shoulders sag. It
bears a date from twenty-five years ago.

“It’s hand-copied from an original,” Jesinia signs. “About five years
before the quadrant received the printing press.”

Right. Because nothing in the Archives is older than four hundred years
except the scrolls from the Unification. Sweat cools on the back of my neck
as I translate a few more sentences for her from various pages, surprised at
how much I still remember after not practicing for a year, then hand the
tome back when I finish the last sentence she has marked.

If I hurry, I can bathe the sweat off and still catch breakfast.
“We’re working on removing all the dead languages from the public

section of the Archives and translating them for easier reading,” she signs
with an excited smile, then puts her things away. “You should come by and
see how much we’ve accomplished.”

“Riders aren’t allowed past the study table,” I remind her.



“I’d make an exception for you.” She grins. “The Archives are almost
always empty on Sundays, especially with most third-years cycling home
for break.”

A scream rends the air, and my head shoots up. Across the courtyard, a
second-year from Third Wing is dragged from the academic building,
between two older riders, followed by Professor Markham.

What in Amari’s name?
Jesinia pales and sinks farther into the shadows of the alcove as he’s

hauled into the dormitory building, where the tunnels beneath lead across
the canyon and into the main campus of Basgiath. “I think,” she signs,
starting to breathe raggedly. “I think that’s my fault.”

“What?” I turn to face her fully.
“That rider requested a book yesterday, and I recorded the request.” She

leans toward me, panic growing in her eyes. “I have to record the requests.
It’s—”

“Regulation,” we both finish signing at the same time. I nod. “You
didn’t do anything wrong. What was the book?”

She glances toward the doors where the rider disappeared. “I should go.
Thank you.”

It’s only the fear in her eyes that keeps me from asking her again before
she rushes off, leaving me staring at the tome in my lap, realizing how
dangerous my “research project” really is.
 
 
 

“W ait for me!” Rhiannon calls out later that day, jogging up through
the crowd of riders as we reach the steps beside the Gauntlet,

where most of us are bottlenecked as we wait for our turn to climb up to the
flight field.

“We’re still here!” I wave before my gaze returns to moving restlessly
over the people closest to us, watching their hands, their weapons. I trust
my squadmates implicitly, but no one else. All it takes is a well-timed stab
in a crowd, and I could bleed out without even knowing who’d killed me.



“This isn’t right,” Sawyer mutters, refolding our homework map for
RSC. “I can’t get number four no matter how many times I count the little
elevation lines.”

“That’s north,” I tell him, tapping the bottom of the folded monstrosity.
“You’re looking at the wrong sector for question four. Trust me, I had to ask
Ridoc for help last night.”

“Ugh. This is some infantry bullshit.” He shoves the map into his
pocket.

“Why won’t you just accept that I am a land navigation god and ask for
help like everyone else?” Ridoc teases Sawyer as Rhi catches up to us.
“Finally! You’d think leadership would be on time.”

“Leadership was in a meeting,” Rhi replies, holding up a collection of
missives. “And leadership was given the mail!”

Hope leaps up, replacing the hypervigilance for a second before I can
squash it.

“Ridoc,” Rhiannon says, handing over a letter. “Sawyer.” She turns,
giving him the next one. “Me.” She flips that one to the back. “And Violet.”

He wouldn’t, I remind myself before taking the letter from her, yet I
can’t help but hold my breath as I open the unsealed flap of the envelope.

Violet,

Sorry it took me so long to write. I only just realized the
date. You’re a second-year!

My shoulders droop, which is just…pathetic.
“Who’s it from?” Rhiannon asks. “You look disappointed.”
“Mira,” I answer. “And no, not disappointed…” My words trail off as

we move forward in line.
“You thought it would be a different lieutenant,” she guesses correctly,

her eyes softening in sympathy.
I shrug, but it’s hard to keep the frustration out of my voice. “I know

better.”



“You miss him, don’t you?” She drops her voice as we shuffle closer to
the steps.

I nod. “I shouldn’t, but I do.”
“Are you two together?” she whispers. “I mean, everyone knows you’re

sleeping together, but something’s off with you.”
I glance ahead, making sure Sawyer and Ridoc are engrossed in their

letters. This is a truth I can easily give her. “Not anymore.”
“Why?” she asks, confusion etching her forehead. “What happened?”
I open my mouth, then shut it. Maybe the truth isn’t that easy. What the

hell am I supposed to tell her? Gods, when did this all become so
complicated?

“You can tell me, you know.” She forces a smile, and the hurt I see
behind it makes me feel like total and complete shit.

“I know.” Lucky for me, we start up the steps, giving me a chance to
think.

We reach the top, walking into the box canyon of the flight field, and my
heart swells at the sight of the dragons organized in the same formation we
stand at in the courtyard. It’s a beautiful, terrifying, humbling kaleidoscope
of power that steals the breath from my lungs.

“This is never going to get old, is it?” Rhiannon says as we follow Ridoc
and Sawyer across the formation, her smile overtaking her face.

“I don’t think so.” We share a look, and I break. “Xaden wasn’t honest
with me,” I say quietly, feeling like I owe my best friend something true. “I
had to end it.”

Her eyes flare. “He lied?”
“No.” My grip tightens on Mira’s letter. “He didn’t tell me the entire

truth. He still won’t.”
“Another woman?” Her brows rise. “Because I will absolutely help you

annihilate that shadow-wielding asshole if you guys were exclusive and he
—”

“No, no.” I laugh. “Nothing like that.” We pass by Second Wing’s
dragons. “It’s…” There go my words again. “It’s…complicated. How are
you and Tara? I haven’t seen her around much.”



She sighs. “Neither of us has enough time for the other. It sucks, but
maybe it will ease up next year when neither of us are squad leaders
anymore.”

“Or maybe you’ll be wingleaders.” The thought makes me bite back a
smile. Rhi would be a fantastic wingleader.

“Maybe.” There’s a bounce to her step. “But in the meantime, we’re free
to see whoever we want. What about you? Because if you’re single, I have
to say that a couple of the guys in Second Wing somehow got hotter after
War Games.” Her eyes sparkle. “Or we could secretly visit Chantara this
weekend and hook up with some infantry cadets!” She holds up a finger.
“Healers might be all right, too, but I draw the line at scribes. The robes
don’t do it for me. Not that I’m judging if that’s your thing. I’m just saying
that we are second-years and our options for blowing off steam are
endless.”

A random stranger might be what I need to flush Xaden out of my
system, but it isn’t what I want.

She studies my face like I’m a puzzle that needs to be solved as we
continue down the field. “Shit. You’re hung up on him.”

“I’m…” I sigh. “It’s complicated.”
“You said that already.” She tries to school her expression, but I catch

the flash of disappointment when I don’t elaborate. “Mira have anything to
say about the front?”

“Not sure.” I glance through the letter, reading it quickly. “She’s been
reassigned to Athebyne. She says the food is only a step above our mother’s
cooking.” That gets a laugh out of me as I flip the page over, but it dies
quickly when I see the thick black lines that eliminate entire paragraphs.
“What the…” I flip to the next page, finding more of the same before she
signs off, hoping to fly over to Samara during one of my upcoming trips.

“What’s wrong?” Rhiannon looks up from her own letter as we continue
walking, passing by Third Wing’s dragons.

“I think it’s been redacted.” I flash it at her so she can see the black
lines, then look around to make sure no one else notices.



“Someone censored your letter?” She looks surprised. “Someone read
your letter?”

“It was unsealed.” I stuff it back into the envelope.
“Who would do that?”
Melgren. Varrish. Markham. Anyone on Aetos’s orders. My mother. The

options are endless. “I’m not sure.” It’s not a lie, not really. I slip the
envelope into the internal pocket of my flight leathers and then cringe as I
button up the jacket. It’s too fucking hot for these things down here, but I
know I’ll be grateful for the extra layer in a few minutes once we’re
airborne.

A red in the second row huffs a blast of steam in warning at a cadet from
Third Wing who gets too close, and we all hurry along.

Tairn is the largest dragon on the field by far, and he looks completely
and utterly bored as he waits for me, the metal of my saddle glistening
against his scales in the sun. I can’t help but sigh in disappointment that
Andarna isn’t with him as his forelegs come into view.

“Hey, has Tairn said anything about another black dragon in the Vale?”
Ridoc asks me over his shoulder as we make it past Claw Section, coming
to Tairn first, who’s standing in the lead position despite Rhiannon and
Sawyer outranking me.

It’s all I can do to not trip over my feet. “I’m sorry?”
“I know, it sounds ludicrous, but when we walked by Kaori back there, I

swear I heard him say something about another black dragon being spotted.
The guy was practically jumping with excitement.”

“Tairn?” If the professor of dragonkind knows about Andarna, we’re
screwed.

“Only a few dragons saw her before she entered the caves for the
Dreamless Sleep. You try keeping her hidden and see how it goes for you.”

Awesome.
“Maybe it’s Tairn they’re seeing,” I say to Ridoc. Not a lie. “Or an

elder?”
“Kaori thinks it’s a new one.” His eyebrows rise. “You should ask him.”
“Huh.” I swallow. “Yeah, I can do that.” Still not lying.



The three continue on, mounting their dragons.
Tairn dips his left shoulder for me but then straightens. “On your left,”

he warns as a shape approaches from behind.
I whip around quickly to face the threat and secure my shields in place.
Varrish saunters toward me, his arms locked behind his back, and the

major must be inhuman because there’s not a dot of sweat on his high
forehead. “Ah, Sorrengail, there you are.”

As if Tairn is hard to miss.
“Major Varrish.” I leave my hands at my thighs, where I can grab hold

of my daggers easily, wondering what his signet might be. I’ve never seen a
signet patch on him. Either he’s cocky like Xaden and thinks his reputation
precedes him or he’s part of the classified-signet club.

“Quite the necklace you have there.” He points to the greenish bruises
on my throat.

“Thank you. It was expensive.” I lift my chin. “Cost someone their life.”
“Ah, that’s right. I recall hearing you were nearly done in by a first-year.

Good to see that the embarrassment didn’t finish the job he started. But I
guess you’re probably used to barely squeaking by alive, seeing how frail
you’re rumored to be.”

I officially loathe this man, but at least I know Tairn will eat him whole
if he tries to attack me on the field.

He leans left, making a show of looking around me. “I thought you were
bonded to two dragons?”

“I am.” Sweat slides down my spine.
“And yet, I only see one.” He looks up at Tairn. “Where’s your little

gold one? The feathertail I’ve heard so much about? I was hoping to see her
for myself.”

A growl rumbles up Tairn’s throat, and he angles his head over me.
Saliva drips in giant globs, hitting the ground in front of Varrish.

The major tenses but maintains a perfect mask of amusement as he steps
back. “Always has had a temper, this one.”

“He likes his space.”



“I’ve noticed he likes you to have yours, too,” he comments. “Tell me,
Sorrengail, how do you feel about the way he gives you…oh, shall we say,
an easier path to take than your fellow cadets?”

“If you mean to ask how I feel about how he stopped the needless
execution of bonded riders by your dragon after Parapet, then I’d have to
say that I feel pretty good about it. I guess it takes one bad-tempered dragon
to keep another civil.”

“Remind him that I threatened to digest him alive.”
“I don’t think that would go well for me,” I reply.
“It would be fun to watch him eat the pompous one.” Andarna’s voice is

groggy.
“Go back to sleep,” I lecture. She’s not due to wake for another month,

Tairn said.
Varrish’s eyes narrow momentarily on mine, and then he smiles, but

there’s nothing kind or happy about it. “About your little feathertail—”
“She can’t bear a rider.” Not lying, since she hasn’t flown since waking

in Aretia. “I fly with Tairn, but she’ll go through maneuvers on the easier
days.”

“Well, see to it that she flies with you next week, and you can consider
that an order.”

Another growl sounds from Tairn.
“Dragons don’t take orders from humans.” Power rises within me,

humming beneath my skin and making my fingers buzz.
“Of course not.” His grin widens like I’ve said something funny. “But

you do, don’t you?”
“Impudent human,” Tairn seethes.
I lift my chin, knowing there’s nothing more I can say about this without

disciplinary action.
“It’s ironic, don’t you think?” Varrish asks, retreating one step at a time.

“From what Colonel Aetos told me, your father was writing a book on
feathertails— dragons which hadn’t been seen in hundreds of years—and
then you ended up bonded to one.”



“Coincidental,” I correct him. “The word you meant to say is
‘coincidental.’”

“Is it?” He seems to ponder, backing away and passing by Bodhi.
My stomach turns. “Is it?”
“I know nothing of your father’s research,” Tairn promises.
But Andarna has gone silent.
“Riders!” Kaori projects his voice across the field as Bodhi reaches my

side. “Third-years have joined us today for a very special reason. They’ll be
demonstrating a running landing.” He gestures to the sky.

Cath is on approach from the west, the Red Swordtail blocking out the
sun for a second as he dives for the field.

“He’s not slowing down,” I murmur. Part of me hopes Dain falls off.
“He will,” Bodhi promises. “Just not by much.”
My jaw slackens. Dain rides crouched on Cath’s shoulder, his arms out

for balance as Cath drops to fly level with the field. The beats of Cath’s
wings slow only slightly the closer he gets, and I hold my breath when Dain
slides down Cath’s leg to perch on his claw while his dragon is still flying.

Holy. Shit.
“This is unadvisable for you,” Tairn says.
“For anyone with a heartbeat,” I counter.
Cath flares his wings subtly, enough to drop speed, and Dain jumps as

he passes by the professors. He hits the sunburned grass at a run, dispelling
the momentum from Cath’s flight within a few yards, and comes to a stop.

The third-years cheer, but Bodhi remains silent at my side.
“And that is why Aetos is a wingleader,” Kaori calls out. “Perfect

execution. This approach is the most efficient landing for when we need to
engage in ground combat. By the time this year is over, you’ll be able to
land like this on any outpost wall. Pay close attention, and you’ll be able to
complete this safely. Try your own method, and you’ll be dead before you
hit the ground.”

The fuck I will.
“Adaptation will be necessary,” Tairn decrees.



“For today, we’re going to practice the basics of moving from the seat to
the shoulder,” Kaori instructs.

“How are we adapting to that?” I ask Tairn.
“I didn’t say we would.” He chuffs. “The dragon-watcher will adapt his

request, or I’ll have an early lunch.”
This maneuver is totally, completely pointless in the kind of war we

need to fight.
“Kaori doesn’t know what’s out there,” I say softly to Bodhi.
“What makes you so sure?” He glances my way.
“If he did, he’d be teaching us faster ways to get off the damned ground,

not land on it.”
 
 
 

“T ell him that we’re still working on the next shipment,” Bodhi tells
me as we walk through the moonlit flight field a little before

midnight a few nights later.
“Shipment of what?” I ask, adjusting my pack on my shoulders.
“He’ll know what I’m talking about,” he promises, wincing as his

fingers graze the dark bruise on his jaw. “And tell him it’s raw. They’ve had
the forge burning night and day, so we haven’t been able to—” He flinches.
“Just tell him it’s raw.”

“I’m starting to feel a lot like a letter.” I shoot a glare at him for a
second. That’s all I’m willing to look away from the uneven terrain for.
There’s no chance I’m risking a sprained ankle before a twelve-hour flight.

“You’re the best way of getting information to him,” he admits.
“Without actually knowing anything.”
“Precisely.” He nods. “It’s safer this way until you’re capable of

shielding from Aetos at all times. Xaden was supposed to continue teaching
you last visit, but then…”

“I got strangled.” At least I’ve only been attacked once so far this year,
but challenges open back up in a week.

“Yeah. It kind of fucked with his head.”



“I imagine that dropping dead randomly would have been inconvenient
to him,” I mutter, half listening. Shit. Challenges open up in a week. It’s
time to start checking the list the cadre keeps so I can go about my
poisoning ways again.

“You know it’s not like that for him,” he says in a lecturing tone that
reminds me of Xaden. “I’ve never seen him—”

“Let’s not do this.”
“—care like this—”
“No really. Stop.”
“—and that includes Catriona.”
My gaze whips toward him. “Who the hell is Catriona?”
He winces and presses his lips in a thin line. “What are the chances that

you’ll forget I said that between here and Samara?”
“None.” I stumble on a rock, or my feelings, but manage to catch my

balance. Physically, at least. My thoughts? Those are tripping over
themselves down the path of wondering who Catriona is. An older rider?
Someone from Aretia?

“Right.” He rubs the back of his neck and sighs. “Not even the tiniest bit
of a chance? Because the thing about the deal you two have with your
dragons is that he’ll be back here next week, and I’m not remotely in the
mood to have my ass kicked after fending off another assassination
attempt.”

I grab his arm and stop walking. “Another assassination attempt?”
He sighs. “Yeah. Second time someone tried to jump me in the bathing

chamber this week.”
My eyes widen as my heart hammers in my chest. “Are you okay?”
He has the gall to grin. “I completely eviscerated some asshole out of

Second Wing while naked and only got a bruise. I’m fine. But back to why
you shouldn’t mention that comment to my rather moody cousin you’re
sleeping with—”

“You know what?” I start walking to the middle of the field again. If he
doesn’t want to process assassination attempts, then we have nothing else to



say. “I don’t know you nearly well enough to discuss who I am or am not
sleeping with, Bodhi,” I throw over my shoulder.

He shoves his hands in his pockets and leans back on his heels. “You
make a fair point.”

“I made the only point.” Tairn’s silhouette blocks the moon for a
heartbeat before he lands ahead of us.

Bodhi grins sheepishly. “Your dragon has arrived in time to save us from
the awkwardness of this conversation.”

“Let’s get going,” Tairn all but snaps. I try not to take it personally. He’s
been insufferable for days now, but I can’t blame him. I can feel his
physical pain like a knife to my own chest when he overpowers my
emotions.

“He’s in a rush,” I tell Bodhi. “Thanks for walking me out—”
“Humans!”
“Well, fuck.” Bodhi swears under his breath as mage lights flicker on

behind us, lighting up the field the same way they had the night we flew for
War Games.

“Cadet Sorrengail, you will delay your launch.” Varrish amplifies his
voice across the field.

We turn and see him flanked by two other riders, walking our way.
Tairn growls in answer.
Bodhi and I exchange a glance, but we both remain silent as the trio

approaches.
“What do we do if they try to stop us?” I ask Tairn.
“Feast.”
Gross.
“I didn’t expect you to leave until morning,” Varrish says, flashing an

oily smile as the two other riders flank us. The stripes on their uniforms
declare them as first lieutenants, the same as Mira, one rank above Xaden.

“It’s been a fortnight. I’m on leave.”
“So you are.” Varrish blinks at me, then looks at the female lieutenant on

my left. “Nora, search her bag.”
“I’m sorry?” I put a step between me and the woman.



“Your bag,” Varrish repeats. “Article Four, Section One of the Codex
states—”

“That all cadet belongings are subject to search at the discretion of
command,” I finish for him.

“Ah, you know your Codex. Good. Your bag.”
I swallow, then roll my shoulders, letting the pack slip off my back

before holding it out to the left, never taking my eyes from Varrish. The
first lieutenant takes the rucksack from my hand.

“You may leave, Cadet Durran,” Varrish says.
Bodhi moves closer to my side, and the male lieutenant takes a step

closer as well, the mage lights catching the signet patch—fire wielding—on
his uniform. “As Cadet Sorrengail’s section leader, I am the next in her
chain of command. And as Article Four, Section Two of the Codex states,
her discipline falls to her chain of command before being brought to cadre. I
would be negligent in my duty were I to leave her in potential possession
of…whatever it is you’re looking for.”

Varrish narrows his eyes as Nora empties my bag onto the ground.
So much for a clean change of clothing.
Tairn lowers his head behind me, angling slightly to the side and

growling deeply in his throat. At this angle, he can scorch two of them
without touching Bodhi or me, which would only leave one for us to
dispatch if we have to.

Anger prickles along my spine, and I fist my hands like that’s going to
actually help me contain the burst of power crawling through my veins.

“Was that really necessary?” the other lieutenant asks.
“He said search,” Nora replies before looking up at Varrish. “Clothing,”

she says, flipping the pieces over. Her hands tremble when she glances in
Tairn’s direction. “Second-year physics text, land navigation manual, and a
hairbrush.”

“Give me the book and the manual.” Varrish holds his hand out to Nora.
“Need a refresher?” I ask, suddenly grateful I left my copy of The Gift of

the First Six in my room, not that it’s taught me anything besides the fact



that the First Six weren’t the first riders—they were simply the first to
survive.

Varrish doesn’t respond as he flips through the pages, no doubt looking
for scrawled secrets in the margins. His jaw flexes when he doesn’t find
any.

“Satisfied?” I drum my fingers along the sheaths at my thighs.
“We’re done here.” He tosses the book onto the pile of clothing. “See

you in forty-eight hours, Cadet Sorrengail. And don’t forget—since your
feathertail decided not to join you for formation again, I will be pondering
your punishment for dereliction of duty while you are gone.”

And with that threat, the trio walks away, the mage lights winking off
one by one as they pass, leaving us in the dark again except for the circle of
light directly above us.

“You knew that was going to happen.” I glare at Bodhi before crouching
in front of my discarded things, packing them back into the bag. “That’s
why you insisted on walking me out.”

“In addition to the very real attempts on all of our lives—Imogen and
Eya were attacked today, too, coming out of a briefing for third-years—we
suspected they’d search you but wanted to confirm,” he admits, dropping
down to help.

They could have died. My heart stutters in my chest, and I quickly fold
that fear into the box where I’ve decided to hide all my feelings this year.
Well, all emotions except one: anger.

“You used me as a test?” I jerk the fastener on the pack closed and shove
my arms through the straps, hoisting it to my shoulders. “Without even
telling me? Let me guess—it was Xaden’s idea?”

“It was an experiment.” He grimaces. “You were the control.”
“Then what the fuck was the variable?”
The bells ring out, the sound faint from here.
“Check Tairn. It’s midnight. You should get going,” Bodhi says. “Every

minute you stay is one fewer that Tairn gets with Sgaeyl.”
“Agreed.”



“Stop using me like I’m some kind of game piece, Bodhi.” Each word is
sharper than the last. “You two want my help? Ask for it. And don’t fucking
start on me about my shielding abilities. That’s no excuse to send me into
something unprepared.”

He looks abashed. “Fair point.”
I nod, then mount the ramp Tairn creates by dropping a shoulder.

Moonlight and what little mage light reaches this height is more than
sufficient for me to find the saddle. I could navigate the spikes of Tairn’s
back in the darkest night. I proved that in Resson.

There are already two packs twice the size of mine secured behind the
saddle.

“Good thing they didn’t search me,” Tairn says.
“Are we carrying…” I blink twice.
“We are,” he confirms. “Now get in the saddle before they change their

minds and I’m forced to incinerate your leadership. Later I’ll have more
than a few words for the wingleader about not preparing you, trust me.”

Taking a second to secure my pack, too, I settle in for the flight,
dragging the leather across my thighs and strapping in.

“Let’s get to them,” I say once I’m buckled.
Tairn backs up a few steps, no doubt to keep Bodhi clear, and then

launches into the night, every wingbeat taking us closer to the front lines…
and Xaden.

OceanofPDF.com



Sgaeyl watched me kill another cadet for bullying Garrick during
Threshing. She says she chose me for my ruthlessness, but I think I just

reminded her of my grandfather.

—RECOVERED CORRESPONDENCE OF LIEUTENANT XADEN RIORSON TO
CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER TWELVE

The landscape around the Samara outpost is as severe as the command
that runs it.

We’re high in the Esben Mountains, a mile or two from the eastern
border with Poromiel, and surrounded by peaks that are still tipped with
snow in the height of summer. The nearest village is a half-hour flight.
There’s not even a trading post within walking distance. This is as cut off
from society as it gets.

“Be careful,” Tairn orders me, waiting behind me in the field where he
landed. “It’s known to be…brutal as a first assignment.”

So naturally, they’d send Xaden here.
“I’ll be all right,” I promise. “And my shields are up.”
To be sure, I check the walls of my mental Archives, where I ground in

my power, and can’t help the little bounce in my step when I see only a hint
of light from my bonds coming from the doorways. I am definitely getting
better at this.

I head for the entrance to the mammoth fortress that rises before me, its
dark-red stone cutting into the crisp blue sky. It’s probably laid out like
Athebyne and Montserrat, but it’s easily twice as big as either. Two
companies of infantry and eighteen dragons and their riders are stationed
here.



Something sways up high on the wall, and I look to see a man in infantry
colors sitting in a cage about four stories above me.

Well, all right then. It’s a little after eight in the morning, so I can’t help
but wonder if he’s been up there all night.

There’s a hum in my veins that only grows stronger as I walk up the
ramp that leads to the portcullis, where two guards are stationed. A platoon
passes by, headed out for a morning run.

“It’s the wards,” Tairn says.
“They didn’t feel like this at Montserrat,” I tell him.
“They’re stronger here, and since your signet has manifested, you’re

more sensitive to them now.” His tone is tight, and when I glance back over
my shoulder, I note that all the soldiers give him a wide berth, taking a path
off to the side of the field.

“You don’t have to watch my back,” I say, reaching the top of the ramp.
“This is an outpost. I’m safe here.”

“There’s a drift on the other side of the mountains, a mile beyond the
border. Sgaeyl just told me. You’re not safe until you’re behind the walls or
with the wingleader.”

I don’t bother reminding him that Xaden isn’t a wingleader anymore as
my stomach jumps into my throat. “A friendly drift?”

“Define friendly.”
Great. We’re not on the front; we are the front.
The guards at the gate stand taller when they take in my flight leathers

but remain silent as I pass by. “They’re not acting like there’s a drift across
the ridgeline.”

“Apparently it’s commonplace.”
Even better.
“There, I’m all safe behind the walls,” I tell Tairn, walking into the

bailey of the fortress. At least it’s cooler here than at Basgiath, but I’m not
sure I’d like to experience winter at this altitude.

Or Aretia’s, come to think of it.
“Call if you need me. I’ll be nearby.” A second later, wingbeats fill the

air.



Like hell am I going to call him for anything. In fact, I’ll consider these
next twenty-four hours a success if I can block him out altogether. I’ve been
on the wrong mental side of the bond during one of his trysts with Sgaeyl,
and no thank you.

I pass by several platoons of infantry standing in formation and note the
infirmary off to the right, in the same location as Montserrat’s, but I’m the
only person in black.

Where the hell are all the riders? I stifle a yawn—there wasn’t much
sleep to be had in the saddle—and locate the entrance to the barracks that
make up the southern side of the fortress. The corridor is dimly lit as I walk
through, passing the office of the scribes, but I find the stairs at the end. A
sensation of unwelcome familiarity crawls along my skin as I climb.

Breathe.
This outpost isn’t deserted. There isn’t a horde of venin and wyvern

waiting to be spotted from the highest point, either. It’s only the same layout
because almost all outposts are built from the same plans.

I push open the door to the third floor without encountering anyone.
Odd. One side of the hallway is lined with windows that open to the bailey,
and the other with equidistant wooden doors. My pulse picks up as I reach
for the handle of the second door. It swings open with a squeak, and I
recognize the tingle of energy that rushes over my skin, leaving chills in its
wake as I step through the wards into Xaden’s room.

Xaden’s empty room.
Shit.
I sigh in pure disappointment as I drop my pack near his desk.
His room is austere, with serviceable furniture and a door that probably

leads to a neighboring room, but there are touches of him here and there.
He’s in the books that sit stacked along the shelves of the bookcase by the
window, the rack of weapons I recognize from his room at Basgiath, and the
two swords that sit near the door, like he’ll be back any second to retrieve
them.

The only softness to be found is in the heavy black drapes—standard
issue in the room of a rider who might have to fly night patrols—and the



plush, darkgray blanket covering his bed. His very large bed.
Nope. Not thinking about that.
What the hell am I supposed to do if he’s not here? The swords say he’s

not out flying, so I close my eyes and open up my senses, finding the
shadow that’s only present when he’s near. If I found him that night on the
parapet, surely I can do it here.

He’s close, but he must have his shields locked, because he doesn’t
reach out like he usually would when I’m close. The bond feels like it’s
tugging me downward, like he’s actually…under me.

I close Xaden’s door on the way out and follow the tugging sensation,
making my way to the staircase and then descending. I pass the arched
entrance to the second floor, catching a glimpse of a wide stone hallway
with more barracks doors, then the entrance to the first, and finally reaching
the sublevel of the fortress where natural light ends with the staircase on a
stone floor. Mage lights illuminate two possible paths along the foundation
of the fortress, both dimly lit and as welcoming as a dungeon. The scent of
damp earth and metal permeates the air.

Shouts and cheers come from down a corridor to the right, echoing off
the walls and floor. I follow the pull of the bond that direction and find a
pair of infantry guards about twenty yards from the stairs who take one look
at my uniform and step aside, allowing me access to a room carved out of
the very foundation.

Noise overwhelms every other sense when I enter the chamber, and
shock halts my feet inside the doorway.

What in the gods’ names is going on?
More than a dozen riders—all in black—stand along the sides of the

square-shaped, windowless room that looks better suited for storage than
occupation. They’re all leaning over a thick wooden railing, intently
watching something in the excavated pit below.

I take the empty space on the rail directly ahead of me, finding myself
between a veteran rider with a grizzled beard on my left and a woman who
looks a few years older than me on the right. Then I see who’s below and
my heart stops.



Xaden. And he is shirtless.
So is the other rider as they circle each other, their fists raised like

they’re sparring. But there’s no mat beneath them, only a packed-dirt floor
decorated with suspicious spatters of crimson, both old and fresh.

They’re equally matched in height, but the other rider is bulky, built like
Garrick, and looks to have about twenty pounds on Xaden, who’s cut in
deep, muscular lines.

The rider swings for Xaden’s face, and I white-knuckle the rough
railing, holding my breath as Xaden easily evades the punch, delivering one
of his own to his opponent’s ribs. The riders around me cheer, and I’m
pretty sure I see money change hands across the pit.

This isn’t sparring. This is straight-up fighting.
And the way Xaden hit him? He’s holding back.
“Why are they…” I ask the silver-barred lieutenant next to me, my

words dying as Xaden dips and spins, avoiding another attempted hit.
There’s a definite sparkle in those dark eyes as he deftly jumps back again,
denying his opponent’s strike.

My pulse jumps. Damn, he’s fast.
“Fighting?” The woman finishes my question.
“Yes.” I keep my gaze centered on Xaden, who lands quick, consecutive

punches to the other rider’s kidneys.
“There’s only one pass for lieutenants this weekend,” she says, moving a

little closer. “Jarrett has it, and Riorson wants it.”
“So they’re fighting for it?” I peel my eyes from Xaden long enough to

glance sideways at the rider beside me. She has short brown hair, sharp,
birdlike features, and a thumbprint-size scar on her jawline.

“Leave and pride. Lieutenant Colonel Degrensi’s rules. You want it? You
fight for it. You want to keep it? You’d better be good enough to defend it.”

“They have to fight for passes? Isn’t that brutal?” And wrong. Extreme.
Horrible. “And detrimental to wing morale?” He’s fighting so Sgaeyl will
have time off to spend with Tairn, so he’ll have time with me.

“Brutal? Hardly.” She scoffs. “No blades. No signets. It’s just a fistfight.
You want to see brutal, go and visit one of the coastal outposts with nothing



to do but turn on one another.” She leans forward and shouts as Xaden
deflects the next punch, then grabs Jarrett by the biceps and throws him to
his back. “Damn. I really thought Jarrett was going to take him in less
time.”

A slow, proud smile spreads across my face.
“He won’t take him at all.” I shake my head, staring at Xaden with more

than a little delight as he waits for Jarrett to gain his feet. “Xaden’s playing
with him.”

The rider turns toward me, her gaze scanning me in clear assessment,
but I’m too busy watching Xaden land hit after carefully placed hit to
bother with what the lieutenant thinks about me.

“You’re her, aren’t you?” the rider asks, her appraisal pausing on my
hair.

“Her who?” Here we go.
“Lieutenant Sorrengail’s sister.”
Not General Sorrengail’s daughter.
Not the cadet Xaden is stuck with because of Tairn.
“You know my sister?” That earns her a glance.
“She has a hell of a right hook.” She nods, her knuckles grazing the scar

on her jaw.
“She does,” I agree, my smile widening. Looks like Mira left her mark.
Xaden lands a solid hit to Jarrett’s jaw with a crack.
“It appears Riorson does, too.”
“He does.”
“You sound pretty confident.” She turns her attention back to the fight.
“I am.” My confidence in Xaden is almost…arrogance. Gods, he’s

beautiful. The mage lights illuminating the chamber highlight every carved
line of roped muscle on his chest and abs and play off the angles of his face.
And when he turns, the hundred and seven scars that mark his back catch
the light under Sgaeyl’s relic.

I stare. I can’t help it. His body is a work of art, honed to lethal
perfection. I know every inch of it, and yet I’m still gawking, transfixed like
it’s the first time I’ve seen him half-dressed. This should absolutely not be



turning me on, but the way he moves, the lethal grace in each and every
calculated strike…

Yep. Turned on.
Maybe it’s toxic as hell, but it’s pointless to deny that every single part

of me is attracted to every facet of Xaden. And it’s not just his body. It’s…
everything. Even the darkest parts of him, the parts I know are merciless,
willing to annihilate anyone and everyone who stands between him and a
goal, pull me in like a moth to a fucking flame.

My heart pounds like a drumbeat and my stupid chest aches just
watching him maneuver around the floor of the pit, toying with his
opponent. I’ve missed watching him in the gym, sparring with Garrick. I’ve
missed being with him on the mat, feeling his body over mine as he puts me
on my back over and over again. I’ve missed the tiny moments in my day
when our eyes would meet in a crowded hallway, the bigger moments when
I’ve had him all to myself.

I’m so damn in love with him that it hurts, and for the moment, I can’t
remember why I’m denying myself.

The rider on my left shouts, and Xaden’s gaze jerks upward, colliding
with mine.

Surprise registers on his features for all of a heartbeat before his
opponent swings, his fist slamming into Xaden’s jaw with a sound that
makes my stomach twist.

I gasp as Xaden’s head snaps sideways with the force of the blow.
He staggers backward to the cheers of the riders around me.
“Stop playing around and end it,” I say through our bond, using it for

the first time since Resson.
“Always so violent.” He thumbs a drop of blood off the split in his lower

lip, his gaze flashing to mine, and I swear I see a hint of a smile before he
turns on Jarrett.

Jarrett swings once, then twice, missing Xaden both times.
Then Xaden strikes with two quick punches, putting his full weight

behind them unlike before, and sending Jarrett to his hands and knees in the



dirt. Jarrett’s head hangs as he shakes it slowly, blood dripping from his
mouth.

“Damn,” the rider next to me says.
“Exactly.” Is it wrong to smirk? Because I can’t seem to control my

facial muscles.
Xaden stands back as the riders fall silent in the chamber, and then he

extends his hand.
Jarrett’s chest heaves for a tense minute before he looks up at Xaden and

shoves away the offered hand. He taps the floor twice, and while some
riders around me groan—and yes, that’s money changing hands in the form
of gold coins—others clap a couple of times. Jarrett spits blood onto the
floor, then stands upright, nodding at Xaden respectfully.

The match—if that’s what this can be called—is apparently over.
The riders head my way, filtering past me for the door.
Xaden says something to Jarrett that I can’t hear, then uses the metal

rungs embedded into the stone’s masonry at the far end of the pit to climb
out.

He reaches the top, then takes his shirt from where it’s draped across the
railing and comes in my direction, watching me with enough heat in his
gaze to set my already humming body on fire. Yeah, definitely can’t
remember why I’m denying myself any part of this man.

“Looks like he won the pass,” the woman next to me says. “I’m Cornelia
Sahalie, by the way.”

“Violet Sorrengail.” I know it’s rude, but I can’t make myself look away
from Xaden as he turns the corner, approaching from the left.

He runs his tongue over the small cut at the side of his lower lip as if
testing it, then tugs his shirt on. Taking away the show should cool my
blood, but it doesn’t. Pretty sure dumping a bucket of snowy slush from the
nearby peaks over my head couldn’t lessen the heat, either. I’d probably just
steam.

Gods, I’m screwed when it comes to this man.
It doesn’t matter that he hurt me, didn’t trust me.
I don’t even know if I trust him.



But I want him.
“Good job, Riorson,” Lieutenant Sahalie says to Xaden. “I’ll tell the

major to take you off the patrol roster for forty-eight hours.”
“Twenty-four,” he corrects her, his eyes on me. “I only need twenty-four

hours. Jarrett can have the other twenty-four.”
Because I’ll be gone.
“Suit yourself.” She clamps Jarrett on the shoulder in consolation as he

walks by, then follows him out.
We’re alone.
“You’re early,” Xaden says, but the look in his eyes is anything but

condemnation.
I lift a brow and try to ignore the way my palms itch to touch him. “Is

that a complaint?”
“No.” He shakes his head slowly. “I just wasn’t expecting you until

noon.”
“Turns out Tairn flies pretty damned fast when he’s not being held back

by a riot.” Gods, why is it so hard to breathe suddenly? The air between us
is thick, and my heart thrums as my gaze wanders to his mouth.

He’s killed people for me before, so why is him fighting for a weekend
pass stripping every ounce of self-control straight out of my bloodstream?

“Violet.” Xaden’s voice drops to that low, quiet tone he only ever uses
when we’re alone, and usually naked. Very naked.

“Hmmm?” Gods, I miss the feel of all his skin against all of mine.
“Tell me what’s spinning around that beautiful head of yours.” He

moves closer, invading my space without touching me.
Fuck, I want him to touch me, even if it’s a bad idea. A really, really bad

idea.
“Does it hurt?” I lift my fingertip to the corner of my lip where his is

split.
He shakes his head. “I’ve had worse. It’s what I get for blocking with

my shields to concentrate on the fight. Otherwise, I would have felt you.
Look at me.” He takes my chin between his thumb and forefinger and
gently tilts my head back before searching my eyes. “What are you



thinking? Because I can read a lot into the way you’re looking at me, but
I’m going to need the words.”

I want him. How hard is that to say? My tongue ties. What would giving
into this insatiable need for him mean?

That you’re human.
“I’m about three seconds away from carrying you up to my bedroom to

continue this conversation.” His hand slides along my jaw, his thumb
caressing my lower lip.

“Not your room.” I shake my head. “You. Me. Bed. Not a good idea at
the moment.” Too tempting.

“As I remember—which I do, often—we don’t always need a bed.” His
other hand palms my waist.

My thighs clench.
“Violet?”
I cannot kiss this man. I can’t. But would it really be the end of the

world if I did? It’s not like it would be the first time. Shit. I’m going to
break. Even if it’s only for this moment.

“Hypothetically, if I wanted you to kiss me but only kiss me—” I start.
His mouth is on mine before I finish.
Yes. This is exactly what I need. My lips part for him, and there’s no

hesitation in the glide of his tongue against mine. He groans, and the sound
reverberates through my very bones as I wrap my arms around his neck.

Home. Gods, he tastes like home.
I hear the door shut a second before my back is pressed against the

rough wall of the chamber. Xaden slides his hands beneath my thighs, then
lifts me so we’re level as he lays expert claim to every line and recess of my
mouth like this is the only time he’ll get. Like kissing me is more vital than
his next breath. Or maybe that’s the way I’m kissing him back. Whatever. I
don’t care who is kissing whom as long as we don’t stop.

I lock my ankles at the small of his back, bringing our bodies flush, and
my breath catches at the heat of his skin radiating through the fabric of his
uniform and my leathers, and suddenly it’s too much and not enough.



This was a bad idea, a teasing taste of everything I want, and yet I can’t
bring myself to stop. There’s nothing outside this kiss. No war. No lies. No
secrets. There’s only his mouth, his hands sweeping up my sides, his desire
matching the fire of mine. This is where I want to live, where nothing else
matters but the way he makes me feel.

“Like a moth to a damned flame.” The lament slips from my mind, into
our mental pathway. He’s gravity, pulling me back to him by the force of his
existence.

“I’m more than willing to let you burn me.”
Wait, that’s not what I meant—
He cradles the back of my head, protecting me from the coarse stone,

and angles for a deeper kiss. Gods, yes. Deeper. More. I can’t get enough.
I’ll never get enough.

Energy arcs between us, hotter with every kiss, every flick of his tongue.
Flames of need dance across my skin, leaving chills in their wake before
settling deep within me, burning dangerously, reminding me that Xaden
knows exactly how to sate this unquenchable desire.

He has the maddening ability to addict and satisfy all in the same breath.
My hands slide into his hair as his lips slip down my throat, and my

pulse leaps when he finds that sweet spot right above the collar of my flight
jacket, then mercilessly worships it with his mouth.

I’m instantly liquid, melting into him.
“Gods, I’ve missed the taste of you.” Even his mental voice comes

across as a groan. “The feel of you in my arms.”
I bring my hands to his face and pull him back to my lips. He sucks my

tongue into his mouth, and I whimper because I can say the exact same
thing about him—I’ve missed everything about his taste, his kiss, him.

If any of those buttons on my flight jacket come undone, they’re all
coming undone.

The slant of his mouth over mine again and again makes me feel alive
for the first time since… Gods, I can’t even remember. Since the last time
he kissed me.



His hand squeezes my waist gently, then stretches up, the tips of his
fingers reaching just beneath my breasts. Fuck it, the jacket can come off.
So can the top. The armor. Everything that separates me from him.

I reach for the buttons.
But he eases his kiss, taking it from urgent and deep to thorough and

deliciously slow. “We should stop.”
“What if I don’t want to?” The physical sound that leaves me is pure

denial. I’m not ready for this to end, not ready to return to the reality where
we’re not together, even if I’m the one standing in our way.

“We have to, or I won’t be able to keep to the only kiss limitation of your
hypothetical question.” His hand drifts to my ass as his mouth softens,
drawing on my lower lip with one last, lingering kiss. “Fuck, I want you.”

“Then don’t stop.” I look him in the eyes so he knows I mean it. “We
can keep it to nothing but sex. We did last year… Not that it worked well.”

“Violet.” It’s part plea, part moan, and the war in his eyes makes my
chest tighten. “You have no idea how badly I want to peel these pants off
your amazing ass and fuck you until you’re hoarse from screaming my
name, so limp from orgasms that you can’t fathom leaving my bed ever
again, and every tree around here goes up in flames from lightning strikes.”
His hand slides from behind my head to the nape of my neck. “Until you
remember exactly how good we are together.”

“I never forgot.” It’s a whimper. My body is still humming.
“I’m not talking about physically.” He leans in and kisses me softly.
It’s sweet. Tender. Everything I don’t want to feel. Not when it comes to

him. Heat and lust, I can cope with. But the rest? “Xaden,” I whisper,
shaking my head slowly.

He studies my face for a heartbeat and masks the flash of
disappointment with a half smile.

“Exactly.” He gently lowers me back to my feet, then steadies me,
holding on to my waist when my knees wobble. “I want you more than my
next breath, but I can’t fuck you into looking at me like you used to. I refuse
to use sex as a tool to get you back.” He takes my hand and presses it to my
chest. “Not when I want to be here.”



My eyes widen, and apprehension knots my stomach.
“That’s what I thought.” He sighs, but it’s not defeat tightening his

mouth. It’s frustration. “You still don’t trust me, and that’s all right. I told
you I’m not in this for a battle. I’m winning the damned war. I’m a fucking
fool for saying this, but when haven’t I been a fool when it comes to you?”

“Excuse me?” I bristle. His memory must be faulty, because I’m the one
who’s been the fool for him.

“Let me get this out.” He glances at my mouth. “I’ll kiss you whenever
you want because my self-control is shit where you’re involved—”

“Whenever I want?” My brows shoot up. What the hell is happening
right now?

“Yes, whenever you want, because I’ll live with my mouth attached to
yours if I do it whenever I want.” He retreats a couple of steps, and I
immediately miss the feel of his hands, the warmth of his skin. “But I’m
begging you, Violet. Don’t offer me your body unless you’re offering me
everything. I want you more than I want to fuck you. I want those three
little words back.”

I stare at him, my mouth dropping open slightly. He’s not asking to hear
that I want him. He wants to hear that I love him.

“It’s new territory for me, too.” He rakes his hands through his hair. “No
one is more surprised than I am, trust me.”

“I’m sorry, but weren’t you the one last year who said we could have all
the sex we wanted as long as we kept feelings out of it?” I fold my arms
across my chest.

“See? Fucking fool.” He looks up at the rough-beamed ceiling like it has
the answers. “Last year, I would have used any method it took to win you
back, but for those three days you were unconscious, all I did was sit there
and watch you sleep, thinking of everything I would have done differently.”
Determination is etched on every line of his face when he brings his gaze
back to mine. “This is me doing things differently.”

Somehow in the last month, we’ve managed to switch roles.
“This is me proving myself to you.” He steps back and pulls the door

open, gesturing for me to walk out first, then rests his hand on the small of



my back as we walk down the hall. “We’re not there yet, but you’ll trust me
again at some point.”

“Sure, as soon as you agree to stop keeping secrets from me.” How the
hell is this my fault?

His sigh sounds like it’s ripped out of his very soul. “You need to trust
me even with secrets for this to work.”

I grab onto the stair railing and take the stairs two at a time. “That’s not
going to happen.”

“It will,” he says as we near the ground floor, then changes the subject.
“Are you hungry?”

“I need to wash up first.” My nose crinkles. “Pretty sure I smell like I’ve
been flying eight hours.”

“Why don’t you head on into my room, and I’ll bring food.” His hand
slips from my lower back as we make our way into his barracks room. He
points to the left and says, “That door leads to a private bathing chamber.”

“There’s no way you got a private bathing chamber as a brand-new
lieutenant,” I sputter. “Mira doesn’t even have one.”

“You’d be amazed what you can get when no one wants to share space
with Fen Riorson’s son,” he answers quietly.

My stomach sinks. I can’t think of a single thing to say to that.
“Don’t look so sad. Garrick has to share with four other riders. Go.” He

motions to the door again. “I’ll be right back.”
An hour later, I’m clean and fed, and Xaden is sitting at his desk,

fiddling with something that looks like a crossbow but smaller, as I sit on
his bed and run a brush through my damp hair. I can’t help but smile at the
steady feeling of what’s becoming routine, Xaden preparing a weapon while
I sit on a bed.

“But they didn’t search Tairn?” he asks without looking up.
“Nope, just dumped my stuff on the ground.” My gaze catches

momentarily on a palm-size gray stone with a decorative black rune on his
nightstand before I spot a piece of grass that made the journey here from the
flight field and flick it off my arm. “Did they search Sgaeyl?”



He shakes his head. “Only me. And Garrick. And every other new
lieutenant leaving Basgiath with a rebellion relic.”

“They know you’ve been smuggling something out.” I lean over the
edge of the high bed and drop my brush into my bag. “Toss me a sharpening
stone.”

“They suspect.” He reaches into the top right drawer of his desk, taking
out the heavy, gray sharpening stone. He leans over to hand it to me, careful
not to brush his fingers along mine, and then goes back to tinkering with his
weapon.

“Thank you.” I grip the stone, then take the first knife from my thigh
sheath and begin sharpening. They’re only as good as they are honed. But
no amount of busying my hands is going to make the next question any
easier to ask without feeling like I’m now the one keeping things from
Xaden.

I choose my words carefully. “When we were at the lake, before Resson,
you said the only thing that can kill a venin is what powers the wards.”

“Yes.” He leans back in his chair, one eyebrow raised, his bow forgotten.
“The daggers are made of the material that powers the wards,” I guess.

“The alloy Brennan mentioned.”
Xaden opens the bottom drawer and moves some things around before

pulling out a replica of the dagger I used to kill the venin on Tairn’s back.
He walks over to me and holds it out, hilt first.

I take it from his hand, and the weight and hum of power coming from
the blade are instantly nauseating—whether from the energy or the memory
of the last time I held one, I’m unsure. Either way, I breathe deeply and
remind myself I’m not on Tairn’s back. There’s no one trying to kill me or
him. I’m in Xaden’s bedroom. Xaden’s very warded bedroom. Safe. No
safer place on the Continent, really.

The blade itself is silver, sharpened on both edges, and the hilt is the
same matte black of the one I used in Resson, the same that had been in my
mother’s desk last year. I run my finger along the medallion in the hilt that’s
a duller gray and decorated with a rune.



“That piece is the alloy.” He sits next to me on the bed. “The metal in
the hilt. It’s a specific blend of materials smelted into what you see there.
It’s not power in itself, but it’s capable of…holding power. The wards
themselves originate from the Vale, near Basgiath, but they only reach so
far. These”—he taps the medallion—“hold extra power to boost the wards
and extend them. The more material, the stronger the wards. There’s an
entire armory of them downstairs, boosting the wards. The details are
classified, but that’s why outposts are placed strategically, to keep our
borders from developing weak points.”

“But how could the wards ever falter if these power them constantly?” I
brush my thumb over the alloy, and my own power rises, charging the air.

“Because they only hold so much power. Once it’s used, it has to be
imbued again.”

“Hold on. Imbued with power?”
“Yes. Imbuing is a process of leaving power in stasis, in an object. A

rider has to pour their own power into it, which is a skill not a lot of us
have.” He glances meaningfully at me. “And don’t ask. We’re not getting
into how that works tonight.”

“Have they always been placed in daggers?”
He shakes his head. “No. That started right before the rebellion. My

guess is Melgren had a vision of how an upcoming battle is going to go and
these were central to his victory. Once Sgaeyl chose me at Threshing, we
started to work to smuggle out a few daggers at a time to supply what drifts
we could make friendly contact with.”

“Aretia needs a forge to smelt the alloy, to make more weapons.”
“Yes. It takes a dragon to fire a crucible, which we have, and a luminary

to intensify dragonfire hot enough to smelt,” he says.
I nod, staring at the thumb-size medallion. How can something so small

be the key to our entire continent’s survival? “So you just put the alloy into
a dagger and get an instant venin killer?”

A smile tugs at his mouth. “It’s a little more complicated than that.”
“What do you think came first?” I ask, studying the dagger. “The wards?

Or the ability to boost them? Or are they intertwined?”



“That’s all classified.” He takes the dagger back and returns it to the
desk drawer. “So how about we work on your shields instead of worrying
about Navarre’s?”

I yawn. “I’m tired.”
“Aetos won’t care.” He slides into my mind easily.
“Fine.” I lean back, bracing my weight on my palms, and build my

mental shields quickly, block by block. “Do your worst.”
His smile makes me regret the challenge.

OceanofPDF.com



Though the chain of command may be consulted, the final say in any
academic punishment or repercussion lies with the commandant’s

office.

—ARTICLE FIVE, SECTION SEVEN THE DRAGON RIDER’S CODEX



CHAPTER THIRTEEN

“You wouldn’t happen to know how to raise wards, would you?” I ask
Tairn as we approach Basgiath from the southeast the next day,

squinting into the afternoon sun. The headwind added an extra couple of
hours onto the flight, making my hips protest and almost outright rebel.

“Despite what you may assume, I am not six hundred years old.”
“Figured I’d ask, just in case you were holding back secret dragon

knowledge.”
“I’m always holding back secret dragon knowledge, but wards are not

among it.” His shoulders tense, rising slightly, and the beats of his wings
slow. “We’re being ordered to the practice grounds. Carr and Varrish are
waiting.”

My stomach plummets even though our altitude hasn’t changed. “He
threatened he’d be pondering my punishment for not forcing Andarna to
participate in maneuvers. I should have taken his warning more seriously.”

Tairn’s low growl vibrates through his entire body. “What are your
wishes?”

“Not sure I get a choice.” A deep sense of foreboding crawls into my
throat.

“There is always a choice.” He maintains direction even though he’ll
have to bank soon to change course to the practice grounds.



I can handle whatever he wants to punish me with if it means keeping
Andarna safe.

“We go.”
An hour later, I’m not so sure I’m handling anything as much as I am

enduring.
“Again,” Professor Carr orders, his thin white hair flopping with every

gust of wind as we stand on the mountain peak we use when training my
signet.

And to think…this is only a warning.
Fatigue washes over me again, but I know better than to complain. I’d

made that mistake somewhere around strike twenty-five, and it had only
added another mark to the tab Professor Carr was keeping in his notebook
while Major Varrish supervised from his side.

“Again, Cadet Sorrengail.” Varrish repeats the command, smiling at me
like he’s simply exchanging pleasantries. Their dragons, Breugan and Solas,
stand as far back as possible without falling off the mountain. Tairn had
lunged for their necks, snapped, and pulled back with inches to spare
around strike thirteen. It was the first time I’d ever seen dragons scurry.
“Unless you’d rather spend the foreseeable future in the brig.”

Tairn’s chest rumbles in a low growl as he stands behind me, his claws
digging into the bare rock of the mountaintop. There’s only so much he can
do, though. While he’s bound by the Empyrean, I have to follow the rules of
the quadrant or risk the brig—and I’d rather bring down a thousand
lightning strikes than spend one night locked in a cage at Varrish’s mercy.

When I don’t move, Carr sends me a pleading look, his gaze darting to
Varrish.

I sigh but lift my hands, my arms trembling as I reach for Tairn’s power.
Then, I ground my feet in the mental construct of the Archives in my mind
so I don’t slip away into the fire that threatens to consume me. Swift and
fast, the power rises again, and sweat beads on my face and drips down my
spine as I struggle to control it.

Anger. Lust. Fear. It’s always the most extreme of my emotions that
bring on the strikes. It’s rage that fuels me now as I summon that sizzling



hot energy and release it, cracking open the sky with another lightning
strike that hits a nearby peak.

“Thirty-two.” Carr jots it down.
There’s no care for if I can aim. Not a single consideration for mastery

or strength. Their only goal here is to wear me down, while mine is to hold
on to whatever scraps of self-control I can muster so I don’t wake Andarna.

“Again,” Varrish orders.
Gods, my body feels like it’s cooking itself alive. I reach for the buttons

on my flight jacket and yank them open, letting some of the infernal heat
escape.

“Violet?” Andarna asks sleepily.
Guilt slams into me harder than a lightning strike. “I’m fine,” I promise

her.
“Waking is dangerous to the growth process,” Tairn lectures. “Sleep.”
“What’s happening?” She’s alarmingly alert now.
“Nothing I can’t handle.” Not quite a lie. Right?
“I’ve never seen her produce more than twenty-six strikes in an hour,

Major. She’s at risk of overheating and burning out if you continue to push
like this,” Carr says to Varrish.

“She can take it just fine.” He looks at me like he knows. Like he was
there at Resson, watching me hurl bolt after bolt at the wyvern. If he’s the
picture of control, then maybe I should be glad I don’t seem to have any.

“All it takes is her slipping in her grounding, or exhausting her
physically, and she will burn out,” Carr warns, his gaze shifting nervously.
“Punishing her for insubordination is one thing, but killing her is quite
another.”

“Again.” Varrish lifts his brows at me. “Unless your golden one would
like to fly up and say hello, since she failed to appear as ordered. If she
joins us, we’ll only task you with three more.”

“This is about me?”
My shoulders drop and my stomach hits the ground.
“This is an example of what happens when dragons choose poorly,”

Tairn counters. “Solas should never have given this barbarian more



power.”
“I don’t want to submit her for tests or anything barbaric,” Varrish

cajoles, as though he’d heard Tairn’s words. “I just want her to understand
that she is not above the structure of command.”

“I fucking hate him,” I tell Tairn.
“I can feel this draining you! I’ll come—” Andarna starts.
“You’ll do no such thing, or you risk every feathertail in the Vale,” I

remind her. “Do you want someone who takes joy in the pain of others like
Varrish bonding a hatchling?”

Andarna growls in pure frustration.
Tairn angles his wing, directing the cooling wind over my scalding skin.
“Well?” Varrish asks, tugging his cloak around him as steam rises from

my body.
Tairn snarls.
“Humans do not command dragons, and that includes you.” I lift my

impossibly heavy arms and reach for power again.
Around strike forty, my knees buckle and I crumple to the hard rock.

The ground rushes up at me, and I throw out my hands, sending pain
shooting through my left shoulder as the joint partially subluxates from the
impact. My mouth waters from the instant nausea, but I cradle my left arm
and force myself to my knees just to take the weight off the joint.

Extending his neck, Tairn roars so loudly at Varrish and Carr that the
notebook blows out of Carr’s hands and tumbles down the mountain,
vanishing from sight.

“Silver One is done!” he shouts.
“They can’t hear you,” I remind him, breathing through the pain.
“Their dragons can.”
“If she dies, you will summon the wrath of not only General Sorrengail

but General Melgren. Her signet is the weapon generals dream of in this
war.” Carr glances between Varrish and me. “And if that’s not enough to
encourage a degree of caution, Vice Commandant, then remember her death
will cost you two of the most powerful dragons on the Continent and
Lieutenant Riorson’s irreplaceable ability to wield shadows.”



“Ah yes, that pesky mating bond.” Varrish clicks his tongue and cocks
his head to the side, studying me like I’m nothing but an experiment for him
to play with. “One more. Just to prove that you can listen to orders if your
dragon will not.”

“Silver One—”
“I can do it.” I stumble to my feet and pray my shoulder will hold if I

tuck my elbow in tight to my body. For Andarna, for the other hatchlings
protected in the Vale, I can do it.

My muscles shake and cramp, and my shoulder screams as though
there’s a dagger in the joint, but I raise my palms and reach for Tairn’s
power anyway. I make the connection and let the energy flood through me
one more time.

I wield, and lightning crashes.
But my arms cramp as the strike hits the nearest peak, the muscles

twisting and bunching in an unnatural way, causing me to physically hold
the power I usually release right away.

Fuck! I can’t let it go!
“Silver One!” Tairn shouts.
Power lashes through me, extending the strike, which cleaves a section

from the northernmost ridgeline ahead of me. The rock crashes down the
mountain’s slope, and still the lightning flows like an incandescent blade,
cutting away the terrain.

I can’t move. Can’t drop my hands. Can’t even twitch my fingers.
This is going to kill me.
Tairn. Sgaeyl. Xaden. It’s going to kill us all. Fear and pain roll into one,

seizing my mind with the one emotion I can’t afford—panic.
“Cut it off mentally!” Tairn bellows as the strike goes on and on, and in

the distance I hear Andarna cry.
My very bones catch fire, and a scream rips from my throat as I shove

mentally at the doors to my Archives.
The strike ends, and I stagger backward, falling against Tairn’s foreleg

and crumpling between his talons. Every breath is a struggle.
Carr swallows. Hard. “We’re done for the day.”



I couldn’t stand if I wanted to.
Varrish examines the destruction I caused and turns toward me.

“Fascinating. You’ll both be indispensable once you come to heel.” He
turns then, his cloak billowing in the wind as he walks to Solas. “This is the
only warning you’ll get, Cadet Sorrengail.”

The threat hits like a punch to the stomach, but I can’t think around the
blistering heat.

Carr hikes over, then puts the back of his hand against my forehead and
hisses. “You’re burning up.” He glances at Tairn. “Tell your dragon to carry
you directly to the courtyard. You won’t make it from the flight field. Get
food and a cold bath.” There’s something suspiciously close to sympathy in
his eyes as he looks me over. “And while I agree that we do not command
dragons, perhaps you could talk Andarna into making an appearance. You
are a rare, powerful signet, Cadet Sorrengail. It would be a travesty to use
your training sessions in this manner again.”

I’m not a signet. I’m a person. But I’m too damned hot, too tired to
make the words form. Not that it matters—he doesn’t see me that way. Carr
never has. To him, we are the sum of our powers and nothing more. My
chest heaves, but even the cool air of the mountaintop can’t touch the burn
sizzling in my veins.

Tairn wraps his claw around me, securing a talon under each arm to lock
my limp body into position, then launches, leaving Carr beneath us on the
peak.

We’re airborne in an instant. Or maybe it’s an hour. Time has no
meaning. It’s all just pain, beckoning me to let go, to release my soul from
the prison of my body.

“You will not let go,” he orders as we fly toward Basgiath, moving faster
than I’ve ever felt him go before. The air rushing by feels so damned good,
but it’s not enough to reach the furnace in my lungs or the molten marrow
of my bones.

Mountains and valleys pass under me in a blur before I recognize the
walls of the quadrant, but Tairn blows by the courtyard and then plummets
to the valley below.



The river. Water. Cold. Clear. Water.
“I’ve already called for support.”
My stomach lurches as he pulls up to a hover at the last second, my body

swaying from the change in momentum.
“Hold your breath.” It’s his only warning before water covers me from

head to toe, gushing with bone-crushing force, icy from the last of the
summer runoff. The contrast threatens to crack every part of me, to peel me
away layer by searing layer.

I’ve lived with pain my entire life, but this agony is beyond my
capability to endure.

Soundlessly, I scream, air gushing from my lungs as I dangle from
Tairn’s claw, the water forcing the heat from my body, saving me with the
same pummeling blows that tear at my skin.

Tairn yanks my head above water, and I gasp for breath.
“Almost there,” he tells me, holding me in the rapids.
The water beats at me mercilessly but lowers the temperature of my

body until the last of the flames in my bones extinguish.
“Violet!” someone bellows from the shoreline.
My teeth chatter as my pulse slows.
“There.” Tairn walks to the bank—I hadn’t even realized he’d been

standing in the river with me—and deposits me in the long summer grass
beneath the row of trees that grow along the Iakobos.

I lie limp, fighting for the energy to take my next breath as my heart
beats slower and slower. Summoning all my energy, I force my lungs to
expand, to draw in air.

“Violet!” Imogen calls out from somewhere to the right, then falls to her
knees beside me a moment later. “What the hell happened to you?”

“Too. Many. Strikes.” A rough blanket lands on my shoulders as I shake,
water dripping from my nose, my chin, the unbuttoned edges of my flight
jacket, which miraculously made the trip, too. Bone-shattering cold has
replaced all the heat, but I’m breathing normally again at least.

“Oh shit.” Bodhi settles at my other side, reaching for my shoulders,
then retreating.



“You’re so…red.” That’s Eya. I think.
“Glane says it’s burnout,” Imogen says, her hand surprisingly gentle on

my back. “Tairn called for her. What do we do, Violet? You’re the only
lightning wielder I know.”

“I. Just need.” I twist to the side, my legs curling under me, the words
punctuated by the chatter of my teeth against one another. “A minute.” I
look up at the trunk of the familiar sprawling oak tree in front of me and
concentrate on holding myself together.

“Cuir says she needs food now that she’s cooled down,” Bodhi adds.
“A green would know,” Eya says with certainty. “Food it is.”
“How did this happen?” Imogen asks. “Carr?”
I nod. “And Varrish.”
Bodhi’s warm brown face appears in front of mine. “Fuck.” He tugs the

edges of the blanket closed around me. “This is because of Andarna?”
“Yes.”
Bodhi’s eyes widen.
“Are you fucking kidding me?” Imogen’s voice rises. “He used your

signet as a punishment for Andarna not showing for flight maneuvers?”
“That asshole,” Eya seethes, shoving a hand through her dark hair as she

exchanges a look with Bodhi.
After a minute, I find the strength to hold the blanket myself. At least

my muscles are working again. Longing rips through me as I stare up at the
tree, its wide trunk, which I know bears the scar from two knife marks.

I want Xaden.
It’s illogical. He couldn’t have stopped Varrish. I don’t need his

protection. I don’t need him to carry me back to the dorms. I just…want
him. He’s the only person I want to talk to about what happened on that
mountain.

“I think we need to get her back to the dorms,” Imogen says.
“I’ll handle it,” Bodhi promises, capturing my gaze. “This won’t happen

to you again.”
“Tell the humans that I will handle dragon matters,” Tairn says.
“How—”



“You will trust me.” It’s an order.
“Tairn says he’ll take care of it.” I rock forward and force myself to my

feet. Bodhi catches my shoulders gently, wincing when I grimace. “I’m
ready. Let’s go.”

“Can you walk?” he asks.
I nod, looking past him to the tree. “I miss him,” I whisper.
“Yeah. Me too.”
No one carries me. They simply stay at my side, step by step, as we

make our way up the hundreds of stairs that spiral through the foundation
walls and back to the dorms, our footsteps the only sound breaking the
silence around us.

Because no one wants to say what we’re all thinking… If Andarna
doesn’t show up at the next formation, Varrish’s second punishment might
just kill me.
 
 
 

“You get your running landing yet?” Imogen asks on Friday.
Sloane is thrown to the mat again, and we wince from the side of

the gym, our backs to the wall so no one can sneak up behind us. Sloane’s
back has none of that protection and is going to be black and blue
tomorrow.

Unlike Rhiannon, who’s in here leading the extra sparring time she
negotiated for all of our squad’s first-years against some others from Third
Wing, Imogen and I are here in full uniform between classes for only one
reason—Sloane—and her terrifying lack of skill. We were hoping to see
that she’s improved over the week. She hasn’t.

“Tairn won’t let me out of the saddle,” I say quietly, like he isn’t
constantly in my head since my near burnout on the mountaintop.

“I heard that,” he grumbles.
“Only because you’re listening.” When shifting my weight doesn’t help,

I take a step off the wall to relieve the pressure on my tight, red skin. At



least the physical remnant of my near burnout has dimmed to nothing more
painful than a sunburn, but it’s annoying as hell.

“Strengthen your shields and perhaps you won’t require monitoring.”
“Not completing maneuvers? Refusing to bring Andarna to class?”

Imogen gasps with mock surprise. “Aren’t you just becoming the little
rebel?” Her gaze darts over my face, then drops to my neck. “Your friends
still think you lost control during a training session?”

I nod. “If they knew what really happened, they wouldn’t leave my
side.”

“You’d be safer,” she notes.
“They wouldn’t be.” End of subject.
“Keep your eyes on your opponent!” Rhi shouts at Sloane from the

sidelines just as Sloane does the opposite, glancing down as she nears the
edge of the mat, and that’s all her opponent needs, the first-year landing a
jaw-cracking punch that sends Sloane sprawling.

Imogen and I both flinch.
“This is sparring, not a challenge! Come on, Tomas!” Rhi snaps at a

squad leader from Second Wing.
“Sorry, Rhi. Pull it back, Jacek,” the squad leader chides.
“Damn.” Imogen shakes her head and folds her arms. “I get that Jacek’s

channeling some serious anger, but I’ve never seen him hit that hard.”
“Jacek? Like Navil Jacek?” The second-year from Third Wing Jesinia

and I saw hauled away by Markham was listed on the death roll a couple of
days ago.

“That’s his younger brother on the mat,” Imogen says.
“Shit.” Now I feel bad for the guy, even though Sloane is in a similar

situation. “I think Markham had him killed,” I whisper.
“Because he didn’t return a book on time?” Imogen’s eyebrows rise.
“I think he asked for something he shouldn’t have, and yes, I know that

sounds absolutely ridiculous, but there’s no other explanation for him being
found in his room, beaten to death.”

“Right,” Imogen muses. “That only makes sense if he’s one of us.”



To others, it fits in with what Panchek is calling a particularly brutal
start to the year. I’m the only one in our group who hasn’t had another
attempt made on their life.

“You’d better be really careful around your little robed friend if scribes
are running out there ordering the death of riders.”

“Jesinia isn’t a threat,” I protest, but my words die in my throat as I
remember that it was her report that got Jacek taken in the first place.

“Let’s end it,” the squad leader from Second Wing suggests after Sloane
gets knocked to the mat again.

“I’m fine!” Sloane staggers to her feet, wiping blood from her mouth
with the back of her hand.

“Are you sure?” Rhi asks, her tone implying it’s absolutely the wrong
decision, which we all know it is.

“Definitely.” Sloane takes a fighting stance against Jacek.
“Glutton for punishment, that one,” Imogen says. “It’s like she wants to

have the shit kicked out of her.”
“I don’t understand.” Aaric shifts ahead of me, his back blocking the

view, and I maneuver to see the mat. “I thought everyone marked was
trained to fight.”

“Depends on where we were fostered.” Imogen moves forward with me.
“And after Xaden started to climb the ranks…well, some of the families in
charge stopped training us, according to what I’m hearing from the first-
years. Good thing she wasn’t on the challenge board this week.”

Jacek puts Sloane on the mat for what feels like the hundredth time, then
brings his knee to her throat, making his point. If this were real, she’d be in
a world of trouble.

“Her first is on Monday, and she’s going to have her ass handed to her if
not worse.” I unsheathe a dagger and flip it, catching it by the tip, like my
skills can in any way help her when she won’t even speak to me.

“Monday?” Imogen turns slowly to look at me. “And how would you
know that?”

Shit. Well, it’s not like she isn’t already holding almost every secret that
could get me killed. “Long story, but…a book my brother wrote.”



“Who is Sloane up against?” She pivots back toward the mat.
“You’re not going to ask about the book I shouldn’t have?”
“No. I, unlike some people, don’t feel the need to know everything

someone else deems private.”
I scoff at the obvious dig. “Yeah, well, you’re not sleeping with me.”
“You wish you were my type. I’m phenomenal in bed.” Her nose

scrunches when Sloane face-plants into the mat. “Seriously. Who is she
against?”

“Someone she can’t beat.” A first-year from Third Wing who moves like
she’s been sparring since birth. It had taken me the better part of an hour to
find someone who could point the girl out earlier in the gym.

“I’ve offered to help her,” Imogen says quietly. “She won’t take it.”
“Why the hell not?” I catch my knife, flipping it with total muscle

memory.
Imogen sighs. “No fucking clue, but her stubbornness is going to get her

killed.”
I watch Liam’s sister struggle under Jacek’s weight, her face splotchy

and red from the exertion, and blow out a slow, resigned breath, my fist
closing around the hilt of the dagger. The unspoken rule of the quadrant is
to let the strong weed out the weak before they can become a liability to the
wing. As a rider, I should walk away. I should let Sloane rise or fall on her
own merits. But as Liam’s friend, there’s no way I can stand by and watch
her die. “Not on Monday, she won’t.”

“You suddenly develop Melgren’s signet over there?” Imogen retorts,
tucking a chin-length strand of pink hair behind her ear.

“I’m calling it!” Rhi shouts, ending the match, and I breathe a sigh of
relief.

“Not exactly.” Glancing around the gym, I locate Sloane’s opponent for
Monday. “I just need to do a couple of things after physics, but I’ll see you
for our gym session tonight.” What muscles I have are all due to Imogen’s
dedication to torturing me at the weight machines since last year.

“How is that class going for you, anyway?” Imogen asks with a sarcastic
smile, damn well knowing that I couldn’t make it through without



Rhiannon’s help. I might lead our year in history, geography, and every
other subject that crosses over with the scribes, but physics? Not my
specialty.

“Hey, Vi—” A hand curls over the top of my shoulder from behind me,
and my heart surges, beating painfully in my ears.

Not again.
Muscle memory takes over as I spin around, dislodging the grip, and

push my left forearm against a leather-clad chest, catching the assailant off-
balance and allowing me to shove him the few inches backward into the
wall while whipping my dagger to his tattooed throat in one instinctual
motion.

“Hey, hey!” Ridoc’s eyes bulge as he throws his hands up, palms
outward. “Violet!”

I blink quickly as the knot in his throat bobs, scraping the edge of my
blade.

Ridoc. It’s not an assassin. It’s just Ridoc.
Adrenaline pours into my system, and my hand trembles slightly as I

lower the weapon. “Sorry,” I mumble.
“For nearly dissecting my jugular?” Ridoc sidesteps before lowering his

hands. “I knew you were fast, but damn.”
Mortification deprives me of words as heat rushes into my face. I nearly

slit my friend’s throat. Somehow, I find the sheath.
“You should know better than to sneak up on someone,” Imogen

lectures, her calm tone at odds with the knife she clutches in her left hand.
“I’m sorry. Won’t do it again,” he promises, his gaze shifting to worry as

he glances over my shoulder. “I just figured I’d see if you wanted to walk to
physics. Sawyer’s already by the door.”

“Everything all right?” Rhi asks, walking to my side as she slips her
satchel over her shoulder.

“All good,” Imogen answers. “You’re doing a great job as squad leader,
by the way. It was a good idea to get the first-years extra sparring time.”

“Thanks?” Rhi stares at Imogen like she’s grown a second nose.



“See you tonight.” Imogen sheathes her knife and looks at me with more
understanding than I want either of us to have as she backs away. “I’m
going to offer my help to Mairi. Again.”

I nod.
“You sure everything is good?” Rhi asks as I pick up my pack from the

floor and nearly drop it with my jitters. Stupid fucking adrenaline.
“Perfect.” I force the fakest smile known to humankind. “Let’s go to

physics. Yay physics.”
Rhi exchanges a look with Ridoc.
“She’s probably just nervous about the quiz, and I didn’t help by

startling her like a jackass.” He rubs the skin of his throat as we start toward
the door, where Sawyer waits.

Rhiannon’s mouth drops open for a second. “Violet! I thought you said
you had it down? We could have studied again this morning. I can’t help
you if you don’t tell me you need help.”

Isn’t that the truth.
“Just remember, you need two out of three elements when pulling any

flight maneuver,” she recites as Sawyer takes a bite out of an apple and
opens the gym door for us. “Velocity, power, or…”

I scan the first floor of the academic wing as we walk down the hall, my
gaze scouring every alcove, every classroom door for someone who might
jump out at us.

“Violet?”
Wrenching my focus from the stairwell ahead, I find Rhi giving me an

expectant look. Right. She’s asking me about physics and aerodynamics.
“Altitude,” Sawyer answers.
“Right.” I nod as we step into the stairwell. “Altitude.”
“You’re killing me—” Rhiannon starts.
“Now!” someone shouts from behind us.
Before I can react, a bag is thrown over my head, and with one breath,

I’m unconscious.

OceanofPDF.com



There is a natural distrust that must be overcome between infantry
cadets and riders. This exists mainly because riders will never trust

that infantry has the courage to hold the line when dragons arrive, and
infantry will never trust that the dragons won’t eat them.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

I jolt awake as the scent of something acrid fills my lungs, and I swing my
fist, knocking a hand away from my face. Smelling salts.
“She’s up,” a woman in dark blue announces, backing away to confer

with… Professor Grady?
My head buzzes as I sit up, stretching my legs in front of me, and

immediately reach for Tairn. “What’s going on?”
My eyes are slow to adjust to the bright light, but it looks like we’re in

some sort of forest.
“The course humans wouldn’t have to take if they would simply stay

seated, known as RSC,” he growls with surprising frustration, like he’s the
one whose just been drugged and dragged out of the quadrant.

Rhiannon, Sawyer, and Ridoc are on my right, all looking as confused as
I feel. To my left are four second-year riders with Second Squad, Flame
Section, Second Wing designations, looking around the forest in
bewilderment. Nice to see we aren’t the only ones befuddled.

“At least it’s not an assassination attempt.” If it was, we’d be dead,
especially as fuzzy as I feel.

“It will be if we aren’t back at Basgiath when Sgaeyl arrives tomorrow.”
Oh. Shit. “This can’t last longer than a day.” Can it? “If it does, you

should fly back alone.”



Across from us sit two groups of eight infantry cadets—if their blue
uniforms are any indication—in hushed conversation. They’re all…
homogenous. The four men all have the same military-short haircut,
cropped close to their skulls in a fade, and the women wear their hair
slicked back in tight buns. Same dark-blue uniforms, same boots, same…
everything. Only the name tags above their hearts are different, except for
the one with a squad leader designation on their shoulder in each group.

The four of us are all dressed in our summer uniforms, but we’ve each
made our own modifications. My lightweight black top has slits down the
front that give me direct access to the daggers sheathed in my armor at my
ribs. Rhiannon prefers a tunic with sheaths directly sewn in. Sawyer likes
his sleeves short, weapons strapped to his upper arms, and Ridoc never took
the time to see the uniform tailor—he just ripped his sleeves off. We aren’t
even wearing name tags, and the same goes for the squad from Second
Wing.

“And leave you to fend for yourself?”
The forest floor is soft and muddy in patches, and the afternoon sun

streams in between the branches at an angle, which means we’ve only been
unconscious an hour, maybe two at most. It’s nothing but trees as far as I
can see.

“I think that’s the point.” I blink, fighting to bring my brain into sharper
focus. “Promise me, if I’m stuck out here on land nav, that you’ll see her if
you can. We can’t be that far from Basgiath.”

Professor Grady hands each rider a waterskin. “Sorry for the abrupt
change of scenery. Hydrate.”

We all uncork our skins and drink. The water is crisp and cold…but
there’s something else there, too. Pungent. Earthy. And something bitterly
floral that I can’t quite place. I close the skin, cringing at the aftertaste.
Professor Grady really needs to take better care of his skins.

“You all right?” I ask Rhi, who is checking her sheaths for weapons.
“A little dazed, but yeah. You?”
I nod, running my hands down my sides to make sure my daggers are

exactly where I left them. They are. My bag is still strapped to my back,



too.
“They took us in the stairwell?” I look over to see Sawyer rubbing his

temples and Ridoc scratching the tattoo on his neck.
“That’s my last memory.” She nods in agreement, studying the squads

next to and across from us.
“Anyone know where we are?” Sawyer asks the obviously more alert

infantry squads.
The cadets look over at us, but no one answers. Or speaks at all.
“I’m going to take that as a no,” Ridoc drawls.
“It’s a no from us.” The rider from Second Wing with a squad leader

designation lifts his hand in greeting.
“Do you know where—” I start to say toward Tairn, but the usually

crystal-clear connection is muffled, like someone has thrown a blanket over
it. Panic clenches my heart as I realize the same is true for Andarna, though
I don’t risk waking her with questions. “I can’t reach Tairn.”

Rhi’s gaze snaps to mine, and she cocks her head to the side. “Shit.
Feirge, either. It feels like something is…”

“Smothering the connection,” Sawyer finishes.
I set the waterskin down next to me, and the others catch on, doing the

same. What in Dunne’s name did we just drink?
“We’re blocked out,” a rider with a shoulder-length dark-blond braid

whispers.
“Breathe, Maribel,” the squad leader orders, shoving his tan hand into

his dark curls, like he might actually benefit from that suggestion a little
more. “It can’t be for long.”

Ridoc’s hands fist. “This isn’t right. I don’t give a shit if it’s for the
course— we’re not supposed to be cut off from them.”

“Tomas?” Rhiannon asks, leaning forward to look past me.
“Hey, Rhi.” The squad leader waves. “This is Brisa.” He points to a

woman with a shaved head, rich brown skin, and an observant, quick-
moving gaze, and she gives us a curt nod. “Mirabel.” He swings his finger
to the blonde with pronounced flight goggle lines in her pale cheeks and a
fire-wielder patch on her shoulder, and she waves. “And Cohen,” he



finishes. The rider closest to me, with a fast smile, short black hair, and
warm russet-brown skin, lifts his hand in greeting.

“Hi.” Rhiannon nods. “This is Sawyer, Ridoc, and Violet.”
The pleasantries are cut short as Professor Grady marks something in a

folder and clears his throat. “Now that you’re all awake, welcome to the
first joint land navigation exercise.” He pulls two closed maps from the
folder. “In the last two weeks, you’ve been taught how to read a map, and
today you’ll put those skills to use in a practical setting. Were this an actual
operation with the makeup of an outpost, this unit would consist of the
composition you see here.”

He steps away from a woman who must be the infantry professor,
revealing two cadets in pale blue sitting beside a scribe. Their hood is
down, and they’re wearing cream pants with a cream hooded tunic—not
robes—but that’s definitely a scribe.

“Riders and infantry for fighting, a scribe to record the event, and
healers for the obvious reasons.” He motions them forward, and all three
move to stand at the end of the infantry lineup.

The infantry professor wearing captain rank walks up and stops beside
Professor Grady with impeccable posture. “Cadets, rise,” she says.

The infantry squads practically jump to their feet, immediately standing
at attention.

I draw back slightly, surprised at my first instinct, which is to tell the
infantry captain to fuck off because I don’t answer to her. No rider does.

Professor Grady glances our way and nods.
The eight of us stand, but we’re not even at ease. We just are.
The infantry captain looks at us and barely refrains from rolling her

eyes. “This is the shortest course you’ll be conquering together this year, so
try to get to know one another. Fourth Wing, you’re attached to fourth
squad.” She looks around, and one of the cadets directly ahead raises his
hand. “And Second Wing, you’re attached to second squad, just to make it
easy.” A cadet raises her hand on the left. “Your objective is to find the
location marked on the maps and secure it. Once you do, you’ll be
extracted.”



It can’t be that easy.
Professor Grady holds out the maps, and Rhiannon steps forward, taking

both and handing one to Tomas.
One of the infantry cadets starts to step forward but stills.
“Two maps,” Professor Grady says. “Two teams but one cohesive unit.

You’re not used to working together. You weren’t even warned you would
be. But keeping Navarre safe requires teamwork between the segments of
our military. There are times in your careers when you’ll need someone you
can trust in the air or on the ground, and those bonds are forged here at
Basgiath.” He looks between our groups. “We’ll see you tomorrow
afternoon.”

Tomorrow afternoon?
My stomach founders. Tairn won’t see Sgaeyl unless he honors my

request and leaves. And me…I’ll miss the few hours Xaden is here. It will
be another week until I can see him. The disappointment hurts more than it
should.

“Just find the extraction point and secure it? That’s our mission?”
Sawyer asks, eyeing the map like it might bite him. This is not his strongest
skill, for certain.

“No problem.” Ridoc puffs out his chest.
“Oh. Right,” Professor Grady replies. “You see, we have to level the

playing field a little bit. Infantry has been doing land nav since their first
year, so naturally, they might be a little better at it than you.”

Ridoc stiffens.
The infantry cadets smirk.
“And you might notice that none of you eight”—Professor Grady looks

us over—“has the ability to fully communicate with your dragons.”
“Which is bullshit,” Ridoc says at full volume.
A woman on the infantry side gawks.
“It is,” Professor Grady agrees. “It’s not something we do lightly, either,

and your dragons loathe it just as much as you do. You’ve all been dosed
with a particular mixture of herbs that dulls not only your connections but



your signet as well. As frustrating as it is, we’re actually pretty proud of the
concoction, so let us know if you feel any side effects.”

“Besides you cutting off the most important bond we have?” Rhi argues.
“Precisely,” Professor Grady replies.
I reach for my power, but only a tingle fills my fingers. Gods, I feel…

vulnerable, and it really fucking sucks. My mind flies over what the mixture
could possibly be as the two professors walk between our groups.

When Grady reaches the end of our section, he turns, moving backward.
“Oh, and did I mention that there are two groups of you out here? The other
is on the far side of the forest, and while your dragons will be hunting them,
their dragons are hunting you. A few unbondeds joined, too.”

The fuck? My stomach hollows.
Almost every infantry cadet looks faint, and one wobbles where he

stands.
“Infantry, the riders are going to need to lean on your land nav expertise,

but you won’t live without them should you encounter a dragon.” Grady
looks the eight of us in the eye as he backs away. “Try and see that most of
them make it out of here, will you?” He flashes a grin and turns around,
walking into the forest with the infantry professor, leaving us in the middle
of the fucking woods without supplies or our dragons.

We stare at the infantry squad.
The infantry squad stares at us.
The healers look comically uncomfortable, and the scribe already has a

notebook out, pencil at the ready.
“Well, this should be a good time had by all,” Ridoc mutters.
“Did he insinuate that we could die?” the smaller of the healers asks, his

olive skin paling.
“Piss off the dragons and find out,” Sawyer replies.
“You’ll be all right”—I look for his name tag—“Dyre.” I offer him a

smile as I pass on my way to the scribe. Soft red hair frames a creamy white
face almost overcome with freckles as the short woman blinks up at me
with even shorter brown lashes. “Aoife? They drag scribes into RSC?”



“Hi, Violet. I’m currently the first in my year training for the field and
not to be an adept,” she says. “You’re the most powerful rider in yours.
Dyre and Calvin are the best in their years.” She shrugs. “Naturally they
built the strongest team first.”

Ridoc grins. “So you’re saying we’re the team to beat?”
“Something like that.” The scribe fights back a smile.
“Then let’s make sure we don’t get beat,” Rhiannon says before turning

her attention to the map. “Tomas, what do you think?”
He hands a map to Brisa and consults on Rhi’s.
Two hours and several arguments with the infantry later, we’re four

miles from our starting location with another six to go. Rhiannon and Ridoc
examined our map—which marked where we’d been dropped and our
extraction point but didn’t label our location—discussed a route with
Tomas, made sure we all saw it, and then handed it over to the infantry to
agree on a route before we started walking.

“I’m telling you, we’re in the Parchille Forest,” Cadet Asshole—
otherwise known as Calvin—argues with Rhiannon a few steps ahead. He’s
actually gone about fifteen minutes without reminding us that he’s their
ranking officer, so I’m sure we’re due any minute now. “That map doesn’t
resemble any I’ve ever seen for Shedrick, which means we could be headed
the opposite direction we should be. None of these landmarks match.”

“And I think you’re wrong,” Rhiannon counters, keeping her tone even.
I think we’re in the Hadden Woods,” Aoife says, holding her journal

closely. She already has three pages of notes taken. “It’s the only forest
close enough to bring us all by horse, since I doubt your dragons flew us
in.”

I add, “It’s also the only forest close enough for Tairn to stay behind and
see Sgaeyl without causing either of us pain from the separation.”

“Their squad leader is the infantry equivalent of Aetos,” Ridoc mutters
from my right side.

I nod but keep from chuckling.
Cohen throws his head back on Ridoc’s right and doesn’t bother

suppressing his laugh. Guess Dain’s reputation carries across the wings.



“Who is Aetos?” Cadet Quiet asks from Aoife’s left. It’s the first time
the curvy brunette has spoken in hours, but her brown eyes are constantly
moving, taking in our surroundings. I would bet that she’s tied with Brisa—
who is covering our flank with Tomas and Sawyer—for most observant in
our group.

“One of our wingleaders,” I answer. “Kind of like your battalion
commander.”

“Oh.” She nods as Rhiannon and Asshole continue arguing ahead of us.
“You guys function in sections, right?”

“Yep.” The landscape hasn’t changed. The forest is mostly flat, with a
few rolling hills that have been easily scalable. But the heat? Damn, it’s
stifling. I tied my uniform top around my waist about an hour ago, leaving
me in my armor. I have no idea how Aoife is surviving with her hood up,
but she hasn’t removed it. “Squad, then section, then wing.”

“What do we do if we come across a dragon?” she asks.
“First we choose a sacrifice,” Ridoc says. “And then we offer it and

run.”
Her eyes flare wide.
“Don’t be an asshole.” I elbow him in the arm. “Depends on the color,

but a good rule of thumb is to lower your eyes and back away,” I tell the
infantry cadet. “But we can usually hear them coming.”

“Then prepare to be digested,” Cohen adds.
“Oh gods,” the brunette whispers.
“You are now my favorite year-mate.” Ridoc throws an arm over his

shoulder.
“Can I see your map?” Brisa asks from the rear of the formation.
“Don’t you have your own?” Calvin retorts.
Rhi’s head whips toward him. “Give it to her or I cut it out of your

hands.”
He glares at Rhi but passes it back so we can get it to Brisa.
Gods, this grass is high. It’s nearly up to my waist in the places where

the trees don’t shade the ground. I step onto an uneven knob, and my ankle



rolls. Ridoc grabs ahold of me before I can fall, then steadies me without a
word as we continue the climb. “Thank you,” I say softly.

“Are your knees wrapped?” Ridoc asks, concern lining his forehead.
I nod. “Yep. Didn’t do the ankles, though, since I wasn’t exactly

expecting a hike.”
“I have cloth if you need to wrap something,” Dyre calls out from

behind us.
“I’ll keep that in mind, thank you,” I answer.
A guy behind me asks, “Are all scribes this quiet?”
“It’s my job to record, not participate,” she answers.
“Not participating will still get you eaten by a dragon,” he argues.
I assure her, my eyes never leaving his, “I’d never let a scribe get eaten

by a dragon.”
Rhiannon’s voice rises as the argument ahead of us heats. “Because

there’s no way in hell they hauled us out of our rooms and brought us that
far away in four hours.”

“Because your dragons can’t fly that quickly?” Calvin is about an inch
shorter than Rhi and has no problem glaring up at her.

“Because our dragons wouldn’t carry you, dumbass,” Ridoc responds.
Aoife snorts and Mirabel laughs, flanked by the rest of the infantry

squad behind us.
Calvin turns and levels a look at Ridoc. “Have some respect for the

rank.” He taps his shoulder, where there’s an open triangle embroidered
beneath two oak leaves.

“Your rank means exactly jack and shit to me.”
“What, like you’re so above us infantry?” Calvin counters.
“I mean technically, when we’re flying we’re above everyone,” Ridoc

argues. “But if you’re asking if I’m better than you, then the answer is
obviously yes.”

I sigh and watch Calvin’s hands just in case he decides to go for the
shortsword sheathed at his side. It’s not a bad weapon, but they all carry
them. There’s no variation for height or specialization. It’s all so…uniform.



Then again, we were pulled straight out of the hallway, so it’s not like
Ridoc is carrying his preferred bow. Sawyer and Rhiannon are missing their
favorite swords, too.

“Stop pissing him off on purpose,” Rhiannon says, glancing back at
Ridoc as we start trudging up another hill. Maybe this one will give us a
better vantage point than the last. “We’re going to need fresh water, or this
is going to get ugly fast.”

Ridoc grins. “But it’s so much fun!”
She arches a brow.
“Fine.” He puts his hands up. “I’ll let him maintain his delusion of

grandeur.”
“Oh, so you’ll listen to her—”
“She’s my squad leader. You’re not.”
“So, you only respect rider squad leaders,” Calvin prods.
Aoife furiously writes in her notebook.
“Shut it, Calvin,” a cadet from behind me says with more than a little

exasperation.
“You want my respect? Earn it.” Ridoc shrugs. “Cross the parapet, climb

the Gauntlet, survive Threshing, and then we’ll be on equal footing.”
“What, like we don’t go through some shit in the Infantry Quadrant?”

someone behind us challenges.
“See her?” Sawyer says, and I swear I can feel him pointing at me. “She

bonded not only one of the biggest fucking dragons on the Continent, but a
second dragon, and then went into combat against the gryphons a couple of
months ago and came out alive. You go through that kind of shit in your
quadrant?”

The cadets around us fall silent. Even Aoife’s pencil remains poised
above her notebook as she stares at me.

Awkward. And wrong. No one in our little group knows what we’re
really against out there. And my silence? It’s starting to feel a lot less like
self-preservation and more like I’m complicit.

“You’re a Sorrengail, aren’t you?” Mirabel asks. “The commanding
general’s daughter?” She winces. “The hair kind of gives you away.”



“Yes.” There’s no use denying it.
“Your mother is terrifying,” she whispers.
The scribe glances between us before putting pencil to parchment again.
I nod. “That’s one of her more prominent qualities.”
“Hey, guys?” Brisa raises her voice behind us. “I think I know why it

feels like we’re getting nowhere.”
“Why is that?” Rhiannon asks over her shoulder.
“Calvin’s right, but so are you. They gave us two different maps,” she

says as the first of us crest the hill…and freeze.
Even my heartbeat comes to a standstill as Rhiannon throws up her hand

to stop the rest of the group.
An Orange Club—nope, that’s a Scorpiontail—growls at us low in her

throat from where she’s been lying in wait on the other side of the hill. Our
heads tilt to follow the movement as she rises to her full height, dominating
the skyline, her tail whipping behind her.

Baide. Jack Barlowe’s dragon. Or at least she was.
“Amari help us,” Calvin whispers, his panic palpable.
I drop my eyes in deference just like Kaori taught us as my pulse leaps

and my brain fights the urge to panic. “Oranges are the most unpredictable.
Eyes down. Do not run,” I whisper. “She’ll kill you if you run. Try not to
show any fear.” Shit, this is what we should have been talking about instead
of arguing about which quadrant is superior and which forest we’re in.

My chest tightens when my immediate instinct—to reach for Tairn—is
denied. With any other dragon, I would bet against risking the anger of our
dragons by torching us, but the cadets behind us are a whole other story.
And since I killed Jack last year? All bets are off.

She has nothing to lose, and given the hot blast of steam that levels the
grass and makes my face sticky, she remembers exactly who I am.

“Riders!” Rhiannon calls out. “Take the front!” She’s obviously thinking
the same way. “Infantry, guard the healers and scribe!” She glances at me
sideways, careful not to raise her eyes. “Violet, maybe you should—”

Keeping my head down, I push past Calvin to stand in the front,
catching movement in my peripheral vision. “I’m not hiding.”



“What are you doing? It’s going to eat you,” one of the cadets behind us
hisses.

I look over and see a healer, Dyre, a few feet to my right, staring straight
at Baide, his mouth agape.

A growl rumbles up the orange’s throat, and I lunge, gripping the strap
of Dyre’s medical pack and yanking him behind us, passing him to Ridoc,
who quickly shoves him to safety and moves to my side.

“No, she’s not,” Sawyer says, moving forward with Ridoc so the
infantry is behind us. “That’s why we’re taking the front.”

Baide swivels her head, then opens her mouth and curls her tongue, and
I chance a quick glance, catching her hazy golden eyes narrowing to slits as
she arches her neck, changing her angle instead of lowering her head to
strike in the typical—

I inhale sharply. “Rhi, she’s going to blast right past us just like Solas.”
Rhi takes less than a second to assess and decide. “Second Wing,” she

calls back. “Halt and cover the infantry where you are!”
Movement behind us ceases as Baide flexes her claws in the ground and

swivels again, choosing a target.
“It’s… It’s…” Calvin babbles.
“Drop your eyes and shut up,” Rhi orders.
“Gods, they all smell scared,” Ridoc whispers from my right.
“Exactly how pissed at you do you think she is?” Sawyer asks me from

Rhi’s left.
“She dropped a mountain on her rider.” Ridoc sighs like we’re all

fucked, and I couldn’t agree more.
My heart leaps into my throat as Baide prowls backward, lowering her

head to our level. It’s the perfect angle to torch us, but I resist the urge to
look and keep my eyes trained on the grass in front of me.

Hot air gusts in our direction as she scents each of us, starting with
Rhiannon and moving to Sawyer. There are a few muffled cries from the
infantry cadets as she exhales a dank huff of steam, then breathes in again
when directly in front of me.



I fight my racing heart. Last year, I might have accepted death. But this
year…this year, I’m bonded to one of the deadliest dragons on the
Continent.

That’s right. You might hate me, but I belong to Tairn.
And while there’s a good chance Tairn might die if I do, I’m not sure

any dragon is willing to risk his wrath if he doesn’t. Baide draws back, then
darts forward with an open jaw, snapping her teeth shut directly in front of
my nose and pelting my face with saliva.

Holy. Shit.
Someone behind us screams, then fucking runs.
“No! Gwen!” Calvin shouts as Cadet Quiet breaks to the left, sprinting

through the grass.
Baide’s head swings, tracking the movement, and my heart sinks as she

drops her jaw, the side of her tongue visible ahead of me as it curls—
“Down!” Rhi shouts as the other squad leader, Tomas, runs after Gwen,

catching her within a few strides and yanking her back by her uniform in
the same way I’d snatched Dyre from the front, all but throwing her at
Calvin as we drop as ordered. She stumbles to the ground at Calvin’s feet
just as Baide’s nostrils flare.

Heat consumes the air around us at the same second my chest hits the
ground, and I close my eyes like that can block out the sounds of screaming
behind us.

“The Northern Esbens are believed to have been the hatching grounds of
the orange dragon before unification, though, true to their unpredictable
nature, they often chose new valleys in the same range,” I whisper as fire
rages past, fighting to keep my heart from seizing.

I haven’t known this type of terror since Tairn began channeling, and
definitely not since I manifested my signet.

The blast ceases, and Baide snaps her jaws shut, then swings her
massive head in front of us one more time before crouching deeply and
launching directly over us. I drop my gaze as her poison-barbed tail comes
within a foot of me.

And then she’s gone.



We all scramble to our feet, and riders run…toward nothing. Brisa is the
first to reach the charred ground where Tomas had stood. Her hand shakes
as she reaches toward the still-smoking earth. My mouth waters as nausea
rolls through me, but I keep my breakfast down.

Mirabel isn’t as lucky, retching in the grass a few feet away.
“Tomas…” Cohen kneels beside Brisa.
Rhi pivots to face the terrified infantry, her fists clenched at her side.

“And that,” she shouts, “is why you don’t fucking run!”

OceanofPDF.com



There’s a course second year that I can’t tell you about, other than to
say that it’s hell.


My only advice? Don’t piss off anyone else’s dragon.

—PAGE NINETY-SIX, THE BOOK OF BRENNAN



CHAPTER FIFTEEN

When the sun sets the next day and we have yet to reach an extraction
point, it’s clear we’ve failed our land navigation exercise.

All because we didn’t stop to make sure the two fucking maps matched
and now have no clue where we are. Blisters have long since formed and
popped on my feet, my bones ache from sleeping on the ground last night,
and the idea of spending another night out here, just to wander aimlessly
again in the morning, makes me want to scream in frustration.

How could something as simple as land navigation fuck us up this
badly?

We’ve backtracked, crossed two creeks that look like they could belong
on either of the maps, and narrowly avoided an encounter with an ornery
Red Daggertail who—lucky for us—decided a nearby cow looked tastier
than weary, hungry cadets.

As I sit against the trunk of a tree down the slight incline from our
makeshift camp, relieving Ridoc of watch, it hits me that I know a slew of
new names. Not that infantry dies at Basgiath at the same rate riders do,
even though they’re the biggest quadrant, with over a thousand cadets at
any given time, but once they get to their units? The upcoming war will
devour them at a far faster pace.

“Did you get dinner?” Ridoc asks, brushing grass off his pants as he
stands.



“I’ll grab some when I’m done.” I slip my pack from my shoulders and
set it next to me. Not only have I been hiking for two days, I’ve carried
textbooks with me. We all have. “Infantry caught a good amount of rabbit
that should be done cooking any minute.”

“They’re way better at that than we are,” he admits begrudgingly,
ruffling his hair. “You don’t think they’ll let us meander out here forever, do
you?”

“I think whatever they gave us has to inevitably wear off.” I turn my
head and see Cadet Dyre walking toward us with Rhiannon, carrying a
plate. “And our dragons aren’t going to let us perish over our inability to
work together enough to compare two maps. Then again, maybe they will.
We might deserve it, since our stubbornness cost Tomas his life.”

“It’s…” He sighs, waving to the pair as they reach us. “Hey, Rhi. I was
just saying that this whole exercise is a little cruel, don’t you think?
Practicing torture, I get. Navigating land, I understand. Evading capture,
sure. I’ll even make an argument for having to learn what bugs are edible.
But it’s not like other dragons are waiting behind enemy lines to kill us.”

“You’d be surprised,” I mutter, exhaustion getting the better of my
tongue.

“What?” Rhi questions.
“I mean, we really don’t know what’s out there, do we?”
“Hopefully not fire-breathing gryphons,” Ridoc says.
“Right.” Rhiannon tilts her head, studying my face, and I quickly shrug.
“Hi, Dyre.” I muster a smile.
“I brought you dinner.” He looks at me with a reverence I don’t deserve.
“You didn’t have to do that,” I reply.
“I owe you my life, Cadet Sorrengail.” He hands me a plate of roasted

rabbit. “The least I can do is bring you dinner.”
“Thank you.” I set the plate in my lap. “Just do me a favor and keep

your head down next time” Another thing infantry has on us? They carry a
rudimentary set of survival gear—including a mess kit—in their packs at all
times, like they might be deployed at any second. We definitely have a few
things to learn from each other.



“Anything you need. I’m at your service. I owe you a life debt.”
Before I can assure him that he doesn’t, Ridoc claps him on the back.

“I’m going to take Life Debt back to camp.”
I nod in thanks, and the two walk back up the incline to camp. Dyre is

sweet, but he’s been underfoot the entire two interminable days we’ve been
lost in these godsforsaken woods.

“You know what’s out there,” Rhi says as she sits next to me, pulling her
braids over one shoulder.

“What?” I fumble and nearly drop the plate.
“You’ve been attacked by gryphons.” She stretches out her legs and

looks at me skeptically. “So you actually do know what’s out there…right?”
“Right.” I nod a little too quickly, then cover a jaw-cracking yawn with

my hand. My body is at its limit, but I’m sure I can push another couple of
hours to make it through watch.

Her frown is fast but unmistakable. “I’ve got the watch. Your body
needs the extra sleep.”

“I can do it,” I protest.
“You can, but it’s my job to manage the needs of my squad, and you

need sleep. Consider it an order.” There’s no room for argument in her tone.
This isn’t my best friend speaking—it’s my squad leader.

“Order it is.” I stand, brushing the grass off my leathers with one hand
and clutching the plate with the other, then give her a forced, tight-lipped
smile before turning toward camp.

“Vi?”
I look back.
“Something is going on with you,” she says quietly, but there’s no

mistaking the steel in her tone. “I haven’t so much as seen Andarna since
you returned, you’re running with Imogen of all people, you won’t open up
about whatever’s up with you and Xaden, and you won’t talk about War
Games. You might think that I don’t notice that you’re pulling away from
everyone, but I do. You barely eat with us, and every chance we get to
sneak into Chantara, you’re holed up in your room reading.” She shakes her



head, running her hand along the grass. “If you’re not ready to talk, to tell
me what’s going on with you, I want you to know that’s all right—”

“There’s—” My stomach twists as I try to deny it.
“Don’t,” she interrupts softly, her unyielding gaze holding mine. “I’ll be

here when you’re ready because your friendship is precious to me. But
please, for the sake of that friendship, don’t insult me by lying.”

She looks away before I can think of a response.
There’s no sleep that night, but at least there aren’t any nightmares,

either.
 
 
 

A convoy of horses and wagons arrives the next morning, as do the
professors, who have choice words for our failure.

“You were in the Hadden Woods, though none of you could work
together long enough to figure it out. It’s apparent that we have a lot to
learn from each other.” Grady hands each rider a waterskin and smiles as
the infantry professor does the same for her cadets. “Seeing as you were our
top squads, I can’t deny that I’m disappointed, but at least most of you
survived.”

He’s disappointed, but Tomas is dead.
I uncork and drink, tasting something sweet and hard to place as I drain

it.
“Next time, we’ll make sure you have supplies,” he promises. “We

wanted to see how you’d make do this first time out, and now we know.”
First time out. Great. We get to do this again.
The blanket thrown over my dragon bonds lifts, and power rushes

through my veins. I feel like me again.
“Tairn.”
“Behind you,” he answers.
Wingbeats fill the air, and the horses prance nervously as our dragons

land at the edge of the trees, the ground vibrating with the force of their
landings.



“Holy shit,” Calvin says softly, backing away with the other cadets.
“You’re going to have to get used to them.” Ridoc pounds the squad

leader’s shoulder. “They’ll be at the outposts you’re all stationed at once
you take your commands after graduation.”

“Right…but so close?” he whispers.
“Probably closer,” Ridoc whispers back and nods.
The seven of us in black say our goodbyes, then head to our dragons.
“Does it bother anyone else that they just took away our bonds? Our

signets? And then handed them back like it wasn’t…” Sawyer shakes his
head. Even the rhythm of his steps is angry.

“Violating?” I suggest.
“Exactly,” he agrees. “If they did it just then, that means they can do it

whenever they want.”
“It’s a new development this year,” Tairn says, his eyes narrowing on

Professor Grady. “One I do not care for. I could hear you, sense you, but
you could not reply.”

“Tairn isn’t a fan, either.” Gods, I’m so tired. Why the hell would
leadership be developing ways to weaken us? Because that’s what it felt
like, being weakened, being cut off not only from my greatest sources of
strength and support—Tairn and Andarna—but the very power I’ve come to
depend on.

“See?” Rhiannon says. “I know you don’t believe me, but I’m telling
you that things are weird this year. Guarded infirmary doors? Developing
elixirs to muffle our bonds? You were nearly assassinated at assessment.”

“Panchek thinks that was someone looking for revenge on my mother,
and I didn’t say I don’t believe you,” I counter with selective truths.

“You don’t say much, period.” She shoots a look at me.
Keeping secrets from her is going to shred our friendship. Already, I feel

it pulling at the seams. She might be trying to be patient, but it’s her nature
to solve problems and I’m a huge one.

Tairn dips his shoulder at my approach.
“Please tell me you got to see Sgaeyl?” I ask, summoning the energy to

mount. Not sure how, but I manage to climb to his back and settle into the



saddle.
“I did for a couple of hours. That’s all the time I was willing to be out of

range from you, and only after Baide left.”
“And they’re already gone, right?” Why does it feel like my heart is

breaking all over again? Missing Xaden is illogical and annoying and kind
of pathetic, but I can’t make the feeling ebb.

“We will see them in a week.”
So why does every instinct I have scream we won’t?

OceanofPDF.com



My dad hoped I’d go into the infantry like he did. He thought riders
were pompous pricks, and in his defense…we really are.

—RECOVERED CORRESPONDENCE OF LIEUTENANT XADEN RIORSON TO
CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER SIXTEEN

W e’re back in enough time for me to visit the Archives, so I do just
that. If I can’t see Xaden, I may as well spend my time researching.

It’s late afternoon before I can get cleaned up and make my way down
there, and it makes me smile to see Jesinia working at one of the tables with
Aoife.

Aoife looks up at the sound of my bootsteps, prompting Jesinia to, as
well. They both wave and I return the gesture.

I pause at the study table, setting down my book to return as the two
have a quick discussion before Aoife rises and heads to the back of the
Archives. Then Jesinia walks over, carrying what looks to be the notebook
Aoife brought along during the land navigation exercise.

“What are you doing in here on a Sunday?” I sign as she reaches the
study table.

She puts the notebook down on the scarred oak surface and lifts her
hands to sign. “Helping Aoife transcribe her account into the official report
to be filed. She’s taking a quick break. Want to see what she chronicled?”
She picks up the notebook and offers it to me.

“Absolutely.” I nod, then take the notebook and skim Aoife’s neat
handwriting. It’s amazingly accurate, with little details I’d missed, like the
two infantry cadets who’d offered to be the healers’ aides because that’s



their job for the squad. They have designated roles for each mission. I set it
down on top of the book I’m returning to sign. “This is incredible.”

“Glad to hear it’s accurate.” She glances over her shoulder, as if
checking to see if we’re alone, which we are. “The tricky thing is to capture
the truth and not just an interpretation. Stories can change depending on
who tells them.”

If she only knew. How does someone like Jesinia graduate to become
whatever Markham has evolved into? “Can I ask… What book did Jacek
request that got him hauled away and killed?” I sign before I think better of
it.

Her eyes widen. “He was killed?”
I nod. “A few days after we saw Markham take him.”
Her face turns the same shade as her robes. “He was looking for an

account of a border attack that doesn’t exist. I told him there’s no such
record, but he came back three times, certain there was because he’d had
family killed in the event. I recorded the request and sent it up my chain of
command, thinking it would help him, but…” She shakes her head and
drops her hands, blinking back tears.

“It’s not your fault,” I sign, but she doesn’t respond, and it hits me that I
could have been hauled away by Markham last year, but I wasn’t. And
there’s only one logical explanation. I glance around us quickly to make
sure we’re still alone. “Last year, you didn’t record when I asked for a book
that doesn’t exist in your records.”

Her eyes widen.
“Did you?” My hands tremble as I sign. Shit. This is a bad idea. She’ll

be in danger if I bring her into this. But she’s also the best person who can
help me find what I’m looking for, and we only have months.

“No.”
“Why?” I have to know. Everything hinges on her answer.
“At first, because I didn’t want to be embarrassed that I couldn’t find it.”

Her nose scrunches. “Then because…I couldn’t find it.” She looks over her
shoulder at the empty Archives. “We should have a copy of almost every
tome in Navarre here, yet you told me you’d read one that we don’t have.”



I nod.
“And then I looked up wyvern.” She spells out the individual letters

because there’s no sign for the winged creatures. “And nothing. We have no
recorded folklore like what you read.”

“I know.” My heart thrums faster. We’re venturing into dangerous
territory. Her brow knits under her hood. “If you were any other rider, I
would have considered that you have a faulty memory and got the title
wrong, or even the subject matter. But you’re…you.”

I sign slowly so she doesn’t miss a word. “The title wasn’t wrong. I
found my copy.”

She takes a deep breath. “Which means our Archives are incomplete.
There are books in existence we have no record of.”

“Yes.” And now we’re talking treason. I can’t tell her too much, not just
for her own safety but in case…in case I’m wrong about her.

“I sent requests to other libraries looking for a wider collection of
folklore, but the responses made it clear we have the most comprehensive
selection.” Her forehead wrinkles in concern.

“Yes.” Gods, she’s catching on without me even having to tell her.
“Does anyone know what you were doing?”

“I implied that it was a personal passion to collect forgotten folklore
from the border regions.” She winces. “And then I implied that I was
considering compiling a new tome as my third-year endeavor to graduate. I
lied.” Her mouth tightens, and she drops her hands.

“I’m doing a lot of that lately.” Once I’m sure we’re still alone, I
continue. “Have you recorded any that I’ve asked for this year?”

“No.”
Great Dunne. If she’s caught breaking regulation, she won’t just be

denied the adept path; she’ll be expelled from the college—or worse. She’s
already risking so much on my account, if she’s telling the truth.

“You’re looking for something. I knew it the second you lied about
preparing for a debate.” She searches my eyes. “You’re a horrible liar,
Violet.”

I laugh. “I’m working on it.”



“Can you tell me what you’re looking for? I won’t record your requests,
not if you’re thinking the same thing I am.”

“Which is?”
“That our Archives are incomplete, either by ignorance…” She breathes

deeply. “Or intention.”
“Helping me could hurt you.” My stomach sinks. “Get you killed. It’s

not fair to bring you into something dangerous.”
“I can handle myself.” She lifts her chin, and her next gestures are sharp.

“Tell me what you need.”
What can I tell her without endangering her further? Or risking our

exposure? I have no idea if she’s capable of shielding Dain or any memory
reader from her mind. So clearly nothing about battles or venin. But that’s
not what I need, anyway. “I need the most comprehensive texts you have
about how the First Six built the wards.”

“The wards?” Her eyes flare.
“Yes.” It’s the simplest request that could be messily explained by

wanting to research how to strengthen our defenses…if she tells. “But no
one can know I’m asking, that I’m researching. More than my life depends
on it. The older the text, the better.”

She looks away for what feels like the longest minute of my life. She has
every right to pause, to think, to realize just how badly this could go for
both of us. This isn’t a slip of memory, simply forgetting to record a request
from a friend. This betrays her quadrant, her training. Her eyes meet mine.
“I can’t risk Aoife seeing right now, but I’ll find you this week with the first
tome I’m thinking of. One is all I can risk going missing. Saturdays are
usually the day I work the Archives, when it’s quiet. Bring it back then and
I’ll give you another if the first doesn’t have what you need. Only
Saturdays.” She lifts her brows as she signs those last two words.

“When it’s quiet.” I nod in understanding, my stomach flipping with a
mixture of hope and fear that I’m going to get her hurt…or worse. Glancing
over her shoulder, I see Aoife walking our way. “Aoife is coming,” I sign,
keeping my hands where the other scribe can’t see them. “Thank you.”



“But there’s something I want in return,” she signs quickly, angling her
back so Aoife won’t see.

“Name it.”
 
 
 

“You think Sloane has a shot?” Rhi asks on Monday as we watch the
first round of challenges be called out.

My stomach churns with nausea like I’m the one who’s going to be
summoned to the mat. Fuck, I’d actually feel better if it was my name I
knew they were going to call instead of Sloane’s.

“She’ll win,” I answer truthfully.
I pocket the latest letter Xaden left me on my bed—I’ve already read it

four times—as Aaric takes his place on the mat. I glance around and see
Eya waiting with First Squad and offer a fast smile, which she returns. Ever
since she helped me after my near burnout, we’ve developed a weird sort of
relationship. We’re friendly, if not friends, at least.

Turns out Xaden has known Eya since they were ten, according to the
letter. Her mother was active in the government of Tyrrendor, holding a
council seat even though she was a rider, which is uncommon. In fact, most
of the aristocracy chooses to serve in the infantry, just like Xaden’s father,
because riders are discouraged from holding their family’s seats. Not only
are our commissions lifelong instead of the few years an infantry officer can
agree to, but too much power in one person terrifies any king.

“You forgive him yet for whatever it is he lied to you about?” Rhi darts a
meaningful look at my pocket, then folds her arms and glares at a pair of
first-years shoving each other near the edge of the mat. “Stop fucking
around!”

They instantly halt.
“Impressive.” I grin, but it falls quickly. “And it’s hard to talk something

out with him when we only see each other once a week.”
“Fucking first-years,” she mutters, then glances over at me. “That’s a

good point. But you should get some time this weekend. Hey, did Ridoc tell



you he saw Nolon yesterday?”
“He just said he had to take one of the first-years to the infirmary,” I say,

raising one eyebrow in question.
“Trysten.” She nods. “He’s the one with the floppy hair that never quite

stays out of his eyes.”
“Whatever his name is. The guy who shattered his forearm.” I don’t

want to know his name. I already feel responsible for Sloane—who is
currently swaying back and forth nervously across the mat. Emotionally
attaching to any more first-years is just reckless. “Ridoc said that Nolon
couldn’t even see them until after dinner, and there were only a handful of
other cadets in the infirmary.”

“And when he walked out of that secretive room he’s got with Varrish in
the back of the infirmary, he was with an air wielder who looked just as
haggard,” Ridoc chimes in as he sidles up between us. “So clearly Nolon
isn’t doing his best work. Guy needs a month off.”

Aaric delivers a punch to his opponent’s jaw that makes the guy’s head
snap back.

“I give that a seven,” Ridoc heckles from the sidelines.
“Out of ten? Solid eight,” Sawyer counters from the other side of

Rhiannon. “Perfect form.” Then he lowers his voice and adds just for the
four of us, “And I’m still going with the torture theory. I bet they’ve got
gryphon riders in there or something.”

“You think he’s really torturing people back there?” Rhiannon says,
lowering her voice even more.

“I have no clue.” I blink as Aaric elbows his opponent in the throat with
a quick jab that even Xaden would respect. “I would think they’d use the
main interrogation chambers if they were doing something like that. The
ones beneath the school.”

“That’s a fucking nine,” Sawyer calls out.
“Nine!” Ridoc agrees, throwing up his hands with all of his fingers

spread out except a thumb.
I laugh, then gasp as Aaric breaks his opponent’s nose with the heel of

his hand, ending the match. Emetterio declares him the winner, and the



first-year has the decency to make it off the mat before dropping his hand
away from his gushing nose.

That’s a lot of blood.
Sawyer and Ridoc break out in applause, both shouting scores.
“Gods, can that one fight.” Rhi nods slowly in approval as Aaric takes

his place in the squad.
“Well, when you’ve had the best tutors,” I whisper, grateful he’s one

secret she knows about.
“Daddy hasn’t come looking for him?” She glances my way.
“Apparently not.”
Challenges around us come to an end, and the professors call out the

next batch.
“Sloane Mairi and Dasha Fabrren,” Emetterio calls out.
“Hey, Rhi?” I swallow. Squads shift, but ours keeps our mat. That’s the

benefit of holding the reigning Iron Squad patch from last year.
“Hmm?”
“Remember how I said Sloane was going to win?”
“Yes, I remember a comment from ten minutes ago,” she teases. A

couple of our first-years pat Sloane on the back and offer what I hope are
words of encouragement as she walks out onto the mat in front of us.

“Right. Well…” Shit, if I tell her, will she feel honor-bound to report
me? She wouldn’t, and that’s the problem. She’d help me break into the
fucking Archives if I wanted.

If you can’t lie, distance yourself. But this is another thing I don’t have
to lie to her about.

Dasha joins Sloane on the mat, her shiny black hair braided in a single
line from the tip of her forehead to the nape of her neck. She’s petite and
still has the pallor of a first-year who hasn’t seen enough sun, but she’s
nothing close to the shade of green Sloane is turning.

There’s a slight crimson tint to Dasha’s lips that lets me know she had
one of the frosted pastries from the tray I’d placed on her squad’s breakfast
table before they arrived this morning. Now that I’m looking, all of the
members of her squad have that same hue to their mouths.



Oh well. It wasn’t like I knew which one Dasha would eat.
“If you’re going to change your mind and say she’s going to lose, then

don’t tell me.” Rhiannon shakes her head. “I’m nervous about this one.”
“Me too,” Imogen says, taking the empty spot on my right.
“That makes three of us,” Quinn says next to her. “She’s not just a first-

year.”
“No,” I agree, noting that even Dain is watching from the next mat over.

And to think, last year, I’d actually hoped I’d be in a relationship with him.
“Rhi.” I lower my voice. “She’s not going to lose.”

Her gaze narrows. “What are you going to do?”
“If you don’t know, you don’t have to feel guilty about reporting it. Just

trust me.” I slide my hand into my pocket as nonchalantly as possible and
uncork the small glass vial as the two girls nod, each taking a fighting
stance.

Rhi searches my eyes, then nods as well, turning back to the match.
The first-years circle each other on the mat, and I carefully turn the vial

in my hand, letting what I know to be a colorless powder fall from the glass
into the creases between my palm and fingers. I withdraw my hand in a fist,
keeping it tight at my side as Dasha delivers her first blow, a punch straight
to Sloane’s cheek.

The blonde’s skin splits.
“Fuck,” Imogen mutters. “Come on, Mairi, hands up!”
Someone screams from the mat behind us, and we all look over our

shoulders to see a first-year staring lifelessly up at his opponent. Shit.
Killing an opponent during a challenge isn’t cheered. But it also isn’t
punishable. More than one grudge has been settled on these mats in the
name of strengthening the wings.

I suddenly feel a lot less guilty about my plans.
The girls circle again, and Dasha kicks high, catching Sloane on the

unmarked side of her face so hard that her head snaps sideways, and then
her body follows, turning as she falls to the mat, landing on her back.

“That was faster than I expected,” Rhi notes, worry lacing her tone.



“Me too.” I lift my closed fist to my mouth and shift my weight, making
sure that I look as worried as I feel as Dasha follows Sloane down to the
floor. The pair is only a few feet away, so at least I won’t have to skirt my
way around the mat. “Crouch,” I say under my breath to Imogen.

She drops without question. “Come on, Mairi!”
I lower myself, too, panic creeping up my throat at the look on Sloane’s

dazed face as Dasha lands another punch, then another, and another. Blood
spatters the mat.

Yeah, that’s enough.
I wait for Dasha to exhale, then open my palm slightly and cough. Hard.
She breathes in and gets one more hit.
Then she shakes her head and her eyes glaze over.
“Get up, Sloane!” I yell, looking her dead in the eye.
Dasha falls back on her ass, blinks rapidly, her head wobbling as if she’s

been at the pub for the evening.
Sloane rolls to her side and plants her palms on the mat.
“Now,” I order her.
Anger fills her eyes, and she lunges forward toward Dasha.
Dasha’s fist curls, but her swing doesn’t make contact as Sloane buries

her shoulder in Dasha’s stomach. At that angle, she had to have knocked the
breath out of her.

Good. She only has another moment. Maybe two.
Sloane scrambles behind Dasha and then yanks her up and into the

weakest chokehold I’ve ever seen. But hey, if it works.
“Yield!” Sloane demands.
Dasha bucks upward, her strength and focus returning.
“Yield!” Sloane yells this time, and I hold my breath.
Gods, if I judged wrong and Dasha gains the upper hand again…
Dasha finally drops her hand to the mat and taps twice.
My shoulders droop in pure relief as Emetterio calls the match.
“What did you do?” Imogen whispers without looking at me.
“What needed to be done.” We both stand as the first-years do, but

unlike them, we don’t stumble as we gain our feet.



“You sound like Xaden,” Imogen says.
My gaze swings toward her.
“Relax. It’s a compliment.” She smiles. “Liam is immeasurably grateful

right now.”
I swallow past the lump in my throat.
“Not half bad,” Rhiannon says, glancing sideways at me before

watching Sloane take her place with the rest of the first-years in our squad.
“Not good, either.”

“I’ll give the match a six,” Ridoc comments. “I mean, she didn’t lose, so
clearly that rates above a five.”

The next pair takes the mat.
Once today’s challenges are over, I look at Imogen and nod toward

Sloane before heading that direction. “Give me a second,” I say over my
shoulder to Rhiannon.

Imogen jogs to catch up.
“Mairi,” I say as we round the corner of the mat, crooking my finger at

her.
Sloane lifts her chin in the air, but at least she comes. This isn’t exactly

the kind of discussion I want to scream across the gym.
“Ouch.” Imogen points to her right eye as she approaches. “That’s going

to swell shut.”
“I won, didn’t I?” Her voice shakes.
“You won because I took Dasha out for you.” I keep my voice low and

spread my palm wide open, where there’s a trace amount of the shimmering
powder left on my skin.

“No.” She shakes her head. “I won that fair and square.”
“Gods, do I wish that were true.” I huff out a breath. “Ardyce powder,

when combined with an earlier dose of ground lillybelle, disorients
someone for a minute—maybe two, depending on the dose. Similar to being
drunk. Alone, they’re mildly upsetting to the stomach. Together?” I lift my
eyebrows. “They kept you alive.”

Sloane’s mouth opens and shuts once. Twice.



“Damn.” Imogen grins, rocking back on her heels as cadets shuffle past,
heading for the door. “Is that how you got through those first challenges last
year? Devious, Sorrengail. Fucking brilliant, but devious.”

“I did that for your brother,” I tell Sloane, keeping eye contact even
though the hatred shining through hers hurts like hell. “He was one of my
closest friends, and I promised him while he was fucking dying that I’d
look after you. So here I am, looking after you.”

“I don’t need—”
“Wrong tactic,” Imogen lectures. “‘Thank you’ is appropriate.”
“I’m not thanking her,” she seethes, her eyes narrowing on me. “He’d be

here if not for you.”
“That’s some bullshit!” Imogen snaps. “Xaden ordered—”
“You’re right,” I interrupt. “He would. And I miss him every single day.

And because of the love I have for him, it’s okay that you hate me. You can
think whatever you need to about me if it gets you through the day, Sloane.
But you’re going to train. You’re going to accept help.”

“If it’s Malek’s will that I join my brother, then so be it. Liam didn’t
need help,” she retorts, but there’s a touch of fear in her eyes that lets me
know most of this is bluster. “He made it on his own.”

“No, he didn’t,” Imogen argues. “Violet saved his life during War
Games. He fell off Deigh’s back, and it was Violet and Tairn who flew after
him and caught him.”

Sloane’s lips part.
“Here’s the deal.” I take a step closer to Sloane. “You’re going to train

so you don’t get yourself killed. Not with me. I don’t need to be part of your
development era. But you will meet with Imogen every single day if that’s
what she wants, because I have something you want.”

“I highly doubt that.” She crosses her arms, but the effect is ruined by
the rapid swelling of her eye.

“I have fifty of the letters Liam wrote for you.”
Her eyes widen.
“Oh shit.” Imogen’s head jerks toward mine. “Seriously?”



“Seriously.” I don’t look away from Sloane. “And at the end of every
week that you attend and participate in whatever Imogen thinks you need,
I’ll give one of them to you.”

“All of his things were burned,” Sloane sputters. “They were sacrificed
to Malek as they should be!”

“I’ll definitely apologize to Malek when we meet,” I assure her. “If you
want his letters, you’ll train for them.”

Her face turns a mottled shade of red. “You’d keep my brother’s letters
from me? If they still exist, they’re mine. You really are a piece of work.”

“In this case, I think Liam would more than approve.” I shrug. “It’s up to
you, Sloane. Show up, train, live, and get a letter a week. Or don’t.”
Without waiting for whatever snarky response she can come up with, I turn
and leave, walking back toward where Rhiannon is waiting with the upper
years of our squad.

“You. Are…” Imogen shakes her head as she catches up to me. “I see it
now.”

“What?” I ask.
“Why Xaden fell for you.”
I scoff.
“Truthfully.” She puts her hands up. “You’re fucking clever. Way more

clever than I gave you credit for. I bet you keep him constantly annoyed.” A
smile beams across her face. “How glorious.”

I roll my eyes at her.
“And you got Sloane to agree to show up tomorrow morning after

chores,” she tells me. “It was a risky move, but it worked.”
Now I’m the one smiling.

 
 
 

J esinia brings me The Unabridged History of the First Six the next day,
which is not only a three-hundred-year-old text but marked Classified in

the endpapers, and I keep my side of the deal, handing over The Fables of
the Barren.



Then I hide away at every available second to read her book, when
we’re not being lectured by Professor Grady about our inability to check
our egos or getting what feels like pointless Battle Briefs.

But while it goes into detail about the complex interpersonal
relationships of the First Six, and even a little of their battle experience
during the Great War, it simply labels the enemy as General Daramor and
our allies as the isle kingdoms.

Not exactly helpful.
The book Jesinia gives me on Saturday is The Sacrifice of Dragonkind,

by one of Kaori’s predecessors, and goes into why Basgiath was chosen for
the location of the wards.

“Green dragons, especially those descending from the line of
Cruaidhuaine, have an especially stable connection to magic, which some
believe is a result of their more reasonable, defensive nature,” I repeat in a
whisper as I pack to head to Samara that night.

There’s absolutely nothing that could ruin my evening. Not when I’m
about to see Xaden in the morning.

My eyes widen when I open the door and find Varrish standing there
instead of Bodhi, flanked by his two henchmen, and immediately remind
myself to thank Xaden for the wards that deny him entry. A quick step
backward puts me out of his reach.

“Relax, Sorrengail.” He smiles like he didn’t nearly kill me with his
little punishment. “I just came by to check your pack and walk you out to
Tairn.”

I slip my pack from my shoulders and hold it out to him, careful not to
let him touch my skin so he can’t slip through the wards. Then I keep my
eyes locked on his henchmen as they dump my belongings instead of
glancing to my bookcase to be sure my classified tome is hidden.

“It’s clear,” the woman says, and she’s kind enough to put my things
away.

“Excellent.” Varrish nods. “Then we’ll just escort you to your dragon.
You can’t be too careful around here, given the rash of attacks these last few



weeks.” He tilts his head. “Funny that most seem to be focused on those of
you who disappeared during War Games, don’t you think?”

“Not sure I’d ever call assaults ‘funny,’” I reply. “And I don’t need the
escort.”

“Nonsense.” He steps back and gestures into the hallway. “We wouldn’t
want anything to happen to the daughter of the commanding general.”

My heart bolts at an unsustainable rhythm.
“It’s not a suggestion.” His smile slides.
I check my sheaths to be sure my daggers are in place, then walk into the

hallway, feeling the tug of Xaden’s wards as I leave their safety. Every step
I take for the next fifteen minutes is careful, deliberate, and I make sure I’m
never within arm’s reach or striking distance.

“I noticed your squad didn’t have flight maneuvers this week,” Varrish
says as we approach Tairn on the flight field.

“I’ll snack if he makes a move,” Tairn promises, and I start to breathe
normally.

“We had a few injuries that needed to recover after running landings.”
“Hmm.” He gestures toward Tairn as if inviting me to ride my own

dragon. “Well, it was noted, as you’ll soon see. I guess I’ll meet your little
golden next week.”

Andarna.
“She is safe within the deepest stage of the Dreamless Sleep. You should

be able to see her in a few weeks,” Tairn says.
“That’s what you said last week.” I mount quickly, my pulse settling as I

strap into the saddle. “Before last year, I never would have considered that
the safest place in the world was on the back of a dragon.”

“Before last year, I might have seen you as an appetizer.” He rolls his
shoulders and launches.

When I get to Samara, I understand why Varrish warned that I’d see why
he’d noted our lack of flight maneuvers.

I might be here, but Xaden is on twenty-four-hour duty in the operations
center.

And I don’t have clearance.



OceanofPDF.com



Many historians choose to ignore the sacrifices made by both humans
and dragonkind to establish Navarre under the first wards in favor of
praising the spirit of unification, but I would be remiss not to mention
the losses suffered, both in terms of the ancestral hatching grounds of
each dragon breed and the civilians who did not survive the continent-
wide migration that resulted from the opening of Navarre’s borders…

or those lost when we closed them.

—THE SACRIFICE OF DRAGONKIND BY MAJOR DEANDRA NAVEEN



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

“Bodhi can’t keep moving maneuvers for our section, or more teachers
than Varrish are going to notice,” Imogen says on Wednesday as we

walk toward Battle Brief, moving up the main staircase in a sea of black.
“Tairn is going to the Empyrean about Andarna, but absolutely nothing

can be done until she wakes from the Dreamless Sleep anyway.”
She sighs. “How are things with Xaden?”
I nearly trip on the last step before the doorway. “You want to talk about

my relationship with Xaden now?”
“I’m only giving you however long it takes us to reach the Battle Brief

room.” Her face puckers like she’s tasted something sour. “So if you need
to…talk, this is your chance, since I’ve noticed you’re still icing your
friends out, which is a mistake.”

Well, in that case.
“One, Xaden told me to keep my distance if I couldn’t lie to them, and

two, between the land nav course—which we failed—and his duty
schedule, I think leadership is keeping us apart as a punishment for not
producing Andarna. And it’s coded, but he says the same in the letter he left
on his bed for me.” A letter that quickly became my favorite because it
delves into what his life had been like before the rebellion. It also makes me
wonder what he’d be like if that was still the reality he was living in.



“That’s just…weird,” Imogen says, her brow furrowing as her gaze
scans the hallway for threats.

“It is.” I do the same, watching every pair of hands I can see. “The
timing of the last two weeks is just too coincidental for it not to be on
purpose.”

“Oh no, that part is completely understandable.” She side-eyes me.
“Separating you two would be my first move if I was in a position of power.
On your own, you’re both capable of terrifying things with those signets.
Together? You’re a fucking menace. I mean it’s weird that he’s writing you
letters.”

“Why? I think it’s…sweet.”
“Exactly. Does he strike you as a letters kind of guy?” She shakes her

head. “He’s not even a talking kind of guy.”
“We’re trying to work on our communication.” It comes out a touch

defensive.
“You’re eventually going to let him off the hook for keeping you in the

dark, aren’t you?” She shoots me a look that says she clearly thinks I should
and pulls two hairpins from her pocket. “Better answer quickly. We’re
almost there.”

“Can you love someone who refuses to be open with you?” I challenge.
“One,” she blatantly mimics me, “we’re not talking about my love life. I

have Quinn—my actual friend—for that.” She pins back the longest section
of her pink hair with quick, efficient movements. “Two, we keep
information classified all the time. You’d have the same problem with any
rider you dated.”

“That’s not…” Fine, she has a point, but she’s missing mine. “All right,
let’s say that you’re with someone, and one day a battle-ax comes hurtling
out of his armoire—”

“An armoire? I really wish you’d go back to confiding in Rhiannon.”
She shakes her head.

“—and nearly kills you. Wouldn’t you demand to see the rest of the
armoire to make sure there are no other battle-axes poised to strike before
getting back together with them?” We’re almost to the lecture hall.



“There’s always a battle-ax.” As we pass the doorway, she nods to Eya,
who is chatting with Bodhi, and my eyes flare at her black eye and what
looks to be a broken nose.

“Because that’s normal?”
“You didn’t want normal. If you did, you’d be in a relationship with

Aetos.” She shudders. “Or hell, anyone else in this place. But you wanted
Riorson. If you didn’t think the man was hiding more than a few battle-
axes, then you’re mad at the wrong person, because you lied to yourself.”

I open and shut my mouth as we funnel through the wide doors into the
Battle Brief room. Without windows to let the hot sun in, the hall is a
welcome refuge from the sticky August heat.

“Oh, look, our time is up.” She sighs in obvious relief.
“Helpful.” I miss talking to Rhi.
“You want actual, meaningful advice?” She takes my elbow and tugs me

to the side of the staircase, where the third-years stand. “Fine. Everyone
fails land nav the first time. We’re egotistical assholes who can’t handle
being wrong. The instructor just wants you to feel bad about it, which is
clearly working. Not to mention that you have bigger issues to worry about
than a man, like how you’re going to survive the rest of RSC, including the
interrogation portions where they will beat the shit out of you for fun, or
like, I don’t know…going to war. And you asked if I wanted to talk about
your relationship, which implies that you damn well know you’re still in
one—”

I bristle. “That’s not—”
“I’m still speaking.” A third-year from First Wing gets too close, and she

shoves his shoulder. “You don’t have to freeze out everyone you can’t be
completely honest with just because Riorson thinks that works for him—it
doesn’t, hence all of your issues, and it damn well looks like your friend
needs you, so go.” She motions toward the staircase behind me, and I turn,
catching sight of Rhi leaning against the wall.

Worry pinches her features as she reads the parchment she’s clutching
next to Tara, oblivious to the cadets passing by on the wide staircase.



I start down the steps, dodging more than one overeager first-year on my
way to Rhi.

“I’m sure it’s nothing.” Tara rubs Rhi’s shoulder as I reach them. “Show
it to Markham after brief. I’m going to get going.” She tucks her black hair
behind her ears and smiles again when she sees me. “Hi, Violet.”

“Hi, Tara.” I wave as she leaves, making her way to First Wing’s seats.
“Everything all right, Rhi?” I ask, knowing she has every right to shut me
out the way I’ve done to her.

“I don’t know.” She hands me the parchment. “I got this with a letter
from my parents this morning. They said they’re circulating around the
village.”

I open it, and my eyes widen for a heartbeat before I school my
expression. It’s the size of the public announcements the scribes nail to
posts in every village in Navarre, but there’s no official announcement
number at the top.

BEWARE OF STRANGERS SEEKING SHELTER.
“What the hell?” I mutter softly.
“My thoughts exactly,” she replies. “Read the rest.”
IN THIS TIME OF UNPRECEDENTED VIOLATIONS OF OUR SOVEREIGN BORDERS,

WE COUNT ON YOU, OUR BORDER VILLAGES, TO BE OUR EYES AND EARS. OUR
SAFETY DEPENDS ON YOUR VIGILANCE. DO NOT TAKE IN STRANGERS. YOUR
KINDNESS COULD KILL.

“‘Your kindness could kill,’” I repeat quietly as cadets shuffle past. “And
what border violations?”

“What do we have here?” Markham says, snatching the paper from my
hands.

“It came from my village,” Rhi explains.
“So it did.” He glances up at me and then over to Rhiannon. “Thank you

for bringing this to class.” He continues down the stairs without another
word.

“I’m so sorry,” I say to Rhi.



“Not your fault,” she replies. “And I would have taken it to him after
class anyway. If anyone could explain that, it would be him.”

“Of course.” I force a smile. “Let’s take our seats.”
We make our way to the seats beside Ridoc and Sawyer, then take out

our things.
“How are your parents?” I ask Rhi, trying to make the transition sound

natural.
“Good.” She smiles softly. “Their shop is booming right now, since they

moved another company of infantry into Montserrat.”
I blink. That puts the outpost at more than capacity.
“Good morning,” Markham says, his voice booming over the hall as he

holds up the paper from Rhiannon’s letter. “Today we’re going to talk about
the battles that aren’t quite so obvious. One of your classmates received this
notice.” He reads it aloud, his intonation changing what’s obviously a
warning to a passionate plea.

Professor Devera stands with her arms crossed, her eyes downcast as he
finishes reading.

“This is a regional notice,” Markham explains, “which is why it does not
carry a public announcement number. We have seen an alarming number of
attempted border crossings in our mountain villages near our most strategic
outposts. Why is this dangerous?”

My grip on my pen tightens. Are the Poromish civilians fleeing a new
offensive? Nausea rolls through my stomach. Wards could protect so many
more people, but I’m no closer to an answer than I was when we got back to
Basgiath from Aretia. Every book I’ve read mentions the glorious
accomplishment, but none say how it was accomplished. If the answer is in
the Archives, then it’s well hidden.

“Because we can’t know their intentions,” a first-year answers. “It’s why
we keep our borders closed.”

Markham nods.
But when did we close our borders? As soon as we unified? Or closer to

400 AU, when I think we wiped the history from the books? I shift in my
seat as power rises in direct proportion to my frustration. Answers are



supposed to follow questions. That’s how my life has always worked. Until
now, there’s never been a question I couldn’t answer after a few hours in the
Archives, and now I’m not sure I can trust any answers I do find there.
Nothing makes sense.

My fingertips buzz, and heat quickly follows.
“Silver One.” There’s a note of warning in Tairn’s tone.
“I know.” I breathe deeply and fight to shove the feelings back into the

neat little box that holds all my inconvenient emotions, tugging my shields
tight around me.

“This could be a new tactic,” a third-year calls out from behind us.
“Infiltrating our outposts under false pretenses.”

“Exactly.” Markham nods again.
Devera shifts her weight and then lifts her chin, looking up at us. Does

she know? Gods, I want her not to know. I want her to be as good of a
person as I think she is. What about Kaori? Emetterio? Grady? Are any of
my professors actually trustworthy?

“What’s more disturbing is the propaganda these Poromish people bring
with them, falsified announcements from their own leadership of cities
destroyed in what they claim to be violent attacks.” He pauses, like he’s
debating telling us the rest, but I know it’s for dramatics. “Attacks they
claim come from dragons.”

Fucking. Liar. Heat stains my cheeks, and I quickly avert my gaze when
he looks my way. The buzzing rises to a hum as energy gathers, pushing at
my skin, looking for an outlet.

A disgruntled murmur rises from the cadets around me.
“As if dragons would ruin cities,” Rhiannon mutters, shaking her head.
They wouldn’t, but wyvern would…and do.
Markham sighs. “This notice does not mean we are without compassion.

In fact, for the first time in hundreds of years, we authorized classified
missions— now completed, of course—to reconnoiter those very cities.”

My pen casing groans and power ripples along my skin, lifting the hair
on my forearm.

“Are you all right?” Rhiannon asks.



“Fine.”
“You sure about that?” She stares pointedly at my hand.
And the tendril of smoke rising from the pen. I drop it, then rub my

hands together, like that’s going to help dispel the energy coursing through
my body.

“Those assigned riots have reported back that the cities inside Poromiel
are intact, leading us to the same conclusion you’ve drawn—this is a new
tactic that plays on our compassion.” He says it with such certainty that I
nearly applaud his acting. “Professor Devera?”

She clears her throat. “I read the reports this morning. There was no
destruction mentioned.”

Whose reports? The scribes can’t be trusted.
“There you have it.” Markham shakes his head. “I think this is a good

time to focus our discussion on the efficiency of propaganda and the role
civilians play in supporting a war effort. Lies are powerful tools.”

He would know.
Somehow, I make it through the rest of the briefing without setting the

map on fire, then pack my things in a hurry and force my way past the other
cadets to get the hell out of there as quickly as possible.

I break into a run down the hallway, pulling the straps of my heavy pack
tight so it doesn’t slam into my spine when I race down the steps.
Agonizing heat spirals tight, building in preparation to strike, and when I
finally push through the doors into the courtyard, I stumble forward and
throw up my hands to release it.

Power rips through me and lightning strikes near the outer walls, far
enough away that the flying gravel only impacts the wall.

I feel Tairn hovering on the edge of my mind, but he doesn’t lecture.
“Violet?” Rhiannon steps in front of me, her chest heaving from

obviously having run after me.
“I’m fine,” I lie. Gods, that’s getting so fucking easy, and it’s the one

thing she asked me not to do.
“Obviously.” She gestures to the courtyard.



“I have to go.” Step by step, I back away from her, a knot the size of the
entire quadrant forming in my throat. “I’ll be late for RSC. Will you take
notes?”

“Because that’s definitely the class you should be late for,” she says
sarcastically. “What could possibly be more important than learning
interrogation techniques?”

I shake my head, then pivot and run before I tell another lie. Into the
dormitory. Down the steps. Through the tunnels. Across the bridge. Into the
Healer Quadrant. I don’t stop running until I’m almost to the Archives, and
then only my body slows, not my thoughts.

The guard stands but doesn’t challenge my right to walk straight past the
large, circular door and into the Archives. Paper and glue and Dad. The
scent fills my lungs, and the knot in my throat loosens as my heartbeat
calms.

Until I realize at least two hundred scribes are seated at the tables, and
every single one of them is staring at me. Then the organ beating in my
chest picks up the pace again.

What in Amari’s name am I doing?
“You’ve apparently lost all common sense with your control and

regressed to where you think you can locate it,” Tairn growls.
Fair point. Not that I’m telling him that.
“Just did.”
A tall figure in cream robes turns in her seat and looks me up and down.

“The Archives are not open to riders at this hour.”
“I know.” I nod. And yet I’m here.
“What can we do for you?” the professor asks in a tone that suggests I

find somewhere else to be.
“I just need…” What? To return the book I shouldn’t have?
Three rows back, a scribe stands, then walks forward, shooting me an

incredulous look before lifting her hands to sign toward her professor.
Jesinia.

The professor nods, and Jesinia heads my way, her eyes flaring in
unspoken what-the-fuck as she approaches.



“I’m sorry,” I sign.
She turns to my right in front of the study table, and I follow, noting that

the stacks block us from the class’s view. “What are you doing?” she signs.
“You can’t be here right now.”

“I know. I accidentally ended up here.” I slip my pack from my
shoulders and rummage through for the book, handing it over to her like
this was some planned meeting.

She glances from me to the book, then sighs and steps back a few feet,
cringing when she slides the book onto a shelf it absolutely doesn’t belong
on. “You look upset.”

“I’m sorry,” I repeat. “Are you going to be in trouble?”
“Of course not. I told her you are an impatient, arrogant rider, and it

would be less disruptive to our studies if I helped you, all of which is true.”
She glances toward the end of the stacks. “This couldn’t wait until
Saturday?”

I start to nod, then shake my head. “I need to read faster.”
She studies my expression, and two lines appear between her eyebrows.

“I asked what you were looking for, but I should have asked what will
happen if you don’t find it.”

“People will die.” My stomach sinks lower with every word I sign.
“That’s all I can say.”

She sits with that for a few seconds. “Have you at least told your
squadmates whatever it is you’re too scared to tell me?”

“No.” I hesitate, struggling to find the words. “I can’t let anyone else die
because of me. I’ve already put you in too much danger.”

“You gave me a choice. Don’t you think they deserve the same?” She
levels a disappointed look on me when I don’t answer. “I’ll bring you a new
selection tonight. Meet me on the bridge at eight.” She steps into my space.
“Saturdays, Violet. Or you’ll get us caught.”

I nod. “Thank you.”

OceanofPDF.com



It was only when we pushed the wards to their true limits, extending
them far past what we first thought possible and to what I now
question as sustainable, that we defined the borders of Navarre,
regretfully knowing not every citizen would benefit from their

protection.

—THE JOURNEY OF THE FIRST SIX, A SECONDHAND ACCOUNT BY SAGAR
OLSEN, FIRST CURATOR OF THE SCRIBE QUADRANT, BASGIATH WAR
COLLEGE—TRANSLATED INTO THE COMMON LANGUAGE BY CAPTAIN
MADILYN CALROS, TWELFTH CURATOR OF THE SCRIBE QUADRANT,

BASGIATH WAR COLLEGE—TRANSLATED AND REDACTED FOR ACADEMIC
CONSUMPTION BY COLONEL PHINEAS CARTLAND, TWENTY-SEVENTH

CURATOR OF THE SCRIBE QUADRANT, BASGIATH WAR COLLEGE



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

“You’re early!” I blurt when Xaden opens my door Saturday morning
to find me on the floor of my room, surrounded by every history text

I own and the two Jesinia loaned me.
Shit, I’m supposed to meet her in less than an hour.
He blinks and shuts the door behind him. “Hello to you, too.”
“Hi,” I respond, my voice softening. The elation of seeing him is

tempered by the shadows under his eyes. “Sorry, I just wasn’t expecting you
to make it until noon, if they even let you come and— You look…
exhausted.” Even his movements are slower. Not by much, but I notice.

“That’s what every man wants to hear.” He sets his swords by the door
and drops his pack right next to them. Like it’s where they go. Like this
room is partly his, too. Like his room at Samara feels like it’s mine. Neither
of us has ever asked for separate quarters.

Maybe I can’t fully trust him, but I also can’t stand to be away from him.
“I didn’t say you aren’t beautiful. I implied that you need a nap.” I nod

toward my empty bed. “You should sleep.”
His slow smile stops my heart. “You think I’m beautiful?”
“Like you don’t already know that.” I roll my eyes and flip the page in

The Journey of the First Six, a Secondhand Account, averting my gaze. “I
also think you smell like you’ve been flying for twelve hours.” It’s not



exactly true, but maybe it will check the already enormous ego I just
inflated.

“Gods, I missed you.” He laughs and rips off his flight jacket, revealing
the short sleeves of his summer uniform and indecently toned arms.

I breathe through the impulse to forget every single worry for a couple
of hours by laying him out over this floor and try like hell to concentrate on
the text in front of me.

“Think anyone will report me for using the bathing chamber?” He’s
already rummaging through his pack.

“I don’t think anyone would report you for cold-blooded murder around
here, let alone taking a bath.”

“Lieutenants aren’t exactly supposed to be sleeping in cadets’ quarters
when they visit,” he tells me. “We’re breaking a few rules.”

“Never bothered you before.” Letting his assumption that he’s sleeping
here slide, I glance up from the book and immediately regret it when I see
that he’s shirtless. Gods help me if he strips off anything else.

“Didn’t say it bothered me now.” He stands, his arms full of fresh
clothes from his pack. “Just don’t want to see you punished for my actions.
I thought they were going to find a way to send you on maneuvers today, or
just lock you away.”

“Me too.” Awareness spreads through every part of my body as I lock
eyes with him. “I’m sure they’ll find a dark cellar for you next week, so we
should try to enjoy this one.”

“You and I have different definitions of the word ‘enjoy.’” He gestures
to the books scattered on my floor.

“Not really.” I scan the page quickly and flip to the next. “I think
spending the day tangled up in that bed together would be enjoyable, but
since you drew your line, here I am with boring, sexless books.”

“Say those three little words, and I’ll have you naked in seconds.” He
looks at me with so much heat that I do a double take when I glance up, my
breath catching.

“I want you.” All day. Every day.



“Those are not the three words I need.” He slides into my mind like a
caress. “And why aren’t your shields up?”

“Well, those are the words you get without full disclosure.” I rip my
gaze away. “And it’s just us in here.”

“Hmmm.” He gives me a look I can’t decipher. “I’ll be right back.”
“You don’t really smell,” I whisper, loath to let him out of my sight for

even a second.
“Get any closer, and you’ll take that back.” He leaves, and I do my best

to concentrate on the book in front of me and not the thought that he’s about
to be naked down the hall.

All I have to do is be honest with him about how I feel, and I can have
him. His body, at least. But isn’t that all I really had before? Ironic that it’s
my truthfulness that can put me out of my own misery when it’s his candor
I crave. I guess in that way, we’re alike, both wanting more than the other
person is willing to risk.

A few minutes later, he walks back in and the room feels instantly
smaller, or maybe it’s the jump in my heart rate making it feel harder to
breathe and not the lack of air.

“That was quick.” I’ve only read another twenty pages or so but I don’t
bother hiding the two books I need to return. It’s not like he’d know which
are mine and which are borrowed. The less I have to hide, the better.

“I could make so many innuendos, but I’ll refrain.” He tosses his things
into his pack, then sinks into the armchair and leans forward, bracing his
forearms on spread knees. He picks a book up off the floor. “Where are all
the books from? You didn’t have this many last year.”

“Mostly from my old room in the main college.” I skim the current page
and sigh. This book is mostly scribe-centric stories about the Great War that
are heavily redacted, with one vague passage about discovering the ability
to extend the wards. “I crated them before Parapet and thought my mother
would have shipped them off to storage, but it appears she is more
sentimental than Mira or I thought. They were right where I left them.” It
had been a surprising discovery. Nothing had been touched in my old room,



like I was expected back at any minute. “Really, you should get some
sleep.”

Jesinia will be pissed if I miss our appointment.
“Colonel Daxton’s Guide to Excelling in the Scribe Quadrant,” he reads

from the spine.
“That one wasn’t as useful as I thought it would be the first time I read

it,” I joke.
“I would say not.” He sets the book down and then tilts his head, reading

the book I have open in front of me. “The Journey of the First Six, a
Secondhand Account.”

“Yes.” My pulse leaps, and my stomach gets the same weightless feeling
that usually comes when Tairn makes a steep dive. I should have hidden the
damned books.

“Or maybe you want him to know,” Tairn interjects.
“Go…be busy.”
“A class assignment?” Xaden’s eyes narrow when I don’t answer.
“For research.” For some reason I can’t fathom, I draw the line at

outright lying to him.
“I don’t remember anything about the First Six being…” A tick of his

jaw later, his gaze jumps to mine. “You’re hiding something from me.”
Shit. He knows. Or he guesses. That was fast.
“Violet?” It’s practically a growl. He definitely knows. “Why are you

researching the First Six?”
“For Aretia.” I shut the book. There’s nothing in it that’s going to help,

anyway.
Xaden draws a deep breath, and shadows extend from under the chair,

rolling over his feet like a dark fog.
“For you, really.” The admission is soft.
He stills so completely that I’m not sure he’s even breathing.
“Brennan told you we have a wardstone.” His words are clipped,

controlled. The shadows begin moving like hands, gathering all the books
around me but the one I’m holding and stacking them. “I’m going to
fucking kill him.”



“Why? Because he’s more forthcoming with me than you are?” I close
the book. “Relax, it’s not like he gave me your journal or something.”

“I don’t keep one, but that would have been far preferable,” he snaps.
“Digging around for information on Navarre’s most classified defense will
get you killed.”

“Civilians are fleeing for our borders, no one in Navarre knows the truth,
and Aretia needs to defend itself—to protect the people I’m guessing you’re
prepared to take in when venin inevitably reach Tyrrendor.” I clutch the old
tome to my chest. “You are going to take people in, aren’t you?”

“Of course we are.”
“Good.” At least my faith isn’t misplaced. I glance over my shoulder at

the clock on my desk. Twenty minutes until I have to return the book.
“But it’s weapons that are going to defend Tyrrendor.”
“I beg to differ, and I’ll keep researching until I figure out how the First

Six put these wards in place so we can duplicate the process in Aretia.” I tilt
my chin at him.

“No one knows how it was originally done, only how to maintain them.”
He rises from the chair, and his shadows follow as he paces, a barometer for
his mood. “It’s a lost magic, and you can’t deny that it was probably lost on
purpose.”

“Someone knows,” I counter, tracking his movements. “There’s no
chance that someone didn’t leave a record somewhere in case they fail. We
aren’t going to destroy the only thing that could save us. We would hide it,
but we wouldn’t destroy it.”

“And how the hell do you propose finding that record without letting the
scribes know what you’re up to?” he challenges, turning at the edge of my
bed with his hands laced behind his neck and pinning me with a stare that
might have sent me running last year.

The click of my teeth is audible as I snap my mouth shut.
He takes one deep breath, then another, closing his eyes. “The book

you’re clutching like a newborn. It’s not one of yours, is it?”
“It’s currently in my possession.”



“Violet.” I can practically feel him counting to ten in his head for
patience.

“Fine. I borrowed it from the Archives. Are you really going to yell at
me for trying to help?”

“Who knows?” The question is so soft that I almost wish he would just
yell. He’s always at his most lethal when he’s calm like this.

“A friend.”
His eyes snap open. “There’s a reason we don’t fuck around in the

Archives. That’s the beating heart of the enemy.” His gaze bores into mine.
“We don’t have any friends there.”

“Well, I do.” I stand slowly. “And I’m going to be late to return the book
if I don’t head down there now. So why don’t you get some sleep while I
—”

“I’m coming with you.”
“The hell you are.” I slip the book into the borrowed bag. “You’ll scare

her witless. I haven’t told her anything about you, or Aretia, or what’s going
on outside our borders, so relax.”

Go figure, he doesn’t. “She just knows you’re researching classified
material. I’m not going to relax knowing that you’ve put yourself in
danger.”

“You’re in danger every single day.” Anger flushes my skin.
Someone knocks on the door, and he sighs before jerking it open.
“Oh!” Rhiannon steps back, almost bumping into Ridoc. “I didn’t realize

you were here today, Lieutenant Riorson.” She glances over at me. “Vi, we
were going to ask if you wanted to come to Chantara with us—”

“She’s busy,” Xaden responds, clasping my hand.
“Don’t be an ass.” I yank my hand from his.
“Whoa.” Ridoc’s eyebrows rise as I turn toward Xaden.
“I’ve done exactly what you asked. I kept everything from my friends.” I

glare into the depths of his soul. “So don’t be an asshole to them.”
“Exactly what I’ve asked?” He leans down, bringing his face within a

breath of mine. “By keeping your research a secret?”



My jaw drops. “Are you really going to stand here and compare secrets
with me?”

“It’s not the same.” He winces.
“It’s exactly the same!” I grip the strap of the bag to keep from jabbing

him in the chest with my finger. How fucking dare he. “I’m researching the
wards for you.”

“Why do you think I’m so angry?” The tension in his eyes, his posture,
his tone equals mine.

“Because you don’t like being on the other side of secrets.”
“What the hell is going on?” Sawyer asks from the hallway.
“I…uh…” Ridoc scratches the top of his head. “I think they’re fighting.”
“That has… How long have you been hiding this from me?” Xaden

questions.
“They’re not even…speaking,” Rhiannon mutters.
“I haven’t hidden shit from you. I’ve simply told you selective truths.”
He draws back like I’ve hit him.
“Sorry, guys.” I turn to my friends. “Trust me, there’s nothing I would

rather do than go to Chantara with you, but unfortunately, I have to run an
errand. Next weekend?”

“You’ll be in Samara.” Xaden folds his arms across his chest.
How is it possible to both love someone and loathe them all in the same

moment?
Rhiannon looks between the two of us, then settles her attention on me.

“Then the weekend after,” she suggests quietly.
I nod.
Her brow knits in wordless question.
“I’m fine. I promise. You guys have a great time.” I force a smile. “I’ll

let you know if I need your help burying a body later.”
Ridoc sputters into a cough, and Sawyer pounds him on the back.
“I think she might mean you,” Rhiannon says as she gives Xaden an

arch look.
“I’m certain she does.”
“Let’s go,” Sawyer says, leading the three of them out of the doorway.



“I’ll do it, too,” Rhiannon says over her shoulder. “I’ve never moved
anything as big as you, but I bet my signet could put you in the ground
without even disturbing the dirt if I’m pissed enough.” She shoots a look at
him before walking down the hallway.

Xaden sighs and closes the door. “You have some loyal friends.”
“I do,” I agree. “Just remember you said that when it comes time to tell

them what’s going on under their noses.”
His answer is barely a grunt.
“I have to go—”
“I’m pissed that you hid it from me,” he interrupts. “But I’m livid that

you’ve put your life at risk for me. That’s not something I can handle.”
“It’s not at risk. I can trust her.” I reach for the door handle, and he steps

aside. His mouth tightens with anger, but it’s the flash of fear in his eyes
that makes me pause. If I had a way of knowing he was just a little safer in
Samara, I would want it. Even if he’s being an ass. “Fine. You can come
with me if you agree not to scare her.”

“I can’t control her feelings.” He scoffs.
I arch a single brow.
“I just want to meet her.” He lifts his hands, palms outward.
“So you can see if she’s trustworthy? By looking at her? Even you aren’t

that powerful.” I open the door and step out into the hallway. “Let’s go.”
“I’ll know. I’m an incredible judge of character.” He walks out after me,

pulling the door closed.
“Your ego really is boundless.” We start down the hall and turn right into

the central corridor. “And just because I’m letting you come doesn’t mean
I’m not still pissed at you.”

“Same.” He puts his hand on the small of my back when we pass a
group of cadets.

“You don’t have to touch me for them to think you have a reason to be
here. Everyone knows that we…”

“Knows that we what? You’ve been pretty damned clear that we’re not
together.”



Wait…is that hurt in his voice? I hate the way my ire dulls. It’s easier to
live in the anger.

We head down the central staircase, winding our way past the ground
floor, where most cadets branch off, and into the sublevel of the quadrant.

It’s a maze of tunnels down here, but I know my way well enough.
“You would never sit here and do nothing when you could help. Asking

me to do differently is just…insulting,” I whisper to him once I know we’re
alone in the tunnels. “I’m smart enough to handle myself in the Archives.”

“I never said you weren’t brilliant. I never even said your plan wasn’t
brilliant. I said you’re putting yourself in danger and I’m just asking you to
be honest with me.” Mage lights flicker on as we make our way toward the
covered bridge that spans the canyon between the Riders Quadrant and the
main college. “Varrish pushed you to near-fucking-burnout, and you didn’t
tell me that, either.” His jaw works. “Or that you wielded in the middle of
the courtyard after Battle Brief.”

“How did you know?” I hadn’t mentioned Varrish in the letter I’d left for
him.

“You didn’t think Bodhi would tell me?” His shadows stream forward,
opening the door, and we head across the enclosed bridge. I don’t think I’ll
ever get used to the casual way he uses his power.

“I hoped he wouldn’t,” I admit.
“That’s the shit you need to tell me, Violet.”
“What would you have done? Flown back here and killed him? He’s the

vice commandant.”
“I debated it.” He opens the next set of doors the same way.
“Bodhi has miraculously found reasons for our squad to miss

maneuvers,” I tell him as we walk into the main campus, passing the
infirmary.

“And how long is that going to work? We’re twice as likely to find a
solution if you tell me what’s going—” Xaden’s head snaps forward and he
grabs me by the waist, stopping in the middle of the hallway.

But we’ve already been seen.
“Put your shields back up.”



“It’s Nolon,” I point out but raise them anyway as guilt nips at me for
letting them fall in the first place. I keep hoping for the moment Xaden
promises is coming, where it’s second nature, but so far, it’s maximum
effort to keep them in place.

“Nolon?” My jaw drops at how much weight the mender has lost. His
skin hangs as loosely as his black uniform, and his eyes are missing their
usual spark when he tries to smile at me.

“Violet. It’s good to see you.” He glances at Xaden, his gaze falling to
the arm wrapped protectively around my waist. “Did you draw back
because you’re under the assumption that I’m going to harm the young
woman I’ve been mending for the last six years, Riorson? Or is it that you
think no one knows that you two spend all your time together on the days
either of you has leave? Because I assure you, I would never endanger
Violet, and everyone already knows.”

I step out of Xaden’s arms. “What are you doing standing in the middle
of the hallway? You look like you’re ready to drop.”

“You’re on it with the compliments today.”
Clearly, I need better shields if it’s that easy for Xaden to slip in again.
“Waiting for someone.” Nolon scratches a few days’ growth of beard on

his jaw. “And I suppose I could use some rest. It’s hard work, mending a
soul. Been at it for months now.” His smile lifts on one side, but I can’t tell
if he’s joking or not. “You’ve been well so far this year? I haven’t been
called to mend you.”

“I’m all right. I subluxated my shoulder a couple of weeks ago and—” I
don’t know if he’s as close to Varrish as my friends have hypothesized. The
thought gives me pause and keeps me from mentioning the burnout. “And
I’ve been really good about keeping my knees wrapped. No broken bones
yet, either.”

“Good.” Nolon nods as the door behind us opens. “That’s good.”
“I’m here!” Caroline Ashton races forward, passing us on the left.

“Sorry I’m late!”
“Punctuality is appreciated,” Nolon lectures her before looking my way.

“Do us both a favor and stay healthy, Violet.”



“I will,” I promise.
Caroline shoots a quick glare in my direction, and they disappear into

the infirmary, the door closing softly behind them.
“She didn’t look hurt,” I note as Xaden and I start toward the Archives

again.
“No, she didn’t,” Xaden agrees. “Must be visiting another cadet from

First Wing. Nolon looks like he’s about to burn out himself. Have there
been more injuries than usual?”

“Not that I’m aware of. Ridoc thinks they’re using Nolon for
interrogations.” My face crinkles. “But I’m not sure if he was serious or
not. It’s hard to tell with Ridoc.”

“Hmm.” That’s all he says as we descend, the tunnels slanting
downward toward the lowest point of Basgiath. The deeper we go, the
cooler the air becomes, and the sharper a pang I recognize as grief resonates
in my chest.

“What are you thinking? Your face just fell,” Xaden notes quietly as we
pass by the stairs that lead up to the main campus.

“Nothing.”
“You can’t expect more than one-word answers from me and not give

the same.”
He has a point.
“My father loved this place. He was ecstatic when my mother was

assigned here because it meant that he’d have the full resources of the
Archives.” I smile at the memory. “Not that he didn’t love maintaining the
records and libraries at the outposts we were stationed at, but to a scribe,
this place is the pinnacle of a career. It’s their temple.” We round the last
curve, bringing the vault-style door into view. The circular entrance is ten
feet across and guarded by a singular scribe, who’s asleep in his chair.

“A well-guarded one.” Xaden shoots a disgusted look at the sleeping
scribe.

“Promise me you’ll be on your best behavior.” I grip his elbow so he
knows I mean it. “She’s an old friend.”

“So was Aetos.”



I narrow my eyes.
“If she’s a true friend, then she has nothing to worry about.”
“Look, if she was going to turn me in, she would have done it when I

requested The Fables of the Barren last year,” I tell him as we cross into the
Archives.

“You. What?” His jaw flexes, and he breathes deeply when we reach the
table. The Archives are empty again, thank Zihnal, but that’s why Jesinia
chose Saturdays.

“Before Mira gave me the book at Montserrat, I requested it. And I
didn’t think anything of it at the time. But no one showed up at my door. No
one hauled me off and divested me of my head. Because we. Are. Friends.”

He remains silent as Jesinia approaches, her gaze widening as she looks
between us.

Her steps slow.
“He’s with me,” I sign, offering a smile. “Stop scaring her.”
“I’m just standing here.”
“That’s enough. Trust me.”
“Did you find what you were looking for?” she signs back, nervously

biting her lip, her focus darting to Xaden.
“No.” I hand the bag over to her, and she slings the strap over her

shoulder. “They’re all too recent…and vague.”
Her lips purse in thought.
“Maybe we should shift to something about the history of wards in

general?” I suggest.
“Give me a couple of minutes. I have an idea.”
“Thank you for helping us,” Xaden signs.
Jesinia nods, then disappears into the rows of bookshelves.
“You can sign,” I whisper at him.
“You speak Tyrrish,” he replies. “One is far less common than the

other.”
We stand there in awkward silence, our argument still festering—at least

on my part. I never know how he’s feeling, which is one of our problems.



By using that one word with Jesinia—us—he’s linked himself to me. If she
turns me in, he’ll be dragged down, too.

“Try these two,” Jesinia signs when she returns, then hands over the bag.
“Also, I returned yours. Thank you for letting me read it.”

“What did you think about it?” I ask, unnervingly aware that Xaden is
watching.

Whatever she says next will seal her fate with him.
“Solid folklore with good stories.” She tilts her head to the side. “It was

a limited printing, clearly done on a press, but not so limited that there
wouldn’t have been one submitted to the Archives at publication.” The look
she gives me is full of expectation. “It’s an…odd subject matter to leave out
of the Archives, don’t you think?”

I swallow hard. “I do.”
Xaden tenses beside me.
“As I said,” she continues. “Intriguing. I’ll see you Saturday after next?”
I nod, and we leave after thanking her again, passing Nasya, who has

started to snore in his seat.
We’re halfway through the tunnels before Xaden speaks.
“Tell me what other book is in the bag.” Guess the argument is still

festering inside him, too.
“It’s The Fables of the Barren.” There’s no point lying to him.
“You gave that to her? Why?” Xaden’s head slants in my direction, and

he stops in the middle of the tunnel, grasping my elbow gently as fear
flashes in his eyes.

“I loaned it to her, and because she asked.”
“With that text, she could have turned you in.” Anger burns in his eyes.
“And if I report that she’s not recording my requests, she’ll be at

Markham’s mercy.” I grip the strap of the bag a little tighter. “Trust has to
go both ways to mean anything.”

“Both ways, but you’re shutting me out while I’m trying my damnedest
to open up to you.”

Says the man who’s never so much as told me he loves me. If he does.
Gods, I’m so sick of having to make the first move when it comes to this



man. And today isn’t the day to open myself up to that rejection, too.
“Sure, as long as you can keep your secrets. Has it ever occurred to you

that this”—I gesture between us—“is all because you don’t trust me?” I
take a step backward. “You expect complete, blind faith without giving it. It.
Goes. Both. Ways.”

“I’m the one who doesn’t trust you?” Shadows curl around his ankles,
following him as he pivots, heading up the tunnel. “I’ll see you later. I have
to find Bodhi.”

He’s heading off on revolution business, no doubt, and leaving me
behind. Again.

“That’s all you have to say?” I call out, frustration locking my muscles.
“No good can come of the things I want to say right now, Violet,” he

says over his shoulder. “So, instead of digging a deeper hole with words I’ll
regret later, I’m going to take some space and do something productive,
because this isn’t.”

It’s on the tip of my tongue to tell him that he doesn’t get to choose
when we have a fight, but he asked for space, and I can do the mature thing
and give it to him.

When I wake in the morning, the other half of my bed hasn’t been slept
in and his things are gone. I can’t stop my chest from tightening at the
thought that he’s headed back to the front lines, that either of us could be
killed at any moment, and the last words we said to each other were in
anger.

OceanofPDF.com



Dragons do not answer to the whims of men.

—COLONEL KAORI’S FIELD GUIDE TO DRAGONKIND



CHAPTER NINETEEN

My heart pounds erratically as I walk past First and Second Wings’
dragons with the rest of my squad two days later for flight

maneuvers.
Kaori stands in front of Fourth Wing, shifting his weight nervously

beside Varrish, who watches me with a focus that makes my skin crawl, like
he’s mentally tabulating how many strikes he’s going to make me wield in
punishment for not producing Andarna. And the way Solas lurks behind
him, his one golden eye narrowed on me, makes me wonder if Varrish will
even wait until tomorrow.

Because obviously, from his angle, he can see that she isn’t here, and
worse, he looks happy about it.

I made it to twenty-seven strikes in an hour this morning with Carr
before my temperature spiked, and he seemed disappointed. That makes
two of us, considering I didn’t hit a single point I aimed for. My arms feel
like dead weight after all that wielding. If Varrish forces me up to that
mountainside again today, I’m not sure I’ll come down.

“There is something off about that orange,” Rhiannon notes, adjusting
the strap of her flight goggles as we approach Third Wing.

“You mean, like the fact that he torched Third Squad without a second
thought?” Ridoc questions, buttoning his flight jacket.



“And Varrish seems so…controlled.” Sawyer stretches his arm across
his chest. “Kind of uptight, you know?”

Unlike me, Sawyer’s only seen him at the surface level. I breathe in
through my nose and out through my mouth, fighting off the nausea that
threatens to expel my breakfast.

“It’s definitely an odd pairing,” Rhi agrees as we reach Claw Section’s
dragons. There aren’t any third-years on the field today, leaving more than
enough room for the second-year dragons to spread out, but gods forbid
Tairn not stand in the front row like the star of the show. I can already see
his head above the others from here, and I’m pretty sure I just heard him
chuff a sigh of annoyance.

Varrish’s mouth quirks into a polished smile at me, but the glint in his
eyes makes the hold I have on my Archives doors weaken, trickling power
into my system in preparation to fight.

“And what’s the deal with the way he stares at you?” Sawyer asks,
shifting beside me to block Varrish’s view. “He’s always smiling at you
like…” He shakes his head. “I can’t quite put my finger on it.”

“Like he knows something you don’t,” Rhi finishes, giving the Red
Clubtail from First Squad a wide berth as we pass. “Is there some history
with your mom, maybe? Some bad blood?”

“Not that I know of.” They don’t even know the half of it, but how could
they when I haven’t told them? “But he’s obsessed with Andarna.” There,
there’s some of the truth.

“She all right?” Sawyer asks. “I haven’t seen her in a while.”
“She’s been resting a lot.” I prepare myself for the utter misery of full

leathers in the stagnant late-summer heat, then start buttoning as we
approach Tairn. “She can keep up with simple maneuvers, but the stuff
we’re doing now? Formation flights and timed rolls? There’s no point in
putting her through this kind of stuff.” Selective truths.

“Makes sense.” Sawyer nudges me with his elbow. “See you up there!”
“You look a little queasy,” Rhi notes once the guys are out of earshot.

“Everything all right?”



“I’m fine.” I force a quick grin and try to think of anything besides how
much it’s going to hurt when Varrish gets ahold of me. “Varrish looks eerily
delighted that Andarna isn’t here.”

“I will handle this.”
“Right. Of course you are.” Rhi’s mouth curves into a sad glimpse of a

smile before she turns away, heading for Feirge, who waits on Tairn’s other
side.

“Fuck,” I mutter, rubbing the bridge of my nose. No matter what I say
right now, it’s always the wrong thing. “She’s never going to forgive me for
keeping all this from her once she finds out.”

“She will,” he says, his head lowering slightly, but he doesn’t dip his
shoulder even as I reach his front left claw. “Humans have the memories of
gnats. Dragons hold grudges.”

“I’m going to forget you said that,” I tease back.
“Be alert.” His head swivels and I turn, unsheathing a dagger in the

same moment.
“Surely you wouldn’t think of attacking a professor, would you,

Sorrengail?” Varrish glances at my weapon, keeping that same mask of a
smile in place. “Let alone a vice commandant.”

A low growl works up Tairn’s throat, and he curls his lip just enough to
bare the tips of his fangs.

“I attack anyone foolish enough to sneak up behind me this year.” I roll
my shoulder back and lift my chin.

“Hmm.” He leans to the side and looks past Tairn’s foreleg. “No little
feathertail with you today?”

“Obviously.” Fear slides down my spine.
“How unfortunate.” He sighs, then turns his back on me, his boots

crunching in the dry grass as he heads toward Solas. “There will be no
maneuvers for you today, Sorrengail.”

My stomach rolls. “I’m sorry?”
Tairn shifts sideways, sweeping his foreleg around me so I stand under

his chest scales.



“Not yet,” Varrish says over his shoulder, his brow puckering for a
second as he notices Tairn’s stance. “But you will be. Warnings have
apparently not worked, and I am hereby charging you with dereliction of
duty for your dragon’s refusal to appear for maneuvers. You will mount and
fly to your training location with Professor Carr to receive your
punishment.”

“That will not be happening.” Tairn’s head lowers fully, and his body
crouches into a defensive position.

“What is going on?” Rhi asks, her gaze jumping between Varrish and me
as she walks back over to me.

“Obviously, her first punishment wasn’t enough to teach your
subordinate, Squad Leader Matthias, so she requires another.” He blinks,
tilting his head. “And as the vice commandant, I don’t owe you an
explanation. Now mount up for maneuvers before you’re punished
alongside her.”

“There will be no punishment!” Tairn roars, and from the abrupt head
jerks of the dragons on the field, including Solas, everyone heard him. “It is
not within your power to summon a dragon.”

It takes a second for thoughts to relay through riders, and Varrish
stiffens. “Your dragon may not fall under my command, Sorrengail, but you
do. So unless you’d like to further explore that delicate space between
burnout and death, you will mount and present yourself—”

“Even the smallest dragon does not answer to the most powerful of
humans, which you are not.” Tairn snaps his teeth, the sound carrying over
the valley.

Feirge’s head draws back, and her golden eyes widen.
“Andarna does not answer to you.” Tairn stalks forward, his head and

chest so low to the ground that he nearly touches my hair, and Varrish
retreats. “I do not answer to you.”

Oh shit. This could go very bad very quickly.
“But you”—Varrish points at me—“answer to me!”
“Does she?” Tairn lunges forward, bypassing Varrish entirely and

surging toward Solas with an ear-shattering roar, his morningstar tail



lashing the air above me. Solas whips his head toward the ground to guard
his most vulnerable area—his neck—but Tairn is faster, bigger, and far
stronger. He’s already there, his enormous jaw locked around Solas’s throat.

I gasp as Tairn’s massive fangs sink between the joints of Solas’s scales,
piercing his neck, and Kaori sprints to get out of the battleground.

Varrish turns and stiffens as crimson rivulets run over Solas’s orange
neck scales, dripping off several of the ridges.

“Tairn…” What will the Empyrean do to him if he kills Solas?
“Only a rider can be the vice commandant of Basgiath,” Tairn warns,

and Solas lets out a sound that’s half roar, half shriek. “Without a dragon,
you are no rider.”

Oh gods. My heart lurches, the beat rushing to a gallop.
“Fine!” Varrish shouts, his fists balled at his side. “She will not pay a

price for her dragon’s refusal to attend.”
“Not good enough.” Tairn’s teeth reach the edges of Solas’s scales as I

watch in slack-jawed horror. “This is about you.”
Solas half roars, causing his blood to pour even faster down his exposed

neck as he whips his tail toward Tairn, but he’s half Tairn’s size and has no
hope of making contact, thank Dunne.

“All right!” Varrish staggers forward, and for a second, I feel sorry for
him. “All right,” he repeats, putting his hands up. “Humans have no
authority to summon dragons.”

Rhiannon sidesteps until her arm brushes my shoulder, and Feirge
lowers her head, as do Aotrom and Sliseag. Hell, every dragon I can see in
my peripherals takes the same stance.

“Apologize,” Tairn demands, his voice low and sharp.
“I’m sorry!” Varrish’s voice breaks.
“Apologize to the one Andarna deemed worthy of her bond.”
I try to swallow, but my mouth has gone dry.
“Did he really just…” Rhiannon whispers.
“I think so.” I nod. “His apology isn’t necessary to me, Tairn. Really.

I’m happy to just not die today.”



“It is necessary to me, Silver One.” His voice rumbles in my head. “I
speak for Andarna while she is in the Dreamless Sleep.”

Varrish pivots toward me, hatred and terror filling his gaze. “I am…
sorry. It is not in my authority to summon any dragon.”

“On your knees.”
Rhiannon sucks in a breath, and Varrish hits his knees. “You have my

most sincere apology—you and your dragon. Both of your dragons.”
“I accept.” My gaze darts frantically to Tairn’s. “I accept!” I shout just in

case he didn’t hear me mentally.
Tairn dislodges his jaw with a wet, sucking sound as his fangs slip free

of Solas’s neck, and he retreats with arrogant footfalls, not even bothering
to lower his head or protect his throat. Rhiannon and I fall into the shade as
Tairn blocks out the sun overhead.

And Varrish stares at me with a hatred so bitter I can taste it on the back
of my tongue as Solas launches behind him with a roar aimed in my
direction—or Tairn’s—leaving behind pools of blood on the grass below.
Only once Solas is clear of the flight field does Varrish rise to his feet, and I
don’t need words to hear him loud and clear as he sends one last, lethal look
my way and then strides for the end of the field and the Gauntlet steps.

“Problem solved.” Tairn’s head swivels, watching Solas’s flight path,
and the rest of the dragons in the field raise their heads again.

But my heartbeat doesn’t calm or even slow at the dread that curdles in
my stomach. Varrish may have been my enemy before, but I have a feeling
this just made Solas my nemesis.
 
 
 

“I thought for sure he’d cancel your leave after Tairn nearly slayed
Solas,” Rhiannon says, walking the path toward the flight field with me

three nights later.
“Me too,” I admit as the bells chime a quarter before midnight. “I’m

sure when Solas is healed, he’ll be right back in my face. Or worse.”



“It’s been a couple of days.” She glances over at me, and even though
there are only a few feet between us, the distance feels insurmountable.
“Are you really going to make me use some of those new interrogation
tactics we’re learning to pry the truth out of you? Would you rather I go
with the empathetic or more directly confrontational approach?”

“About?” I nudge her shoulder.
She shakes her head in frustration. “About Varrish’s little comment that

you’d already been punished once before?”
“Oh. Right.” I take a deep breath and focus on my footsteps as we near

the Gauntlet. “A few weeks ago, he got mad that Andarna wasn’t feeling up
to maneuvers and used my signet training as punishment.”

“He what?” Her voice raises. “Why wouldn’t you tell us that?”
“Because I didn’t want you targeted.” It’s the simplest truth.
“And he’s been targeting you?” She sounds incredulous.
“He doesn’t like not getting his way.” I adjust my pack on my shoulders

and grimace as we approach the stairs alongside the Gauntlet. This is going
to hurt like hell. I subluxated my knee yesterday during a challenge, but at
least I won. “You really don’t have to walk all the way out here with me.
It’s late.” I change the subject before she can dig deeper about Varrish.

“I don’t mind. I feel like I never see you anymore.”
Gods, I feel so fucking guilty. And frustrated. And…lonely. I miss my

friends.
“I’m sorry.” It’s all I can think to say. “Hard to believe that the first-

years are about to start training on this thing.” I look out over the Gauntlet,
the five ascents of obstacles the first-years will have to complete in order to
get to Presentation.

“More like dying on it.” She bites out the words.
“That, too.” My knee protests every step, threatening to buckle with

each stair I climb, but the wrap holds it in place as I limp upward, my hand
dragging along the rough stone that lines the staircase on either side.

“It’s fucking pointless.” She shakes her head. “Just another way to weed
out the weaker—or worse, the unlucky.”

“It’s not.” As much as I hate to admit it, the Gauntlet has its place here.



“Seriously?” She reaches the top of the stairs and waits for me.
“Seriously.” I begin the walk down the flight field. “It made me look at

everything differently. I couldn’t climb it in the same way you did, the
others did, so I had to find another way. It taught me that I could find
another way and still survive.” The moment on Tairn’s back, fighting that
venin, plays through my mind, and my hand curls around empty air as if
still clutching that dagger.

“I just don’t think it’s worth the lives it costs. Most of what happens here
isn’t.”

“It is.” My rebuttal is quiet.
“How can you say that?” She halts, turning toward me. “You were right

there when Aurelie fell. Is there any part of you that thinks she would have
been a liability to the wing had she survived to Threshing? She was a
legacy!”

I look up at the star-filled sky and take a breath before facing her. “No. I
think she would have been a phenomenal rider. Better than me, that’s for
sure. But I also know that…” I can’t get the words out. They lodge in my
throat, held captive by the memory of Aurelie’s eyes widening in that
second before she fell.

“I wish that for once you would just say whatever you’re thinking. I
never know anymore.”

“You don’t want to know.” It’s the most truthful I’ve been with her since
returning.

“I really do, Violet! It’s just us out here. Talk to me!”
“Talk to you,” I repeat, like it’s really that simple, and feel something

inside me snap under the weight of both our frustrations. “Fine. Yes, it’s
awful that Aurelie fell. That she died. But I think I’m a better rider for
having been there, having watched her fall to her death and known that if I
didn’t get my ass moving, I was going to be next.”

“That’s…horrible.” Rhiannon’s lips part, and she looks at me like she’s
never seen me before.

“So is everything waiting out there for us.” I swing my arms out. “That
stupid fucking Gauntlet isn’t just about physically climbing it. It’s about



overcoming the fear that we can’t. It’s about climbing after we see it kill
our friends. Parapet, Gauntlet, Presentation—they seem excessive when
we’re here, but they prepare us for something way worse when we leave.
And until you…” I shake my head. “You don’t know what it’s like out
there, Rhi. You can’t understand.”

“Of course I don’t know,” she retorts, her body tensing more with every
word. “You won’t talk to me! You’re running with Imogen, or locked away
reading, or spending every possible Saturday with Riorson. And that’s fine,
I want you to get whatever support you need, but you’re sure as hell not
talking to me, so how would you expect me to know anything? Don’t
forget, Liam was my friend, too!”

“You weren’t there!” My anger slips from the box I painstakingly built
for it, and power whips through me, scalding my veins. “You didn’t hold
him, watch the light fade out of his eyes, knowing that there wasn’t a
physical thing wrong with him but he was dying because Deigh lay
eviscerated just a few feet away. Nothing I did in those moments before
mattered! Gods, I held on to him so tightly!” My hands curl into fists, my
nails biting into my palms. “My shoulders almost dislocated, he was so
damned heavy, but I held on! And it didn’t matter!” Rage burns my throat,
devouring me whole. “You haven’t seen what’s out there! What makes me
run every fucking morning!”

“Vi,” she whispers, her posture sagging.
“And the look on his face?” My voice breaks and my eyes burn with the

memory of Liam’s head in my hands. “You don’t see it every time you try
to sleep. You don’t hear him begging you to take care of Sloane. You sure
as hell don’t hear Deigh scream…” I lace my fingers on top of my head and
look away, waging war with the grief, the pain, the never-ending guilt, and
as usual, I lose. There’s only that box and the blessed emptiness I know is
achievable if I can get a little control, but the words won’t stop coming. It’s
like my mouth has disassociated from my brain and my emotions are
running the show.

“And as horrible as it might be, as callous as it might make me,
watching Aurelie fall, and Pryor burn, and even Jack-fucking-Barlowe get



crushed under my landslide prepared me for the moment I had to leave
Liam’s body on the ground and fight. If I’d sat there and mourned like I
wanted to, none of us would be here. Imogen, Bodhi, Xaden, Garrick—
everyone—we’d all be dead. There’s a reason they want us to watch our
friends die, Rhi.” I tap my chest with one finger. “We are the weapons, and
this place is the stone they use to sharpen us.” The energy in my body
dwindles, and the heat dissipates.

My stomach hollows out at the utter devastation on Rhiannon’s face.
Tairn’s wingbeats grow louder as he approaches, and the sound helps

settle my heartbeat.
“I’m sorry,” I whisper. “And I’m glad you don’t know what it’s like.”

Blinking rapidly clears the blurriness from my eyes. “I’m grateful every
single day that you don’t have those memories, that you and Sawyer and
Ridoc weren’t there. I wouldn’t wish that day on my worst enemy, let alone
my closest friend, and even if I’m quiet lately, that’s what you still are—my
closest friend.” But friends tell the truth. Telling her will put her in danger,
but not telling her leaves her unprepared, just like we were. Shit. “And
you’re right. I should talk to you. You lost Liam, too. You have every right
to know—”

“No.” Tairn’s voice blasts through my head and wind gusts at my back a
second before he lands behind me. “Solas’s rider.”

“Good evening, Cadet Sorrengail,” Major Varrish says directly from our
left, mage lights popping on overhead as he walks around the boulders
where he and his guards have been waiting only a dozen feet away. “Cadet
Matthias. Sounds like I may have interrupted a discussion?”

His guards follow.
Oh gods. I almost—
“But you didn’t,” Tairn says.
“Sir?” Rhiannon’s eyes widen as her gaze swings from me to the vice

commandant.
“You know the drill, cadet.” He closes the distance between us and

points to the ground. “Or are you going to argue that you’re not under my
command at all now?”



Tairn lowers his head and rumbles a low growl.
Apprehension knots my throat, and I step to the side, taking Rhi out of

Varrish’s direct path. Indignation isn’t going to help, so I swing my pack
from my shoulders and open it, emptying the contents onto the ground.
Then I shake the open bag to show him that it’s empty. “Happy?”

“Not yet, but one day.” His smile makes my stomach churn. “I’m
patient.”

The rider finishes the search, taking a look inside my bag just to be sure
I actually emptied it before handing it back.

“Enjoy your leave while you have it.” Varrish nods, that smile still
frozen in place, and the three head off the field.

“Assholes.” I crouch down and Rhi matches the movement, helping me
repack the bag. “Thanks.”

“Is that normal?”
“Yes.” We stand once everything is tucked away. “Are we glad they

didn’t search you again tonight?”
“We are.”
“But…why?” Confusion lines her forehead. “What is going on? That

couldn’t have been about Andarna.”
“They’ll never fully trust Xaden’s last name.” With good reason. I sling

my pack over my shoulders and slip my arms through the straps. “I really
am sorry for exploding on you back there. There’s no excuse.”

“Don’t be.” She offers me a sad half smile. “I’d rather you scream at me
than pretend everything is all right with silence.”

At least there’s one truth I can give her.
“Nothing is all right.”

OceanofPDF.com



In the years after my father died, I forgot what it felt like to be loved.
Then I entered the quadrant and became the monster everyone needed
me to be, and I never regretted it. But then you gave those words to me,
and I remembered…and nearly lost you, too. I’m striving to be better

for you just like I promised, but I need you to know that monster is still
there, screaming to use every ruthless part of me to get your words

back.

—RECOVERED CORRESPONDENCE OF LIEUTENANT XADEN RIORSON TO
CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER TWENTY

The ground rushes up at us as Tairn flares his wings, slowing our descent
as we land on the field at Samara. “We will figure something else out,”

Tairn argues.
“Even if you move to my shoulder and successfully slide to perch…” He

shudders.
We’ve spent the better part of the last two hours arguing over whether or

not I would ever attempt a running landing, which, if you ask Tairn, would
be never.

“You can’t change graduation requirements.” I unbuckle from the
saddle and wince at the twinge in my hips that tells me I went too long
between breaks.

“I’ve never tried,” Tairn lectures, and his head whips toward the edge of
the clearing, tilting in excitement as he watches the tree line for movement.

I grin, knowing Sgaeyl must be close.
“Let’s agree that we will come up with a solution that meets graduation

requirements without breaking every bone in your body,” he suggests
quickly.

“Agreed.” I should remember to only argue with him when he’s got
better things to do more often. Climbing to the back of the saddle, I unclip
the packs and nearly lose my footing in my haste.

“We’re all dead if you fall off my back and break your impatient neck.”



“Because I’m the impatient one.” I swing my small pack onto my back,
then place one of the heavier packs on each of my shoulders. “I can’t
believe you allowed someone up here to secure the bags. I’m impressed with
your restraint.”

“The section leader attached the bags to the saddle before I put it on,
naturally.”

“And here I was thinking you’d evolved.” My knee throbs as I navigate
Tairn’s back, but it’s all but forgotten the second I lower my shields and feel
that shadowy bond wrap around my mind.

It goes against my instincts to block him, but I force my mental shields
back into place. After the way we left things last weekend, I have no idea
what to expect from him, but he’ll damn well expect me to have my shields
up no matter how mad we are at each other. Bags secured, I slide down
Tairn’s leg and take the brunt of the impact on my good knee when I hit the
ground.

“Go find Sgaeyl,” I urge Tairn, heading across the field of trampled
grass toward the looming fortress.

“I’ll wait until you’re inside as always.”
“You’re wasting time.” I can feel his anticipation singing through my

bloodstream, but I don’t block it out. At least one of us is happy. The thing
that happens later? That, I’ll block out like my life depends on it.

“Then walk faster.”
I laugh and trudge forward. Gods, these bags are heavy, and weirdly…

vibrating with energy. Guess these ones have already been imbued with
power.

An entire company of infantry jogs toward me from the arched entrance
as I make it to the top of the stone ramp. Oh shit, I’m right in their way.

“Rider!” the commander yells.
Before I can step aside, the company splits down the middle and runs

around me, so close I can feel the breeze from the air they displace like I’m
a boulder in the middle of their rushing creek. I hold completely still to
avoid impact, not even daring to breathe as they run by.



When the last of them pass, I exhale, then continue into the bailey. A
group of healers crosses in front of my path, and when they clear, I see
Xaden striding toward me across the courtyard, his face unreadable. My
heart stutters, then pounds, but I make myself move forward.

Not sure how it’s possible, but I simultaneously want to climb the man
and kick him hard in the shins.

There’s a group of riders in the courtyard behind Xaden, but they’re only
a blur of black because I can’t look away from him, can’t see past him. As
complicated as our connection is, it’s also undeniably simple. He’s the
horizon, and nothing exists beyond for me.

“I’m going to have to force your hand and I’m sorry,” he says quickly
as he approaches, cutting through my shields like they’re nothing but lace
where he’s concerned.

“What else is new?” I pause, noting that everyone between us gets out
of his way.

“You have about two seconds to decide if you want time to talk in
private tonight.” He’s less than a dozen feet from me.

“Not sure you want to be alone with me, considering what I’m
carrying.” I bristle. That’s the first thing he has to say to me after the way
he cut out last week?

“Choose.”
“Yes. Of course I want to talk to you in private.”
“Tell me to kiss you. Even if it’s just for show.” There are only heartbeats

between us now, and he’s not slowing.
“What?”
“Now, Violet. Or you’ll be sleeping in someone else’s room tonight.”

The look in his eyes demands an instant answer. Right. Because he told me
months ago he’d only kiss me when I asked him to. He reaches for me, one
hand sliding to the back of my neck and the other bracing my waist as our
bodies collide.

The impact sends every sense reeling.
“Kiss me.” Just for show.
“I missed you,” he says a second before his mouth crashes into mine.



“You walked out on me,” I accuse, nipping the soft skin of his bottom lip
with my teeth.

“Fight later.” His hand slides along my face, and he presses his thumb
just above my chin. “Now kiss me like you mean it.”

“Since you asked so nicely.” I part my lips under his and immediately
regret every second I’ve spent not kissing him lately.

I whimper at the first stroke of his tongue along mine, and his hand
flexes on my waist, gripping me tighter as he sinks into the kiss. Yes. One
touch, that’s all it takes, and the world around us ceases to exist. This is
everything. The energy thrumming in the air around us pales in comparison
to the power that floods my veins, the need that ignites within me as we
both work to control the kiss.

He wins, consuming me, devouring every thought in my head besides
getting closer. The bags slide from my shoulders, hitting the ground beside
me with a thud, and I wind my arms around his neck, arching against him. I
kiss him back like my life depends on his surrender and tilt my head for that
perfect angle. He finds it without even trying, taking the kiss deeper,
stealing little pieces of my soul with each swirl and slide of his tongue with
an expertise I can’t fight.

I can’t remember why I ever wanted to.
Why would I deny myself the explosive pleasure of kissing Xaden? This

is when we make sense. When nothing else matters but the feel of his lips,
the flick of his tongue behind my teeth, the lust burning through me I know
only he can fully sate. My heart gallops and my body floats as my hands
slide into his soft hair.

Weightless. He makes me feel totally, completely weightless, like it’s
possible to fly on nothing but waves of sensation.

Gods, I fucking want him. Just like this. Just us.
“Violet.” It’s a mental groan as his mouth thoroughly lays claim to mine.

“Oh for fuck’s sake.” A familiar voice intrudes on my own little piece of
heaven, and that’s when I remember.

This is supposed to be for show, and here I am, completely losing myself
in him. In the middle of the courtyard. In front of gods only know who. And



that weightless feeling? It’s because I’m anchored against his chest by one
of his strong arms, my feet dangling off the ground.

“Good enough show for you?” I draw back slowly, dragging my teeth
across his bottom lip before releasing him.

“Fuck the show.” His eyes flare with the same heat that has me ready to
combust. At least I’m not the only one losing control. I know that look on
his face. He’s just as turned on as I am.

He kisses me again, losing his polished finesse in favor of untamed
demand, and I melt.

“Put my sister down, Riorson. You made your point.” That familiar
voice— My head whips to the right, breaking the kiss. “Mira?”

She taps her fingers along her folded arms, but her stern expression—
eerily close to our mother’s—doesn’t last more than a breath before her
mouth curves into a smile. “Good to see you, Vi.”

“What are you doing here?” I grin as Xaden sets me down. Then I step
over the discarded bag to hug my sister.

“As of yesterday, I’m stationed here.” She holds me tightly, just like she
always does, then pushes me away by the shoulders to do her customary
inspection for mortal wounds.

“I’m fine,” I promise her.
“Are you sure?” Her hands move to the sides of my head, and she rises

up on her tiptoes to look down at me. “Because I’m thinking you must have
taken a pretty serious blow to the head to be involved with this one.”

I blink. What the hell am I supposed to say to that?
“Play along, or you’ll be in her room tonight. Not mine,” Xaden tells

me.
“She’s been more than adamant.”
“Right, well…” Shit, I really don’t want to lie to my sister any more

than I have to.
“I’m going to take your bags to my room,” Xaden says, helping me out

of the pack on my back, then picking up the two I dropped.
“Thank you,” I say mostly out of habit.
He leans in and brushes a kiss over my forehead. “I have duty today.”



“No,” I whisper, my stomach dropping in disappointment. That doesn’t
exactly leave us time to talk—which is probably the point. “I guess we
can’t fight if we don’t talk?”

“We’ll have time later,” he promises. “Have fun with your sister. I’ll see
you tonight.” He brushes a flight-loosened strand of my hair behind my ear
and grazes his knuckles gently down the side of my cheek.

“All right.” If it wasn’t all for show, I’d be a puddle. And the heat in his
eyes when they meet mine for a second? I’m instantly warm despite the
mountain air.

“Don’t let her set anything on fire,” he says over his shoulder to Mira as
he walks away, heading for the corridor near the southwestern staircase.

I scoff, but that doesn’t stop me from watching him go.
“Keep your shields up.”
“It’s not like they help block you out.”
“Told you, I’m harder than most,” he replies. “Keep them up anyway.

It’s not me you have to worry about.”
“He’s…carrying your bags up to his room for you,” Mira says slowly,

moving to my side and glancing between Xaden’s retreating back and me.
“He is.” I nod. Or is he? The ache in my chest turns bitter. Maybe he’s

actually taking two of those bags to a drop point and leaving me with Mira
to distract me. I hate that I can’t trust him, that he can’t trust me, that we’re
at this impasse.

“Oh shit,” Mira mutters.
“What?” I sigh as he disappears into the building.
“You’re not just fucking him, are you? You’re falling for him.” She

stares at me like I’ve lost my mind.
My gaze swings to hers, and though I know I should, I can’t lie to her.

Not about this. “Not exactly.”
“Who do you think you’re fooling? He basically swallowed you whole,

and now you’re watching him with those big, soft eyes that are practically
oozing with”—she gestures at my face, her nose crinkling like she smells
something bad—“what even is that? Yearning? Infatuation?”

I roll my eyes.



“Love?” She says the word like it’s poisonous, and something on my
face must give me away because the disgust on hers morphs into shock.
“Oh, no. You’re in love with him, aren’t you?”

“You can’t possibly know that just by looking at me,” I counter, my
spine stiffening.

“Ugh. Let’s go throw knives at shit.”
 
 
 

Brennan is alive. Brennan is alive. Brennan. Is. Alive. It’s all I can think
as we empty our sheathes into the wooden targets that line the back of

the outpost’s small sparring gym on the north side of the first floor. It’s a far
cry from the pit on the south side of the fortress I first found Xaden fighting
in.

Keeping secrets from Rhiannon is loathsome, but not telling Mira that
Brennan is alive might just make me the worst person on the Continent.

“I’m the last person to judge who you sleep with—” Mira starts.
“Then don’t.” I flip my next-to-last dagger, catch it by the tip, and throw

it, hitting the neck of the target.
“Regulations aside, because yes, what you’re doing is fraternizing”—she

throws her next dagger without even looking and hits the target mid-chest—
“with an officer, I’m just saying that if it goes badly, you’re stuck with each
other for the rest of your careers.”

“But you’re not judging.” I throw my last dagger, hitting her target in
the neck.

“Fine, maybe I’m judging.” She shrugs, and we walk to the targets. “But
you’re my only sibling. I’m allowed to worry.”

I’m not, though. She and Brennan were inseparable as kids. If one of us
should know that he’s alive and healthy, it’s her. “You don’t have to worry
about me.” I yank my daggers out of the wood one by one and sheathe them
along my thighs and at my ribs.

“You’re a second-year. Of course I’m going to worry.” She retrieves her
own knives and looks over her shoulder at a pair of riders sparring on the



mat behind us. “How is RSC going?” she asks, lowering her voice.
“We lost a rider in the first exercise. Two maps?”
“Yeah, it’s a mindfuck.” She presses her lips into a thin line. “But that’s

not what I meant.”
“You’re worried about the interrogation portion,” I guess, sheathing the

eleventh dagger at my ribs.
“They’re going to beat you black and blue just to see if you can take it.”

She plucks my dagger from the throat of her target. “And the way you break
—”

“I can handle pain.” I turn toward her. “I live in pain. I practically built a
house there and set up a whole economy. I can take whatever they dish
out.”

“After War Games, RSC is when the most second-years die,” she admits
quietly. “And they take one or two squads at a time for exercises, so you
don’t really notice the increase in the death roll, but it’s there. If you don’t
break, they can accidentally torture you to death, and if you do break,
they’ll kill you for it.” Her gaze drops to my dagger, and she looks
concerned.

“It’s going to be a shitty few days, but I’ll be all right. I made it this far.”
Breaking bones is a Tuesday for me.

“Since when do you use Tyrrish daggers?” She holds mine up,
examining the black hilt and the decorative rune at the pommel. “I haven’t
seen runes like these in…a while.”

“Xaden gave them to me.”
“Gave?” She hands it back.
“I won them from him during a sparring match last year.” I sheathe it at

my ribs beside the others as she lifts a skeptical eyebrow and chuckles. “So
yeah, he pretty much gave them to me.”

“Huh.” She tilts her head to the side and studies me, seeing more than I
want her to, like always. “They look custom.”

“They are. They’re harder to knock out of my hands than the traditional
length and not as heavy.”

She doesn’t look away as we walk back to the throwing line.



“What?” I feel my cheeks heat. “He has a vested interest in keeping me
alive.

I know you don’t like him. I know you don’t trust him—”
“He’s a Riorson,” she says. “You shouldn’t trust him, either.”
“I don’t.” I look away after the whispered confession.
“But you’re in love with him.” She heaves a frustrated sigh and throws a

dagger. “That’s… I don’t even know what that is, but ‘unhealthy’ is the first
word that comes to mind.”

“It’s us,” I murmur and change the subject. “Why did they station you
here, anyway?” I choose a spot on the target in the upper abdomen, then hit
it. “Samara is warded, and you’re a walking shield. Kind of a waste of your
signet.” She’s a shield.

Why the hell didn’t I think of asking her about the wards sooner? Maybe
the answer isn’t in a book. Maybe it’s in Mira. After all, her signet is the
ability to extend the wards, to tug the protections with her even where they
shouldn’t be able to stretch.

She glances back at the sparring pair. “I think they’re worried about
attacks here because this outpost has one of the biggest power supplies for
the wards. If this place falls, a giant portion of the border is vulnerable.”

“Because they’re set up like dominos?” I throw another dagger, wincing
when I’m not as careful as I should be on my aching knee.

“Not exactly. What would you know about it?” She throws another
without looking and hits the target true.

“Fucking show-off,” I mutter. “Is there anything you don’t excel at?”
“Poisons,” she answers, flicking another dagger at the target. “Never had

the aptitude for them like you and Brennan. Or maybe it’s just that I could
never sit still long enough to listen to Dad’s lessons. Now tell me what you
know about the wards.” She shoots a sideways look at me. “Weaving isn’t
taught until third-year, and anything beyond is classified.”

“I read.” I shrug and hope to Zihnal it looks nonchalant. “I know that
they originate from the wardstone in the Vale because of the hatching
grounds located there, and that they’re boosted with a power supply along



our border outposts to expand their natural distance in places and maintain a
strong defense.” All common knowledge, or at least researchable.

She flings another knife. “They’re woven to the ground out here,” she
says quietly as the pair behind us continues sparring. “Think of an umbrella.
The wardstone is the stem, and the wards take the shape of a dome over
Navarre.” She motions with her hands, forming the shape. “But just like an
umbrella’s spokes are strongest at the stem, by the time the wards reach the
ground, they’re too weak to do much without a boost.”

“Provided by the alloy,” I whisper. My heart starts to pound.
“And the dragons.” She nods, two lines appearing between her brows.

“You know about alloy? Are they teaching that now? Or did Dad—”
“It’s the alloy stored in the outposts that tugs some of those umbrella

spokes forward,” I continue, flipping my dagger in my hand by pure muscle
memory. “Extending the wards twice as far as they’d normally reach in
some cases, right?”

“Right.”
“And what’s it made of?”
“That’s definitely above your clearance.” She scoffs.
“Fine.” It stings a little that she won’t tell me. “But how do you weave

new wards? Like if we wanted to protect places like Athebyne?” Flip. Flip.
Flip. I keep moving the dagger and hope she sees it as casual.

“You don’t.” She shakes her head. “The extensions are what we weave.
It’s like continuing a tapestry that’s been stretched too far. You’re just
adding threads to something that already exists, and we can’t extend the
wards to Athebyne. We’ve tried. But who told you—”

“Is that how your signet works?” I stop flipping. “Because you’re
basically a ward, right?”

“Not exactly. I kind of pull the wards with me. Sometimes I can manifest
on my own, but I have to be close to an outpost. Kind of like I’m just
another thread. What has gotten into you?” She flicks another dagger, and it
lands dead center.

“Do you know how the wardstone works?” I ask, lowering my voice to a
whisper.



“No.” Her eyes flare. “Keep throwing before curious ears start
listening.”

I dutifully throw another.
“That information is way beyond my rank—and yours.” Her next dagger

lands right next to the first. “Why are you asking?”
“Just curious.”
“Don’t be. It’s classified for a reason.” Her wrist flicks another knife

toward the target. “The only people who know are the ones who need to
know, just like every other piece of classified intelligence.”

“Right.” I force a smile and throw my next dagger with a little more
strength than necessary. Time to change the subject. Maybe she knows, or
maybe she doesn’t, but she’s definitely not going to tell me. “Speaking of
classified, were you on any of the missions to check the Poromish cities for
damage?” I put my hands up when she gawks at me. “They told us about it
in Battle Brief; it’s not secret anymore.”

“No,” she answers. “But I saw one of the riots who did the flying while
Teine and I were out on patrol.”

My stomach twists. “Do you know anyone who was on the missions?”
“No.” Another knife, another hit. “But I read the reports. Did they give

those to you?”
I shake my head. “And you trust the reports?” It doesn’t come out as

casually as I’m trying for.
“Of course.” She searches my eyes for answers I can’t give. “Why

wouldn’t I? Why wouldn’t you?” Her hands make a quick, outward motion,
and the noise of the sparring pair disappears. It’s a sound shield, just like
she used in Montserrat—a lesser magic, but still a tricky one I haven’t
mastered. “Tell me what’s going on with you. Now.”

I was thrown into a battle with dark wielders, lost one of my closest
friends, fought an actual venin on the back of my dragon, and then was
mended by our very not-dead brother. “Nothing.”

She gives me the look. The one that always loosened my tongue when
we were kids.



I waver. If there was only one person on the Continent I could tell, it
would be Mira.

“I just think it’s weird that you wouldn’t know anyone on the missions
into Poromiel. You know everyone. And how do you know that what you
saw was one of the riots tasked with reconnaissance?” I ask.

“Because there were over a dozen dragons in the distance to the south,
over the border. What the hell else could it have been, Violet?” She gives
me a skeptical look.

This is it. This is the opening to tell her the truth. The chance to bring
her in so she fights on the right side of this conflict, so she can see our
brother. Wyvern. She saw wyvern. But it’s not just my life I’d risk by telling
her. My heart sinks, but I have to.

Xaden could never understand—he doesn’t have a sister.
“I don’t know,” I whisper. “What if they’re wyvern?” There. I said it.

Kind of.
She blinks and draws her head back. “Say again?”
“What if you saw wyvern? What if they’re destroying Poromish cities,

since we both know it isn’t dragons?” My hand clenches around the hilt of
my last dagger. “What if there’s an entire war out there we know nothing
about?”

Her shoulders dip and sympathy fills her eyes. “You have to spend less
time reading those fables, Vi. Have you been getting enough rest since the
gryphon attack? Because you sound like maybe you’re not sleeping.” The
concern in her tone breaks me down like nothing else could. “And it’s hard
to see combat for the first time, let alone as a first-year, but if you don’t get
enough sleep and present a stable, steady front… Riders have to be solid,
Violet. You understand what I’m saying?”

Of course she doesn’t believe me. I wouldn’t either. But she’s the only
person in the world who absolutely, unconditionally loves me. Brennan let
me believe he was dead—would still let me believe it. Mom has never seen
me as anything but a liability. Xaden? I can’t even go there.

“No.” I shake my head slowly. “No, I’m not sleeping very well.” It’s an
excuse, and I take it. Heaviness settles in my chest.



She sighs, and the relief in her eyes eases a little of the weight in mine.
“That explains it. I can recommend some really great teas that will help.
Come on, let’s get these daggers out and get you to bed. You’ve had a long
flight, and I have duty in a few hours, anyway.” She leads me to the targets,
and we remove the daggers once again.

“You’re on duty with Xaden?” I ask to fill the silence as we pull blade
after blade from the wood.

“No. He’s in the operations center, which is—”
“Above my clearance. I know.”
“I have a patrol flight.” She puts her arm around my shoulders. “Don’t

worry.
We’ll get to spend some time together when you’re here next. Every two

weeks, right?”
“Right.”

…

The sky is black when Xaden slides into bed shirtless, the movement
waking me from a fitful attempt at sleep. Enough moonlight comes

through the window to see the harsh, beautiful lines of his face as he turns
toward me, both of us lying on our sides. Enough moonlight to see a silver
scar across his heart I somehow missed in the fighting pits. Was he
wounded at Resson?

“You’re awake.” He leans onto his elbow, propping his head on his
hand.

“I don’t sleep well anymore.” I tug the summer-weight blanket up over
my shoulder as if he hasn’t seen me in less than the slip of a nightgown I’m
wearing. “And I don’t have it in me to fight tonight.”

“Then we won’t fight.”
“Because it’s that simple.” Even my sarcasm is exhausted.
“It is if that’s what we decide.” His gaze wanders over my face,

softening with every second.
“What time is it?”



“A little after midnight. I wanted to talk to you earlier, but there was an
incident—”

“Mira.” I jolt upright, fear stabbing deep.
“She’s fine. Everything’s fine. Just some civilians trying to cross the

border and the infantry…wasn’t pleased.”
“They weren’t pleased?”
“They killed them,” he admits softly. “Happens all the time out here, just

doesn’t get briefed at Basgiath. Lie back down.” The suggestion is gentle.
“Mira’s perfectly fine.”

We kill civilians? That information goes straight to the box.
“I almost told her today.” I whisper the confession as my head hits the

pillow, even knowing no one can hear us in here. “For all my anger, you’re
right not to trust me, because I almost told her. I even hinted, hoping she’d
catch on.” A bitter laugh slips free. “I want her to know. I want her to see
Brennan. I want her to be on our side. I just…” My throat threatens to close.

Xaden reaches out and cups my cheek. There’s no reproach in his gaze,
or even judgment, though I’ve just given him reason to shut me out for the
rest of our lives. His silence, the quiet acceptance in his eyes, keeps me
talking.

“I just feel…heavy,” I admit. “I don’t have anyone who knows who I
really am anymore. The guy I considered my best friend nearly got us
killed. I’m keeping secrets from Rhiannon, from my sister, from…you.
There’s not a single person in this world I’m entirely truthful with.”

“I haven’t exactly made it easy for you to trust me,” he says, stroking his
thumb over my cheek. “I’m still not making it easy. But you and I are not
easy people. What we build together has to be strong enough to withstand a
storm. Or a war. Easy isn’t going to give that to us.”

What we build together. The words make my reckless heart clench.
“I should have told you I was reading into the wards.” I rest my hand on

the warm skin of his arm. “I knew you’d tell me not to, and I’d probably do
it anyway, but mostly I didn’t tell you because…” I can’t even say it.

“Because I don’t tell you everything, either.” His thumb strokes across
my cheek again. “You put it between us on purpose. Gave yourself a secret



because I wouldn’t share all of mine.”
I nod.
“You’re allowed to have secrets. That’s the point. I’d prefer they not risk

everything I’ve worked toward for the last few years—or your life. And
yes, I’m still not happy about the scribe, but we’re not fighting tonight. I
just need to know the important things. I won’t withhold information that
could change how you make decisions, and I ask the same of you.” His
thumb continues the same soothing, lazy pattern.

I don’t want us to have secrets, but he’s already made it clear that’s not
changing. So maybe it’s time to try another tactic. “How long will you hold
on to the weapons for?”

A corner of his mouth tugs upward. “I won’t meet up with a drift for
another couple of weeks.”

Holy shit, it worked. “You answered.”
“I did.” He smiles, and an ache wakes in my chest. “How did it go with

Varrish?”
“Tairn nearly ripped out Solas’s throat, which worked for getting

Andarna out of maneuvers but may end up causing me bigger problems in
the future.” A small smile spreads across my face. Look at us: having a
conversation without fighting.

“We’ll keep an eye on the situation. I’m slightly worried I’ll kill Varrish
if he pushes you to burnout again.” There’s no teasing in his voice, and I
know he’ll do it.

“What’s with the weaving book you left me after graduation?” I change
the subject with a small, confused shake of my head. “And the strips of
fabric? Do you think I’m suddenly going to start crafting?”

“Just thought you might like to keep your hands busy.” He shrugs with
one shoulder, but the devious glint in his eyes says it’s something more than
that.

“So I keep them off other cadets?”
“I just thought you might like to explore an aspect of Tyrrish culture. I

can weave every knot in that book.” He flashes a smile. “It’ll be fun to see
if you can keep up with me.”



“In fabric knots?” Has he fallen off Sgaeyl recently?
“Culture, Violence.” His hand slides to the base of my neck, and his

gaze turns serious. “Do you have nightmares about Resson? Is that why you
can’t sleep?”

I nod. “I dream of a million different ways we could have lost.
Sometimes I dream it’s Imogen who dies, or Garrick…or you.” Those are
the ones that make it impossible to sleep afterward, the ones where their
Sage takes him from me.

“Come here.” He wraps his arm around my waist and tugs, rolling me
toward him.

My back settles against his chest as he tucks me in close. Gods, he
hasn’t held me like this since the night we destroyed my room. Warmth
infuses every inch of my exposed skin, pushing the cold from my bones.
The ache in my chest expands.

“Tell me something real.” It comes out as a plea, just like it did last year.
He sighs and curls around me. “I know who you really are, Violet. Even

when you keep things from me, I know you,” he promises.
And I know enough about him to be a real liability with the interrogation

portion of RSC coming up.
“I’m still not strong enough to shield you out.” Right now, with his arm

draped across my waist, I’m not sure I want to.
“I’m not a good measure of your skill,” he says against the bare skin of

my shoulder, and a shiver of awareness ripples through me. “The day you
can successfully block me all the way out is the day I’m dead. We’re both
dead. I can’t block you out entirely, either, which is how you found me in
the sublevel even when my shields were up. You might not be able to barge
through, but you’re aware I’m there. Just like you can muffle Tairn’s and
Andarna’s emotions but you can’t lock them out forever.”

My breath hitches. “So I might be strong enough to block Dain?”
“Yes, if you keep the shields intact at all times.”
“What’s alloy made of?” I ask, heady with the knowledge that I can keep

Dain out.



“An amalgamation of Talladium, a few other ores, and dragon egg
shells.”

I blink with surprise, both at his answer and the fact that he told me.
“Dragon egg shells?” Well that’s…weird.

“They’re metal and still carry magic long after the dragons hatch.” His
lips skim the back of my neck as he inhales, then sighs. “Now go to sleep
before I forget all my honorable intentions.”

“I could remind you of some very fun, very dishonorable ones.” I lean
back into him, and he throws his leg over mine, locking me down tight.

“You want to give me those three little words?”
I stiffen.
“I thought not. Sleep, Violet.” His arm tightens around me. “You love

me,” he whispers.
“Stop reminding me. I thought we agreed not to fight tonight.” I snuggle

in deeper, his warmth lulling me into that sweet middle space between
wakefulness and oblivion.

“Maybe you’re not the one I’m reminding.”

OceanofPDF.com



The Migration of The First Year is one of the crowning achievements of
Navarre’s unification. What a celebration of the human spirit, to leave
a life of war and enter one of peace, blending people, languages, and
culture from every region of the continent and forming a cohesive,

united society, whose only goal is mutual security.

—NAVARRE, AN UNEDITED HISTORY BY COLONEL LEWIS MARKHAM



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

I ’ve decided rolling dismounts might be the death of me yet.
Thursday morning begins with my arm in a sling that’s secured around

my ribs with a strap, immobilizing my shoulder, thanks to yesterday’s
maneuvers. Turns out Tairn was right, and though I’m capable of making it
to his shoulder, my body doesn’t take the impact of the actual landing very
well. We both agreed this time—accommodations will need to be made
before graduation.

“How is it feeling today?” Rhiannon asks as we walk into the history
class we share with Third Wing on the second floor.

“Like Tairn set me down and I just kept going,” I answer. “It’s not my
first sprain. Healers say it should be about four weeks in the sling. I’m
giving it two. Maybe.” I’ll be the first on the challenge board after
Threshing if I give it much longer than that.

“You could ask Nolon—” Ridoc starts, then stops when he sees the look
on my face. “What? Don’t tell me Varrish won’t let you get mended.”

“Not that I’m aware of, no,” I counter as we find our seats. “I put my
name on Nolon’s list, but I was told he likely wouldn’t have an opening
before it healed naturally.”

Rhi shoots me a look that says told-you-so but I just give my head a
quick shake. This is not the place to explore her conspiracy theories—even



if they’re starting to feel more and more like there might be some truth to
them. I’ve never known a mender with a waiting list a month long.

Thursdays are my second favorite day of the week. No maneuvers, no
RSC, no physics. I unload the heavy textbook and the notes I took on
today’s assigned reading, which is more like review for me. There hasn’t
been a single thing in this class I hadn’t already studied with my father or
Markham—or that I don’t have trouble believing is true now.

Then I take out a few strips of the bright blue fabric Xaden left me and
put them in my lap. I’ve got two of the knots in the book down already, and
I’m determined to have two more by the time he gets here on Saturday. It’s
a ridiculous thing to challenge me on, but that doesn’t mean I’m willing to
lose. Even a sling won’t stop me.

“Wonder who’s actually here to teach,” Sawyer says, stepping over the
back of his chair from the row behind us and sitting next to Ridoc on my
left. “Pretty sure I just saw most of the leadership making a run for the
flight field.”

My heart stops. “What?” Only a major attack would empty Basgiath of
leadership. I turn in my seat to look out the window behind us, but the view
of the courtyard isn’t helping.

“They were running.” Sawyer makes a running motion with his first two
fingers. “That’s all I know.”

“Good morning.” Professor Devera walks in, her smile tight as she
passes three rows of tables and chairs to get to the front of the room. “I’ll be
filling in for Professor Levini. He was called away due to an attack on the
Eastern Wing.” She makes a quick study of his cluttered desk, then picks up
the book on top. “You’ll hear about it in Battle Brief tomorrow, but so far
there’s only one death.” Her throat works before she looks up from the
book. “Masen Sanborn. Some of you may have known him, since he’s a
recent graduate.”

Masen. Oh my gods, no. His face flashes through my mind, smiling as
he pushes his glasses up his nose. It could be coincidence. There’s no
logical way an attack would be used to cover up a single death…right?



“Unless they assassinated him during the attack,” I mumble under my
breath. We weren’t even friends. I didn’t even know him that well, but out
of the ten of us who flew into Resson, now only six are still alive.

“What?” Rhi leans into my space. “Violet?”
I blink quickly and clutch the fabric in my lap. “It’s nothing.”
Rhi’s brows lower, but she sits back in her seat.
“I see he has you discussing the second Cygni incursion from year 328.”

Devera rubs the back of her neck. “But I honestly don’t see how that has
any practical application.”

“That makes most of us,” Ridoc comments, tapping his pen against his
textbook, and those around us chuckle.

“But just to say we did,” Devera continues, running a hand up and down
a faded scar marring the warm brown skin on her upper arm. “Everyone
should know that the end result of the four-day temper tantrum was
Cygnisen being absorbed into the Kingdom of Poromiel, where they’ve
been for the last three hundred years. History and current events are tied
because one influences the other.” She glances up at the map on the wall
that’s about a fifth of the size of the one in the briefing room. “Can anyone
tell me the differences between Poromiel’s provinces and ours?”

The room is quiet.
“This is important, cadets.” Devera moves to the front of Professor

Levini’s desk and leans back against it. When no one answers, she gives me
an arch look.

“Poromiel’s provinces maintain their individual cultural identities,” I
answer. “Someone from Cygnisen is more likely to label themselves as a
Cygni instead of Poromish. As opposed to our provinces, who unified under
the protection of the first wards, chose the common language, and blended
the cultures of all six provinces into one cohesive kingdom.” I recite it
nearly verbatim from Markham’s book.

“Except Tyrrendor,” someone from the left remarks. Third Wing. “They
never quite got the ‘unified’ message, did they?”

My stomach sinks. Asshole.



“No.” Devera points her finger at the guy. “That’s what we’re not going
to do. It’s comments like that that threaten the unity of Navarre. Now,
Sorrengail brought up a good point that I think some of you are missing.
Navarre chose the common language, but who was it common to?” She
calls on someone from Tail Section.

“The Calldyr, Deaconshire, and Elsum provinces,” the woman answers.
“Correct.” Devera’s gaze sweeps over us just like it does in Battle Brief

when she expects us to not only think through the answers but come up
with the questions ourselves. “Which means what?”

“The Luceras, Morraine, and Tyrrendor provinces lost their languages,”
Sawyer answers, shifting in his seat. He’s from Luceras, along the bitterly
cold northwestern coastline. “Technically they gave them up willingly for
the good of the Unification, but other than a few words here and there being
assimilated, they’re dead languages.”

“Correct. There is always a cost,” Devera says, enunciating every word.
“That doesn’t mean it’s not worth it, but not being aware of the price we
pay to live under the protection of the wards is how rebellions happen. Tell
me what the other costs have been.” She folds her arms and waits. “Come
on. I’m not telling you to commit treason. I’m asking for historical facts in
a history class of second-year riders. What was sacrificed in the
Unification?”

“Travel,” someone from Claw Section answers. “We’re safe here, but
we’re not welcome beyond our borders.”

Nor is anyone welcome past ours.
“Good point.” Devera nods. “Navarre might be the largest kingdom on

the Continent, but we are not the only one. Nor do we travel to the isles
anymore. What else?”

“We lost major parts of our culture,” a girl with a rebellion relic winding
around her arm answers from two rows ahead. Tail Section, I think. “Not
just our language. Our songs, our festivals, our libraries… Everything in
Tyrrish had to be changed. The only unique thing we kept were our runes
because they’re in too much of our architecture to justify changing.”



Like the ones on my daggers. The ones on the columns of the temple in
Aretia. The ones I’m currently weaving in my lap.

“Yes.” Somehow Devera makes that word sound both sympathetic and
blunt at the same time. “I’m not a historian. I’m a tactician, but I can’t
imagine the depth of what we lost knowledge-wise.”

“The books were all translated into the common language,” someone
from Third Wing argues. “Festivals still happen. Songs are still sung.”

“And what was lost in translation?” the Tyrrish girl ahead of me asks.
“Do you know?”

“Of course I don’t know.” His lip rises in a sneer. “It’s a dead language
to all but a few scribes.”

I drop my gaze to my notebook.
“Just because it’s not in Tyrrish doesn’t mean you can’t walk into the

Archives and read whatever translated Tyrrish book you want.” It’s his
haughty, arrogant tone that pricks my temper.

“No, actually you can’t.” I drop the fabric in my lap. “For starters, no
one can just walk into the Archives and read whatever they want. You have
to put in a request that any scribe can deny. Secondly, only a portion of the
original scribes spoke Tyrrish, meaning it would have taken hundreds of
years to translate every text, and even then, there are no historical tomes
older than four hundred years in our Archives that I know of. They’re all
sixth, seventh, or eighth editions. Logic dictates that she’s right.” I gesture
up to the girl a few rows ahead. “Things are lost in translation.”

He looks ready to argue.
“Cadet Trebor, if I were you, I would consider the fact that Cadet

Sorrengail has spent more time in the Archives than anyone else in this
room, and then I would carefully consider an intelligent response.” She
arches a brow.

The guy from Third Wing shoots a glare in my direction and sits back in
his chair.

“We lost our folklore,” Rhiannon says.
Every muscle in my body locks.
Devera cocks her head to the side. “Go on.”



“I’m from a border village near Cygnisen,” Rhiannon says. “A lot of our
folklore came from the other side of the border, probably as a result of the
Migration of The First Year, and as far as I know, none of it’s written. It
only survives as an oral history.” She glances my way. “Violet and I were
actually talking about this last year. People raised in Calldyr or Luceras or
other provinces aren’t raised with that same folklore. They don’t know the
stories, and generation by generation, we’re losing it.” She looks left, then
right. “I’m sure all of us have similar stories, depending on where we grew
up. Sawyer knows stories Ridoc doesn’t. Ridoc knows stories Violet
doesn’t.”

“Impossible,” Ridoc counters. “Violet knows everything.”
Sawyer laughs and I roll my eyes.
“All excellent points.” Devera nods, a satisfied smile curving her mouth.

“And what did the Migration of The First Year give us?”
“A more unified culture,” a girl from Tail Section answers. “Not only

within our provinces but throughout the Continent. And it allowed those in
what’s now Poromiel a chance to live under the safety of the wards if they
chose to move.”

One year. That’s all Navarre gave before we closed our borders.
And if you couldn’t afford to move your family, couldn’t risk the

treacherous journey… Nothing about war, or the aftermath, is kind.
“Correct,” Devera says. “Which means there’s every chance that when

you fly against a drift, you could encounter a distant relative. The question
we must all ask ourselves as we enter service is: are our sacrifices worth it
to keep the citizens of Navarre safe?”

“Yes.” The answer is muttered all around me, some riders saying it
louder than others.

But I keep quiet, because I know it’s not only Navarre paying the price
—it’s everyone outside our wards.
 
 
 



he gym buzzes with anticipation that afternoon as the combat professors
call the first names of the day to the mats. These will be the last

T challenges for months. The first-years will have the Gauntlet to worry
about starting next week, then Presentation and Threshing. And the

second-years will start disappearing by the squad for a few days at a time so
they can teach us how to take torture.

Fun times.
A squad from Tail Section is called to our mat.
“I really hope I get called to the mat today.” Ridoc bounces on his toes.

“I’m in the mood to kick some ass.”
“That makes one of us.” I tighten the strap of my sling over my armor.

Looking across the mat, I nod to Imogen, lifting my eyebrows as she talks
with Sloane.

She nods back with a smile, telling me wordlessly that Sloane is ready to
take on her opponent today. Rhiannon and Sawyer are doing the same with
the other first-years, checking in as names are called out around the gym. I
glance Aaric’s way, but as usual, he’s completely, totally focused, tuning
out everything around him as he stares at the mat.

“How bad do you think the attack on the Eastern Wing is? It has to be
something massive to call out half the leadership all day long,” Ridoc
muses.

Big enough to kill Masen.
“Speculating is only going to fuel rumors,” Dain says, taking the empty

place on my left side.
Fuck. I’ve managed not to have to interact with him for weeks. I step

closer to Ridoc and lock every brick of my shields in place.
“As opposed to not noticing that most of the professors flew out of here

like the wards have fallen?” Ridoc asks.
“The wards haven’t fallen.” Dain barely spares him a glance, crossing

his arms. “You’d know if they had.”
“You think we’d be able to feel it?” Ridoc asks.
“We would have been called out, too,” I say. “And the dragons would

have told us.”



“Can’t you ask your mom?” Ridoc tilts his head.
“The woman who knew I was missing for a week, then told me to get

back in formation when she realized I’d survived my first combat mission?
Yeah, I’m sure she’ll be forthcoming with all the information.” I give him a
sarcastic thumbs-up.

The first pair is called to the mat, and I’m simultaneously horrified and
grateful I don’t know the first-year’s name.

“You finally going to talk to me?” Dain asks.
“No.” I don’t give him the courtesy of even looking at him and, to be

sure he gets the point, I move to Ridoc’s other side, putting him between us.
“Come on, Violet.” He walks behind Ridoc, then squeezes in between

Quinn and me. “You have to be ready at some point. We’ve been friends
since you were five.”

“We’re no longer friends, and I’ll be ready to talk when the sight of you
doesn’t make me want to bury my knife in your chest all the way to the
fucking hilt.” I walk away before I act on the urge to stab the memory-
stealing asshole.

“You cannot keep running away from me!”
I lift my middle finger and round the corner of the mat, taking the spot

next to Rhiannon.
“What was that about?” she asks, wincing when our first-year takes a

punch to the kidneys.
“Dain being an asshole, as usual.” Sometimes the best answer is the

simplest.
Our first-year kicks out, catching Tail Section directly in the mouth, and

blood sprays.
“I don’t get it.” She shoots me a confused look, leaning in to murmur so

Dain doesn’t overhear. “I figured the thing at graduation was him and
Riorson dick-measuring, but you don’t speak to Aetos anymore. I thought
he was your best friend. Sure, you two grew apart last year, but to not even
be on speaking terms?”

“Was.” My gaze tracks Dain as he walks around the mat to Professor
Emetterio. “He was my best friend.” For fifteen years, there was no one



closer. I’d thought he was going to be my everything.
“Look. I’ll hate him on principle if that’s what we’re doing. No problem

with that. But I know you, and you don’t cut people out like that unless they
hurt you. So tell me, as your friend: Did he hurt you?” she asks quietly. “Or
is this something else we aren’t talking about?”

My throat clenches. “He stole something from me.”
“Seriously?” Her gaze pierces mine. “Then report him for a violation of

the Codex. He shouldn’t be our wingleader.”
If only she knew what her last wingleader had been stealing.
“It’s more complicated than that.” How much can I tell her without it

being too much?
Our first-year pulls off a quick comeback, getting his opponent’s leg into

a bow-and-arrow submission maneuver. It’s a quick tap-out after that.
We all clap. So far, we’re looking like the squad to beat again this year,

especially with the way Aaric is racking up the wins.
Emetterio looks at Dain, then clears his throat. I breathe deeply, waiting

for him to call Sloane’s name. “You’re sure?” Emetterio asks.
“It’s within my rights as wingleader.” He disarms, unclipping his sheaths

and dropping them at the edge of the mat.
What the actual hell?
“Not denying that.” Emetterio rubs a thick hand across his shaved head.

“Next match is Dain Aetos against Violet Sorrengail.”
My stomach hits the floor. If my shields slip, I could doom everyone in

Aretia and every marked one in the quadrant.
Imogen’s eyes aren’t just wide—they’re huge as she looks at me,

backing away from the mat before quickly disappearing. Where is she
going? It’s not like she can run and get Xaden to interfere like last year. I’m
on my own.

“No fucking way.” Rhiannon shakes her head. “She’s wounded.”
Maybe not entirely on my own.
“And since when does that matter?” the other squad leader counters.
Breathe. I need to breathe.



“This is bullshit.” I look Dain in the eyes when I say it, and he simply
folds his arms across his chest. There’s no getting out of this. He’s a
wingleader. He can challenge whomever he wants whenever he wants, just
like Xaden had last year. Ironically, I’d been in far less danger the first time
Xaden had taken me to my back on the mat. Then, I’d been gambling with
just my life, but this could get the people I care about killed.

“Keep your shields in place,” Tairn warns. His agitation rolls through
me, prickling the hair on my neck.

Dain steps out on to the mat, completely disarmed, but I’ve seen him
spar. He’s not Xaden, but he’s deadly enough without any weapons, and I’m
down an arm.

“You shouldn’t do this!” Bodhi shouts as he runs at us, skidding to a
stop next to me. Imogen isn’t far behind. Ah, she’d run to find the closest
person to Xaden possible. Makes sense. “She’s in a fucking sling, Aetos.”

“Last time I checked, you’re a section leader.” Dain narrows his eyes on
Bodhi. “And your cousin isn’t her wingleader anymore. I am.”

The muscles in Bodhi’s neck bulge. “Xaden’s going to fucking kill him,”
he whispers.

“Yeah, well, he isn’t here. It’s fine,” I lie, reaching for my first dagger.
“Just remember who trained me.” I’m not talking about hand-to-hand, and
from the look Bodhi gives me, he knows it, too.

“Keep the daggers if that makes you feel better, Cadet Sorrengail,” Dain
says, finding the center of the mat.

My eyebrows shoot up.
“You know she’s good enough to kill you from here with those,” Bodhi

reminds him.
“She won’t.” Dain cocks his head at me. “I’m her oldest friend.

Remember?”
“And this is certainly friendly behavior,” Rhiannon counters.
Taking a fortifying breath, I secure every brick in my shields just like

Xaden taught me and step out onto the mat, palming one of my daggers in
my free hand. If it comes between killing Dain and saving Xaden, there’s no
choice.



Emetterio signals the beginning of the match, and Dain and I circle each
other.

“Reach for my face, and I’ll cut you open,” I warn him.
“Deal,” he responds a second before he lunges for me, going for the

torso.
I know his moves and easily dodge the first attempt, spinning out of

reach. He’s fast. Being chosen as wingleader wasn’t all nepotism. He’s
always been good on the mat.

“You’re faster this year.” He smiles like he’s proud of me as we circle
again.

“Xaden taught me a few things last year.”
He winces, then attacks, swinging for my torso again. I flip my dagger

so the blade runs perpendicular to my forearm as I duck under his jab, then
punch upward, clipping him under the jaw without cutting him.

“Fuck yes!” I hear Ridoc cheer, but I don’t take my eyes off Dain.
Dain blinks, then rotates his jaw. “Damn.” This time, he comes at me

faster. It’s harder to duck and dodge his swings without my arm to balance,
but I hold my own until he catches me unaware and sweeps my feet out
from under me with his.

My back slams into the mat and pain erupts in my shoulder, so sharp that
stars swim in my vision and I cry out. But damn if my blade isn’t at Dain’s
throat when he pins me with a forearm at my collarbone a heartbeat later.

Shields. I have to keep my shields up.
“I just want to talk to you,” he whispers, his face inches from mine.
The pain is nothing compared to the ice-cold fear of having his hands

this close to me.
“And I just want you to leave me the fuck alone.” I hold my knife steady

right where he can feel it. “It’s not an idle threat, Dain. You will bleed out
on this mat if you even think of taking a single one of my memories.”

“That’s what Riorson meant when he said Athebyne, isn’t it?” he asks,
his tone just as soft as his eyes—those familiar eyes I’ve always been able
to count on. How the hell did we end up here? Fifteen years of the closest



friendship I’ve ever known, and my knife could end him with a flick of my
wrist.

“You know damn well what he meant,” I reply, keeping my voice down.
Two lines appear between his brows. “I told my father what I saw when

I touched you—”
“When you stole my memory,” I correct him.
“But it was a flash of a memory. Riorson told you he’d gone to

Athebyne with his cousin.” He searches my eyes. “Second-years don’t get
leave for that kind of flight, so I told my father. I know you were attacked
on the way there, but I had no way of knowing—”

“You said I’ll miss you.” It comes out in a hiss. “And then you sent me
to die, sent Liam and Soleil to their deaths. Did you know what was waiting
for us?”

“No.” He shakes his head. “I said ‘I’ll miss you’ because you chose him.
I told you I knew things about him, that he had reasons you don’t know
about to hate you, and you still chose him. I knew I was saying goodbye to
any chance of us on that field. I had no clue gryphons were waiting to
ambush you.”

“If you expect me to believe that, then you sorely misjudged me, and I
know every reason Xaden has to hate me, and none of them matter.”

“You know about the scars on his back?” he challenges, and I
contemplate cutting into his throat to get him off me.

“The hundred and seven for the marked ones he’s responsible for? Yes.
You’re going to have to do better than—”

“Do you know who carved those wounds into his skin?”
I blink, and—fuck him—he sees it, the flash of doubt.
“Tap out!” Sawyer shouts from the edge of the mat.
“My hand is a little busy at the moment,” I respond without looking

away from Dain.
“Violet—” Dain starts.
“You may have been my oldest friend, my best friend, but that all died

the day you violated my privacy, stole my memory, and got Liam and Soleil



killed. I will never forgive you for that.” I press just hard enough for the
blade to scrape against the stubbled skin of his upper throat.

His eyes flare with something that looks like devastation. “Your mother
did it,” he whispers and slowly rises, first to his knees, removing his
forearm from my collarbone, and then to his feet. “She wins,” he says as he
walks off the mat. “I tap out.”

He didn’t mean that. There’s no way my mother sliced into Xaden a
hundred and seven times. Dain’s just trying to get under my skin. I lie there
for a handful of breaths, calming my racing pulse. Then I sheathe my blade
and roll, gaining my feet awkwardly.

Emetterio calls the next challenge, and I walk off the mat and take my
place between Rhiannon and Bodhi like nothing happened.

“Violet?” The question in Bodhi’s eyes makes me shake my head in
reply.

“He didn’t touch me.” Every secret in my head is safe.
Bodhi nods, then leaves our mat as Aaric faces off against a guy from

Tail Section who looks like he might actually have a shot of ending Aaric’s
winning streak.

“Walk with me,” Rhiannon demands, her jaw tense. “Now.”
“Are you pulling rank on me?”
“Do I have to?” She folds her arms across her chest.
“No. Of course not.” I sigh, then follow her to the edge of the gym.
“Was that about the something he stole?” Rhiannon asks. “Because

whatever it was, it wasn’t about defeating you.”
“Yes,” I answer, rolling my neck as the aftereffects of the adrenaline roll

through me, nausea taking the lead.
She waits for me to add to my answer, and when I don’t, she sighs.

“You’ve been off all day. Is it because of the attack?”
“Yes.” I glance over her shoulder and glimpse Imogen watching us.

Does she know Masen’s dead?
“Are you really going to make me pry answers out of you?” Her arms

fall to her sides. “I swear to Amari, if you answer with a yes one more
time…”



I say nothing instead.
“I heard what you said in history, you know.” She drops her shoulders.

“You said something about an assassination.”
Fuck. “Yeah, I guess I did.”
She studies me, her gaze flickering between my eyes. “Who else besides

Masen is dead that went to Athebyne with you?”
My gaze collides with hers, and my heart starts to pound. “Ciaran. He

was in Third Squad.” I’m not telling her anything that isn’t easily answered
by anyone else.

“And you were attacked on assessment day. Imogen’s been targeted
twice since Parapet, too. So were Bodhi and Eya.” Her gaze narrows. “Dain
has one of those classified signets,” she whispers. “What did he steal,
Violet?”

Gods, she’s putting it together too quickly. She’s also owed as much of
the truth as I can give her. “A memory,” I say slowly.

Her eyes flare. “He can read memories.”
I nod. “No one is supposed to know.”
“I can keep a secret, Violet.” Hurt flashes across her features, and I feel

another thread of our friendship unravel as though I’d pulled it myself.
A chorus of cheers goes up behind us, but neither of us looks.
“I know.” It’s barely a whisper. “And I trust you implicitly, but not every

secret is mine to tell.” Dread digs its claws into my stomach. She’s going to
figure it out—it’s only a matter of time. And then her life will be in as much
jeopardy as mine.

“Dain stole one of your memories,” she repeats. “And now you think the
other riders with you during War Games are being picked off.”

“Stop,” I beg her. “Do us both a favor and just…” I shake my head.
“Stop.”

Her brow knits. “You saw something you weren’t supposed to, didn’t
you?”

She tilts her head to the side, then looks away.
I stop breathing. I know that look. She’s thinking.
“Is that the memory he stole?”



“No.” I inhale. Thank gods she’s off the mark with that one. Movement
to the right catches my attention, and I glance over to see Aaric walking our
way, cradling his left wrist. “Shit. I think he’s hurt.”

“What killed Deigh?” Rhiannon asks.
Suddenly, there’s not enough oxygen in the room, on the entire

Continent, but I manage to pull air through my lungs as I face her. “You
already know that part of the story.”

“Not from you,” she says quietly, her brown eyes crinkling at the edges
as she narrows them. “You were holding Liam, and then you had to fight.
That’s what you said. What. Killed. Deigh?” The whispered words cut me
to the quick. “Was it another dragon? Is that what happened out there?”

“No.” I shake my head emphatically, then turn as Aaric reaches us.
“Finally lose?”

He scoffs. “Of course not. But I did break my wrist. I’m supposed to
come tell you,” he says to Rhiannon.

“I’ll take him to the infirmary,” I tell her.
“Violet—” she starts, her tone indicating that she doesn’t think our

conversation is over, but it is. It has to be.
“Stop.” I turn my back on Aaric and lower my voice. “And don’t ever

ask me that question again. Please don’t make me lie to you.”
Her head draws back, and she stares at me in stunned silence.
“Let’s go,” I say to Aaric, then start walking to the exit, shoving what

just happened with Rhi into what’s quickly becoming an overfull box.
He catches up, his long legs covering the distance quickly. The corridor

of the academic wing’s first floor is deserted when we enter, and our booted
footsteps echo against the windows.

“So where does your father think you are?” I ask as we turn toward the
rotunda, trying to take my mind off everything I just let slip to Rhiannon
and everything I didn’t.

“He thinks I’m on my twentieth-birthday tour,” Aaric answers, rubbing
his hand over his square jawline and light-brown scruff, disgust curling his
upper lip. “Drinking and fucking my way across the kingdom.”



“Sounds like way more fun than what we’re doing here.” I push the door
open with my good arm.

“What part of this isn’t fun?” he asks, walking ahead and opening the
next door with his unbroken hand. “Between the two of us, we have a full
set of functioning arms.”

I crack a smile as we enter the dormitory corridor. “Ever the charmer,
aren’t you, Cam—” I wince. “Aaric. Sorry. It’s been a hell of a long day.”
And all I want is to tell Xaden about it, but he won’t be here for two more
days.

We head down the steps, and though Aaric is roughly the same height as
Xaden, he shortens his stride so I can keep up easily.

“She’s catching on, isn’t she?” he says when we reach the tunnels.
The hairs on the back of my neck lift as I look up at Aaric. “Catching on

to what, exactly?”
“They haven’t hidden it all away as well as they think they have.” His

jaw flexes. “It’s easy to figure out if you know what you’re looking for.
Personally, it was the daggers my guards started carrying that tipped me
off.” He shoots a look at me. “The ones with the little metal discs.”

My heart pounds so loudly I can hear it in my ears. Daggers. Metal
discs.

“The guards were the hardest to slip, too,” he says with a grimace.
“They won’t tell my father they’ve lost me until they absolutely have to.
I’m just hoping it’s after Threshing. He can’t do shit after Threshing.
Dragons don’t even answer to kings.”

“Oh shit.” My chest feels like it’s caving in as I grab hold of his good
arm, halting our steps before the tunnel. “You know, don’t you?”

He lifts a brow, the mage lights catching on those royally green eyes.
“Why else would I be here?”

OceanofPDF.com



At some point, probably during your second year, you’ll realize the
trust you feel for your friends and family has nothing on the loyalty you

develop for your squad.

—PAGE NINETY-ONE, THE BOOK OF BRENNAN



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

F aster. I have to run faster. Fear holds my throat shut as a tidal wave of
death chases me across the sunburned field to where Tairn waits, his

back turned.
Wind roars around me, stealing every other sound, even my own

heartbeat. Tairn’s going to die, and he doesn’t even see it coming for him.
Gold flickers near the tip of his wing.
Gods, no. Andarna. She’s here. She shouldn’t be here.
The wave nips at my heels, transforming the ground beneath my feet

into an ashen, desiccated wasteland.
“There is nowhere to run, rider.” A hooded figure steps into my path out

of nowhere, raising one arm.
I’m yanked off my feet by an unseen force and lifted into the air,

completely immobilized. The wave of death halts and the wind falls silent,
as if he’s stopped time.

He shifts his staff to the other hand, then pulls back the thick maroon
hood of his floor-length robes with gnarled fingers, revealing the white of
his scalp under his slicked-back, thinning hair. Shadows mark the gaunt
hollows of his cheekbones on an eerily youthful face, and his lips are
cracked and dry, just like the land behind me, but it’s his red-rimmed eyes,
the distended veins spiderwebbing across his temples and cheeks, that have
me fighting to open my mouth, straining to scream.



Venin.
“So disappointing,” he lectures, as if he’s my Sage and not the teacher of

the dark wielder I killed on Tairn’s back. “All of that power at your
fingertips, and yet you insist on fleeing over and over, using the same failed
tactics, and expecting what?” He tilts his head to the side. “To escape?”

My ribs tighten around my lungs as terror takes hold, and I force a
garbled sound through my throat, but it does nothing to warn Tairn and
Andarna.

“There is no escaping me, rider,” he whispers, his fingers ghosting over
my cheek but not quite touching. “Fight me and die, or join me and live
beyond the ages, but you will never escape me, not when I’ve waited
centuries for someone with your power.”

“Fuck you.” It comes out as a whisper, but I mean it with every bone in
my body.

“Death it is.” He looks so…disappointed as he lowers his hand.
Wind howls as I fall to the ground. A scream tears through my body as a

wave of agony rolls over my skin and bones, leaching the very essence of
my energy until—

I wake, my heart pounding, my skin clammy, my fingers wrapped
around my black-hilted dagger.

Just a dream. Just a dream. Just a dream.
 
 
 

“A re you going to tell me where we’re going?” I ask Xaden on
Saturday as he leads me down the stairs from my dorm room.

“To Basgiath’s forge,” he says as we emerge from the academic wing
into the empty courtyard. It’s finally the time of year when the temperature
outside matches inside. Autumn is settling in.

My chest tightens as I realize he’s taking me to see where they steal the
weapons—and what that means. He’s letting me in.

“Thank you for trusting me.” The words don’t do the feeling justice.



“You’re welcome.” He looks down at me, his expression shifting. “Will I
earn a little trust back now?”

I nod, tearing my gaze away from his before I do something reckless like
let those three little words he wants spill out just because we’re having a
moment. But I can share with him a secret of mine as well. “I found a text
that said the First Six didn’t just establish the wards but personally carved
the first wardstone.”

“We knew that.”
“Partially.” We cross down to the tunnels to the flight field, and I nod at

one of our first-years. Channing? Chapman? Charan? Shit, it’s something
like that. I’ll learn it in a couple of weeks—after Threshing. “The text said
first wardstone,

which means if they carved the one here, there’s a good chance they
carved the one in Aretia. I’m on the right track.”

“Good point.” He jerks open the door to the tunnels, and I walk inside.
“I know what I need to look for, but I’m not sure where it would even

exist.”
“Which is?” He asks as we move toward the stairs.
My pulse is thrumming with excitement to finally see the forge, get a

look at the luminary that the revolution needs so badly, too.
“I need a firsthand account from one of the six. My father talked about

seeing one once, so I know they exist. Question is if they’ve been translated
and redacted into uselessness.” We turn into the staircase and both stop
abruptly.

Major Varrish blocks our path. “Ah, nice to see you, Lieutenant
Riorson.” His smile is just as greasy as ever.

Fear squeezes my heart. Xaden is carrying enough contraband to see him
executed two dozen times.

“Wish I could say the same,” Xaden retorts.
“Found her!” Varrish calls up the stairs. “Shouldn’t you be headed over

to the main campus, Riorson? Surely that’s where officers lodge when
visiting.” His gaze flicks my way.

It takes all my willpower not to retreat.



“There you are, Cadet Sorrengail.” Professor Grady offers me a genuine
smile as he descends, his arm linked through Ridoc’s, whose hands are
behind his back.

Ridoc shoots me a warning look, and dread settles heavily in my chest.
No. Not today. We’re being taken.
“Turns out, you’re quite hard to catch by surprise,” Professor Grady

says, a note of admiration in his voice. “Your door doesn’t allow anyone
entrance.” He glances at Xaden, his focus shifting to the exposed swirls of
his rebellion relic just under his jaw. “I’m guessing she has you to thank for
that, since second-years can’t ward. Makes nabbing her for interrogation
training a little difficult.”

“I’m not going to apologize.” Xaden’s eyebrows lower as Varrish’s
riders— the ones who usually dump my belongings on the flight field—
both turn the corner above Professor Grady. One escorts Rhiannon, and the
other, Sawyer. Both of them have their hands bound behind their backs.

Looks like our squad is next for interrogation…and I almost just saw the
mother of all secrets around here. I force myself to breathe, fighting to keep
the nausea at bay.

“She’s on leave.” Xaden sweeps me to the side, putting me behind his
back. “And recovering from an injury.” Shadows race from the edges of the
stairwell, rising to form a waist-high wall. “He’ll use this opportunity to kill
you for the embarrassment Tairn put him and Solas through.”

“You can’t possibly know that.”
“His intentions are pretty fucking clear. Trust me.”
“No, you’re on leave,” Varrish says, delight sparkling in his eyes. “Cadet

Sorrengail is headed out for training.” He jabs his finger at the wall of
shadow and winces. “Well, that’s fascinating. No wonder you’re so coveted.
The pair of you really are quite something.”

“You can’t protect me from this any more than you could Threshing,” I
tell Xaden, stepping out from the shelter of his body. “You know it’s true.”

“You weren’t mine at Threshing,” he counters.
“I’m not yours now,” I remind him. “I’ll be fine,” I say out loud. “Drop

the barrier.”



“Do listen to your little girlfriend,” Varrish suggests. “I’d hate to report
that you disobeyed a direct order, or worse—cancel her leave for next
weekend. There’s really nothing you can do here.”

Oh, fuck. That is not the way to deal with Xaden. Ordering him around
only makes him push that much harder. And separating Tairn and Sgaeyl for
two weeks is more than they can take.

“I’m not in your chain of command, therefore I’m under no obligation to
follow your fucking orders, and there is always something I can do. She’s in
no condition to be tortured, and if her fucking wingleader isn’t here to
advocate for her, then I will.”

“Sgaeyl!” I reach out through the one pathway I avoid at almost every
cost. “They’re going to cancel next week’s leave if he doesn’t relent.”

“How hurt are you?” Grady asks, concern on his face.
“Dislocated my shoulder last week,” I answer.
“I chose him for his inability to relent,” Sgaeyl reminds me.
“Not helpful at the moment. Do I need to remind you of what he’s

carrying?”
“Fine. But only so this conversation ends.”
“Her wingleader is otherwise engaged,” Varrish says to Xaden. “And

feel free to continue to argue with me. You’re right. You’re not under my
chain of command, but as I had to remind her dragon, she is. Or did you not
hear about her disciplinary session? I’d hate for her to have to repeat it
simply for you to learn your lesson, Lieutenant. Then again, you could
always join us.”

Xaden smiles, but it’s not the kind that warms my heart. It’s the one that
chills every cell in my body to ice, the cruel, menacing curve I first saw on
the dais when he was my wingleader. “One day, Major Varrish, you and I
are going to have words.” He drops the shadow barrier and lifts a brow at
me. “You went to Sgaeyl?”

“I make no apologies for saving your ass from your own stubbornness.”
I put out my good hand, and Grady steps forward, binding it mercifully to
the one protruding from the sling. At least he didn’t wrench my hurt



shoulder behind my back, but damn, the rope is tight. “There’s a book on
my desk that needs to be returned to the Archives.”

Anger burns in the depths of his gold-flecked onyx eyes. “I’ll see that
it’s done.”

“See you next week,” I whisper. “Tell her page three hundred and four
mentions a text I’d like to read next.”

“Next week,” he responds with a nod, his fists clenched as Varrish walks
by with the others in my squad. “Violence, remember it’s only the body
that’s fragile. You are unbreakable.”

“Unbreakable,” I repeat to myself as Professor Grady leads me away.

OceanofPDF.com



The things that happen behind closed doors in the Riders Quadrant in
order to turn young cadets into full-fledged riders are enough to turn
even the staunchest of stomachs. Those prone to queasiness should not

pry.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

The key can be found in my desk drawer.
As far as secret phrases go, that one is laughably uncreative, but

nevertheless, it’s the one I’m quietly given after we enter the training
facility. The entrance is so well hidden in the cliffside under the foundation
walls of the quadrant that I’ve never seen it in all the years I’ve lived here.
It’s remarkably accessible for its intended purpose.

The antechamber of the windowless, guarded cave isn’t too bad as far as
torture chambers come. It could even double as an office. A large wooden
desk consumes the center of the space, with a high-backed chair on one side
and two on the other. They disarm us as soon as we arrive, our weapons
taking up a respectable amount of the desk’s surface.

But it’s the two chambers beyond that make me wish I hadn’t eaten
breakfast. Both doors are braced with steel, and both have a barred window
currently held closed by a steel latch.

“You’ve all been given your classified information to protect,” Professor
Grady says, leading us into the chamber on the right. There’s a scarred
wooden table in the center of the dome-shaped room with six chairs, and
along the cobblestone walls are five wooden beds with no mattresses and a
door that I’m desperately hoping leads to a bathroom or things are going to
get awkward over the next couple of days. “Have a seat.” He gestures to the
table.



We all do as we’re told. Rhiannon and I take the chairs across from
Sawyer and Ridoc, the wood scraping the stone as we sit, all managing it
without the use of our hands.

“For right now, we’re in what’s called a classroom setting. Remember
what that means?” Professor Grady reaches behind Sawyer, and a second
later, Sawyer’s hands are free.

“It means we’re not in the graded scenario,” Rhiannon answers. “We can
ask questions.”

“Correct.” Professor Grady moves to Ridoc and does the same. “The
purpose of this exercise really is to teach you how to survive capture,” he
assures us. “These next couple of days are instructional only.” He reaches
for my bonds next, untying the rope with surprising gentleness. “It’s an
assessment.”

“So you know which buttons to push when it’s the real thing,” Ridoc
says, rubbing his wrists.

“Exactly.” Professor Grady smiles. “Is it going to be fun? Absolutely
not. Are we going to show you mercy? Also, no.” He moves on to
Rhiannon once my hands are free. “And Vice Commandant Varrish seems
to have taken an interest in your squad, no doubt because you have quite the
legacy here in Cadet Sorrengail. So unfortunately, it looks like we’ll all be
evaluated in how we handle this.”

Two riders walk in with trays of food and pewter mugs, setting them
down on the table. There are more than enough biscuits for the four of us
and a jar of what looks to be strawberry jam.

“Eat and drink,” Professor Grady says, gesturing to the trays. “You
won’t have the opportunity once we enter the scenario. Also”—he flashes a
grin— “there’s a patch up for grabs if you manage to escape. Though from
what I hear, no squad has managed it in the last decade.”

“It’s as good as ours,” Ridoc responds.
“Confidence.” Professor Grady nods at Ridoc. “I like that in a second-

year.” He moves toward the door, then turns. “I’ll let you know when we
begin the scenario. Until then, you all need to share a secret. Something no
one else outside the four of you could possibly know. And yes, we’re going



to try and force it out of you, along with the secret phrases you’ve already
been given. Remember the coping mechanisms you’ve been taught in class
so far, and this will be over before you know it. Every rider who graduates
has sat where you’re sitting and made it through what you’re about to
experience. Have faith in yourself. We’re doing this for you, not to you.”
He offers a final reassuring smile, then takes his leave, shutting the door
behind him.

Rhiannon moves immediately to the door, examining the bars and sealed
hatch. “It’s not sound-shielded that I can tell, but if we keep our voices
down, we should have a modicum of privacy.” She tries the handle. “And
we’re definitely locked in.”

Sawyer parcels out the food onto the four plates we’ve been given.
“It’s all so…civilized,” I note as he slides a plate in front of me.
Rhiannon checks the other door. “And that’s a bathroom, thank gods.”
“I wonder if they take it away during the actual test,” Ridoc muses,

slathering jam onto his biscuit with the lone knife we’ve been provided.
“Fuck, I hope not,” Sawyer says, taking the knife from Ridoc. “Anyone

else wondering if we’re expecting company?” He nods toward the bed on
the end.

“Statistically, five second-years are alive in each squad at this point,” I
say, reaching for one of the mugs on the tray. “We lost Nadine.”

Silence falls for a second, then two.
“Well, we’re not losing anyone else. The four of us will make it to

graduation,”
Rhiannon says, grabbing a mug for herself, too. She sniffs at it, then sets

it down. “Smells like apple juice. All right. We don’t know how much time
we have, so let’s go. Pick a secret—any secret—and share with the group.”
The knife and jam go to her next. “I’ll start. Last year while we were at
Montserrat, Violet and I snuck out so I could see my family.”

“You what?” Sawyer’s brows rise.
Ridoc swallows his bite. “Badass. Didn’t know you had it in you to

break the rules, Violet.”



“Oh, Violet’s full of secrets, aren’t you?” Rhiannon shoots a look my
way and hands me the knife.

“Really?” I dish out the jam a little too aggressively.
“Whoa.” Ridoc glances between us. “Am I picking up on some

tension?”
“No,” Rhi and I simultaneously answer, then look at each other. Both

our shoulders sag, and she sighs, looking away. I guess that’s where our line
is drawn. This thing we’re going through is just between us. “We’re fine,”
she says.

Somehow that makes me feel a little better, but not much.
I bite into the biscuit and chew thoroughly just in case whatever they put

us through makes me puke it up later. I need a secret I can share that won’t
get any of them killed.

“I didn’t tell my parents I had to repeat,” Sawyer says, his gaze locked
on his plate. “They didn’t even question my first letter this year. They
assumed that Riders Quadrant cadets couldn’t write for the first two years,
and I let them believe it. I just didn’t want them to be embarrassed of me.”

“You’re not an embarrassment,” I say softly, reaching for my mug. “And
I’m sure they’re just glad you’re alive. So many of us aren’t.”

“Agreed.” Ridoc nods, his hands wrapped around his mug. “I’m terrified
of snakes.”

“That’s a shitty secret,” Sawyer counters, his mouth lifting into a smile.
“Surprise me with one, and you’ll see just how shitty. Besides, you

didn’t know it, so I think it qualifies.” Ridoc shrugs. “We’re not supposed to
have a weakness in the quadrant, right? That’s my weakness. I scream like a
toddler every time I see one.”

Everyone looks my way. Here we go. “I’m in love with Xaden Riorson.”
Mira. Them. I seem to be able to say the words to anyone who isn’t Xaden.

“Hate to break it to you, but that’s not a secret,” Ridoc says, shaking his
head. “Yes, it is,” I argue, my grip tightening on the mug.

“No,” Sawyer chimes in. “It’s really not.”
“Hasn’t been for a while,” Rhi adds, giving me the first real smile I’ve

seen from her in weeks. “You’re going to have to do better than that.”



They’re supposed to be my center, my backbone, my safe place. That’s
why squadmates are forbidden from killing each other. Venin. Wyvern. The
daggers. The wards. Andarna. Brennan. Aretia. I have too many secrets to
count, and none of them are safer for it—they’re just blissfully ignorant.

“Can’t my secret be the same as Rhiannon’s?” I ask.
“No,” they all answer.
One thing. There has to be one thing I can tell them that might help

prepare them for what’s coming. “Our infantry is killing Poromish civilians
at the border.”

“What?” Sawyer leans in, his freckles standing out as the blood drains
from his face.

“There’s no way,” Ridoc argues.
Rhiannon stares silently at me.
“Happened while I was at Samara.” I look them each in the eye.

“Whether or not we’re getting updated at Battle Brief, it’s happening. Good
enough secret?”

They all nod, and I look away when I catch Rhiannon studying me.
“Good,” I say, lifting my mug. The others do the same. I breathe in,

tilting the mug to drink— “Stop!” I hiss. “Don’t drink it.” I set it down like
the poison it is.

“What the hell?” Ridoc asks, putting his mug on the table.
“It smells like the water they gave us before the land navigation course,”

I whisper.
Rhi and Sawyer set theirs down, too.
“They’re trying to disconnect us from our dragons,” Sawyer notes.
“Or dull our signets,” Rhiannon adds. “Did anyone drink?”
We all shake our heads.
“Good. Don’t tell them. Fake the disconnect.” She rises quickly and we

follow, each dumping the content of our mugs in the toilet. “We can survive
for three days without water, and we should be out of here tomorrow. No
matter how thirsty we get, we’ll live. We hold the line.”

Now I understand the biscuits. My mouth feels like I’ve been eating
sand. “We hold the line,” Sawyer agrees as we return to the table and sit.



“Fuck tomorrow. I say we break out tonight,” Ridoc whispers. “There
have to be keys that you can transport, right?” he says to Rhi.

“Not through walls.” She shakes her head. “I’m close but not there yet.”
“Or you can bend the metal hinges?” That one is directed to Sawyer.

“Hell, I can pull moisture out of the air and force ice through the lock.” He
turns to me.

“I’m of absolutely no use in this situation.” I lean back in my chair.
The door swings open and Professor Grady walks in.
“We can’t reach our dragons,” Rhi says, lifting her chin. “You tricked

us.”
“Lesson number one.” He holds up a finger. “We’re always in scenario.”
Ten minutes later, we find out what the second chamber holds—not

much— when they chain Ridoc, Rhiannon, and Sawyer to the rock wall
they’ve been ordered to sit against. They’re close enough together that they
can almost but not quite touch as their wrists are cuffed in hanging
manacles. There are at least six other sets on either side of the trio, and the
mage lights above us show every dried blood spatter on the stone.

“I’m guessing the seat is for me?” I ask Professor Grady, eyeing the
stained wooden chair in the center of the cylindrical room and its shackles
along each armrest and leg. My heart pounds like it has a chance of
escaping my chest, escaping this room. There’s a drain under the chair, but I
refuse to even think about what it’s for.

“It is.” He motions, and I sit, ignoring every instinct to flee. Panic
threatens to choke me as he locks my right arm into the shackle, then does
the same with both of my legs, leaving my dislocated shoulder in the sling.
“Here is where I leave you.”

“You what?” Ridoc pulls against the shackles at his wrists, but they
don’t give.

“I’ll read the reports and give you my advice before the exam,” he tells
us. “But we learned a long time ago that it doesn’t exactly foster trust
between cadets and professors if we’re the ones doing the questioning.” He
looks at each of us in turn. “Remember what you’ve been taught. They’ll
try to separate you, turn you against one another, or make you think that



talking is an act of mercy. Use the strategies from your reading. Lean on
one another. I’ll be just outside the entrance. You make it to me, you earn
that patch. Good luck.” He smiles like he didn’t just serve us up to be
beaten, then leaves.

“Is now a good time to admit that I haven’t done this portion of the
reading?” Ridoc asks once we’re alone.

“No!” Rhiannon shoots him a glare.
“Violet, are you all right?” Sawyer asks.
“I’m the only one in a chair, so I feel like I’m one up on you guys,” I

joke, but it falls flat as the door opens behind me.
Two riders I’ve never seen before—one man, one woman—enter. The

man offers us a smile. “Well, hello there. You are all prisoners selected for
interrogation,” he says, leaning against the wall, just out of reach from
Sawyer. He’s average, unremarkable in height, looks, even his hair. I could
have passed him a dozen times in the halls of Basgiath, or any of the
outposts, and not noticed him. Same goes for the woman. It’s as if being
unmemorable is necessary to the job.

The woman circles me, a vulture scenting for weakness. I lift my chin,
determined to show none.

“You each have one piece of information we need,” the man says. “Give
it up now, and this all ends. It’s as easy as that.”

“My map is under my mattress,” Ridoc says.
My jaw fucking drops.
“Ah, going with the start-lying-immediately-so-they-won’t-know-when-

youtell-the-truth strategy.” The man grins. “Good one. But unfortunately for
you, my signet is similar to Lieutenant Nora’s and has to do with your
bodily functions. In layman’s terms, I’ll know when you’re lying, and you
are lying.”

The woman lashes out, the back of her hand striking my cheek so hard
that my head snaps to the side. Pain bursts and I blink rapidly, then run my
tongue over my teeth. No blood.

“Silver One!”
“Not now.” I slam my shields up to spare him this.



“Violet!” Ridoc shouts, surging against his chains.
“I’m all right,” I tell him, tell all of them. I do what I always do,

compartmentalize the pain and push past it, forcing a smile. “See? Fine.”
Rhiannon quickly masks her horror, but Sawyer doesn’t bother to hide

his disgust with our captors.
“You’re the weakest. That’s why you’re first up,” the woman says,

disdain dripping from her low voice. “We’ve read the files on all of you.”
She drops to a crouch in front of me, then looks me over, her attention
catching on my hair, the sting of heat at my cheek that I’m sure bears her
handprint, and finally the sling. “How did someone as frail as you survive
your first year?”

“You three carried her, didn’t you?” the man says, looking at my
squadmates. “What an unfair burden to put on first-years.”

“Don’t tell them anything they can use against us,” Rhiannon orders.
The woman laughs. “As if we don’t know everything already.” She

stands slowly. “Tell us the secret you’re keeping.”
“Fuck off.” I brace, and sure enough, her hand flies at my face. This

time, I taste blood, but none of my teeth are loose. I build a mental wall
around the pain, picturing it disappearing beneath the box I build for it, just
like I do with my shields.

“Quite the mouth for a general’s daughter,” the woman sneers.
“Who do you think I got it from?”
Her facade slips, and she genuinely smiles for a heartbeat before

masking it. “How about this? Any of you give up your secret, and I won’t
shatter her pretty little face.”

“It’s going to take a lot more than that to break us,” Rhiannon says.
“I couldn’t agree more. Don’t watch,” I tell my squadmates, then brace.
She hits from the other side, striking higher, and my cheek explodes. At

least that’s how it feels. The initial wave nauseates me, then dissipates into
a dull throb. My vision in my right eye blurs and something wet trickles
down my cheek.

“Maybe she’s not the key,” the woman says, backing away from me and
heading for the others. “Maybe you’re all sick and tired of having to carry



her frail weight.” She tips Ridoc’s head up. “Or maybe she’s only strong for
herself.” She closed-fist punches him in the face. Blood and saliva hit the
wall next to him.

Rage overtakes the pain, and I try to rock forward, but not only are my
arms and legs shackled, the chair is bolted to the floor.

She looks over her shoulder at me. “You have the power to make it
stop.” She hits again.

I close my eyes and wish I could close my ears when I hear his grunt
after the next punch. And the next. And the next. When I open my eyes—
correction, eye, we’ve all taken a hit.

“Let them sit with that for a minute,” the man suggests. “They’ll soften
up in a couple of hours.” The woman agrees and they leave us, shutting the
door but not the hatch on the window.

“Well, this fucking sucks.” Sawyer spits blood onto the floor.
“Violet, your eye…” Rhiannon says softly.
“It’s swelling shut, not falling out.” I shrug with my good shoulder.
“If that’s their opening, what’s next?” Ridoc asks. His cheek is split wide

open.
“They’ll try to turn us against one another,” Rhiannon answers. “We

don’t break. Agreed?”
“Agreed.” We all say it.
The worst part isn’t the pain or the swollen eye. It’s the hours of waiting,

the not knowing when they’re going to come back and dish out worse. And
then worse comes and leaves us all with more bruises in various places.

I’m pretty sure that last blow left Sawyer concussed.
Without windows, it’s impossible to know how much longer we have to

hold out for when we don’t know what time it—
“What time is it?” I ask Xaden, lifting my shields just enough to

communicate.
“Almost midnight,” he answers. “Are you—”
“Don’t finish that question. You know what happens down here.”
“Yeah. I do.”



“It’s almost midnight,” I tell the others quietly. “We still have all night to
go.”

“Is Tairn listening for the bells?” Sawyer asks, turning his face against
his shackled arm to clear some of the blood off.

“Not exact—”
The door opens and the man walks in carrying a pewter mug. “Who’s

thirsty?” He drops down in front of Sawyer, blocking my view of his face.
“It’s right here. And you don’t even have to give me your secret. You just
have to tell me one of their personal ones.” He motions down the line. “It
doesn’t count as breaking. It’s just a personal detail that doesn’t mean
anything.”

“Fuck you.”
“Pity.” The man tilts his head. “You’re just not thirsty enough yet. Don’t

worry. You’ll get there.” He moves to Rhiannon, then Ridoc, then me. Our
answers are all the same.

“Tight-knit group, aren’t they?” Chills race down my spine as Varrish
walks in, eyeing us all with unfettered joy.

“They are, sir,” the man says.
Varrish rubs his thumb across his chin. “Doesn’t someone usually give

up a personal detail by now?”
“They do, sir.”
Pride flares behind my ribs.
Varrish leans down and flicks the green Iron Squad patch on Ridoc’s

chest.
“I’m guessing that’s how they earned this last year.” He stands and

sighs. “This is taking too long.”
“Sir, we’re using standard interrogation protocol,” the woman says,

entering the chamber.
“Then it’s a good thing that I’m here.” His cheery disposition scares me

more than the woman’s fist. “This is my area of expertise—interrogation.
And I have just the thing to crack them in record time.” He looks toward the
hallway, then crooks his fingers. “Come on in. Don’t be shy.”



Rhiannon’s eyes flare, her gaze jumping from the doorway to me. The
fear I see there hits me like a punch to the stomach.

“I believe you all know Wingleader Aetos?”

OceanofPDF.com



Every few years, a squad comes along that defies all expectations. They
rise through the ranks, secure every patch, win every challenge. And

then…they inexplicably falter, then fall. They call it the burnout effect:
they flare too fast, too bright to sustain the pace. Sad, really, but mildly

entertaining to watch them turn on one another.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

D ain steps into view, and my heart hits the stone floor as he surveys my
friends, then turns toward me. His eyes widen as he takes stock of my

bruised and swollen face. “Violet.”
“Dain is here.” I reach for Xaden even as fear freezes me in place. This

can’t happen. I’m unsure how much Dain knows, but it’s definitely not as
much as I do.

“I’m on my way.” The tense tone of Xaden’s voice is all it takes for me
to know how deep the shit is about to get.

“You can’t do anything.” I reinforce my shields, putting all my mental
energy into the task and drawing power from Tairn to bolster them, stacking
the bricks two deep around my mental Archives.

“I don’t understand,” Sawyer says. “Why is our wingleader here?”
“He’s advocating for her like Riorson said a wingleader should,” Ridoc

answers, hope in his voice. “Aren’t you?”
“He’s not,” I answer, keeping my eyes on Dain and his hands.
“Regulations state that riders should be healthy before beginning

interrogation assessment,” Dain barks, ripping his gaze from mine to
address Varrish. “Cadet Sorrengail is clearly not healthy.”

I blink in sheer surprise.
“Such a rule follower.” Varrish clucks his tongue. “Regulations say they

should, not that they have to be. It’s more realistic that a rider would be



wounded when captured.”
“What am I doing here?” Dain demands.
“Testing a theory.” Varrish smiles. “But while we’re waiting for our

guest to arrive, you should practice on her.” He points to me.
Guest? My fear is replaced with anger. “Don’t come. Varrish wants to

see if you will. I think he’s testing the bond-blocking mixture.”
“If he sees your memory, the entire movement is at risk.”
“And if you come in here, whipping shadows around, he’ll know I have

something to hide, and this will become a real interrogation. Your only
option is to trust that you trained me well enough.” A rescue sounds great
in theory but would fuck all of us.

“Violet—” The plea in his voice nearly breaks me.
I shove that last brick in place and block Xaden out.
“You want me to…” Dain lifts his brows.
“Yes. Use your signet on her. Only to draw out the secret phrase, of

course.”
“My signet is classified.”
“And she already knows what it is,” Varrish says, shaking his head like

this is all no big deal. “Doesn’t she? That’s why she’s so angry with you.
She blames you for what happened to her friend.” He walks forward. “It’s
amazing what you can learn by simply observing.”

Dain shakes his head. “I’m not doing this.”
“Then who are you going to practice on to extend your ability past

recent events? We’re running out of civilians around here for Nolon to
mend, and if you think she hasn’t told the rest of her squad your little secret,
you’re giving her far too much credit.”

Holy shit. While Carr is my teacher, Varrish is Dain’s. What the hell is
our vice commandant’s signet?

Dain stiffens, his eyes searching mine.
I don’t deny it. I can’t. I’m a shitty liar, and with the lie-finder—or

whatever his signet is called—on the other side of the room, I’m better off
keeping my mouth shut.



“This is what your signet is made for. You’re the first line of defense,
Aetos. She could be a Poromish spy or a gryphon rider. You could save the
entire kingdom by just plucking her secrets from her memory.” Varrish
looks at me like I’m an animal made to be studied. “You can see what really
happened that day when the two marked ones were killed by”—he cocks
his head to the side—“gryphons, wasn’t it, Cadet Sorrengail? The truth is
waiting, Wingleader Aetos, and you’re the only one who can see it.”

Breathe in. Breathe out. I concentrate on steadying my heart rate and
holding Dain’s gaze.

“Holy shit,” Ridoc mutters. “He can what?”
I keep my focus on Dain. How can someone be so familiar and yet such

a stranger? He’s the same boy I climbed trees with, the same one I ran to
whenever anything went wrong. But he’s also the reason Soleil and Liam
are dead.

“You could learn what it is she sees in him,” Varrish whispers, getting
closer to Dain. “Why she chose him over you. Don’t you want to know? All
the answers are right there. You just have to know where to reach.” Have to
give it to him, he’s convincing as fuck.

The war within Dain’s eyes makes my throat tighten, and when he
reaches for my face with both hands, I arch my neck, leaning as far back as
the chair will let me.

“No.” I force the word out.
“No.” He repeats my refusal slowly, then drops his hands, his gaze

falling from mine. “I will not participate in an interrogation assessment of a
cadet with a prior injury,” he says over his shoulder at Varrish.

Then he walks out.
I drag a breath in, air wheezing past the tightness of my throat and into

my lungs.
Rhiannon’s eyes meet mine, then slide shut slowly in relief.
“Well, that was disappointing and anticlimactic,” Varrish says with the

first frown I’ve ever seen on his face. “Fucking rule follower. Back to
typical tactics, I guess.” He draws back before I can brace and throws a
hard punch to my dislocated shoulder.



Agony overwhelms every one of my senses.
Then there’s only black.

 
 
 

Nolon hovers above me when I wake. I jolt up from the wooden bed,
and he rears back.

“There she is,” he says, settling into the chair next to the bed.
“What time is it?” I glance around the room, quickly spotting Rhiannon,

Sawyer, and Ridoc sitting on bunks. They don’t look any more injured than
they did before I passed out.

Before Varrish punched my shoulder out of the socket. Gingerly, I rotate
the joint, then look at Nolon. I’m mended. There’s an ache but nothing
more, and I can see out of both eyes.

He nods.
“It’s morning,” Rhi answers, worry lining her forehead. “I think.”
I reach for Xaden, but the pathway is opaque again. He’s gone.
“The vice commandant called me in to heal you.” Nolon’s voice drops,

and he leans forward. “So he can shatter you again and again until you
break. I’m on orders to remain in the antechamber for the rest of your
interrogation, which he’s extended until tomorrow.”

Dread knots my empty stomach.
“Is that normal?” Sawyer asks, leaning toward me and bracing his

forearms on his knees.
“No,” Nolon answers, holding my gaze. “He wants whatever it is you

know, Violet.” He reaches for my hand and squeezes lightly. “Is it worth
holding on to?”

I nod.
“Is it worth watching your squadmates tortured?”
I wince but nod again.
“I think I’ve had my head buried in other matters for too long.” He

sighs, then stands. “Why don’t you walk me to the door?”



I swing my legs over the bunk, then do as he asks, following him to the
chamber’s door. Rhiannon isn’t far behind. “You’d better find a way out,”
he whispers to me before speaking through the open window. “I’m done for
now.”

The door opens, and Nolon escapes. “I’ll close it,” he tells whoever is on
the other side. His eyes meet mine through the window as he shuts the door,
the lock audibly clicking into place…but not the window.

Rhiannon tugs me down, and we both drop into a crouch.
“I’ve been thinking about my other patient,” Nolon says casually.
“What about him?” Varrish replies.
“He spent the night in the infirmary again. Sorrengail will have to sleep

off the mending for another hour or so. Why don’t you walk back with me
and see if your particular skills could be of use? I might be overlooking
something.”

Rhiannon and I exchange the same confused look.
“You think the sessions are failing?” Varrish asks.
“I think I’ve done all I can for him,” Nolon answers. “I’m not going to

sit here all day and waste time while she’s sleeping—”
“Fine, we’ll go,” Varrish replies. “We have to be quick. The others are

fetching breakfast.”
“Then by all means, let’s make it fast.”
A moment later, the antechamber door opens and closes.
Rhiannon and I stand slowly, then peer through the window.
“I think we’re alone,” she whispers.
“Agreed.”
“We have to get out of here,” Rhiannon says to the guys. “I really,

honestly think Varrish might try to kill Violet.”
My stomach flips. Oh Dunne, she actually said it.
“Are you serious?” Sawyer asks, his eyes bulging, but Ridoc stays quiet,

his gaze jumping between Rhiannon and me.
“He’s already pushed me to burnout once,” I admit quietly.
A look passes between the guys, and they stand.



“Fine, I’ll ask the obvious question,” Ridoc says as they cross the
chamber. “What the hell do you know that we don’t?”

I glance between all three of them. “If I told you—and trust me, I’ve
considered it—you would be the ones strapped to the chair. I’m not about to
let that happen.”

“Maybe you should let us decide what risks we’re willing to take.”
Sawyer cracks his knuckles and rolls his shoulders, already looking at the
door.

“Lesser magic isn’t working on the lock,” Ridoc mutters, his hand
extended toward the door.

“Valid point, Sawyer. But this…” I shake my head. “It’s not just about
me.”

“Right now it is,” Rhiannon says. “It’s all about saving you. We can
figure the rest out later. Sawyer, do your thing.”

“Already on it.”
We move out of his way, and he puts his hands up toward each of the

hinges. His fingers tremble and the hinges smoke, then melt. Hot metal
drips down the edges of the door as he works.

“Quick, before you accidentally weld us in here,” Ridoc lectures.
“I don’t see you melting anything,” Sawyer responds from where he’s

crouched, sweat beading his brow as he melts the last hinge.
Relief nearly takes out my knees. We’re going to make it!
The door wobbles, and Rhiannon and I lunge toward the guys, both

throwing up our hands over them. Wood smacks into my palms, sending a
jolt of pain through my newly mended shoulder as we catch what feels like
the heaviest door ever made.

“Move!” Rhiannon shouts.
The guys scurry out from under the door, then help us lower it to the

floor.
“We should consider quitting the quadrant,” Ridoc jokes as we walk

over the door and out of the chamber. “We’d be kickass thieves.”
“With dragons,” Sawyer agrees.
“Unstoppable,” Ridoc says with a grin.



We pause at the desk only long enough to retrieve our weapons. I feel a
little less panicked, less vulnerable with every blade I sheathe.

“Ready?” Rhiannon asks, gripping her shortsword.
Guess I’m not the only one who disdains feeling helpless.
We all nod, then head for the main door. Hope lives for all of a

millisecond.
“It’s the same kind of lock. Lesser magic isn’t working,” Sawyer

seethes, already putting his hands out.
“I don’t—” Heat prickles along my ribs. It’s the same feeling I get when

I walk through the wards on my door. I look down and stare. The dagger
closest to the door handle is hot and…tingling. I pull it from the sheath,
bumping against the door handle as I brush my thumb over the decorative
pommel.

Metal clicks against metal, and we all turn to look at the lock.
“What the hell?” Sawyer’s eyebrows jump.
“I don’t know. That’s…impossible.” Knives don’t open locks. But the

heat and the tingling sensation are gone.
“Someone stop staring and try the fucking door!” Rhi orders.
Reaching for the handle, I hold my breath as the latch depresses. I pull.

The door opens. “Holy shit.” It’s coincidence. It has to be. Magic isn’t tied
to objects like that.

“Holy shit later, escape now,” Rhi says. “Go!”
“Right.” I sheathe the blade and yank the door open.

OceanofPDF.com



If we ever choose to invade enemy territory—which we don’t—I would
choose Zolya as my first target. Take out Cliffsbane Academy and you

take out years of gryphon riders in one strike.

—TACTICS, A PERSONAL MEMOIR BY LIEUTENANT LYRON PANCHEK



CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

W e race out of the cave and into the morning air, the rising sun hitting
us in the face. Throwing up our hands to shield our eyes, we run

forward into the knee-high grass that spans the distance from the cliffs to the
trees.

“Where did you get those knives?” Rhiannon asks when we’re halfway
to the line of oaks.

“Xaden.” It doesn’t even occur to me to lie. “He had them made for me
—”

“Well, this is an unexpected delight,” Professor Grady says from behind
us.

We spin, and I draw two daggers. I’d rather visit Malek than go back into
that chamber. But I will…for the final exam.

“Think about that later,” Tairn commands.
“I’m fine, thanks for asking.”
“Of course you are. I chose well.”
Professor Grady grins and sets down his mug as he rises from the chair

that sits a few feet away from the door against the rocky cliffside.
Rhiannon strides forward, lifting her sword in attack position with her

right arm and extending her left hand. “We’ll take that patch now.”

…



D ain doesn’t look me in the eye at any point over the next few days, and I
don’t make the effort to talk to him. What could I even say? Thank you
for doing the only decent thing and not violating my privacy?

“I’m just saying that spending every weekend flying for Samara or holed
up in your room with Riorson isn’t good for you,” Ridoc says as we climb
the staircase of the academic wing with the crowd headed for Battle Brief.

“As opposed to…” I glance over at him and wince. His cheek is still
black and blue.

Thanks to Nolon, there’s not a mark on me. It’s anything but fair.
We lost a first-year, Trysten, to Gauntlet practice while we were in

interrogation and missed the formation where they called his name on the
death roll, too. That isn’t fair, either.

“Being a normal second-year and spending some time blowing off a little
steam every now and then,” Sawyer answers for Ridoc from my other side.
Ever since the interrogation, my squadmates have barely let me out of their
sight.

“I’m fine,” I tell them both. “This is just what happens when mated
dragons bond to riders in different years.” Twenty-four hours from now, I’ll
be in the saddle on my way to Xaden.

“It’s why they usually don’t do it,” Ridoc mutters.
“First Squad lost someone,” Rhiannon says, coming up behind us as we

reach the second floor. “They just came out of interrogation about an hour
ago. Sorrel’s name will be on the death roll tomorrow.”

My heart drops. The interrogation assessment has now taken two second-
years.

“The girl with the kick-ass bow skills?” Sawyer gapes at Rhiannon as
she scoots between us.

“Yeah,” she says quietly.
A scribe cadet walks by, but I can’t see who it is with the hood up. That’s

odd. Usually they’re only in the quadrant for death roll or whenever
Markham needs extra people.

“Did she break?” Ridoc asks. “Or did they break her?”



“I don’t—” Rhiannon’s words stop short, and so do we when two First
Wing squads move off the wall and into our path. “Can we help you?”

They’re all second-years. I drop my hands to my sides, close to my
daggers. “You guys escaped, right?” Caroline Ashton asks, lowering her
voice. “That’s what people are saying about the new patch.” She taps beside
her own shoulder, where we now wear a circular, silver patch with a black
key.

“It’s a classified patch,” Sawyer says.
“We just want to know how you did it,” Caroline whispers as the crowd

pushes by us on the side to get to the briefing room. “Rumor is, it took them
an entire day to reset the interrogation room after you guys.”

The fact that she calls it a room and not rooms lets me know no one is
really talking.

“All we can tell you is the same advice you’ve already been given. Don’t
break,” Rhiannon tells them.

“Stick together,” I add, holding Caroline’s gaze even when she narrows it
on me.

“Shouldn’t you all be in Battle Brief?” Bodhi asks, his voice booming as
he comes up behind us. One look sends the other squads scurrying for the
door.

“Tairn told me he felt Sgaeyl get very angry last night,” I say over my
shoulder to Bodhi as we continue walking. “Anything I should know
about?”

“Not that I’m aware of.” We separate as we walk through the wide
double doors into the briefing room.

My squadmates and I start down the steps, but something is off. The
usual hum of the briefing room is approaching a roar of murmurs and
outright exclamations as cadets pick up what look to be leaflets lying on
every seat.

“What’s happening?” Ridoc asks.
“Not sure,” I answer as we bypass the first cadets in our row and find our

way to our seats.



I pick up the half sheet of parchment on my chair and flip it over as my
squadmates do the same.

My knees weaken as I read the headline.

ZOLYA FALLS TO DRAGON FIRE

THE THIRD LARGEST CITY IN THE BRAEVICK
PROVINCE HAS FALLEN TO THE BLUE FIRE
DRAGONS AND THEIR RIDERS. THOUGH THE CITY
AND ITS DRIFTS FOUGHT VALIANTLY, THE TWO-DAY
BATTLE ENDED IN POROMISH DEFEAT. ALL WHO DID
NOT EVACUATE HAVE PERISHED. AN ESTIMATED
TEN THOUSAND LIVES HAVE BEEN LOST, INCLUDING
GENERAL FENELLA, THE COMMANDER OF
BRAEVICK’S GRYPHON FLEET. ALL TRADE ROUTES
TO THE CITY HAVE BEEN BARRICADED TO PREVENT
FURTHER LOSS OF LIFE.

Two days ago.
My hand trembles, and I twist around toward the back of the room, my

gaze jumping from one third-year to the next until I find Bodhi and Imogen.
“Oh gods,” Rhiannon whispers beside me.
Bodhi and Imogen exchange a panicked look, and then our gazes collide.

What the hell are we supposed to do? Bodhi’s tense shake of his head tells
me he doesn’t know, either.

Drawing the least amount of attention to myself seems prudent, so I turn
back to face the map and slide into my seat.

“Is this real?” Sawyer asks, turning over the parchment to examine it.
“Looks…real?” Ridoc scratches the back of his neck as he sits. “Is this

some kind of test to see if we can discern official proclamation leaflets from
propaganda?”

“I don’t think so,” Rhiannon says slowly, staring at me.



But my eyes are locked on the recessed floor and Professor Devera, who
has just been handed a leaflet.

Please be who I think you are.
Her eyes widen, but I only see them for a second before she turns to face

the map, her head tilted back. I’d bet my life that she’s staring right where I
am now, at the little circle at the foot of the Esben Mountains along the
Stonewater River that marks where Zolya stands—stood. It’s maybe a four-
hour flight from our border.

“Violet?” Rhiannon’s voice rises, like it’s not the first time she’s called
my name.

“What is all the commotion this morning?” Markham shouts over the
briefing room as he descends the steps. Someone hands him a leaflet.

“What do you think?” Rhiannon asks.
I glance from my squadmate’s furrowed brows to the leaflet and force

the roaring in my ears to quiet as I make a quick study of the parchment.
“Parchment looks like ours, but I’ve never personally seen any made outside
the border. Typeset is standard to every printing press I’ve ever seen.
There’s no seal, Navarrian or Poromish.” I run my thumb over the larger,
scrolling block letters of the headline, smudging the ink. “It’s less than
twenty-four hours old. The ink hasn’t cured.”

“But is it real?” Sawyer repeats his earlier question.
“The chances of someone hauling in all these leaflets from the border are

next to nothing,” I tell him. “So if you’re asking if it was printed in
Poromiel—”

My head jerks up, and I see Markham’s face blotch red as he says
something to Caroline Ashton on the aisle. She jumps from her seat and
runs up the stairs, disappearing through the door.

“It was printed here,” I whisper, fear twisting my stomach into knots.
Whoever did it is as good as dead if they left any trace.

“So it’s not real.” Sawyer lifts his eyebrows, the freckles on his forehead
disappearing into the grooves of his skin.

“Just because it’s printed here for public dissemination doesn’t mean
what’s on it isn’t real,” I explain, “but it also doesn’t mean that it is.”



“We wouldn’t do this,” Sawyer argues. “There’s no way we send a riot to
annihilate a city of civilians.”

“Attention!” Markham shouts, his footsteps thudding as he strides down
the steps.

The noise doesn’t dissipate.
“If someone was trying to get news out, they’d send one leaflet like this

to the printing press to be approved by scribes,” I tell my squadmates
quickly, knowing our time is short. “Once approved, it would take hours to
set the blocks to print unless multiple scribes worked on it. But this isn’t
official. There’s no seal. So either it’s fake and printed for just this class—
which is a lot of work—or it’s real…and not approved.” It’s exactly what I
would say if I didn’t know the truth, and to be honest, I’m not certain this
leaflet is the truth.

“Riders!” Devera yells, turning to face us. “Quiet!”
The room falls silent.
Markham’s at the front of the classroom now, his features schooled in a

mask of serenity as he stands beside Professor Devera. If I didn’t know him
better, I’d say he was almost enjoying the chaos, but I do, and he’s rubbing
his forefinger against his thumb.

No matter what he says next, this wasn’t his plan.
“Apparently”—he gestures to us, his palm facing upward—“we are not

ready for today’s exercise. We were going to follow up on our discussion
about propaganda, but I can see now that I overestimated your ability to
judge a simple printing like this without hysteria.” The insult is delivered in
unemotional monotone.

Suddenly, I feel fifteen again, my self-worth determined by this man’s
opinion of my intellect and control.

“Damn.” Ridoc sags in his seat. “That’s…harsh.”
“That’s Markham,” I say quietly. “You think only riders can be vicious?
Words are just as capable of eviscerating someone as a blade, and he’s a

master.”
“On the off chance that we actually did this and someone leaked the

information?” Rhiannon asks, glancing my way. “You know him better than



we do. What’s his next move?”
“First, I don’t think we’d target civilians across the border.” That’s the

truth. We just won’t do anything to help them, either. “But if he didn’t print
the leaflets, he’ll discredit, deflect, then distract.”

“As it is, we have two much more pressing matters to discuss,” Markham
lectures, his tone still cool. “So, you will now pass all pieces of propaganda
to the left, where they will be collected to discuss on a day when you’re
capable of being rational.”

A ripple passes over the room as everyone hurries to do as he asks. I’m
reluctant to let mine go, but it’s not worth drawing attention.

Professor Devera folds hers with quick, precise movements and pockets
it.

“Honestly.” Markham shakes his head. “You should have been able to
spot those leaflets as propaganda within seconds.”

Discredit. I have to admit, he’s good. The stacks reach the ends of the
rows, and then the cadets hand them forward, the pile growing and growing
as it descends toward the floor.

“When, in the history of Navarre, have we ever flown a riot comprised
only of blue dragons?” He looks us over like we’re children. Like we’ve
been found wanting.

Clever. He’s so fucking clever. With the leaflets collected, every cadet in
the room will question the exact wording. Every cadet except the riders who
know the meaning of that entire paragraph came down to the placement of
the word fire.

“But as I said.” Markham claps his hands together and sighs. “We’ll
return to this lesson when we’re ready. Right now, our first order of business
is here, and celebration is in order.”

Deflection complete. Cue distraction.
“I wasn’t sure this day would come, which is why I hope that you’ll

forgive us for keeping the months of Colonel Nolon’s hard work a secret.
We didn’t want to disappoint you if he could not pull off what will arguably
be the greatest achievement of any mender in our history.”



Didn’t want to disappoint us? I barely manage to keep from rolling my
eyes.

Markham raises his hand toward the doorway and smiles. “He was
crushed under the weight of a mountain a few months ago, but Nolon has
mended bone after bone to return him to your quadrant.”

Crushed under the weight of a mountain? It can’t be. My stomach
hollows, and the noise of the room muffles under the sound of my own
blood rushing through my ears to the cadence of a drum.

“No fucking way,” Ridoc says, breaking through my panic.
“Tairn?” I can’t bring myself to look.
“Checking now.” The clipped, tense tone reminds me of Resson.
“Join me in welcoming back your fellow rider, Jack Barlowe!” Markham

claps. The entire briefing room joins in, the loudest cheers coming from
First Wing as two figures walk down the stairs.

Breathe. In. Out. I force air through my lungs as Rhiannon grasps my
hand and holds tight.

“It’s him,” Rhiannon says. “It’s really him.”
“You brought down an entire cliff on his unhinged ass.” Sawyer claps

slowly, but it’s only for show. “How the fuck was there anything left to
mend?”

Dragging my gaze left, I finally work up the courage to look.
Same bulky frame. Same blond hair. Same profile. Same hands that

nearly killed me during a challenge last year…before I killed him during
War Games the first time my signet flared.

He turns a few rows down, walking past other second-years as Caroline
Ashton escorts him back to his squad. It all makes sense now. The secrecy.
Her visiting the infirmary. Nolon’s exhaustion.

Jack pivots as he reaches an empty seat, turning slowly and nodding as
the applause carries on. The look on his face is almost humble, like a man
who’s received a second chance he definitely doesn’t deserve, and then he
pivots, looking up the rows to find me.

Glacial blue eyes meet mine. Any doubt I had dies a swift death. It’s
him. My pounding heart jumps into my throat.



“Maybe he learned his lesson?” Rhiannon’s voice pitches high with
empty hope.

“No,” Ridoc says, letting his hands fall to his lap. “He’s definitely going
to try to kill you. Again.”

OceanofPDF.com



Menders are not healers. Healers are bound to the Code of Chricton,
sworn to aide all in time of need and never to harm a beating heart.
Menders are riders. They’re only sworn to the Codex. They can as

easily bring harm as heal.

—MAJOR FREDERICK’S MODERN GUIDE FOR HEALERS



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

“Not helping!” Rhiannon hisses as we all stare at Jack-fucking-
Barlowe. A small, almost soft smile curves his mouth for an instant,

and we fall silent as he nods at me then looks away quickly before he takes
his seat.

“What the fuck was that?” Ridoc asks.
“I have no idea.” It’s the first time since Parapet he’s looked at me with

anything but pure malice.
“It’s him,” Tairn growls. “Baide has kept the truth hidden for these

months.”
“I can see him.” I’d ask how the fuck a dragon hides something in the

Vale, but Andarna isn’t exactly common knowledge, either.
“Be aware of him at all times,” Tairn warns.
Rhiannon squeezes my hand as she shifts in her seat. “Maybe a few

months of being dead has changed him.”
“Maybe.” Sawyer’s eyes narrow as he stares holes in the back of Jack’s

head. “But I think we’re better off killing him again.”
“I’m down with that plan,” Ridoc agrees.
“Let’s focus on keeping an eye on him,” I suggest, forcing my voice past

the knot in my throat as the applause finally dies down, allowing me to put
my thoughts in order.



Jack is alive. Fine. He’s hardly the worst thing I faced last year. I
brought down not only one but two venin. I destroyed an entire horde of
wyvern with Xaden. Maybe Jack’s changed. Maybe he hasn’t. Either way,
my signet and hand-to-hand skills have only improved, and I doubt he’s
been sparring in the infirmary.

Ridoc, Sawyer, and Rhiannon all stare at me like there’s a chance I
might grow a tail and start breathing fire at any second. “I’m all right,” I tell
them. “Seriously. Stop staring.” I don’t have the option of not being all
right.

They shoot me skeptical looks of varying degrees, then face forward.
Markham clears his throat. “Now, to our second matter of business for

the hour.” He looks over at Professor Devera.
“Yesterday evening, there was an unprecedented attack on one of our

largest outposts,” she says, her shoulders straightening as she scans the
room.

“Again?” Rhiannon mutters. “What the hell is going on out there?” She
releases my hand and starts to take notes.

A murmur rises among the cadets.
Focus. I have to focus.
“And this, cadets, is no conjecture. No propaganda. No game.” That last

word is said with a sideways glance at Markham. “It’s unprecedented not
only in its proximity—we’ve never had outposts attacked this close together
before—but also because it involved three drifts.” She lifts her pointed chin.

I glance up at the map, forcing my mind to work. Pelham near the Cygni
border is my first guess, but Keldavi—along the Braevick border—is a
close second after it nearly fell last week. Maybe the fliers are recognizing
our weaknesses.

“They attacked Samara a little after sundown, while most of the riot was
wrapping up the day’s patrol.”

The breath freezes in my lungs and my heart stutters. She has my full,
undivided attention. Who cares if Jack Barlowe is seated beneath me or if
papers are flying around with Poromish news? None of that matters more
than whatever Professor Devera is about to say.



They’re alive. They have to be.
I can’t begin to fathom a world without Mira…and Xaden? My heart

can’t comprehend the possibility.
Oh gods, Sgaeyl’s anger. I drop my shields completely, searching for a

bond I wouldn’t be able to feel from this far anyway. Still, I search.
“Tairn?” I reach out, but anxiety floods my bloodstream, overpowering

every logical thought. It’s not mine, but it may as well be. My heart begins
to pound, and my ribs close in on my lungs.

“The outpost was successfully defended by the three riders who were
not on patrol. Their victory is nothing short of astonishing. While no riders
were killed in the assault”—her gaze snaps to mine—“there was one rider
severely wounded.”

No. The denial is sharp and fast.
Rage and terror pump through my veins.
Professor Devera lifts her hand and scratches the left side of her neck

before looking away. “What questions would you ask?”
The left side of her neck.
Right where Xaden’s relic is.
Mira’s all right, but Xaden… I can’t be here. It’s impossible to be here

when I have to be there. There’s no reality outside of me being there. Here
doesn’t mean anything. Doesn’t exist.

“I have to go.” I grab my bag from the floor and shove the strap over my
shoulder.

“Was the outpost breached?” someone in front of me asks.
“Vi?” Rhi reaches for me, but I’m already standing, moving down the

row toward the staircase.
“Cadet Sorrengail!” Professor Markham calls out.
There’s no time to answer him as I climb the stairs. No world outside the

impossible-to-ignore drive that propels me up. My body isn’t even my own
because I’m not here.

“Cadet Sorrengail!” Markham yells as I leave the briefing room. “You
do not have leave!”

“Get to the courtyard,” Tairn rumbles through my mind.



We’re on the same page, neither of us willing to wait for me to walk to
the flight field. It doesn’t matter if the uncontrollable urge is coming from
me or Tairn, not when we both need the same thing.

“Violet!” someone shouts after me. Bootsteps race down the hall.
Jack Barlowe is alive. I whip a dagger from my thigh sheath and spin

toward the threat.
“Whoa!” Bodhi throws up one hand, the other clutching his rucksack. “I

don’t want you to freeze to death on the flight there.” He yanks his flight
jacket out of his pack and hands it to me.

“Thank you.” I take the jacket with motions that don’t feel like my own.
He’s right. I would have climbed onto Tairn without a jacket. At least I
carry my flight goggles in my bag at all times. “I can’t stay. I can’t explain.
I can’t be here.”

“It’s Tairn.” He nods. “Go.”
I go.

OceanofPDF.com



By their third year, a rider must attain full and complete control over
their shields. Otherwise, in moments of extreme stress, they are

susceptible to being not only influenced by their dragon’s emotions but
controlled by them.

—COLONEL KAORI’S FIELD GUIDE TO DRAGONKIND



CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

By the time we land at Samara just before nightfall, I’m a jittery, frantic
mess. I can’t bring myself to care about whatever retribution waits for

me at Basgiath. I’ll handle whatever punishment Varrish wants to dish out.
I’ve spent every minute of the eight-hour flight trying to separate my

feelings from Tairn’s, but I can’t, and he’s definitively in primal mode.
He has to be the reason there’s a hollow pit in my stomach threatening to

devour all logical thought if I don’t set eyes on Xaden in the next minute.
It’s Tairn’s desperation to see Sgaeyl unharmed making my heart pound, not
my own concern for Xaden. After all, if he was at death’s door, Sgaeyl
would have told us once we flew close enough for them to communicate. At
least that’s what the barely functioning logical part of my brain is telling
me.

This is all Tairn. But what if it isn’t? How seriously has Xaden been
wounded?

Sgaeyl may have told Tairn that Xaden lives and I could see how bad it
was for myself, but I’m still counting every second it takes the guards to
raise the portcullis. The increased security is protocol and completely
reasonable given yesterday’s attack, but every moment that ticks by grates
on my last nerve.

Just because I logically know Tairn is still flooding my emotions doesn’t
mean I can control them.



The second the portcullis is high enough for me to duck under, I do so.
For once, my size works to my advantage. I’m inside the outpost before it’s
even a quarter of the way open.

Organized chaos reigns within. Chunks of masonry ranging from half
my size to double it lay scattered around the courtyard, and a quick glance
upward is all it takes to see where they fell from. There are scorch marks on
the northern wall, too. The fliers must have breached the perimeter.

The healers work a triage station on the southern end of the fortress, the
area around them thick with wounded infantry. But there are no black
uniforms among the blue. No cream, either.

“Violet?” Mira calls out, emerging from the northwestern staircase I
know leads to their operations room. No limp, no slings, no blood that I can
see. She’s all right. Just like Devera said, only one has been wounded, and
it’s not Mira.

“Where is he?” I yank my flight goggles from the top of my head and
shove them into my bag without breaking my stride.

“What are you doing here?” She grabs hold of my shoulders, looking me
over with her customary inspection. “You’re not supposed to arrive until
Saturday.”

“Are you unharmed?”
“Yes.” She nods. “I wasn’t here. I was out on patrol.”
“Good, then tell me where he is.” My tone sharpens as my gaze swings

wildly, looking for him. Fuck, I can’t even sense him with Tairn overriding
everything.

“You don’t have leave, do you? Gods, you’re going to be so fucked
when you get back.” She sighs. Have to give it to Mira, she doesn’t fight
battles she can’t win. “He’s in the sparring gym. From what I hear, your
man is the reason we still have an outpost.”

He’s not mine. Not really.
“Thank you.” I turn away from her without another word and head for

the sparring gym. I love her, I’m thankful she’s all right, but all of that is
buried underneath the desperation clawing at my soul to lay eyes on Xaden.



The fortress is busy with recovery efforts, but the hall to the gym is
deserted. Why would they have taken him to the gym for recovery? Is he
unable to climb the steps to his room? That pit in my stomach deepens.
How badly is he hurt?

The mage lights more than make up for the dying evening light outside
the three oversize windows when I enter the gym. But there’s certainly no
makeshift infirmary in here.

Wait. What? I blink.
Xaden is on the mat in his short-sleeved, muscle-hugging sparring

uniform.
He has both his heavy swords out, metal clanging against metal as he

spars with Garrick.
“You’re slow today,” Xaden lectures, advancing mercilessly. He moves

like he always does, with lethal expertise and complete concentration.
There’s zero chance he’s even close to seriously wounded. The burst of
relief lets me draw my first full breath since leaving Basgiath, but it quickly
fades.

Hands on him. I need my hands on him.
“Not. Much. I can do. About. That!” Garrick argues, blocking Xaden’s

advances.
“Get faster.” Xaden lands blow after deliberate blow, deftly avoiding

taking any himself. Each swing of those swords shifts the worry, the abject
terror that he’d been hurt, into rage.

He’s unharmed, and I’m a fucking fool for letting my emotions run
amok, for letting my love for him overrule my common sense. That’s on
me, not Tairn.

But the wildness I can’t breathe through? That’s a hundred percent black
morningstartail, and I can’t break free, can’t raise my shields enough to own
myself.

I step into Xaden’s line of sight, my toes hitting the edge of the mat.
Xaden glances toward me, and his eyes widen for all of a heartbeat

before he nails Garrick in the face with his elbow, sending him tumbling to
the ground.



Ouch.
Garrick sprawls across the mat, his swords slipping from his hands.

“Damn!”
“We’re done,” Xaden says without even looking back, already headed

toward me, eating up the half dozen feet that separate us with those long,
prowling strides of his. “I had my shields up. What are you doing here?”
His eyes widen, like he can feel the chaos within me. “Violence, are you all
right?”

“What am I doing here?” I bite out each word as my eyes rake over him,
looking for the wounds Devera spoke of. Did I misinterpret her gesture?
Did I really just fly here for nothing? My hands begin to shake. “I have no
fucking clue!”

“This isn’t you.” His gaze sweeps over me.
“I know that!” I shout, torn between weeping with gratitude that he’s

alive and seemingly unhurt and destroying this entire gym—this entire
fortress— because he was ever put in danger. “I can’t get him out!”

“Hold on.” He shoves my pack off my shoulders, and it falls to the gym
floor before he sweeps me up against his chest.

I wrap my arms around him and shove my face into his neck, breathing
in deep. He smells like mint and leather and mine— For fuck’s sake, am I
scenting him?

Xaden walks us straight into the gym’s bathing chamber, and I get a
quick glimpse of polished stone walls; high, glazed windows partially
cracked open; and a row of wide benches under the center of three lines of
spouts, not dissimilar to the ones at Basgiath. With a flick of his fingers, the
door slams shut, and then he works a lever on the wall. Water streams from
the spout in the aqueduct overhead, soaking us both in what feels like ice.

I gasp, my body tensing with the shock of the bitter cold, and for that
heartbeat, it’s all I’m capable of feeling.

“Put your shields up,” Xaden orders. “Now, Violet!”
I claw through the glacier of my mind and shove the bricks of my

shields into place. Tairn’s emotions dull enough for me to claim some
semblance of control. “Fucking. Cold,” I say, my teeth chattering.



“There we go.” Xaden flips another lever and the water warms. “What
the hell happened that they gave you leave to come early?” Concern lines
the area between his brows as he sets me on my feet, water spraying down
on us.

My mind is mine again, though I can feel the intensity of Tairn’s
emotions beating at my shields.

“They didn’t give me leave—”
“You didn’t get leave?” His voice lowers to that dangerous tone that

terrifies everyone in the world besides me. “When you already know that
Varrish is going to—” His words die abruptly as his focus drops to my
shoulder. “Who the fuck’s flight jacket are you wearing?”

“Really?” I throw my arms out, happily letting the warmth soak into me.
“It has third-year rank, Fourth Wing insignia, and a section leader
designation. Who the hell’s jacket do you think I’m wearing?”

His jaw ticks, water streaming down his face.
“It’s Bodhi’s, you territorial asshole!”
That answer doesn’t seem to help.
“Are you serious right now?” I unbutton the fucking jacket and tug at

the sleeves, but leather is a bitch when wet, and it takes a moment to yank it
free. “I ran out of Battle Brief the second Devera clued me in that you’d
been wounded. Yes, I left without leave. Then I flew eight hours at
breakneck speed with an absolutely irrational Tairn, who thought if you’d
been hurt, then Sgaeyl could have been, too. And now you pull some
possessive, jealous, whose-jacket-is-that bullshit just because your cousin
knew I was so panicked that I wouldn’t stop for my own flight leathers?” I
flat-out glare at his nonsensical ass and drop the jacket to the floor. “You
can fuck right off!”

A corner of his mouth turns up. “You were worried about me?”
“Not anymore, I’m not.” I see red. How can he find this amusing?
“But you were.” A slow smile spreads across his face, and his eyes light

up. “You were worried about me.” He reaches for me.
“Do you think this is funny?” I step back out of his reach only to find the

water-slick wall at my back.



“No.” He cocks his head to the side, his smile slipping. “You seem a
little angry that I’m not at Malek’s doorstep. Would you rather I be bleeding
to death in the infirmary?”

“No!” Of course he doesn’t get it. His life might depend on mine, but he
doesn’t feel the way I do about him. He wants me, even said he fell for me,
but he’s never said he loves me. “I’m not mad at you for not being hurt. I
would never want you hurt. I’m pissed at myself for being so reckless, so
wrapped up in you, having such little control over my emotions that I just
ran after you like… like…” Like a lovesick little fool. “And you, you’re
always calm, collected, and in control. You would have waited for all the
information, and you sure as hell never, ever would have let Sgaeyl’s
emotions take over—”

My words die as Xaden wrenches up the wet sleeve on his right arm,
exposing a puckered, angry red line that stretches from the top of his
shoulder to halfway down his biceps. It’s an inch thick at the top and triple
that where it ends. He’s obviously been mended, and if the scar is still that
raised, he must have almost lost his arm.

“You really were wounded,” I whisper, all the anger falling out of my
body. My chest clenches; it must have hurt like hell. “Are you all right?”
The question tumbles out even though I’ve just seen him demolish an
opponent.

“I’m fine. The scribe’s report must have gone out before the mender
arrived from the Eastern Wing.” The scar disappears as he tugs the sleeve
back down. “And you’re wrong about me. I wouldn’t have waited for all the
information—or even proof—if I’d heard you’d been hurt.” This time, I
don’t step away when he reaches for me. His arm winds around my waist,
and his hand splays on the small of my back to guide us out of the water’s
direct spray. The inches between us are both a gift and a curse as he leans
in. “I’m not always calm or collected, and I’m never in control when it
comes to you.”

My heart leaps at his words, at the ever-present tension that rises
between us, at the awareness that spreads through me from that single
touch. It’s not just the water warming me.



“Even now, I’m not doing what I should.” His words come out clipped.
“Which is?”
“Hauling your ass to the mat until you’re a hot, sweaty, aching mess

from a dozen rounds of sparring.” His jaw ticks. “Because I warned you
never to put your life at risk over something as trivial as talking to me, and
yet you did just that. Again.”

“I’m down with everything but the sparring.” Shit. That comes out
breathless. “And it’s not up to you to punish me anymore. I’m no longer in
your chain of command.”

“Oh, I know. And somehow it was a hell of a lot easier on us both when
you were. You want full disclosure when it comes to me, right? How is this
for open?” His gaze drops to my mouth. “I would have done the same thing
you did because I’m just as reckless for you as you are for me.”

A sharp, sweet ache consumes my chest. Gods, I want to believe that.
But I also want more. I want the same three words he demands from me. I
run my tongue over my bottom lip, and his eyes flare as steam fills the
room.

“You were worried for me.” The first time he said it came out amused.
The second sounded happy. But this time, his tone shifts as if it’s a
revelation.

“Of course I was worried for you.”
He draws me forward slowly, giving me every chance to object before

bringing our bodies flush. The heat of him soaks into every chilled part of
me, and all the burning worry I’d felt on the flight here and the searing
anger that followed transforms into an entirely different—and far more
dangerous—form of heat.

Fuck, I want him. I want to touch every inch of his skin, feel his
heartbeat against mine in assurance that he’s really all right. I want his body
over me, inside me, as close as humanly possible. I want him to make me
forget there’s anything beyond this room or the two of us.

“And you flew here without even stopping to get your leathers.” He
lowers his head inch by torturously slow inch.

I nod.



“Because you still love me,” he whispers against my lips a heartbeat
before he kisses me. Thank gods he doesn’t wait for my denial, because I’m
not sure I have it in me to give one, not with the way he toys with my
bottom lip, nipping it gently, then stroking his tongue over the curve. It
feels too good, too right, too…everything.

It’s the first time since Aretia that he hasn’t waited for me to ask. The
first time his infamous self-control has slipped. The first time he’s gambled
with possible rejection, kissed me simply because he wanted to, and fuck,
that’s exactly what I need—for him to need me.

I part my lips in invitation not just because I want him, but because he’s
acting on a confession I didn’t have to pry out of him or even ask for. He
groans, his arms surrounding me, and the kiss becomes exactly what he
called himself— reckless. The feel of his tongue flicking against mine, then
claiming, stroking, is a flame to a tinderbox, and I catch fire.

Need, lust, desire—whatever it is—dances down my spine and gathers,
becoming an insistent ache between my thighs. Rising on my toes to get
closer, I loop my arms around his neck, but we’re still not close enough.

His hands work the buttons of my uniform, and I reluctantly relinquish
my grip so he can slide it off. It smacks onto the floor somewhere to the
left. I tug on his shirt, desperate for the feel of him, and he obliges, grabbing
hold of it behind his neck and dragging it overhead, revealing miles and
miles of warm, wet skin.

I kiss the scar right above his heart and stroke my hands down his sides,
my fingers tracing the hard dips and grooves along his stomach. There is
nothing in this world that compares to him. He is complete, utter perfection,
his body carved from years of sparring and flight.

“Violet.” He tilts my head and kisses me hard and deep, then slow and
soft, changing the pace, keeping me straining for more.

My hands trace the lines of his back as he spears his fingers through the
wet, loosened strands of my braid, then tugs, arching my neck before setting
his mouth to it.

He knows exactly where I’m sensitive and damn does he use every bit of
that knowledge, sucking and laving that spot at the side of my throat that



melts my knees and makes my fingers curl against his skin.
“Xaden,” I whimper, my hands sliding over the curve of his ass. Mine.

This man is mine—at least for right now. Even if it’s just these next few
minutes.

He nips at the delicate skin of my ear, sending a shudder of sensation
down my spine, and then his mouth is on mine again, stealing my sanity
and replacing it with pure need. This kiss isn’t as patient, as controlled as
the others. There’s a wild, carnal edge to it that makes my mouth curve
against his, makes me bolder. I sweep my hand between us, then sigh.

He’s hard for me, the length of him straining against his waistband as I
squeeze.

“Fuck,” he growls, ripping his mouth from mine, his breaths as ragged
as mine as I stroke him through the fabric. “If you keep doing that…” He
slams his eyes shut and lets his head fall back.

“I’ll actually get you?” My core clenches.
His gaze snaps to mine, and the conflict I see in those dark depths makes

me pause.
“Don’t make me fight for this. Not again.” I retreat from the warmth of

his arms, and every nerve in my body screams in protest. “I can’t always be
the one fighting for this while you invent new ways to hesitate or tell me
no, Xaden. You either want me or you don’t.”

“You just had your hand wrapped around my cock, Violet. I’m pretty
sure you felt how fucking badly I want you.” He rips his hand through his
wet hair. “Gods, I am the one fighting for this!” he argues, gesturing
between us. “I told you, I’m not using sex as a weapon to get you back.”

“You’ll just weaponize it with your little rule to make me say the three
words I’m not ready to give you.” And that edge of maddening need he has
me riding is just sharp enough that I might cave, I crave him that fucking
much.

“Weaponize it against you?” He shakes his head. “You told me that you
can’t separate emotion from sex. Remember?”

I open, then shut my mouth. He’s right. I did say that. Shit. “Maybe I’m
learning how.”



“Maybe I don’t want you to.” He takes a step forward and cups the back
of my neck. “I want you exactly how you are, emotions and all. I want the
woman I fell for. It kills me every time I have to keep my hands off you,
every night I lie awake next to you, both blessed and damned with the
memory of how hot, how wet, how fucking perfect you feel when I’m
losing myself in you.”

My lips part and heat flushes my skin as if his words are an actual
caress.

“When I do sleep, I dream of the sounds you make right before you
come and the way the blue in your eyes outshines the amber right after, all
sated and hazy. I wake up starving for you—only you—even on the
mornings you’re halfway across the kingdom. This isn’t me denying you or
manipulating you. This is me fighting for you.” He palms my hip, and his
thumb strokes the bare strip of skin between my pants and my armor.

“You want to fight for me?” I reach up into my hair and pull the pins
loose one by one, letting them fall to the stone floor. “Then take a chance
without knowing how I feel. You want my heart back? Risk yours first this
time.”

“If I tell you how I feel right now, you’d never trust that I’m not just
desperate for your body.” His brow furrows.

“Exactly my point.” The last pin falls from my hair. “Choose, Xaden.
You can let me walk out that door, or you can be the one who takes what
I’m willing to give this time.” I shake my hair loose and run my fingers
through the wet mass to unravel the braid.

“Are you trying to bring me to my knees? Or win the argument?” His
hand flexes at my hip as his heated gaze sweeps over me.

“Yes,” I answer, reaching for the ties at the small of my back that secure
my armor. “I just spent eight hours terrified of what condition I’d find you
in, and I’m telling you that I don’t just want you. I need you. There are your
three words.” I tug the wet string, and it gives. “That’s all you get. Take me
or leave me.”

The fight within him is palpable, the tension between us sharp enough to
pierce dragon scale. And for a second, I think he might just be stubborn



enough to walk away and keep us at this impasse.
But then—thank gods—he breaks, fusing his mouth to mine, and the fire

that had banked during our argument flares back to life even hotter than
before. He kisses me like I’m the answer to every question. Like everything
we’ve been and will be hinges on this moment. And maybe it does.

His hands work the laces at my back while I undo the buttons of his
pants. I win the race, sliding my hand beneath the fabric to stroke him from
root to tip.

The guttural groan he gives me feels like a reward and hits straight
between my thighs, the ache intensifying to a throb.

“Let go so I can get you naked.” He punctuates that last word with a nip
of my lower lip.

Yes, please. I free him, and he pulls my armor loose enough to tug it over
my head. It smacks the ground, and a second later the sensitive peak of my
breast is surrounded by his mouth, flicked by his tongue. I moan, my
fingers tunneling through his hair to hold him right there. “That feels so
damned good.”

Wrapping an arm around my back and the other behind my knees, he
lifts, then lays me onto a water-warmed stone bench in one smooth motion.
“You sure you want this here, now?” he asks, rising above me, blocking the
spray of water from my breasts, his eyes hooded and his hair mussed from
my hands. “In five minutes, I can have you comfortable in my bed.”

He’s so beautiful that my heart actually hurts from just looking at him.
“Now.” My hands stroke his wide shoulders and down the relic that

winds from his jaw to his forearm.
“Now,” he agrees. There’s nothing practiced or polished about the next

kiss— it’s all need sweetened with a desperation that matches my own, and
all the hotter for it. This is exactly what I need, to be pressed between his
hard body and stone, devoured with the same urgency I feel for him.

His hand skims down my curves, following the dip of my waist before
skimming my waistband and undoing the buttons of my pants one by one.
There’s no hesitation in his touch when his fingers delve and stroke from
my entrance to my clit.



My back arches and I gasp with white-hot pleasure.
“Even hotter than I remember.” His mouth moves down my neck,

overwhelming me with sensation as his fingers tease with featherlight
touches. “Fuck, you feel like silk. Hot, slick silk.” His voice has that rough
rasp to it that I’ve missed.

He moves lower to worship my breasts with his mouth, his teeth raking
lightly over my nipple with the perfect amount of friction to build the
pleasure coiling tight within me. Of course he knows what I like. This isn’t
our first time. It’s not going to be our last, either.

Power swells under my skin and builds as he circles my swollen clit,
denying me the pressure I need.

“Xaden,” I beg, my nails biting into the tops of his shoulders, but I’m
careful not to brush his new scar. Every stroke of his fingers and flick of his
tongue feels like a jolt of lightning through my system, electrifying every
nerve until I’m a hypersensitive bowstring drawn too tight but not tight
enough.

“I know exactly what you want”—he skims my clit—“and what you
need.” Two fingers slide inside me.

Deeper. Closer. More. That’s what I need.
“Then give it to me,” I demand, my hips rolling.
“I’ve waited forever to touch you.”
My breaths come in ragged pants and moans, and my skin flushes, heat

prickling as he builds the aching pressure with tighter, faster strokes.
“Gods, look at you. You are all I’m ever going to want. Just you. Just

this. Just us.” His voice curls around my mind until he’s all I see, all I hear,
all I feel and think. He’s everything, watching me like he thinks the same
about me.

“I need you.” Maybe need isn’t the right word, but there’s no other term
that captures how essential he is to my existence. I shove my thumbs into
the waistband of my pants and push. I need them off, now.

“Same.” We’re a frenzy of questing hands and mouths as we struggle out
of the rest of our wet clothes. I have a whole new reason to curse these
boots, but Xaden makes quick work of them, stripping me bare.



I ghost my lips over the new scar on his arm, more than aware of how
close I came to losing him, and then he’s over me again, bracing his weight
on his forearms, his eyes studying mine with an intensity that makes me
shiver with anticipation as he settles between my thighs.

Reaching between our bodies, I wrap my fingers around him, bringing
the head of his cock to my entrance. I’ll die if he makes me wait any longer.
I won’t survive another breath without him inside me.

“I need you more, Violet.” He cradles the side of my face and rolls his
hips, pushing inside, stretching me as he consumes those first sensitive
inches. “However much you think you need this, need me—I need you
more.” He thrusts, filling me with one long drive, until he’s so deep that my
eyes flutter closed, and I moan with the sublime pleasure.

There’s nothing like this in the world. I’m sure of it.
“So. Fucking. Good.” He echoes my thoughts with a groan, and then

he’s moving, withdrawing only to slam home again and again, stealing my
stuttered breaths with kiss after kiss. The stone at my back gives me the
leverage to arch into his thrusts, taking him deeper. It’s too much, too good,
and not enough all at the same time.

Each powerful stroke has me greedy for more. This is where I want to
exist, with him above me, moving inside me, his focus totally, completely
mine. “Harder. Deeper.” I’m breathing too hard to speak. “Don’t treat me
like I’m breakable.”

“I know exactly how much you can take.” He slides his hands under me,
then holds me to his chest as he rises, pivoting to sit on the edge of the
bench.

My cry echoes in the chamber as I sink onto him, my knees anchoring
on either side of his hips, and he hits that sweeter, deeper angle that steals
my breath. “Yes. There. Gods, I feel you everywhere.”

“Right where we left off.” His hands shift to my ass. “With you riding
me.”

I wind my arms around his neck and smile against his mouth. No one is
coming through those doors to interrupt us this time. There’s only the sound
of water hitting the bench beside us and our bodies coming together again



and again, our hearts pounding, breaths strained between long, drugging
kisses.

Reality narrows to sensation, the exquisite feel of his chest against my
breasts, his mouth worshipping mine, his cock filling every inch I have,
stretching me for more. The pressure coiling in my core is so tight, the
pleasure so sweet I can taste it. It vibrates through me as my power rises,
transforming me into pure, rapturous energy, until I’m the very lightning I
wield, crackling in anticipation of the strike.

“More,” he growls. “I want everything, Violet.”
“You have it.” His stubble scrapes my palms as I cup his face and kiss

him. Lightning courses through me, building to a dangerous peak, and I
don’t need to ask. I know he has me.

It releases with a snap, flaring bright outside the windows for a heartbeat
before it’s swallowed by shadows that stream out to smother it. Nothing
shatters. Nothing catches fire. He knows how my body reacts, knows
exactly how to push me to the breaking point, and he has me covered when
I explode.

I love him. I love him. I love him. I’m not ready to give him the words,
the power that comes with them, but I can keep them for myself, chant them
like my own personal Codex, the only truth I’m certain of.

His body tightens beneath mine, his thrusts coming harder as he curls an
arm around me, hooking my shoulder and pulling me into every thrust.

That spiraling pressure arcs to a breaking point, and I fight, holding it at
bay. Not yet. I want more. Fuck, I want to feel like this every minute of
every day for the rest of my life.

“Let go.” He shifts his angle, rubbing against my clit with the next
thrust.

“I don’t want it to end.” I can hear the note of panic in my voice, the
sharp note of fear that this will be the only time I feel like this, the only
time he’s mine. But the waves are coming closer with every roll of our hips,
and my muscles tighten to the point of locking.

“Violet.” His hand slides from my shoulder to the back of my neck,
fisting in the long strands of my hair as he looks into my eyes like he can



see straight to my soul. “I can’t give this up. I won’t give you up. Now let
go.”

My thighs tremble, and at the next thrust, I fracture with a cry. Lightning
flashes, power tearing through me with instant thunder as the waves crest
over me again and again. All I can do is hold on to Xaden and ride them
out, bliss flooding my body until I’m too limp to rock back against him.

“Perfect.” His restraint vanishes in an instant. Gone are the measured,
precise thrusts. He growls into my neck and drives wildly with his hips,
consuming me with abandon, and I realize that this is what I craved beyond
anything else, even beyond his secrets—his loss of control.

I want to be the only person he unravels for.
Holding on to his shoulders, I push back into every thrust, swiveling my

hips and savoring the shout he lets loose when he finally shudders beneath
me, his shadows blasting through the room. Rock cracks and water bursts
from the aqueducts.

My heart races as I grin.
“Fuck.” His forehead rests against mine, our chests heaving as we fight

to catch our breath. “Just when I think I can handle you, I completely
fucking lose it.”

“That’s my favorite part.”
“Why does that not surprise me?” He brushes his lips over mine, and he

locks his arms around me, keeping me from melting off his lap. “Death of
me, I swear.”

“What do we do now?” The question slips out before I can stop it. After
all, I’m the one who’s been fighting this—whatever this is.

“We have options.” He caresses the side of my face and studies my eyes.
“First, we can stay right here and go again. Second, we can clean up, get
dressed, and sneak up to my room, where we can go again. Or third…” He
pauses. “We can clean up, find a water wielder to dry our clothes, get you
into one of my flight jackets, and fly to the rendezvous to drop the daggers
—”

I’m up and running, grabbing for my clothes before he can even finish.
Of course I’m going with him.



“I’m guessing that’s a no to options one and two?” he says with a
disappointed sigh.

OceanofPDF.com



Though gryphon riders are not capable of producing signets, they are
not powerless. In fact, some would argue that they’ve honed lesser

magic, especially mindwork, into the deadliest weapon of all.
Underestimating them is an error.

—GRYPHONS OF POROMIEL, A STUDY IN COMBAT BY MAJOR GARION
SAVOY



CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

The thing about being two riders in an assumed relationship who happen
to be bonded to a mated pair of dragons is that no one thinks twice

about a midnight flight to get away, and there is no better view of the stars
on the Continent than from Tairn’s back.

“I still do not approve,” Tairn lectures as we cross the barrier of the
wards a little after midnight.

“And yet, we’re still flying,” I counter, shaking off the feeling of
wrongness that sinks further into my bones with every wingbeat. From
experience, I know it’ll pass once we’ve been out beyond the wards long
enough for my senses to adjust.

“Only because I vowed to let you make your own choices after Resson,
not because I agree with you.” He follows the slope of the peak, banking
left to skim the landscape. Tonight’s full moon means keeping a low profile.
“This is an unnecessary risk.”

“One Xaden and Sgaeyl take all the time.” I stop fighting the wind and
lean forward as he dives, grinning into the wind.

“The shadow wielder is not my concern.”
“Sgaeyl is.” The saddle’s straps dig into my thighs, a constant reminder

that I can’t keep my seat without it.
“Sgaeyl would never be taken down by something as puny as a

gryphon.”



He scoffs. “And as for losing the shadow wielder, she would be
emotionally inconvenienced, that is true.”

I scoff at his bluster. “An emotional inconvenience? Is that what I am to
you?” If so, then we don’t need to worry that my death would cause Tairn’s,
or Sgaeyl’s and Xaden’s.

“You’re currently a prize annoyance.”
The wind steals my laughter, and I brace as we approach what looks to

be a forested valley. The edge of the nearest ridgeline glows with the light
from a Poromish village, but I’m not sure which one.

Tairn flares his wings, and gravity catches up with us, forcing me deeper
into the saddle in the instant before he lands at the edge of a dark lake,
jostling every bone in my body. Before I can get my bearings, he swings,
leaving me grasping for the pommel as he puts his back to the water, facing
the open meadow.

“That was abrupt.” Good thing I’m still strapped in.
“Next time, you fly and I’ll ride.” His head sweeps from left to right as

Sgaeyl lands next to us, Xaden on her back.
“He’s still pissed that I came along,” I tell Xaden, reaching for the

buckle.
“You’ve gotten strong enough to handle Aetos,” Xaden says, already

moving for Sgaeyl’s shoulder. Moonlight catches on his swords as he
dismounts.

“I’m more worried about the company the lieutenant keeps than Aetos,”
Tairn growls. “And don’t even think of dismounting, Silver One.”

“I’m sorry?” I pull the leather through the first loop.
“Undo that strap and I’ll launch.” His head swivels, eerily snakelike, to

glare at me over his shoulder.
My jaw drops. “You can’t be serious,” I whisper in a hiss.
“Try me.” His golden eyes narrow into slits. “I agreed to come to the

drop-off. I did not agree to endanger your life when we are easily within a
wyvern’s flight from Zolya. I, too, remember what happens to dismounted
riders.”



“You’re being an overprotective ass.” Not that he doesn’t have a point.
Maybe I’m not the only one with bad dreams.

“I am a credit to my line.” He swings his head forward, completely
dismissing me.

“Don’t worry, you’ll be able to hear everything from up there.” Xaden’s
voice carries from where he stands just ahead of Tairn and Sgaeyl.

“Says the guy whose dragon isn’t putting him in the corner,” I grumble.
“I could have refused the rendezvous. This is a compromise.” Tairn

chuffs. “They’re approaching.”
It’s on my tongue to fire back, but I close my mouth when I hear the

wingbeats of gryphons. The sound is softer than those of dragons, less
enunciated. Like a gale wind instead of a drumbeat.

Seven gryphons—a full drift—land in the clearing ahead and walk
forward, their formidable heads darting left and right as they glance
between Tairn and Sgaeyl. The gryphons are about a foot taller than Xaden,
and though I can’t make out colors well in the moonlight, I can see their
razor-sharp beaks just fine from here.

“Please tell me you recognize them,” I say to Xaden, my heart
pounding. Power rises under my skin and charges the air around me.

“I do. You will in a minute, too,” he replies as if we’re meeting friends
at the local tavern.

Tairn lowers his head in a gesture I recognize as both a threat to them
and a favor to me, allowing me to see the rest of the approach.

The gryphons, half eagle and half lion, halt about twenty feet away, and
three of their fliers dismount, leaving the pairs at the edges ready to fly at a
moment’s notice.

Our trust is as thin as December ice. One misstep and the fracture will
have deadly consequences.

The trio walks toward Xaden through the knee-high mountain grass, and
I recognize the one in the center almost immediately as the veteran that
came upon us at the lake, then fought with us in Resson. Her face is a little
more drawn, and she has a new scar down the side of her neck that
disappears into her uniform, but that’s definitely her.



But the man on her left isn’t the same. He’s a little shorter, a little more
wiry than her stocky companion had been, and there’s no malice under
those slashing eyebrows when he glances past Xaden and up to me before
quickly looking away.

I can’t help but wonder if the man she’d been with at the lake was killed
in the attack.

“Riorson,” the woman calls out, pausing about ten feet from Xaden.
“Syrena,” Xaden says, lifting two bags and then setting them on the ground
before him. The message is clear: if they want them, they’ll be coming
closer to Tairn and Sgaeyl.

Syrena sighs and then motions the others forward.
The younger woman walking on Syrena’s right is dressed in a paler

shade of brown than the others. She looks to be my age and shares enough
of Syrena’s features that they could be related—cousins, maybe…or even
sisters. They have the same straight noses, full mouths, lithe builds, and
glossy black hair that contrasts their fair skin, though the younger one’s is
plaited in a simple braid over her shoulder. Her eyes are slightly larger, and
her cheekbones are a little higher than Syrena’s. She’s the kind of beautiful
that would normally lead to positions in a king’s court or on stage in the
theaters of Calldyr.

My chest tightens. The way she looks at Xaden isn’t just doe-eyed.
There’s an unmistakable longing there, a hunger that has me blinking. It’s
like she’s been trudging through a desert and he’s the oasis.

She looks…like how I feel.
“Good to see you made it through the unfortunate assault on Samara,”

Syrena says as they reach Xaden.
“You want to explain what the fuck that was about?” Xaden’s tone

ventures into less-than-friendly territory. “Because one of your gryphons
nearly took me out. If we didn’t have a mender nearby in the Eastern Wing,
I’d be down an arm because I hesitated, thinking it might be one of you.”
He glances at the other woman. “I thought we were on the same side, but I
won’t hesitate if it happens again.”



I lean forward in the saddle, but there’s not much give. Being up here,
where I can only guess at what his expression might be, is torturous. Energy
crackles in my fingertips, but I hold steady, keeping ready in case this drop
doesn’t go according to plan.

“I can’t control every drift, Riorson,” Syrena responds. “And I’m not
going to blame other drifts in other chains of command who have to follow
orders. We need more weapons than what you can supply. There are enough
daggers in that outpost to arm a hundred fliers—”

“Those are powering our wards.” His hands curl into fists at his sides.
“Our wards? Since when do you sympathize as Navarrian? And at least

you have wards, Xaden,” the girl on the right argues.
“For now.” Xaden looks in her direction for a split second before

returning to face Syrena.
That tone. The way she used his name… They definitely know each

other.
“The attacks have to stop, Syrena,” Xaden continues. “In your chain of

command or not, the second I hear of fliers actually stealing daggers from
outposts or any Navarrian wards being weakened by flier thievery, I’ll cut
off what shipments we do have coming your way.”

I suck in a deep breath at his threat.
“You’ll condemn us to death.” Her shoulders straighten.
“You’ll condemn us all to death if you take down the only wards

standing between the venin and the hatching grounds at Basgiath,” I say.
“It’s our only forge for weaponry, and there’s enough raw magic in that
range to feed them for a century. They’d be unstoppable.”

Every head lifts my direction.
“You’re drawing attention.” Tairn growls at the fliers, and they

immediately look away.
“I never said I’d sit here silently.”
“Nice to meet you without Riorson’s face attached to yours, Sorrengail,”
Syrena says, her gaze diverted from Tairn. Smart woman. “Though I’m

guessing he still doesn’t trust us completely if he’s got you on the back of
that enormous dragon of yours.”



Xaden remains quiet.
“I’m glad you made it through Resson,” I respond with a smile. Not that

she can see it.
But the younger flier does. She stares up at me in an unsettling mix of

shock and…shit, I think that’s malice narrowing her eyes.
“My last name isn’t winning any friends to your left,” I say to Xaden.
“Ignore her.”
“We made it through thanks to you and that incredible lightning you

wield,” Syrena says.
Another rumbling growl works up Tairn’s throat as his head pivots right

and he bares his teeth.
Syrena glances at the younger flier and then blanches. “You know better

than to stare at a dragon, Cat!”
Cat. It’s a fitting name for the way she’s sizing me up.
“Wasn’t staring at the dragon,” the woman replies just loud enough that I

barely make out the words. But she shifts her glare, aiming it at Xaden.
“She’s striking, I’ll give you that.”

What the fuck?
“Don’t,” Xaden replies, his tone dipping to that icy calm before

addressing Syrena. “Sorrengail is right. You take down our wards, and
there’s nothing stopping them from draining the hatching grounds. They’d
be impossible to engage, let alone defeat.”

“So you’d rather we die while you sit protected behind the very weapon
that could save our civilians?” the man asks like he’s requesting the weather
report.

“Yes.” Xaden shrugs.
My eyebrows hit my hairline.
“This is a war,” Xaden continues. “People die in wars. So, if you’re

asking if I’d rather your people die than mine, then obviously my answer is
yes. It’s foolish to think we can save everyone. We can’t.”

I inhale sharply at the reminder that the man I get behind closed doors
isn’t the one the rest of the world knows. It’s not the first time I’ve heard



him express the sentiment. He feels the same way about the marked ones
who won’t work to save themselves at Basgiath.

“Still an asshole, I see.” Cat folds her arms.
“We’ve lost riders to the venin, too,” he counters. “We’re fighting with

you. But I’m not sacrificing the safety of our movement or our civilians for
yours. If that makes me an asshole, then so be it. We’re not just sitting
behind our wards,

either. I’m risking my life, risking the lives of the people I care about, to
get you weaponry from Basgiath and to complete our own forge to keep
providing that weaponry so we’re ready when both dark wielders and
Navarre inevitably come for us. Which they will.”

“Completing a forge?” Cat chances another glare in my direction.
“Viscount Tecarus would strongly argue with that statement. You’ve had
not one but two chances to acquire the luminary, and it’s not like you
haven’t had what he’s asked for both times.”

“Out of the question,” Xaden bites out.
“You’re willing to let our entire kingdom fall prey to these monsters

because you’re what?” Cat asks, cocking her head at Xaden. “Smitten?
Please. I know you better than that.”

“Cat!” Syrena snaps.
My stomach lurches. “What the hell is she talking about?” Ludicrous as

it might be, I think…it’s me. What the hell would I have to do with a
Poromish viscount?

“Nothing of any consequence.” Xaden’s tone is anything but
comforting.

Tairn chuffs.
“We’ll be discussing this later,” I warn Xaden, adding it to a never-

ending list.
“You know nothing where she’s concerned.” Xaden shakes his head

once at Cat before turning back to Syrena. “The forge is our highest
priority. As soon as we secure a luminary, we’ll be operational and able to
supply you in full. We have the rest of the material we need to begin, and
that’s all you get to know, because you’re right, Syrena. I don’t trust you.



Until then, there are twenty-three daggers in these bags.” He points to the
bags at his feet.

“Twenty-three?” Syrena asks, lifting a brow.
“I need one of them.” There’s no apology in his words or tone. “Take

them or leave them. Either way, Garrick will see your next shipment is
delivered at the appointed location.” He backs away, keeping his face
toward them. “It’s near Athebyne. I’m not hiding it from you, just not
repeating it in front of the rest of her drift.”

“I appreciate the honesty.” It’s surprising and refreshing.
“You have maybe a year until they’re on your border,” Syrena says.
My stomach sours as I remember that Brennan thinks we have way less

than that. I need to delve deeper into researching the wards as soon as I’m
back at Basgiath.

“We’re all that stands between them and you. You know that, right? Or
are you still hiding your heads in the don’t-tell-us-too-much-in-case-
we’reinterrogated sand like you were last year?”

“We know,” Xaden responds. “We’ll be ready.”
Syrena nods. “I’ll do what I can to lessen the attacks on the outposts, but

until you can openly say you’re supplying us, it’s like asking our forces to
believe in specters. They don’t trust you like I do.”

“How you stop them is your business. I meant what I said.” He tilts his
head. “Come for our wards, and I’ll watch you die.”

We need to get them under wards of their own. It’s the most logical path.
Sgaeyl huffs a blast of steam, and the male flier startles, then comes for the
two bags and pivots, handing one to Syrena on his way back to the
remainder of the drift.

“Thank you,” Syrena says to Xaden before glancing up at me. “Tell your
dragon he’s still the scariest fucking thing I’ve ever seen, Sorrengail.”

“I would, but it would just inflate his ego,” I reply, settling back in the
saddle as Xaden runs up Sgaeyl’s foreleg to mount. “Stay alive, Syrena. I’m
starting to like you.”

She flashes me a smirk of a smile, then turns toward the other flier.
“Let’s go, Catriona.”



Catriona. Cat.
The way my stomach hollows has nothing to do with Tairn’s sudden

launch into the night sky and everything to do with remembering what
Bodhi said weeks ago.

I’ve never seen him care like this, and that includes Catriona.
Oh gods. The way she’d looked at him wasn’t just longing—it was

memory.

OceanofPDF.com



Cadets who are found absent without leave will be subject to court-
martial by their chain of command, if they are not executed on sight.

—ARTICLE FOUR, SECTION ONE THE BASGIATH WAR COLLEGE CODE OF
CONDUCT



CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

A ir steals the heat from my cheeks, and I pull my goggles into place as
Tairn flies for the border with forceful wingbeats. “To avoid jumping

to conclusions like last year, she’s your ex, isn’t she?” I ask Xaden, hoping
my mental voice sounds a hell of a lot steadier than I feel.

“How do you— Never mind, that’s not important. Yes.” He speaks
slowly, like he’s choosing his words with the utmost care. “We were over
before I met you.”

It shouldn’t matter. I have exes, too. It’s not like we’ve really discussed
our sexual or romantic history, right? Of course, neither of them is a
gryphon flier who looks like…that, but still. There’s no logical reason for
me to feel this ugly twist of irrational—

Shit. What is this? Jealousy? Anxiety? Insecurity?
“All three,” Tairn responds in utter annoyance. “To which I will remind

you that not a single dragon chose her. You were selected by two. Pull
yourself together.”

His metric is sound but has little to do with what I’m feeling.
“But at one point Xaden chose her.” I lean into the right bank as Tairn

hugs the face of the mountain, continuing to climb.
“And at one point, you thought gruel was a satisfactory meal, until you

grew some teeth and found the rest of the world’s food waiting. Now cease
this line of thinking. It does not serve to make you stronger.”



Easy for him to say.
Silence envelops me for the rest of the flight, and I breathe a little easier

once we cross Navarre’s wards. Then guilt settles like a stone in my gut.
We’re safe behind our shields, but the drift we just armed won’t sleep with
the same certainty.

We land in the field, and I dismount after unbuckling, sliding down
Tairn’s foreleg.

“Be ready to go in the morning,” Tairn orders. “Perhaps returning
quickly will soften your inevitable punishment for leaving abruptly.”

Because no one punishes dragons.
“I doubt it, but we can try.” I lift my flight goggles as Tairn walks off

with Sgaeyl, their tails swishing in rhythm. It’s a little thing, but it makes
me smile.

Xaden approaches, then winds his arm around my waist and tugs me to
his firm chest before tipping my chin up with his thumb and forefinger so
our gazes meet. Worry lines the space between his brows. “Are we going to
have to spend our last few hours together talking about Cat?”

“No.” I wind my arms around his neck. “Not unless you’d like to spend
them talking about my previous lovers.”

His focus drops to my mouth. “I would much rather choose our previous
option number two, where we head up to my bedchamber and use our time
judiciously.”

“Solid plan,” I agree, my body heating at the mere suggestion. “But we
are going to have to talk about Viscount Tecarus.”

“Fuck.” He looks away. “I’d almost rather talk about our exes.” His
focus shifts back to mine. “Who are your exes? Do I know them?”

“Tecarus.” I arch an eyebrow. “Now. I know you want to keep your
secrets, but you told me you’d give me information if it could affect my
decisions, and I have a nagging suspicion what’s going on has to do with
me.” I trail my fingers down the side of his neck with his relic, simply
because I can’t help but touch him. “So I’m asking you: what does Tecarus
want for the luminary—the one device that could complete your forge—that
you’re unwilling to give?”



His grip tightens around my waist, pulling me even closer. “Besides
weaponry and a private army?” He pauses, war waging in his eyes before
he sighs. “You’re the first lightning wielder in over a century. He swears
he’ll let us take it to Aretia if he can see you wield.”

I blink. “That part seems easy enough.”
“It’s not. Our first deal fell apart when I discovered he was only willing

to let us use the luminary, not take it, which would have meant stationing
dragons in Cordyn. And secondly, I don’t trust him to stop at seeing you.
He’s known for collecting precious things and keeping them against their
will.” His thumb grazes my lower lip, sending a shiver of awareness
through me. “I won’t risk it. Won’t risk you.”

“Doesn’t seem like it’s your risk to take,” I say softly. He needs that
luminary, but maybe if I can get the wards up, that will buy us some time.

“I told you in Aretia—I would rather lose this entire war than live
without you.” He skims my jawline with his fingers before dropping his
hand.

“I didn’t really think you meant it when you said that.” The ache in my
chest damn near explodes. I love this man with every beat of my reckless
heart, which would be his if he’d simply stop keeping all his secrets and let
me know him.

“You have to trust me again at some point.” His mouth tightens. “Going
to Cordyn isn’t up for discussion. Brennan is already negotiating for
different terms.”

“But I’m right here. You cannot protect me from every—” I glance over
at the weight he slides into the deep sheath at my shoulder, the sheath that’s
only there because I’m wearing his flight jacket. “What is that?” But I
already know. The alloy in the hilt flashes in the moonlight before it
disappears, tucked against my arm.

“I need you to be able to defend yourself no matter what happens.
You’re not the only one with bad dreams, you know.”

My lips part. “Xaden,” I whisper, sliding my hands to his face and
scratching my palms on the stubble of his cheeks. “I’m a lightning wielder.
I’m never defenseless against venin.”



“You’ll have to keep it hidden, of course.” His voice turns gruff. “Sew a
deeper sheath into wherever you’re most comfortable.”

I nod. Right now, there’s almost no chance anyone could spot it unless it
was facing outward or they knew where to look, anyway.

“Anything else we need to discuss?” he asks.
A grimace wrinkles my nose.
“Other than the battle of Zolya getting leaked in Battle Brief and

Markham playing it off as propaganda?” My mouth twists.
He simply stares at me this time.
“Or the fact that Nolon’s spent months saving Jack Barlowe’s life?” I

turn out of his arms, and we start walking toward the outpost with its
burning torches along the outer battlements. “Oh, and Varrish punched my
shoulder out of socket during interrogation after Dain refused to use his
signet on me.”

Xaden stops.
“Don’t worry,” I say over my shoulder, tugging him along. “We escaped.
They tried using this new elixir on us that dulls our connections to our

dragons and our signets, but I remembered how it smelled from land nav, so
we avoided that one.”

“Signet-blocking elixir?” His voice rises.
“It’s fine. If I can get my hands on the solution, I can probably figure out

an antidote.” I glance at him. “Or Brennan can.”
His gaze bores into mine. “What happened to us working on that whole

communication thing?”
“I could make you ask questions for the information.” I flash a sarcastic

smile. “Did I mention that Dain challenged me?” I’m definitely not asking
about the ridiculous statement he dropped on me about my mother. Dain
doesn’t deserve my headspace. “Shit, I should probably tell you about
Aaric, too.”

Xaden sighs. “So much for option number two.”
 
 
 



here’s an odd hope that fills me as Tairn and I land on the flight field at

TBasgiath the next afternoon. Maybe it’s that I finally feel like Xaden
and I are really, honestly trusting each other with more than just our

bodies, even if he’s not giving me full access.
And his body is most definitely a perk. I’m deliciously sore from more

than just the flight as I dismount Tairn at the edge of the field to avoid the
incoming landings as First Wing goes through third-year maneuvers.

Shit, I should have slipped the dagger into my pack before landing.
Dragons and their riders are everywhere.

“With all these dragons present, I have no doubt that Varrish and Aetos
have been alerted to your return,” Tairn warns me.

“I’ll face my punishment,” I respond, scratching the dull scales of his
chin. “You need to hydrate. You’re all dried out from the flight.”

“Our departure was more my fault than yours. I will not stand for you to
bear my punishment.”

“Stop being sweet. It’s disturbing.” I pat his scales one more time and
heft my bag higher on my shoulder. “It’s been a couple of weeks. Do you
think Andarna will wake anytime soon?” I miss her.

“There’s no way to tell,” he says quickly. Too quickly.
Suspicion finds home between my brows. “Is there something you aren’t

telling me?”
“Every adolescent enters the sleep for whatever amount of time their

body needs. Hers apparently requires more than most.”
And until the last couple of weeks, she’s been waking up every time I’m

distraught. Fuck. “Should I worry?”
“Worrying changes nothing. She is guarded by the elders and is sleeping

safely.”
Hmm. “I’ll tell you if my punishment includes death or inconvenience.”
“I will already know, as I am continuously with you,” he grumbles.

“Forced to bear witness to the awkwardness that is twenty-one-year-old
humans.”

“I’ll strive to make it less awkward.”



“Could you do so, I would think you would have done it already.” He
waits until I walk in front of him, heading for the stairs by the Gauntlet, and
then he launches, his wings gusting wind at my back.

I can’t help but look to the left as I descend the steps. Our squad is
practicing the deadly obstacle course that cost Trysten his life while we
were in interrogation practice.

Aaric and Visia have already made it to the top—no surprise there—but
the others are struggling. I have yet to learn any more of their names, but so
far, we’ve only lost two.

Sloane bites her lower lip as she watches a girl with blue-black hair
fumble along the spinning log on the fourth ascent…and fall. My heart
lurches into my throat, but she grasps one of the vertical ropes along the
course.

“Take that one at a run,” I tell Sloane as I walk by. “Hesitate and you’ll
fall.”

“I didn’t say I need your help,” she mutters back.
“Your brother won the Gauntlet patch last year. No one expects you to

fill those shoes, but try not to die, will you?” I say over my shoulder, not
bothering to stop. It’s not like she’s going to let me help, and I can’t save
her from this. She’ll make it or she won’t.

Fuck, I feel like Xaden of all people.
“You’ve angered the leadership, Sorrengail,” Emetterio says as I

approach, the sun reflecting off his freshly shaved and oiled head.
“It couldn’t be helped,” I say quietly, pausing at his side.
He glances sideways at me. “I do not have favorites. That would be

foolish in this place.”
“Noted.”
“But if I did.” He lifts his forefinger at me. “And I’m not saying I do.

But if I did, I would suggest to that favored student that she stresses the
undimmable bond of her legendary battle dragon and forgets any mention
that perhaps strengthening her mental shields could have saved her from
such a rash decision when it came to departing without leave.” He lifts both
of his dark brows at me. “But, I would also hope that another favored



student—were I to have such a thing—would be teaching you stronger
shield techniques so it doesn’t happen again.” His gaze drops to my collar,
where there’s a single silver line of lieutenant’s rank.

“I get the point.” A smile curves my mouth. “Thank you for caring,
Professor Emetterio.”

“I never said I did.” He turns his attention to the Gauntlet, where Sloane
has just crossed the fourth ascent.

“Right. Of course not.” I grin as I walk away, taking the rocky path to
the quadrant, then fight the fear of my upcoming punishment. If Varrish
tries to kill me, I’ll fight. If he wants to torture me, I’ll deal with it. Or
maybe I should go straight to Panchek?

The path is crowded as another squad passes by for their turn at Gauntlet
practice, and I stop stressing about stashing the dagger in my bag. At this
rate, I’ll make it to my room without anyone seeing the alloy-hilted dagger.

By the time I reach the second-year floor, I’ve gone through about a
dozen different scenarios of how to turn myself in.

Professor Kaori looks up from his book as he walks toward me in the
main corridor, his brows furrowed in concentration, and I wave before
turning into the little hallway that houses my squad’s chambers.

I stop short, my heart seizing for the length of what should be two beats
when I see them.

“There she is.” Varrish’s greasy voice lifts the hairs on the back of my
neck as he and his two henchmen push off the wall and head my way.
“We’ve been waiting for you, Sorrengail.”

“I was going to wash the flight off and then present myself for
judgment.” Close. I’m so fucking close to the safety behind my door.

“Oh, so you do realize you were absent without leave,” Varrish says, his
smile anything but reassuring. The trio passes by my door and Rhiannon’s
across the hall, then approaches Sawyer’s to my left and Ridoc’s to my
right.

“Of course.” I nod.
Rhiannon’s door opens silently, and she peeks her head out, her eyes

flying wide.



I subtly shake my head in warning, and she nods, ducking back inside
and closing her door almost all the way. Good. I don’t want them looping
her in on my punishment as soon as she inevitably tries to defend me as my
squad leader.

“Bag,” Varrish orders.
Oh. Fuck. At least I didn’t stash the dagger in there. My mistake might

just save my life.
Nora holds out her hand, and I slip my bag from my shoulder and hand it

over.
“You couldn’t be bothered to wear your own uniform?” Varrish eyes

Xaden’s rank on my collar. “You do know that impersonating a
commissioned officer is against the Codex, do you not?”

Nora dumps my bag onto the stone floor, breaking the binding on my
history book. Ouch. “Look, she has another one here.” She hands Bodhi’s
jacket to Varrish.

“Collecting them, are we?” Varrish takes the jacket without looking my
direction. His focus is on the bag with the other two riders’.

He’s going to take Xaden’s jacket. I fucking know it. Panic wells in my
throat, threatening to cut off my oxygen. I glance up at Rhi, locking eyes
with her through the slit she’s left in her door.

She cocks her head to the side silently, and I look pointedly to the dagger
sheathed at my shoulder before lifting my brows at her.

“It’s just books, some flight goggles, and the jacket,” Nora says.
“A jacket that isn’t hers,” Varrish corrects her. “Just like the one she’s

wearing.”
Rhiannon’s door squeaks, but she manages to close it before they swing

their gazes her way.
Fuck. Fuck. Fuck. I’m on my own. The dagger is more than enough to

implicate me if he knows what it is, and if he doesn’t, Markham will. But
worse, it will implicate Xaden. They’ll kill all the marked ones for what
they’ll perceive as his betrayal.

“Check the one she’s wearing,” Varrish orders. “Since it’s clearly not
regulation.”



“I’m sorry,” Professor Kaori says as he comes up behind me. “Did I just
hear you order your…aides, or whatever it is you’re calling them, to strip a
cadet?”

“It’s a jacket. She’s in violation of Article Seven, Section Three, which
states that impersonating a commissioned officer—” Varrish starts.

“It’s Article Two, actually,” I interrupt, folding my arms across my
chest. The shoulder has way more give to it than what I’d expect, but I’m
not foolish enough to draw attention to it by glancing down again. “And it
says impersonating a commissioned officer is a punishable offense, not
wearing someone’s flight jacket. As you can see, I’m not wearing anyone’s
name tag, nor am I claiming to be someone I’m not.”

“She has you there, Vice Commandant.” Kaori tucks his book under his
arm. “And since when do we search cadets’ bags?”

“Since I took over as vice commandant.” Varrish lifts his head, standing
to his full height. “This doesn’t involve you, Kaori.”

“Nevertheless, I’ll be staying,” Kaori retorts. “Power must always be
kept in check, don’t you think, Major Varrish?”

“Are you accusing me of abusing my power where this cadet is
concerned, Colonel Kaori?” Varrish moves to step toward us, but my bag is
in the way.

“Oh, no.” Kaori shakes his head. “I think you abuse your power in
general.”

It takes every muscle in my body to keep my features schooled.
Varrish’s eyes narrow on Kaori before turning to me. “I will have that

flight jacket.” He holds out his hand.
I undo the buttons, begging my fingers not to tremble, and hand it over.
Varrish goes through every. Single. Pocket.
I don’t need to warn Tairn—I can already feel his quiet presence in the

back of my mind.
“Hmm.” Kaori leans my direction and cocks his head, sweeping his gaze

over my uniform. “Her name tag here clearly says Sorrengail, and I note
two of her squad patches. Doesn’t seem to be impersonating anyone to me.”



“She is…” Varrish’s face blotches as he comes up empty on the jacket.
“She is still due to face court-martial for departing campus without leave
—”

“Oh.” Kaori nods. “That explains it. You haven’t talked to Panchek this
afternoon. I turned in my expert opinion that Sorrengail not be punished for
what was clearly the choice of her dragon. Her very powerful, very worried,
very mated dragon. Panchek agrees. She’s clear of all charges.”

“I’m sorry?” Varrish drops Xaden’s jacket on the floor on top of
Bodhi’s, and his henchmen stand.

“Come now,” Kaori says as if he’s talking to a child. “We can hardly
expect a second-year to shield out the overpowering emotions of her dragon
when even we struggle as officers, let alone one as strong as Tairn.”

“Maybe you struggle,” Varrish snips, losing his customary slick
indifference. “Some of us do not bow to the whims of our dragons. In fact,
we influence them.”

“Well, that’s certainly a theory worth contemplating.” Kaori pauses,
waiting for a reply that doesn’t come. “Odd. Would that mean you
influenced Solas when he set fire to that squad of bonded riders after
Parapet?”

Varrish glances between us. “We’re done here.”
The trio sidesteps the mess they made of my things and pushes by

Professor Kaori.
“You’re making enemies, Sorrengail,” Kaori says softly after waiting

until they’ve left.
“Not sure I made that one, Professor,” I tell him honestly, dropping to

the ground and shoving my things back in the bag. “Pretty sure he came that
way.”

“Hmm.” He watches me as I stand. “Either way, be careful there.” He
gives me a cautious look and then disappears down the hallway.

I squeeze the jacket between my hands, finding a very empty sheath.
Oh gods.
“Get in here!” Rhiannon hisses, all but yanking me into her room and

slamming the door shut behind me.



Ridoc and Sawyer rise from where they’re seated at the window and
close their physics books, exchanging a look before coming toward us.

“I didn’t want you caught up in—” My words die when she holds the
dagger up, grasping the tip. “Holy shit!” My jaw drops, then rises in an
awestruck smile. “You just pulled that through the wall! I thought you
couldn’t do that yet!”

“I can’t!” she rebuts. “Well, couldn’t, I guess. Not until right now. Not
until I thought whatever this is had a chance of getting you killed from the
look you gave me.”

“You’re incredible!” I glance at the guys. “She is, right?”
“Enough about the signet!” Her voice rises with tension. “What is this?

And why did you need them not to find it?”
“Oh. Right.” I take a single step forward, and she hands me the dagger.

A thousand possibilities, all varying degrees of the truth, run through my
mind. But I’m so sick of lying to her, to them. Especially when attacks are
increasing and keeping them in the dark will only hurt them. “The dagger.”

Gods, I hope Xaden forgives me for this.
She’s my closest friend and she just saved not only my ass but the lives

of every marked one in this college. She deserves better from me. She
deserves the truth. They all do.

“Violet?” she pleads.
I swallow the lump in my throat and meet her gaze. “It’s for killing

venin.”

OceanofPDF.com



Barring invasion, only riders and designated scribes are permitted in
the Riders Quadrant. To enter uninvited as infantry or even healer is to

welcome a swift death.

—ARTICLE TWO, SECTION THREE THE BASGIATH WAR COLLEGE CODE
OF CONDUCT



CHAPTER THIRTY

I tell them everything. Every moment that transpired from the minute I
made the decision to leave our squad with Xaden for War Games to the

second I fell from Tairn’s back after being stabbed. But when it comes to
revealing how and where I woke up, my tongue ties. I just can’t do it.

It’s not because I don’t trust them, but because it isn’t my secret to tell,
and to do so betrays Xaden…and Brennan. It risks every life in Aretia.

So, I tell them almost everything that happened after Resson. Andarna,
the assassination attempts, the daggers, supplying friendly drifts, Jesinia
sneaking me classified books about the wards, even the theory that Navarre
knows how to lure the venin—the rest spills out of my mouth in a deluge of
words as they stare at me, their expressions varying from shocked to
disbelief.

“I was right. Deigh wasn’t killed by gryphons.” Rhi sits on her bed,
staring at the wall, her eyes unfocused as she processes.

“Deigh wasn’t killed by gryphons.” I shake my head slowly, sitting
beside her.

“And you let him—let Riorson—lie for you.” Sawyer folds his arms
across his chest.

I nod, a pit opening in my stomach as I wait for them to condemn me, to
shout, to kick me out of the room, to end our friendship.



“And you’re sure the dragons know?” Ridoc tilts his head to the side,
and his eyes slowly widen as if he’s talking to Aotrom. “The dragons
know.”

“Feirge does, too.” Rhi grips the edge of her bed. “She’s stunned that I
do. That you do.”

“Tairn says the Empyrean is split. Some of the dragons want to act, and
others don’t. Without the Empyrean taking an official stance, none of the
dragons are willing to put their riders in danger by telling them if they don’t
already know.”

“And people are dying beyond the wards. All that propaganda is real.”
Ridoc paces between the window and door.

“Yes.” I nod.
“They can’t keep a lie this big,” Ridoc argues, rubbing his hand over his

recently buzzed hair. “It’s impossible.”
“It’s not.” Sawyer leans against Rhiannon’s desk. “Living in Luceras, I

promise you the only news we got along the coast came from what the
scribes put out as official announcements. It’s as easy as Markham choosing
which news gets published and which doesn’t. We aren’t even open to
trading vessels from the isle kingdoms.”

Ridoc shakes his head. “Fine, then what about the wabern, or whatever
you called them?”

“Wyvern?” Rhiannon offers.
“Right. If you killed all those dragon-size monsters, then where are the

bodies? They can’t hide an entire killing field, and Resson is close enough
to Athebyne that someone would see. Liam wasn’t the only rider with
farsight.”

“They burned them,” Rhiannon says quietly, looking away in thought.
“The patrol reports from Battle Brief said the trading post was charred for
miles and we’d have to find a new location for the quarterly trades.”

“How long do we have?” Ridoc stops pacing. “Until those things are at
the border?”

“Some say a year, some say less. A lot less.” I turn to Rhi. “You need to
get your family to leave. The farther from the border, the better.”



She lifts her brows. “You want me to tell my parents to leave the
business they worked their entire lives for and uproot my sister and her
family without telling them why?”

“You have to try,” I whisper. “I’m so sorry I couldn’t tell you.” Guilt
threatens to swallow me whole. “And the truth of it is that you still don’t
know everything. There are things I can’t tell you, at least not until you’re
all capable of shielding Dain out. And I know that sounds like a bunch of
bullshit because I’ve basically been lying to you for the last few months.
And you have every single right to be angry at me, or to hate me, or to feel
however you want to feel…of course.” A self-deprecating laugh slips free.
“Because it’s exactly why I’ve been so pissed at Xaden.” I end on a
whisper.

“Stop.” She takes a deep, shuddering breath and drags her gaze to meet
mine.

“I’m not pissed at you.”
I draw back, speechless.
“I’m a little pissed,” Ridoc mutters.
“I’m stunned but not angry,” Sawyer adds, shooting Ridoc a look.
“I’m not pissed at you, Vi,” Rhiannon repeats, her gaze locked on mine.

“I’m just really sorry you didn’t feel like you could tell me. Am I
disappointed and more than a little frustrated that you didn’t trust me
earlier? Absolutely, but I can’t imagine how heavy this has been for you to
carry.”

“But you should be pissed.” My eyes burn and a boulder forms in my
throat as I look at them all in turn. “You should all be pissed.”

Rhiannon lifts her brows at me. “So, I only get to feel however I want as
long as I rip you apart for not telling me? Not sure that’s fair.”

Breathe. I have to breathe, but the boulder feels like a mountain, now. “I
do not deserve you.” Her reaction to my outright deception couldn’t be
more different from how I’d torn Xaden to shreds. “Any of you.”

She yanks me into a hug, setting her chin on my shoulder. “Even if it
makes me a target to know all of this, you put your own life at risk and
shared your boot with me at Parapet when we were complete strangers.



How can you think I wouldn’t want to share this risk with you now that
you’re my best friend?”

I hold her tight, torn between the absolute relief of her knowing—them
all knowing—and ice-cold fear that all I did was expose them.

“We don’t run.” Sawyer moves toward us, then clasps my shoulder,
squeezing lightly.

Ridoc walks over slowly and rests his hand on my upper back. “The four
of us stick together. That’s the deal. We make it to graduation, no matter
what.”

“If there’s a Basgiath to graduate from,” Sawyer remarks.
“I do have one question.” Rhiannon pulls back, and the others drop their

hands. “If we only have months, then what are we doing about it?” There’s
no fear in her eyes, just a steely determination. “We have to tell everyone,
right? We can’t just let them show up at the border and start sucking the life
out of people.”

Leave it to Rhiannon to jump into problem-solving mode. For the first
time since returning to Basgiath after Resson, I don’t feel so alone. Maybe
keeping his distance works for Xaden, but I need my friends.

“We can’t. Not until we have everything in place to fight. They’ll kill us
all before we even get the chance to spread the truth, just like they did
during the Tyrrish rebellion.”

“You can’t expect us to twiddle our thumbs while Riorson and his
marked ones run around with the fate of the Continent in their hands.”
Sawyer rubs the bridge of his nose.

“He’s right.” Rhiannon nods. “And if you think that establishing a
second set of wards is the way to save people, then let’s do that. We’ll leave
the marked ones to their weapons smuggling and focus on helping you
research.”

“Solid plan,” Ridoc agrees, picking up the alloy-hilted dagger and
studying it.

“Are you guys really volunteering to spend your time reading dozens of
classified books on wards?” I look between them with raised brows.



“If it means we get to spend time in the Archives, I’m in.” Sawyer nods
enthusiastically.

“And we all know why, my friend.” Ridoc grins and claps him on the
back.

A spark of hope ignites in my chest. We’ll be able to read four times as
fast, cover four times as many books. “There has to be a record somewhere
about how the First Six created the first wards. Jesinia has been looking, but
she doesn’t have access to every classified tome, and everything I’ve read
has been edited or redacted during translation, including an account from
the first of the scribes. It’s like they hid the knowledge when they changed
our history, which I think happened about four hundred years ago.”

“So we’re looking for a book older than four hundred years.” Rhiannon
drums her fingers on her knee as she thinks. “One that hasn’t been through
a set of hands to translate or change.”

“Exactly. And Jesinia has already given me the oldest book she has
access to on ward-weaving curricula, and it only covers expansion, not
creation.” My shoulders fall as I sigh. “What we really need is a primary
source, and I doubt the First Six sat around writing books after they
founded Basgiath. They were a little busy.”

“Not too busy to keep personal journals.” Ridoc sets the dagger’s hilt in
the center of his palm and tries to balance it.

Our heads turn in his direction, and my heart threatens to stop.
“What?” Rhiannon asks.
“They kept journals,” he says with a shrug, moving as he tries to keep

the blade upright. “At least two of them. War—” He catches us staring and
quickly grabs the dagger by the handle. “Wait. Do I actually know
something about the Archives that you don’t?” A grin flashes across his
face. “I do, don’t I?”

“Ridoc…” Rhiannon warns, leveling a look on him I want nothing to do
with. “Right. Sorry.” He sets the dagger on the desk and then sits beside it.
“Lyra’s and Warrick’s journals are here. At least according to a classified
ledger in your mom’s office, they are.”

“My mom’s office?” My jaw hangs.



“The ledger, not the journals.” He shrugs. “I thumbed through it when
we were looking for something to steal during the Squad Battle, but it listed
them in a sublevel vault, and you’d already said the Archives were closed,
and then you suggested the map—”

“There aren’t any sublevel vaults.” I shake my head.
“That you know of,” he counters.
I blink. “Jesinia would know if we had those books, let alone a sublevel

vault.” My father would have told me…wouldn’t he?
Ridoc scoffs. “Right. Because the scribes have kept the biggest secret in

Navarre’s history safe all these years by granting access to second-years.”
“He makes a good point,” Sawyer notes.
He does. “I’ll ask her to look.” And it hits me that I would have known

this ages ago if I’d just trusted my friends. “But if I don’t even know about
the vault, then they’re beyond classified. Retrieving them could definitely
get us killed.”

Ridoc rolls his eyes. “Oh, good. I was wondering when it was going to
start getting dangerous around here again.”
 
 
 

J esinia knows nothing about a sublevel vault, so while she hunts, the rest
of us pore over every book about ward-weaving and the First Six she

can give us.
Research goes a lot faster when four people are doing it. And I have to

admit, it’s nice to look across my room during the hours we study and see
my friends again.

But we don’t find answers. And Andarna remains suspiciously asleep.
And Tairn kindly telling me not to worry feels like a giant trigger to do
exactly that, so I do.

I never get a chance to tell Xaden about our discovery—or lack thereof.
That next Saturday, our squad is pulled into another session of land nav
with the infantry, this time with First Wing, and I spend two days wandering



the steep terrain of the mountains near Basgiath, avoiding Jack Barlowe—
who is weirdly nice to everyone—at all costs.

“It’s like he met Malek and decided to come back a decent guy,”
Rhiannon observes when we catch him tutoring first-years on the mat. “But
I still don’t trust him.”

“Me, either.” The professors all seem to love him now, too.
The next week, Andarna is still sleeping, and Sawyer stumbles onto a

three-hundred-year-old passage that confirms more than one wardstone was
created.

On Saturday, not only is Xaden on duty in the ops room, but Mira is on
patrol for the majority of my visit, and the weekend after, our squad is
dropped into the Parchille Forest amid the changing leaves without supplies
and told to walk our way out.

Message received. Tairn and Sgaeyl won’t be denied, but Xaden and I
only get to see each other when we play by the rules—Varrish has
determined that we’ve broken too many.

The next weekend, I have to choose between my squad receiving a zero
if I don’t participate in a cat-and-mouse evasion operation against Third
Wing in the Shedrick Woods and flying to Samara for Xaden.

It’s the very scenario Mira predicted last year when she learned I’d
bonded Tairn—being forced to choose between my education, my squad,
and Xaden and Sgaeyl. Tairn makes the choice before I can bludgeon
myself about it.

We stay, but he’s fucking miserable the next day when Threshing comes,
and I can’t blame him. I might not have a mating bond, but I’d chew my
own arm off if it meant I had five minutes to talk to Xaden. Nothing I need
to tell him can be written in a letter.

“You look more nervous than you did when it was our Threshing,”
Rhiannon says, coming to stand next to where my squadmates have claimed
a spot on the hillside across from where the Fourth Wing first-years wait
with their newly bonded dragons.

“I haven’t seen Sloane yet, and I need to leave to take over the watch
soon.” I sway back and forth nervously, like a mother with a colicky



newborn. I’ll find time to get to temple if you could just be with her, I
promise Dunne, the goddess of war.

“She’ll make it.” The tension in Imogen’s folded arms tells me she’s not
feeling quite as certain as she proclaims. In addition to the extra reps during
our nightly workouts, she’s been more than a little short with me since I had
to tell her that I spilled our secret, which then pressured her to tell Quinn,
too.

Quinn took it a lot like Rhiannon, with grace and a sense of resolve.
Xaden’s going to lose his shit when I tell him, but I’ll deal with that

when he gets here on Saturday. If they actually let us see each other.
“All of Flame Section is looking strong. Bodhi should be proud,” Quinn

says with a hopeful smile.
“Visia bonded a Brown Daggertail,” Rhi says, nodding across the field

to where the first-year stands in front of her dragon. “Avalynn, Lynx, and
Baylor all made it, too. But I don’t see Aaric or Mischa.” She glances at me.
“She’s the one who’s always biting her nails.”

“Oh. Right.” Guilt clogs my throat, and I swallow, but there’s no
clearing it. While I’ve avoided getting to know anything about the first-
years, Rhi hasn’t had that luxury.

Wingbeats fill the air again, and we all look to the right as a Blue
Clubtail approaches with sapphire-hued scales that contrast the changing
colors of the sunset sky, and he is beautiful.

“We’ve always been the better-looking species,” Tairn chimes in.
“Andarna?” I ask him every single day, and today, twice.
“She still sleeps.”
“That can’t be natural.” I shift my weight on the hillside.
“It’s…longer than expected.”
“So you keep saying. You have the Empyrean gathered.” I change the

subject and glance back over my shoulder at the dragon-covered mountain,
spotting Tairn high on the ridgeline above, just a little lower than the
dragons I assume are their elders. “Plan on discussing anything tonight?”
Without the cooperation of the Empyrean, we’re stuck.

“If we were, I couldn’t tell you.”



“Figured,” I say with a sigh, watching the blue land in the field directly
in front of the dais where leadership, including my mother, watch.

“I’ll be damned,” Rhiannon mutters as Aaric dismounts from the Blue
Clubtail like he’s been doing it for years, with an ease that reminds me of
Xaden and Liam. I smile as he keeps his head down while recording his
dragon’s name and makes it back without my mother recognizing him.

“There.” Rhiannon points toward the end of the field.
A midsize red the shade of a strawberry flies in, whipping her daggertail

behind her when she lands in the middle of the field.
“A Red Daggertail,” I whisper, relief flooding my veins as Sloane

clumsily dismounts, clutching her shoulder. “Just like her brother.”
Sloane hugs Visia tight, and I smile. I’m glad she has friends, that their

year has the chance to become just as tight as ours.
“It’s hard not to loathe her for hating you.” Rhiannon sighs. “But I’m

glad she survived.”
“I don’t need her to like me.” I shrug. “I just need her to live.”
“Squad Leader Matthias?” A rider from Third Wing wearing a black

sash with a gray messenger insignia approaches.
“Here.” Rhi beckons him forward, then takes the folded parchment from

his hand. “Thank you.” He leaves, and she breaks the wax seal to open the
missive. Her gaze darts to mine, and she lowers her voice as Ridoc leans in.
“Jesinia requests we meet her by the Archives door in fifteen minutes. She
has a tome we’ve requested.” She reads our code phrase slowly, excitement
growing in her eyes.

I inhale sharply, and my heart jumps as I grin. “She’s found the vault,” I
whisper. “But I have the next watch, and Threshing is almost over. You
have squad leader duties.”

“I’ll take your watch,” Ridoc offers quietly.
“And give Varrish a reason for me not to see Xaden this weekend? No

way.”
I shake my head.
“Then I’ll meet Jesinia.” He reaches for the missive, and Rhi hands it

over. “Sawyer can cover us here.”



We all agree, and Ridoc and I head toward the quadrant, keeping clear of
the newly bonded dragons’ flight path.

“Which tower are we keeping watch on?” he asks as we enter the
courtyard. “Dormitory?”

“Academic.” I point up to the turret where the never-ending fire blazes.
“Ah. The burn pit. It’s going to be a busy night up there once the ceremony
ends.” He nudges my shoulder. “I’ll come up right after I meet with her.
And then I vote we join the Threshing celebration after your watch.” His
head tilts. “Or at least I’ll be celebrating. Unfortunately, I think you limit
yourself to celebrating with Riorson, now.”

“Go find out if all our problems are answered.” I laugh, and we part
ways when I push open the doors to the academic wing. It’s eerily quiet in
the building as I climb the wide spiral stairs up to the top floor. Come to
think of it, I don’t think I’ve ever been alone in the academic building in all
my years here. Someone is always around. My heart rate increases with
every flight of stairs, but I’m nowhere near as winded as I was when I made
this journey for Aurelie last year.

I open the door onto the flat-topped turret and am immediately
enveloped in heat from the flames rising from the iron barrel in the center.

“Violet?” Eya smiles and hops off the edge of the thick stone wall on the
other side of the barrel. “I didn’t realize you were relieving me.”

“I didn’t realize you had watch before me. How have you been?” I make
my way around the barrel and try not to think of how many of the cadets
will have their things offered to Malek in the next day.

“Good—” Her eyes blow wide as she glances past me—and I turn,
immediately drawing a dagger from my thigh and moving to her side.

Four grown soldiers in infantry blue rush out of the doorway, each
brandishing a shortsword as they face us. My stomach drops to the bottom
floor and crashes. They definitely don’t look lost.

“Infantry is not allowed in the Riders Quadrant!” Eya snaps, flipping her
hatchet over her wrist and gripping the handle.

“We’re here with express permission,” the one on the right snarls.



“And paid well for the specific message we’re to deliver.” That ominous
line comes from the tallest one on the left as they spread out on the far side
of the barrel, splitting in the center to come at us from both sides.

Four assassins and two of us. They have the exit, and we’re pinned
between the fire, the wall, and four stories of nothing. Not good. And they
know it, especially by the slow smile the one closer to the center gives, the
firelight reflecting off his blade as he raises it.

Fuck them. I did not survive the entirety of last year, or these last few
months, to die on top of the academic wing.

“Kill them all,” Tairn orders.
“Go left,” Eya mutters.
I nod and unsheathe another dagger. “Let me guess.” They take slow,

coordinated steps toward us, and Eya and I pivot so we stand back-to-back.
“Secrets die with the people who keep them?”

The one on the left blinks in surprise.
“It’s not as original as you’d think.” In rapid-fire, I flick two daggers at

him, catching him in the throat and heart. Eya shouts behind me, charging at
the two on her side as my first attacker falls like a damned tree, crashing
into stone and driving my daggers deeper.

Blades clash behind me, and I lose sight of my remaining attacker in the
high flames as I grab two more daggers. Shit, shit, shit. Where is—

Fire blasts toward my face and I dive to the left, narrowly missing the
barrel that skids across the cobblestone floor and slams into the wall with a
thud loud enough to wake the dead. My shoulder takes the brunt of the
impact when I fall, and I grimace as I force myself onto my knees, ignoring
the wide, unseeing eyes of the soldier I’ve already killed.

“I’m coming!” Tairn shouts.
Eya screams, and I make the mistake of looking back over my shoulder

as one of the soldiers wrenches his sword from the middle of her chest.
Blood. There’s so much blood. It slides over her leathers as she clutches

her ribs, and I watch in horror as she falls to her knees.
“Eya!” I shout, stumbling to my feet, but I can’t get to her with the

barrel blazing between us. Pinching the edges of my daggers, I lunge



forward, then hurl both at the assassin she hasn’t slain, catching him in the
chest.

I have two more out when I spin to face the only one left, but there’s no
time to throw them. He’s used Eya’s death to close the distance. I gasp as he
grabs ahold of my waist, locking down with a grip I can’t dislodge as he
marches three quick steps to the edge of the tower.

No! I slice at his arms, but he holds fast despite the wounds. I kick hard
in his stomach, and he sputters, and with the next kick, he releases me. My
momentum sends me flying backward, and my daggers scrape both sides of
the turret’s crenellations as I skid toward the edge, my feet kicking under
me and finding nothing but air.

Fast. It’s happening too fast to do anything but react.
Instinct takes over and my hands splay wide against the sides of the

crenellations, releasing the daggers. Clawing for purchase, I sail backward,
my skin grating against the rock to slow me down as I do, and the tips of
my boots hit the edge of the turret…then slip right off.

But the impact is enough to change the angle of my fall, and stone
rushes up at my face for no longer than a heartbeat before my stomach
collides with the edge of the turret, stealing what breath I have on impact.

My weight drags me the rest of the way backward, and I dig in with my
fingernails and hold as my lower half kicks against the crevices in the
stonework beneath me, looking for a foothold.

This can’t be happening, but it is.
“It’s nothing personal,” the soldier says, crawling forward onto the

three-foot-deep wall.
I gasp for breath and cough at the first full inhale. There has to be a

foothold below. There just does. This isn’t how I die.
My feet search and I can feel the ridges, but there’s nothing substantial

enough to support my weight.
“It’s just money,” he whispers from his knees and reaches for my hands.
Oh gods, he’s going to—
“No!” Power floods my veins, but there’s nothing to do with a strike this

close.



“Just money,” he repeats, lifting my hands from the stone.
Xaden. Sgaeyl. Tairn. This will kill us all.
The soldier lets go.
I scream, the sound so shrill it tears my throat, and I slide, scraping my

forearms raw as gravity drags me down, the top of the turret fading from
view, but my fingers grab hold of the tiny lip at the edge…and cling.

My heart lurches into my throat as my feet scramble.
No foothold.
Barely any handhold, and my shoulders start to wail as I dangle.
“Just let go,” the soldier urges, crawling forward again. “It will be over

before you—” His eyes bulge and he gurgles, grabbing for his throat and
the dagger whose tip protrudes a few inches below his chin.

Someone has shoved their knife in through his spine.

OceanofPDF.com



Everyone thinks most Riders cadets die from dragon fire. Truth be
told, it’s usually gravity that gets us.

—PAGE FORTY-SEVEN, THE BOOK OF BRENNAN



CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

I slip another precious inch as the soldier is yanked backward, then thrown
forward, over my head, disappearing into the darkness.
It’s Eya. It has to be. Maybe the wound isn’t—
Blond hair and icy-blue eyes appear above me, and my heart plummets

with the assassin’s body. Jack Barlowe.
“Sorrengail?” He lunges forward, grasping my wrists with an

unbreakable grip.
“I’m so sorry,” I tell Tairn and prepare myself for the weightless

moment that will be my last.
“I’ve got you!” Jack shouts, holding my wrists tight as he throws

himself backward and hauls me up and over the edge.
My ribs hit stone, and he lets one hand go, then grabs my leathers and

pulls, heaving me the rest of the way onto the tower wall.
I don’t waste time, scrambling forward to safety. As soon as my boots

land inside the turret, he backs up a few steps, his chest rising and falling
quickly with exertion as he gives me space, dodging the fallen body to the
left as fire rages to the right.

“You saved me?” I scurry backward, leaving my hands at my sides and
close to my daggers.

“I didn’t know it was you,” he admits, falling back against the tower
wall and catching his breath. “But yeah.”



“You could have let me fall, but you pulled me up,” I say, like I’m trying
to convince myself.

“Do you want to climb back up there and we’ll do it again that way?” he
offers, gesturing to the wall.

“No!”
Wingbeats sound overhead, and we both look up as Tairn soars by. He

would have been too late, and we both know it. The relief coursing through
my body isn’t just mine; it’s his, too.

“Look.” Jack shakes his head and peers over at Eya’s lifeless form. “I
was on the dorm’s watch for First Wing and ran when I heard the screams.
And…well… riders don’t die at the hands of infantry.”

“I killed you. You have every right to throw me off the tower.” I reach
behind me one hand at a time and collect two of my daggers, sheathing
them slowly, bracing myself for anything.

“Yeah.” He rubs his hand through his short blond hair. “Well, that death
was kind of a second chance for me. You don’t know who you really are
until you face down Malek. So, the way I see this is I just gave you a
second chance, too. We’re even.” He nods once, then walks away, exiting
into the tower.

I move slowly around the edge of the turret, stopping to roll over the
body of the first assassin I killed and remove my daggers, cleaning them on
his uniform before sheathing them at my thighs. The fire slowly sputters in
the barrel, and I lean against the hard stone wall before letting my back hit
every ridge on the way down as I slide to sit.

I stare at the tips of Eya’s boots—they’re all I can see from this angle—
and let my head fall back against the wall. Then I breathe and wait for the
adrenaline to pass, for the shock to wear off, for the trembling in my aching
hands to cease.

Eya’s dead. That’s half of us who flew into Resson. Aetos isn’t going to
stop until we’re all gone. He’ll pick us off one by one. I hug my knees to
my chest. Who will he come for next? Garrick? Imogen? Xaden? Bodhi?
We can’t go on like this.



“Holy shit.” I hear Ridoc’s voice a second before I see him. “What
happened?” He falls to his knees beside me, looking me over in obvious
appraisal. “Are you hurt? Stabbed?” His glance skitters sideways.
“Burned?”

“No.” I shake my head. “But Eya’s dead. Assassins. Aetos.”
“Fuck.”
I laugh, the sound tripping out of my lips hysterically. “Jack Barlowe

saved my life.”
“Are you kidding?” Ridoc rises up and cups my face, checking my eyes

for signs of concussion.
“No. He said this makes us even, and I really think he failed math,

because by my calculations now I owe him two lives: the one I took from
him, and the one he just gave me.”

“I should have come with you.” His hands fall away.
“No.” I shake my head, and my vision swims. “They could have killed

you, too.” Shivers rack my frame.
“What do you need?”
“Just wait with me while it passes.”
Silence stretches between us.
“I saw Jesinia,” he says quietly. “The good news is she knows where the

vault is. There are wards, but she knows how to get through them, too. But
the bad news is we need someone in King Tauri’s bloodline to do it.
They’re not just in some sublevel vault. They’re in the royal one.” His
shoulders dip in defeat. “I’m sorry, Violet.”

I look over at Eya’s boots. There’s nothing I can do to protect her now,
but I can protect what she fought for. “Then it’s a good thing we have
access to a prince who happens to hate his father.”

OceanofPDF.com



Gods save us from the ambitions of second-years. They think they’ve
experienced everything because they’ve survived their first year, but in

reality, they only know enough to get themselves killed.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

X aden stares down at me that Saturday, his eyes boring a hole through
my soul, and a muscle in his jaw ticks once. Twice.

At least there aren’t any shadows creeping out from under my bed, so he
can’t be that angry, right?

“Say something.” I hold his gaze and shift my weight when the edge of
my desk digs into the backs of my thighs.

His shoulders rise with a deep breath. At least one of us is getting
enough oxygen. My chest feels like it’s about to squeeze my lungs right out
of it.

“Rhiannon saved my life. If she hadn’t retrieved that dagger before
Varrish took your jacket, I wouldn’t be sitting here.” It comes out like the
plea it is. “They had to know eventually. She saw the dagger. She knew
something was up.”

Those beautiful eyes close, and I swear I can feel him counting to ten.
Fine, maybe twenty.
“Say something. Please,” I whisper.
“I’m choosing my words carefully,” he replies, then takes another

measured breath.
“I appreciate that.” I open my mouth to make another excuse, but there

really is none to give, so I sit and listen to the clock tick and rain pelt the
window while he composes his thoughts.



“Who exactly knows?” he finally asks, slowly opening his eyes.
“Rhiannon, Sawyer, Ridoc, and Quinn.”
“Quinn, too?” His eyes flare.
I hold up a finger. “That was all Imogen.”
“For fuck’s sake.” He drags a hand down his face.
“They don’t know everything.” He lifts his scarred brow, looking

anything but reassured.
“They don’t know about Aretia or Brennan or the luminary issue.” I

cock my head to the side. “Which really isn’t an issue if I can get a week
away from this place to fly to Cordyn. It’s what? A two-day flight?” The
city on the southern coast of the Krovlan province can’t be too far.

“Stop.” He leans in, bringing his face right up to mine, bracketing my
hips on the desktop with his hands. “Do not go there with me. Not right
now. This asinine idea of breaking into the Archives tonight is more than
enough for me to sweat about without worrying you’re going to fly off and
get yourself captured and killed in enemy territory.”

“It’s not an idea—it’s a plan.” I cup his cheeks. “And it doesn’t feel like
you’re sweating to me.”

A sound like a growl works up his throat as he pushes away, retreating a
step. “You have no idea what I’m thinking.”

“You’re right. I don’t. So tell me.” I grip the edge of the desk and wait to
see if he’ll shut me out as usual.

He runs his thumb beneath the bottom lip I haven’t had the chance to
kiss and glances toward the books piled on my shelves. “I appreciate you
waiting for me to do this, but there are holes in your plan.”

“What holes?”
“You haven’t secured the agreement of the key participant, for starters

—” He lifts a finger.
“That’s because—”
“No, no, it’s my turn to talk right now. You asked what I was thinking,

right?” He gives me the wingleader look—the shrewd, calculated one that
used to scare the shit out of me—and I snap my mouth shut. He lifts a
second finger. “Jesinia won’t be the only scribe there, which means there’s a



high probability of being caught.” A third finger joins the other two. “Not
only do the books have to be stolen, they have to be returned before anyone
notices. Or were you planning on staying overnight to read?”

“I wasn’t borrowing tomorrow’s trouble on that one,” I admit.
“And you really think we can get in and out in under an hour? Because

the alternative leaves us dead.”
“We don’t have much of a choice if we want those journals.”
He sighs deeply, then closes the distance between us and takes my chin

between his thumb and forefinger to gently tilt my face toward his. “How
certain are you that the answers to the wardstone are in those books?”

“We’ve read through half the classified tomes on ward-weaving and
repair in the last month, and whatever we haven’t, Jesinia has. They only
cover weaving into existing wards or repairing them. Those journals are our
best shot at learning how the First Six built the first wards. Our only shot.”

“You know they’ll kill us if we’re caught, right?”
Us. I slide my hands up his chest. “We’re dead anyway if we don’t get

Aretia’s wards up. We have months if Brennan’s right, and he usually is.
The truth is coming out. It’s just a matter of time.”

His attention drops to my mouth, and my pulse leaps. “If you’re certain
this is the only way, then I’m in. There’s no chance I’m letting you do this
on your own.”

My smile is instantaneous. “You’re not going to argue? Or tell me
there’s another way?”

“Me? Argue with you about books?” He shakes his head, sliding his
hand to my cheek. “I only pick fights I can win.” He lowers his mouth inch
by slow inch, then stops a breath away. “It’s your turn to talk now.”

He hovers right there and waits, our mouths so close it would only take a
whisper of movement to connect us. All it takes is his nearness, his touch,
and my blood simmers. Anticipation flushes my skin, and he strokes his
thumb along my heated cheek but doesn’t take what I so desperately want
him to.

My breath catches at the realization that he’s giving me the choice not
just to kiss him, but to call our night in Samara an exception.



But it wasn’t.
Leaning up, I brush my lips across his, then kiss him gently as if it’s the

first time. This isn’t heat and passion, though I know it will be in a matter of
heartbeats. This is something else entirely. Something that scares the shit
out of me, and yet I can’t bring myself to pull away, even in the name of
self-preservation.

I’m choosing him, choosing us. There will be no calling this a lapse in
judgment, or the result of too much adrenaline, or even lust.

I love him. No matter what he’s done or why he did it, I still love him,
and I know he cares about me.

Maybe it isn’t love.
Maybe after all he’s been through, he isn’t capable of that emotion.
But I mean something to him.
He kisses me long and slow, like we have all the time we want, like

there’s nothing more important in this world than the slide of his tongue
against mine, the drag of his teeth across my lower lip.

It’s a bone-melting, intense assault on every one of my senses, and by
the time he lifts his head, we’re both breathing harder.

“We have to stop, or we’re not leaving this room tonight.” He drags the
backs of his fingers down my cheek and steps back when I force myself to
nod in agreement.

I shake my head to clear it, and he moves toward the door.
Where the hell is he going?
“I didn’t ask him to help us yet for a reason.”
“Yeah. I gathered that.” Xaden pauses, gripping the door handle, and

looks over his shoulder at me. “I’m with you. I’ll do this. But you have to
know the consequences if he says no.”

My stomach pitches. Telling him will expose us…
“He won’t.” I’m sure of it.
Xaden dips his chin once, then yanks open the door.
Ridoc and Sawyer stagger forward, then slam into the wards and fall to

the hallway floor.
My hand flies to my face as I smother a laugh.



“It’s soundproof when the door is closed, assholes,” Xaden growls.
“And what the fuck is he already doing here?”

“He doesn’t know why he’s here,” Bodhi is saying. “I just ordered him
out of flight lessons.”

I hop off the desk and hurry to the door as Ridoc and Sawyer pick
themselves up and split, revealing Bodhi, Rhiannon, Imogen, and Quinn
across the hall.

Aaric stands between them all, leaning against the wall, his arms folded
across his chest. “Figured you’d come for me sooner or later,” he says, his
eyes narrowing on Xaden, shining with nothing short of malice.

The energy between these two is anything but good, which I should have
expected. Xaden’s father started a war that Aaric’s father ended.

One by one, I pull them through the wards into my room, including
Aaric, who hovers just inside the doorway, but I leave the door open in case
anyone needs a quick exit. I turn to Aaric. “We need your help. And you
can say no and walk away right now, but if I explain why we need you and
you say no…” I drag in a shaky breath, reluctant to say what needs to be
said.

“If we tell you why and you decline, you won’t be walking away,”
Xaden finishes when I can’t.

“You think I’m going to lift a finger for you?” Aaric reaches for his
sword hilt.

“Whoa, whoa!” Bodhi grabs for his sword, angling to step between
them. “Everyone calm down.”

“You know what’s happening out there, and you came here for a reason,
right?” I say to Aaric, putting myself in front of Xaden. “Help us do
something about it.”

“You have no idea what he did to Alic!” he seethes.
“Your brother was a craven, murderous prick.” Xaden hooks his fingers

into my waistband and tugs me backward, setting me slightly behind him
before he shoves Aaric through the wards and into the hallway. “And I’m
not sorry I killed him.”

Oh shit. I did not see that coming.



 
 
 

Three hours later, we’ve gone over the plan until we know not only our
parts but everyone else’s, too. Bodhi’s had to step in between Aaric and

Xaden twice, but we’re finally on our way to the Archives. Turns out the
key to securing Aaric’s participation was noting that he’d be stealing from
his father. An hour from now, we’ll either have retrieved the journals or
we’ll be dead. The Archives aren’t kind to visitors after the vault-like door
closes.

“You sure about this?” I ask Aaric quietly as we walk down the tunnel
from the infirmary in pairs, eight of us covered in scribe robes embroidered
with second-year golden rectangles. This entire plan hinges on him.

“Absolutely. The only person I hate more than Xaden Riorson is my
father. Just keep your boyfriend the fuck away from me.” He stares straight
ahead.

“He’ll keep his distance,” I promise, glancing over my shoulder, past the
others at where Xaden follows close behind, the only one who refused to
wear a disguise. Then again, if I was a shadow wielder I’m not sure I’d
walk around in anything but black, either.

“I’ll be wherever you are,” Xaden counters as the bells ring out six
times, signaling the hour. “Remember, the goal is secrecy, not showing off.
This isn’t the Squad Battle,” he says, his tone low.

We pass the stairwell on the right that leads up to the rest of campus and
down to the brig, then round the last corner. The Archives door comes into
view, and lucky for us, Nasya is exactly where I expect him to be: asleep at
his post.

Bodhi moves quickly with Ridoc, slipping behind Nasya and hiding
behind the door to keep watch.

First obstacle complete.
Jesinia surprises me, meeting us at the door. “No,” she signs, appraising

our group, the lines of her mouth tense. “Only four of you. Any more, and
it’ll be too suspicious.” Her gaze sweeps over Xaden. “Especially you.”



Fuck. Everyone here was chosen for not only their loyalty but their
signets.

“No one will see me,” Xaden assures, keeping his voice low as he signs
simultaneously. “Aaric. Violet. Imogen.”

Jesinia’s gaze catches on Aaric, and I see the moment she realizes who
he is. The blood drains from her face, and she jerks her attention to me.

“Is he that obvious?” I sign as the others start to argue quietly.
“Only if you’re looking for it,” she replies. “They have the same eyes.”
“The wonder of heredity,” Aaric signs.
“I can retrieve.” Rhiannon whispers her argument at Xaden.
“And I can wipe short-term memory if we’re seen,” Imogen replies.

“Classified signet, remember? Your power is impressive, Matthias, but I’m
the last line of defense around here.” She moves to Nasya, putting her hands
lightly on his head. “Just in case.”

“We’ll stay close.” Quinn steps away from the group and motions at
Sawyer and Rhiannon to follow. “Just in case you need us.”

Rhiannon looks between Xaden and me, clearly torn. “If something goes
wrong—”

“Then you’ll go back to your rooms and act like it didn’t.” I hold her
gaze so she knows I’m serious. “No matter what. Stick to the plan.”

Her shoulders drop and she nods, shooting me one last look of
frustration before joining the others behind the massive door.

“Walk softly,” Jesinia reminds us, and my heart pounds as we file into
the Archives. “We have to be quick. The Archives close in exactly an hour,
and if we’re in here when that door seals shut…”

I swallow the nausea that’s threatening. “I know. We’ll die.” The
Archives are warded with the ultimate pest protection.

“Just show us the way. We’ll do the rest,” Xaden says. He disappears the
moment we cross the threshold, sticking to the shadows along the dimly lit
walls. I can just see the vague outline of his shape if I look closely, but it’s
almost shocking how well he blends into the darkness.

Or maybe it’s that the rest of the space is so bright, mage lights
illuminating the rows and rows of bookshelves and empty study tables that



stretch to the back of the cavernous dome. Empty is good—and expected
for a Saturday night—but there’s no telling who might be within the stacks
or in the workrooms deeper within the Archives.

I force myself past the pinch of hesitation when I walk by the oak study
table, following Jesinia. The marble under my boots is familiar and yet
completely foreign. As many years as I’ve spent here, this is the farthest
I’ve ever walked into the Archives.

Aaric glances down each row as we pass, but I don’t take my eyes off
Jesinia, forcing my mannerisms, my posture, my pace to mirror hers. The
quiet I usually find such peace in is unnerving under these circumstances.

Gods, so much can go wrong. What little dinner I ate threatens to
reappear.

The three of us follow Jesinia as she turns left and cuts through the
second-to-last row of tables, guiding us in the direction of the workrooms.
The scent of bonding glue grows stronger, and my heart stutters at the sight
of a scribe headed our way, coming from the same hallway we’re headed
for.

The single golden rectangle on his shoulder marks him as a first-year,
and though the Scribe Quadrant educates twice as many cadets as the
Riders Quadrant, it’s still small enough that he should recognize us if we
were what we’re pretending to be.

“Cadet Neilwart?” he signs while speaking, glancing at us in confusion.
I lower my head and see Aaric doing the same, shielding our features as
much as possible.

“Cadet Samuelson,” Jesinia answers, turning slightly so I can see her
hands.

Fuck, we’re going to be caught before we even get near the wards.
“I’ve got this.” Xaden’s voice soothes the sharpest of the anxiety but not

all of it.
But he’s here. He’s exactly why we waited for this particular night.
Shadows creep from beneath the tables, racing for Samuelson’s feet, and

Aaric tenses beside me.



“I thought only you and Cadet Nasya were on duty tonight?” Samuelson
asks.

“And yet you’re here,” she replies.
Tendrils of black rise up behind the first-year.
“Wait.” The last thing we need is a dead scribe cadet.
“This is me being patient,” Xaden answers.
“I forgot my binding assignment in Culley’s room.” Samuelson glances

meaningfully at the cream satchel strapped over his shoulder.
“Forgetfulness doesn’t become a scribe,” Jesinia signs, and my

eyebrows rise as I fight back a smile. “If you don’t mind, first-year, we
second-years have things to accomplish. Not everyone requires weekends
off to study.”

The first-year flushes in obvious embarrassment, then steps aside into
the aisle.

Shadows fall back into place, and we walk forward as a group.
“I thought he might kill him,” Aaric whispers once we’re out of the first-

year’s range of hearing.
“Wouldn’t have surprised me,” Imogen replies. “Might have been more

efficient.”
We both whip our heads around to see her shrug.
Jesinia leads us out of the main library and down a well-lit hallway lined

with windows and with a few classrooms on each side. The deeper we
travel into the Archives, the tighter my collar feels.

Xaden catches up to us in a few strides, walking calmly beside me.
“Someone is going to notice all that black,” I lecture quietly as Jesinia

turns to the right. This place is a fucking maze, and it all looks exactly the
same.

“There’s no one here.” Xaden’s hands are loose at his sides, and he’s
exchanged the swords he prefers at his back in favor of a short one, which
tells me he’s prepared for close-quarters fighting. “At least not in this
section.”

“Your shadows tell you that?” Aaric quips.
“I thought we agreed not to speak,” Xaden retorts.



Jesinia opens the third door on the left, and we follow her into what
looks to be a classroom. No wonder the hallway is lined with windows; in
here, it’s dark. Two of the walls are made of stone, and the back one is lined
with books. The rest of the space is sparse, filled with rows of long trestle
tables and benches that face a lone desk at the front of the room.

“Everything from here is only what I’ve been told,” she signs, worry
pursing her lips. “I’ve never been farther. If I’m wrong about any of this—”

“We can handle ourselves,” I promise.
She nods, then walks to the far corner of the room, toward the long

bookcase.
“Imogen,” Xaden orders, nodding toward the door.
She takes a lookout position, retrieving a knife from under her robes as

Jesinia reaches for the back of the bookcase, moving several tomes out of
the way before locating a lever.

She pulls down on the metal piece, and the corner of the room separates
from the other stones. It rotates a quarter-turn with surprising near silence,
revealing the opening to a steep spiral staircase.

Looking closely, I can see the faint lines of the metal track it spins on.
“Amazing,” I whisper. How many of these little hidden wonders exist

around here? “What?” I hiss at Xaden when I catch him looking at me.
“I feel like I’m looking at what could have been.”
“And?” The secret entrance clicks into place, halting its rotation.
“You look better in black,” Xaden whispers, his lips brushing the shell of

my ear and eliciting a shiver of awareness despite our current situation.
“This is as far as I can take you,” Jesinia signs. “If I’m gone much

longer, someone may notice. According to the others, the normal Archives
wards end here, so if you can’t get back in time, you’re safer down there
overnight.”

“Thank you,” I reply. “I’ll be in contact as soon as we can return them.”
“Good luck.” She offers us an encouraging smile, then leaves the four of

us to it.
Xaden leans into the stairwell. “Watch your step,” he tells us. “There’s a

little light coming from the bottom, but we’ll need to keep the rest from



turning on.”
“We’re down to forty-five minutes,” Imogen says. Any longer and we’re

either stuck and court-martialed…or dead.
No pressure.
“Then we’d better move quickly,” Xaden replies, lacing his fingers with

mine before starting down the steps.

OceanofPDF.com



The first time you are caught in the Archives after the door seals for
the evening will be the last. The complex magics put in place to

preserve our texts are not compatible with life.

—COLONEL DAXTON’S GUIDE TO EXCELLING IN THE SCRIBE QUADRANT



CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

Shadows blanket the ceiling, blocking any mage lights that could flicker
on at our presence, so I put my free hand on the wall as we descend the

stairs slowly. Every step is a gamble in the darkness, but miraculously, no
one stumbles.

Pale blue light blooms at the bottom of the staircase.
“A mage light?”
“There are two guards at the end of this hallway,” Xaden answers,

slipping his hand from mine. “Wait here while I solve that problem.”
I put my hand up to signal the others to stop when we reach the final

step. The space opens into what looks to be a hallway, but Xaden doesn’t
question which direction to take. He moves quickly to the right, lifting both
hands. A crumpling sound follows.

“Now,” he says aloud.
The hallway is maybe thirty feet long and little more than a glorified

tunnel supported by carved pillars over a stone floor. It smells like earth and
metal and feels dank with humidity. At one end, light shines through an
open archway. Glancing over my shoulder, I see that only darkness
consumes the other possible path.

“There isn’t even a door?” Imogen asks as we hurry down the hall.
“No need with wards that strong,” Xaden comments.



“I can feel them.” The thrum of sharp, intense power grows stronger the
closer we get. The hair on the back of my neck rises, and my own power
surges in answer to what feels like a hell of a threat.

“We have a few minutes before these two will wake up. I didn’t hit them
that hard,” Xaden says as he and Imogen drag the infantry guards to the
side, clearing the path.

“Those wards are some uncomfortable shit.” Imogen rolls her shoulders.
“There’s a hum, but it’s not that bad,” Aaric replies as we stare through

the warded archway with its intricately carved stonework to the shelves of
the small, circular library that lies beyond it.

“That bodes well for getting past,” Imogen remarks. “And you’d better
hurry.”

“You’re looking for two journals,” I nervously remind him, even though
we’ve gone over this three times.

“There have to be at least five hundred tomes in there.” Aaric’s gaze
skims the shelves, and he sighs.

“You’ll have to search—”
“Violet!” Xaden shouts as Aaric grips my hand and strides forward

through the archway, yanking me along.
Powerful magic ripples over me as I stumble through, pricking every

inch of my skin and twisting my stomach with the feel of a hundred-foot
freefall as he pulls me into the library.

He releases my hand and I hit my knees, falling forward and catching
myself on my hands. Nausea overwhelms every other sense. My mouth
waters and my head hangs as I fight back the urge to vomit.

“Why the fuck would you do that?” Xaden snaps from the other side of
the wards. “Tell me you’re unharmed.”

“Queasy, but I’ll live.”
Aaric ignores Xaden, dropping to a crouch in front of me. “Are you all

right, Violet?”
I force air in through my nose and out through my mouth. “Tell me you

knew it would let me through,” I bite out as the worst of the illness passes.
“Because it sure as hell didn’t want to.”



“My father doesn’t have anything warded that isn’t worth showing off,”
he explains, holding out his hand. “So, I took a chance that you wouldn’t
smack into the wards like a wall. And I can’t get through these books in the
next forty minutes alone. You’re the one who knows what to look for.”

I ignore his hand and push to my feet despite the smarting pain in my
knees from the impact. I turn in a circle, taking the library space in. There
are six heavy bookshelves with glass doors lining the circular walls, and a
pedestal of cabinetry in the middle decorated with a velvet tablecloth
embroidered with the king’s signet. Above us, mage lights emit a soft glow,
the illumination catching on the curves and knot-like lines carved into the
decorative ceiling about five feet above Aaric’s head.

The scent of damp earth is gone, and it’s considerably cooler in this
room than the tunnel beyond the archway. I scour above me, but there are
no windows for ventilation or any visible modifications I can see. It’s not
just the wards. There’s magic in this room.

“Pull me in. Now,” Xaden demands.
“No,” Aaric replies without so much as glancing in his direction. “The

only perk I’m getting out of this whole expedition is knowing how much it
must pain you to realize you can’t get to her.”

“Stop antagonizing him and get to work, Aaric. You start to the left and
ignore anything that’s not handwritten.” I peek through the archway to see
Xaden in full fuck-you mode.

His hands are loose, and shadows rise around him, forming blades as
sharp as the one he carries. But it’s the cool, calculating wrath in his eyes
that makes me worry for Aaric’s health—which is why I don’t insist he pull
Xaden in. “I’m fine,” I promise him.

“I’m going to fucking kill him.”
“Then you’d be responsible for the deaths of two princes.”
“Warrick and Lyra, right?” Aaric questions, already pulling tomes from

the shelves.
“Yes,” I reply.
“Alic deserved it. He was a bully and forfeited his life by coming after

Garrick during Threshing. Though I wonder who it was that told Aaric,



since if his father knew I highly doubt I’d still be in possession of my head.”
“Well, Aaric doesn’t deserve it.” I skip the right side of the shelves in

favor of the cabinetry. If I had a six-hundred-year-old book that was worth
our entire kingdom, I’d store it where it was least exposed to the elements. I
pull open the first drawer, which stores two books—The Study of Winged
Creatures, which looks to be at least half a century old, and A History of the
Island Wars, which appears even older.

“These are all journals,” Aaric says. “Looks like every commanding
general of the armies since the Unification.”

“Keep going.” I check the next drawer, then the next, and so on, until
I’ve opened three-quarters of the storage. It’s an exercise in self-control not
to open every book and devour its contents. There are tomes here on the
early wars, the history of the individual provinces, mythology of the gods,
and even what looks to be the earliest tome I’ve ever seen on mining
practices. My fingers itch to turn the pages, but I know better than to
damage the parchment.

“This shelf is all journals of the commanding generals of the riders?”
Aaric lowers his hood and glances over his shoulder at me.

“They used to be separate positions.” I move to the last section of the
center pedestal. “Healers, infantry, or even scribes could be the General of
the Armies until about two hundred years ago with the second Krovlan
uprising. After that, the commander of the riders commanded all Navarre’s
forces.”

“You know that no rider has ever been named king, right?” Imogen asks
through the archway.

“That’s not entirely true—” I start, opening the top drawer.
“If you’re asking if I give a shit about being second in line, then the

answer is no,” Aaric says over his shoulder at Imogen. “It’s Halden’s
destiny to be king. Not mine.”

“Does Halden know?” I ask, reading over the titles in the top drawer.
“About what’s happening out there?”

“Yes,” Aaric says quietly.
“And?” I look over at him.



Our eyes lock for a heartbeat before he replaces a tome and moves to the
next. “I’m here, aren’t I?”

Understood. Halden isn’t going to help. “Guess we have that in
common.”

“I still can’t believe you kept his secret all these months,” Imogen says.
“I kept yours, too,” I remind her, opening the next drawer. This entire

section seems dedicated to historical records.
“I’ve known Violet longer, which is why I’m not surprised she kept

yours.” He looks my way and moves to the next set of shelves. “The rift
between you and Aetos was what caught me off guard. You two were
inseparable when we were kids.”

“Yeah, well, kids grow up.” I bark out the words, shutting the drawer
with a little more force than necessary. “You can’t trust him, you know.”

“Figured that out by that little exchange that went down between the two
of you on the mat.” He pulls out another tome. “These are the generals of
the healers.”

“Useful but not what we need.” I crouch to open the last drawer. “Fuck.
More records.”

“We’re down to twenty minutes, and we need ten of those to get back to
the door,” Imogen warns, her tone tight with urgency.

The collar of my armor tightens a little more, and I tug it away from my
throat.

“These are the scribes,” Aaric says at the fourth case.
“As carefully as you can, glance through the earliest ones. Try to only

touch the edges of the pages.” I close the bottom drawer and stand. There
are two more cases to search. “Look for anything that mentions wards or
wardstones.”

He nods and pulls the first one down.
My attention shifts to the sixth bookcase. “Half of these look like Tyrrish

history,” I tell Xaden.
“Fascinating. We’ll come back and study up after we win this war,” he

replies. A guard rustles and we all pivot, but Xaden has him knocked out



again before he so much as opens his eyes. “Hurry, before I do permanent
brain damage over here.”

“This is dated six AU,” Aaric says, shutting the journal. “The wards
were well in place by then.”

“Shit.” Frustration expands the knot in my throat. “Start the next one.” I
pull a promising, cracked-spined tome, but it’s a fucking weather almanac.

“Arts and crafts?” Aaric shows me the painted cover of one.
“Violet,” Imogen warns. “That giant-ass door is going to seal us in here

in fifteen minutes!”
This is not how this was supposed to go, but isn’t that the story of my

life these last couple of months? The propaganda should have opened the
eyes of other cadets. Mira should have believed me. Andarna should be
awake.

“Take a breath,” Xaden orders. “You look like you’re about to pass out,
and I can’t catch you.”

“What if this is all for nothing?” I concentrate on lowering my heart
rate, on keeping the panic from consuming me, then tilt my head to the side
and read the spines of the collection in front of me that pertains to the isle
kingdoms.

“Then we’ll know to look elsewhere. The only way to fail this mission is
to be caught. You still have five minutes. Use them.”

“Astronomy,” Aaric says, dropping down to read the bottom row of
titles.

I close my eyes, draw a deep breath, and find my center. Then I open
them and step back from the shelves. “‘In the storage of ancient
documents,’” I recite from the Scribe Manual, “‘it is not only temperature
and touch that must be monitored—’”

“Glad to see you haven’t changed that much.” Aaric’s mouth curves into
the first smile I’ve seen from him in years.

“‘—but light.’” I glance up. “‘Light will steal ink’s pigment and crack
the leather of spine and cover.’”

“One time, I heard her recite the entire unification agreement while
climbing the battlements in Calldyr,” Aaric notes, moving to the top of the



next bookcase.
Light. They’d have to be hidden from light. I start searching for track

marks in the floor that might signal another hidden door, or cubby, or
something.

“Thought we weren’t talking,” Xaden drawls.
“Wasn’t talking to you.” He glances at Imogen.
“So, it’s not all marked ones you hate,” she replies, folding her arms

across her chest.
“Why would I hate you?” Aaric puts the tome back. “Your parents led a

righteous rebellion, and from what I can tell, you’re just trying to do the
same. I hate him for killing my brother.”

“Fair enough.” Imogen starts to tap her foot.
“Where would your father keep his most precious possession?” I ask

Aaric. “He’d want to show it off, right?”
“He’d keep it within easy reach,” Aaric agrees. “And are you going to

tell me what it is you guys are trying to ward? It’s a rebel outpost, isn’t it?”
Xaden’s eyes meet mine as I prod the wood pieces between the drawers

on the center piece, looking for a pop-out compartment.
King Tauri would keep the journals within reach.
“It’s the only logical thing to do,” Aaric says, dropping to the floor and

looking under the center pedestal. “To establish your own wards that aren’t
dependent on Basgiath’s because you know you’ll be waging war on two
fronts. There’s nothing under here.” He stands. “Where is it? Draithus?
That’s the most logical choice. Close to both the Navarrian border and the
sea.”

“Violet, we have to go,” Imogen warns, walking toward the guards and
rolling up the sleeves of her cream robes.

King Tauri would want to show them off.
I reach for the velvet tablecloth and pull it off.
“There!” I point to the circle of glass set in the top of the pedestal.

“Aaric! Beneath the glass!” Two leather tomes, barely larger than my hand.
Perfect for keeping in a rucksack…while riding the first dragons.



“Not glass. Another set of wards.” He leans over the cabinet and reaches
in, then lets out a sharp hiss, his face contorting in pain as he pulls out both
books. “Fuck!” He sets them on the edge of the cabinet, then holds his
hands up.

I watch in horror as blisters the size of my thumb swell over every inch
of skin that passed through the wards.

“I think those wards know I wasn’t him.” He grimaces. “Let’s go!”
I unbelt my robes and reveal the two cream satchels Jesinia gave me for

this exact reason, then carefully put one tome in each.
“Two minutes!” Imogen shouts from where she’s kneeled next to the

guards, her hands on the larger one’s head.
Xaden drops two wineskins into their laps, and I snatch the tablecloth

from the floor, then throw it over the case.
“Zihnal may love you, but let’s not test him,” Aaric grits through his

teeth, holding out a blistered hand.
“It’s going to hurt—” I protest, tying my belt tight.
“And I’m not leaving you in here.” He grabs hold of my hand and grunts

in pain as he pulls us through the wards and into the hallway.
My hand is sticky when he lets go.
“We have to run.” Xaden gestures down the hallway, and I do exactly

that. Run.
When the robe gets in the way, I gather the fabric in my hands and

sprint, following Xaden as he races up the stairs.
“Bet you’re glad we’ve been running every morning!” Imogen calls

from behind me as we turn and turn and turn, the staircase dizzying me by
the time we emerge into the classroom.

Xaden reaches for the lever Jesinia used, and as soon as Imogen and
Aaric are clear, he pushes. We wait only long enough to see that the
entrance begins closing before taking off again.

My chest heaves as we run down the hallways, Xaden taking every turn
Jesinia did, never once questioning himself. Either he’s really certain of the
path or he knows we can’t afford the time to even debate.



We reach the main library and the bells ring out, signaling an hour has
passed. “Faster!” Xaden demands.

They peal once.
There is no faster, but I don’t have enough breath to snap back at him.

Our boots pound against the marble as we race between the tables.
Twice.
“Run!” Sawyer shouts from the entrance.
Oh gods the door.
Three times.
It’s closing on its own, and the locking mechanism won’t allow it to

open until a full twelve hours passes. The muscles in my thighs burn in
protest.

I skid as we turn at the last of the tables, sliding into the end of the
bookshelf and hitting my shoulder hard enough to wince.

A fourth.
Xaden falls back to run at my side, but he’s the faster of us.
“Take the books!” I shout between gasping breaths. “You can make it!”
A fifth.
“You stay, I stay!” He lifts a hand, sprinting with it outstretched, and

shadows fly from the walls to push against the closing door as we pass the
study table.

Sawyer clears the narrow path that remains between the thick steel of the
door and its casing.

The bells ring out a sixth time.
Xaden pushes me through the doorway first, and once I’m in, I look

back, my breaths ragged and my heart pounding so hard I can feel it in my
head.

Imogen races by, and Xaden reaches into the doorway as the seventh bell
peals.

Oh gods, he’s going to lose an arm, and Aaric—
They’re not going to make it.

OceanofPDF.com



My last words with my father before the Battle of Aretia were spoken
in anger, because he was sending me away for my own safety.


I’m not sure I’ll ever forgive myself for that, but I like to think he
forgivesme.

—RECOVERED CORRESPONDENCE OF LIEUTENANT XADEN RIORSON TO
CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

X aden yanks Aaric through just as the door slams shut, shadows
scattering along the floor like fallen leaves.

I sag, leaning over and bracing my hands above my knees as I gasp for
air.

“You made it!” Rhiannon ducks her head to mine, smiling wide.
“And we have to keep making it,” Xaden reminds us. “Robes off. Keep

to the plan.”
My heart slows somewhat, and I straighten, then shrug out of the

scribe’s robes, putting them in Quinn’s outstretched palms.
Bodhi helps Aaric out of his, careful with his blistered hands.
“Did you get them?” Jesinia signs, hope lighting her face.
I nod. “Will they suspect you?” Nasya looks more unconscious than

asleep against the wall.
“Not if I get us back to the dorms quickly,” she replies.
“I’ll take care of him,” Imogen says, heading over to Nasya.
“He shouldn’t remember much. I hit him from behind,” Sawyer admits,

stuffing the robes into a large cream laundry bag.
I translate for Jesinia.
“I’ll just berate him for falling asleep,” she signs back, offering Sawyer

a smile, and I translate.



He blinks, pausing for a long second before taking the last robe—Aaric’s
— and putting it into the bag. “Damn, your hands…”

The blisters that have popped are bleeding, and those that haven’t look
like they might go at any second.

“That’s a rebound burn,” Bodhi says. “It will clear up overnight if
treated.”

“Change to the plan.” I glance at Xaden, but he merely lifts an eyebrow.
“Ridoc, take Aaric to your room and keep his hands hidden. Rhi, go to the
infirmary and ask for Dyre. A mender will draw too much attention. It
might take him some time to report if he’s not on duty, but he should keep
quiet if you call in the debt he owes me. You’ll have to sneak him into the
quadrant—”

“Good idea. I can do that.” She nods to the guys. “C’mon. Now.” The
three of them take off down the hallway.

“I’ll take the laundry,” Jesinia signs.
I translate for Sawyer, and he hands over the bag.
“Let’s move,” Xaden orders.
“Go,” Jesinia urges. “We’re clear here.”
“Thank you,” I sign, then head out with Xaden and the others.
“How did it go for you?” Xaden asks Quinn as we pass the stairs on our

left and continue toward the Healer Quadrant.
“I projected into commons and made it clear I was looking for lemonade

because we’ve all been drinking in Imogen’s room.” She grins, a dimple
popping in her cheek. “And then I managed to take a walk as Violet and
Rhiannon.”

My mouth drops and I nearly stumble. “You projected looking like
someone else?”

She nods. “I can distort my own features a little, but it’s way easier in
the astral plane. My signet is stronger because Cruth was my great-aunt’s
dragon. But she’s not a direct descendant, so I don’t have to worry about
going mad like those whose dragons bond in the direct familial line.
Dragons aren’t supposed to even get close to family lines for that exact



reason—like they listen to human rules.” She glances at Imogen. “I still
can’t quite get the right shade of pink for your hair.”

We fall quiet as we pass by the infirmary. It’s the last obstacle before we
can split up in the quadrant as planned.

“Well, that was blissfully uneventful.” Bodhi pushes open the door to the
bridge.

“Speak for yourself,” Imogen replies, smacking him in the chest as she
walks by. “You weren’t in charge of keeping Xaden calm while Aaric had
Violet trapped behind the wards with him.”

I scoff, because we both know that’s not how that went down.
Xaden’s jaw ticks.
We part once we reach the other side of the bridge. Imogen and Quinn

take the stairs to their rooms, Bodhi and Sawyer head to commons to make
as much of a scene as they can in order to be remembered, and Xaden and I
climb to the first floor and escape into the courtyard.

The October air cools my flushed cheeks.
“You feel all right?” Xaden asks as we pass a group of cadets.
“Thirsty from sprinting, but…” I don’t bother fighting the smile that

stretches across my face. “But good.”
He glances my way, his gaze flickering to my mouth, then tugs me into

one of the shadowy alcoves carved into the thick walls. “That smile,” he
murmurs before his mouth takes mine in a hungry kiss.

I arch against him, spearing my hands into his hair as I kiss him back
with everything I feel. It’s not slow and sensuous like the one we shared in
my room. This is hard and fast and…happy.

We’re both smiling when we break apart.
“We did it,” I say as my hands fall to his shoulders.
“We did it,” he agrees, resting his forehead against mine. “I hate leaving

before I really have to.”
“Me too.” I pull back and lift one of the satchels from my shoulder, then

remove the journal. “But it’s safer this way. You need to get one to
Brennan.”



I flip to the center of Warrick’s journal and grin at the sprawling strokes
of Old Lucerish, keeping my ungloved fingers to the very edge. What I read
has me grinning, victory swelling in my chest. “‘After we placed the last
rune, we placed the wardstone where the dragons felt the deepest currents
of magic run,’” I translate slowly to Xaden, then glance up. “I might be off
a word or two, but it’s here!” I flip another few pages. “‘That last step
complete, the protections fell into place at…’” My face scrunches as I work
out the rest. “‘…at the birth of an iron rain.’”

I spot at least three more mentions of that term before quickly putting
the journal back in the satchel. “This is it.” I hand it to Xaden. “Take this to
Brennan. He should be able to translate it. They won’t expect you to leave
until morning, so you can get out of here without being searched if you head
out now, and splitting up the journals means we can read them twice as
fast.” And ensures that one of them makes it out of this place.

He folds the cream canvas around the journal inside, then unbuttons his
flight jacket and stores the bundle against his chest before rebuttoning. “I
wish I could spend the night,” he says in that gravelly tone that instantly
turns me on.

“That makes two of us.”
He stares at me with something like longing, then reaches into the

shadows and grabs the pack he’d stored there earlier. Keeping his eyes
locked with mine, he swings the pack onto his back, then reaches for my
face and kisses me again.

The simple pleasure of it is perfect.
“You are astonishing,” he says against my lips. “I’ll see you in seven

days.”
“Seven days,” I agree, fighting the urge to pull him into another kiss.

And another. “Now go. We have to keep to the plan, remember?”
He kisses me hard and quick, then walks away, striding across the

courtyard like he owns it. I rub my hand over my heart, hoping to ease the
ache of watching him walk away, but the hurt is nothing compared to the
triumph I feel.



I step into the courtyard, then look up, waiting to catch one last glimpse
of him in the overcast sky as he flies southeast.

For the first time in months, it’s hope coursing through my veins instead
of dread.

We can do this—we’re doing this. We have the firsthand account of how
the First Six activated their wardstone, and I know I can talk Xaden into
flying for Cordyn to secure the luminary with me. He won’t like it, but he’ll
do it. I just have to figure out how to get the leave approved. And until then,
we’ll keep doing what we’re doing, smuggling out weaponry and building
from within Navarre until we can stand on our own. Aretia will have wards
in a matter of days; I’m certain of it.

“Violet?”
I look over my shoulder and smile at Nolon as he approaches, carrying a

wineskin in one hand and a pewter mug in the other. He looks so damned
tired, like he’s just come from a major session or twelve. “Hi, Nolon.” I
wave.

“I thought that was you. I was getting some lemonade when Jack told
me he saw you out here, and I remembered that you’re on my mending
list.” He hands me the mug, then stands at my side, looking up at the sky.
“It’s your favorite, if I remember.”

“That’s too kind of you.” I lift the mug and drink deeply, slaking the
thirst that’s burned my throat since our little sprint through the Archives.
“And don’t worry about my shoulder. It’s already healed. You know, I never
got the chance to thank you for helping us during interrogation.”

“I never like to see you hurt, and Varrish has it out for you.” He drinks
from his own skin, then scratches his stubbled cheek. “Where is Riorson,
anyway? I don’t often see you apart on Saturdays.”

My stomach dips as Jack Barlowe walks across the courtyard, Caroline
Ashton at his side with some other second-years from First Wing. It
completely flips when he gives me a nod, which I awkwardly return.

“Violet?” Nolon prompts, following my line of sight to Jack.
“Everything all right?”



“Everything is fine. And Xaden left earlier. We don’t always get along.”
I take another sip of the lemonade, then glance down at the contents. The
kitchen must have changed up the recipe, because it has a funny yet familiar
aftertaste.

“I meant what I said,” Nolon says quietly, glancing at the cream satchel I
carry.

Cream. Not black.
My head blurs, my vision swimming momentarily as I swing my head to

look at him.
“Tairn—” But Tairn isn’t there. Every connection I have is fuzzy.
No. Oh gods, no.
But...but I’ve trusted Nolon with my life for years.
“I never like to see you hurt,” Nolon whispers, apology crinkling his

brow as the mug rolls from my hand, crashing to the gravel a heartbeat
later. “But I can’t protect you from the consequences of your own actions
when you risk the safety of every civilian in this kingdom.”

Bootsteps sound all around me and the world spins, but it’s Varrish’s
face I see hovering above mine. “Why, Cadet Sorrengail, what have you
gotten yourself into?”

OceanofPDF.com



The only signet more terrifying than an inntinnsic is a truth-sayer. And
yet we let them live.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

Iblink slowly, my vision coming into focus with all the urgency of a snail.
Dull, throbbing pressure radiates forward from the back of my head, and

the mass of gray clears slightly, revealing stones set in a spiral pattern—a
patch of them charred from smoke. A ceiling?

“That’s not our concern,” a man says, his voice unfamiliar and raspy.
“We follow orders.”

Fear-laced adrenaline charges through me, but I lock my muscles tight,
forcing myself to remain as still as possible so I can get a grip on what the
fuck is happening.

“It is if she finds out,” another voice—this one female—replies.
It smells like wet moss and iron, and the air is cool but thick. We’re

underground. A steady dripping sound fills the silence.
“She’s in Calldyr. We have a week until she’s scheduled to return,” the

raspy-voiced one says.
And I’m sitting; that’s what’s digging into the base of my skull—the

back of a chair. The weight across my wrists and ankles is familiar. I’m
strapped in, just like assessment.

“Tairn—” I reach out, but the connection is foggy, and my power
doesn’t rise.

The lemonade. The satchel. Nolon.
Fuck. I’ve been caught.



“Ahh, there she is.” A grizzled face appears over mine, and the man
smiles, revealing three missing teeth. “Major? Your prisoner is awake!” He
retreats, and I lift my head, taking in my surroundings.

The prison cell is wedge-shaped, and a door that looks exactly like the
one in the interrogation chamber makes up the narrowest portion, but this
cell isn’t for instructional purposes. My jailer wears infantry blue, which
means this must be the brig.

I assume the wooden shelf at my right is meant to be a bed, and at least
there’s a toilet on the other side of that. Fear pulses through my veins at the
sight of the unwashed, bloodstained walls, and I quickly look away,
scanning the rest of the cell as my head clears. Nora, the woman who
always dumps my bag, leans against a wooden table, her arms folded, and
her face puckers into lines of what I think might be concern as the door
opens beside her.

The smile on Major Varrish’s face forms a pit in my stomach as he
enters.

Oh gods. The others. Are they here? Have they been hurt? A boulder
lodges in my throat, making it nearly impossible to draw a full breath.

“Out,” he tells the other man, who scurries like a spider into the main
chamber but doesn’t shut the door behind him, giving me a glimpse of a
desk covered in my black-hilted daggers before Varrish blocks the view. “I
promised you I’d try your way once,” Varrish calls over his shoulder.

Terror expands the pressure in my throat. I can’t reach Tairn or Xaden.
Can’t call on my signet or even my knife skills, since my hands are bound.

I’m alone and fucking defenseless.
Nolon walks in, his steps sluggish, his eyes heavy with sadness. “We just

need you to answer a few questions, Violet.”
“You drugged me.” My voice cracks. “I trusted you. I’ve always trusted

you.”
“Clear this up quickly and we can return to trusting each other,” Nolon

says. “Let’s start with why you stole Lyra’s journal?” He reaches behind
Nora and brings out the book.



Every interrogation technique I’ve been taught deserts me, and I stare…
just stare at the journal, my mind scrambling for a way out of this when
there clearly is none.

“I wanted to be wrong,” he says gently. “But Markham had sounded the
alarm that the royal wards within the king’s private library had been
breached, and then I saw you standing in the courtyard with a scribe’s
satchel—”

“Which is common to transport books from the Archives,” I counter.
Damn it. We were stupid for not assuming tripping the wards would alert

Markham.
“And had that been the case, you would have woken up in the infirmary

with a headache and my most sincere apologies.” Nolon holds up the
scarred leather journal, the very key to protecting Aretia. “But you carried
this.”

“We’re not here to argue that point.” Varrish watches me with rapt
fascination. “Answer my questions, and we’ll let you go sleep that headache
off before class tomorrow. Lie—even once—and it’s going to get messy.”

So, it’s already Sunday.
“Three questions.” Nolon shoots a stern look in Varrish’s direction. “We

want to know how you did it, who you did it with, and most importantly,
why.”

The boulder in my throat loosens, and I fill my lungs completely, willing
my panic to subside. They don’t know who, which means no one else is
chained up down here. Not Xaden, or Rhiannon, or Aaric, or any of the
others. It’s just me. Being alone just turned into a blessing.

And I’m not defenseless. I’m still in full possession of my mind.
“Let’s start with how you breached a royal ward,” Varrish suggests.
“It would be impossible for me to breach a royal ward, seeing as I’m not

royal.” I lift my chin and mentally prepare for the worst.
“She’s telling the truth,” Nora says, tilting her head to the side. “My

signet detects lies. Tell one, and I’ll know.”
My heart jolts.



Truth it is, then. After this is over, I’ll have to explain my answers—or
lack thereof—to my mother. Every single word matters.

“Violet, please,” Nolon pleads, setting the journal on the table. “Just
explain. Was it an unsanctioned squad challenge? Some kind of dare
between second-years? They’re still trying to ascertain exactly what’s
missing. Help us. Tell us, and this will go much easier for you.”

Trying to ascertain. They can’t get in.
“You’re jumping to the why part.” Varrish rolls his eyes. “Honestly,

Nolon, this is why you’ve never been suited to interrogation.” His pale gaze
locks on mine. “How?”

“How can you assume that book isn’t a reproduction if you haven’t
verified the original is even missing?” I ask Nolon.

Nolon glances sideways at Varrish. “Markham said the coverlet wasn’t
disturbed.”

“And yet we have the fucking journal.” Varrish walks a slow circle
around me. “Is it a reproduction?”

He’s trying to catch me in a lie.
“I wouldn’t know, seeing as I haven’t examined it.” There hadn’t been

time.
“Truth,” Nora rules.
Varrish stops in front of me, and I look straight into those pale, soulless

eyes. “I’m guessing you have no proof, Major Varrish, because none of you
can cross a royal ward, and no one is volunteering to tell the king that
there’s been an alarm, false or otherwise. Please, let me remind you, the last
time someone accused me of lying without proof, they found themselves
assigned to the farthest outpost Luceras has to offer.”

“Ah, you mean Aetos.” He doesn’t even flinch. “No worries. I’ll ferret
out the evidence he needs while I have you here under my supervision,
since you’re proving to be combatant instead of helpful, as Nolon had
hoped. Grady is such a stickler for rules, so our last encounter wasn’t nearly
as fruitful as I would have liked.” He crouches, looking at me like I’m a
shiny new toy he can’t wait to break. “Who stole that book for you?” He
looks pointedly at my hands. “Because we both know you didn’t.”



Selective truth. That’s all I have within my arsenal to protect my friends.
“I alone put that particular book into its bag.”
“She’s telling the truth,” Nora remarks.
I glance from Varrish to Nolon. “And I’m done answering your

questions. If you want to put me on trial, then call a quorum of wingleaders
and do so according to the rules put forth in the Codex.”

Varrish stands slowly, then backhands me. Pain erupts in my cheek as
my head snaps to the side under the force of the blow.

“Major!” Nolon shouts.
“Nora, order an immediate formation and check the hands of every cadet

in the quadrant,” Varrish says as I blink through the sting. “Nolon, you’re
dismissed.”

I breathe deeply, preparing for the coming pain as Varrish rolls up the
sleeves of his uniform. I try to focus on a misshapen brick in the wall, try
like hell to dissociate from my body.

No matter what happens in this room, they can’t change the fact that
Xaden got out with Warrick’s journal. Brennan will have what he needs to
raise Aretia’s wards. Whatever agony Varrish has planned will be worth it.

Violence, remember it’s only the body that’s fragile. You are
unbreakable. I cling to Xaden’s words.

“I’ll call you when you’re needed,” Varrish promises, waving Nolon off.
When he’s needed to mend me.
“Don’t worry. I’ll start small,” Varrish tells me. “And you have all the

power here, Cadet Sorrengail. This stops as soon as you talk.”
I cry out when he dislocates the first finger.
Then scream when he breaks it.

 
 
 

Drip. Drip. Drip.
I pretend the sound is rain against my window, pretend the hard,

unforgiving wood under my cheek is Xaden’s chest, that the arm bent at an



unnatural angle in front of me, throbbing in time with my pulse, belongs to
someone else.

“Sleep if you can.” The suggestion is soft, the voice so achingly familiar
that I squeeze my undamaged eye shut.

You’re not really here. You’re a hallucination from pain and
dehydration. A mirage.

“Maybe,” Liam says, and I open my eye just enough to see him sit on
the floor beside me. He pulls his knees up, resting his elbow on the side of
the bunk just beneath my fractured arm. “Or maybe Malek sent me as a
kindness.”

Malek doesn’t do kindness. Nor does he allow souls to wander about.
Kudos to my brain; he’s an excellent hallucination. He looks exactly as he
had the last time I saw him, dressed in flight leathers and wearing a smile
that makes my heart ache.

“I’m not wandering, Violet. I’m exactly where I need to be.”
Everything hurts. Unending pain threatens to pull me into the blackness

again, but unlike the last two times, I fight to stay conscious. It’s the first
moment I’ve been alone in hours, and I no longer fear the chair in the
middle of the room.

Now I know more bones break when Varrish takes me out of it.
“I know,” Liam says gently. “But you’re staying strong. I’m so proud of

you.”
Of course that’s what my subconscious would say—exactly what I need

to hear.
I run my tongue over the split in my lip and taste blood. Varrish hasn’t

taken a blade to me, but my skin has split from his blows in so many places
that I feel like one giant, open wound. The last time I moved, my uniform
crunched from dried blood.

“Bring in her squad,” Nora suggests from the antechamber. “She’ll break
as soon as you start on them.”

Liam’s jaw flexes, and fear knots my empty stomach.
“She didn’t during assessment,” Varrish responds. Gods, I wish I didn’t

know his voice. “And bringing them in means they’ll know what’s



happened, and given the relic winding around Imogen Cardulo’s arm, I
doubt she’ll be willing to wipe their memories. Killing them presents an
entirely different set of issues, too. You’re sure none of the cadets have
hand injuries?”

“I inspected them all myself,” Nora replies. “Devera and Emetterio are
asking where she is, as is the rest of her squad. She’s missed class today.”

It’s Monday.
I reach for Tairn, but the bond is still fogged. Right, because they forced

that solution down my throat once again between shattering my arm and
snapping my ankle. He didn’t even have to take off my boots to make that
happen.

But it’s only my body they’ve broken. I haven’t spoken a single word.
“That means you’ve been here two days,” Liam says.
It will be another five before Xaden realizes I’m missing. No doubt

they’re monitoring correspondence to make sure someone doesn’t alert him.
He can’t react, Liam. If he does, he’ll risk everything.

“You think he’s not already losing his shit?” A corner of Liam’s mouth
rises into the cocky smirk I’ve missed so much. “I’d bet he already knows.
Sgaeyl will have felt Tairn’s panic. That dragon of yours might not be able
to reach you this deep under Basgiath, but Xaden’s going to rip this place
apart brick by brick. You just have to survive.”

He can’t risk the movement. He won’t. Xaden’s priorities have always
been clear, and damn if that’s not one of the things I love about him.

“He will.”
The door opens, but I don’t have the energy or the ability to rise, to turn

my head or even lift a hand. My heart jumps, pounding like it sees the
chance to flee this hellscape of a body. I don’t know how to tell it that
Mira’s armor will keep it safe long after it wishes it could just stop.

Varrish lowers himself to my eye level, no more than a foot away from
Liam. “You must be in so much pain. It can all stop. Maybe Nolon was
right. Let’s forget how you stole the book. You’re clearly not going to give
up your accomplices. But I need to know why. Why would you need a



journal from one of the First Six? I’ve been reading it. Interesting history.
What are you trying to ward, Sorrengail?”

He waits, but I keep my words to myself. He’s way too fucking close.
“We could just stop dancing around each other and have a true

discussion,”
he offers. “Surely you have questions I could answer about why it is we

don’t involve ourselves in Poromish issues. Is that what this is? Righteous
indignation? We could have an equal exchange of information, since we
both know it wasn’t gryphons that killed your friend’s dragon.”

I startle, and pain washes over me, fresh and violent.
“Don’t fall for it.” Liam shakes his head. “You know he’s trying to play

you.”
“But how much do you know?” Varrish asks softly, like it’s a kindness.

“And what have you been doing with the marked ones? We’ve been
watching them for years, of course, but until Cadet Aetos gave you up, all
we’d had to go on was speculation. But then you didn’t come back to
Basgiath. No outposts reported you seeking a healer. So, I’m going to
rephrase my earlier question. Where did you go, Cadet Sorrengail? Where
are you trying to ward?”

This is so much bigger than me stealing the book.
“Gods, you’re good. Or you’re in too much pain to react.” Varrish tilts

his head, reminding me of an owl as he studies me. “Do you know what my
signet is, Cadet Sorrengail? Why it is I’m so good in this room? It’s
classified, but we’re all friends here, aren’t we?”

I stare at him but don’t reply.
“I don’t see people.” He tilts his head and studies me. “I see their

weaknesses. It’s a great advantage in battle. Honestly, you surprised me
when we met. From everything I’d heard about the youngest Sorrengail, I
expected to look at you and see pain, broken bones, or maybe shame for
never living up to Mom’s expectations.” He skims his finger over the
obvious break in my forearm but doesn’t apply pressure. The threat is
enough to make my chest tighten. “But I saw…nothing. Someone taught



you to shield, and I’ll admit you’re very good at it.” He leans closer. “Do
you want to know what I see now that we’ve cut you off from your power?”

Hatred wells within me and I hope he sees it.
“By Dunne, must I carry all of the conversation? ‘Yes, of course I want

to know,’” he says, raising his voice in mock imitation. “Well, Cadet
Sorrengail, your weaknesses are the people you love. So many people to
choose from. Squad Leader Matthias and the rest of your squad, your sister,
your dragons.” A twisted smile curves his mouth. “Lieutenant Riorson.”

My heartbeat skips.
“Hold steady, Violet,” Liam says.
“She’s triggered,” Nora notes from the doorway.
“I know,” Varrish replies. “And I bet you’re thinking he’ll be the one

who comes for you, aren’t you?” He admires the bruises on my forearm like
they’re artwork. “That come Saturday, when you don’t show in Samara,
he’ll come looking, even if it means violating his leave policy. You’re
pinning your hopes that he’ll break the rules for you. That he’ll save you,
since your own mother hasn’t lifted a finger for you.”

My throat moves even though I’m too dehydrated to swallow.
“He won’t wait until Saturday,” Liam promises.
“That’s what I’m counting on.” Varrish nods. “I waited all year for you

to break a rule so I could question you under Codex. Your mom’s a real rule
follower that way. But you have no idea the joy it gives me to know that
Fen Riorson’s son will break Codex by abandoning his post to come to your
aid, that he’ll be strapped to this chair next. And he will give me the
answers I seek.”

Wait. What?
“Shit. He’s not just questioning you. He’s setting a trap for Xaden.”

Liam tenses.
My heart starts to pound.
“You have so much power here, Sorrengail. You alone can save

Lieutenant Riorson from what awaits him should he arrive. Tell me what I
want to know, and I won’t hurt him.”



For a heartbeat, I’m tempted. The thought of Xaden being tortured
makes my hand curl and my nails catch on the rough grain of the wooden
slab.

“Where are you trying to ward? What are the marked ones up to?”
“Hold the line, Vi.” Liam rests his hand against my side, and gods it

feels so real. “Talking would lead to the deaths of every living thing on this
Continent. If they had anything on Xaden, he’d already be in custody.
They’re not going to hurt him. They can’t.”

Logically, I know that, but emotionally…
“No? You’re sure? You can save him. Right here. Right now. Because I

think he’ll come, and when he does, I will break him—and I’ll make you
watch,” Varrish promises in a whisper. “But don’t worry. You’ll be
screaming your secrets in no time. Of course, by then I won’t need them.
I’ll have who I really want.”

His gaze drops to my neck, as if he can see my pulse skyrocketing.
“Ahh, you see it now, don’t you?” Varrish grins. “I’m sure you think

he’s indestructible, but let me assure you, I was lucky enough to glimpse the
most powerful rider of your generation fumble his shields like a novice
once. It was for less than a second, but that was all I needed to see what it
would take to shatter him. We’ll have all the information we need in a
matter of days. You’re not the prize, Sorrengail. You’re the tool.”

Fuck him.
“Does Solas enjoy hiding?” My voice croaks, and I cough.
He blinks but quickly masks his surprise.
“Just because you’ve blocked my ability to talk to Tairn doesn’t mean he

doesn’t know exactly what you’ve done to me.” My lip splits again when I
force a smile. “You’re hunting Xaden. But Tairn is hunting Solas. You’re
the weaker on both counts. I might die in this chamber, but I promise you
will.”

“Just because I can’t kill you without losing my target doesn’t mean I
won’t shatter you over and over until he arrives. We’re going to have fun,
you and I.” He stands, then brushes his hands on the thighs of his uniform



before walking out. I hear his faint words through the door: “Call Nolon in.
We need to start fresh.”

But Varrish is wrong. Xaden won’t come. He’ll choose the safety of the
revolution. I’m now one of the people he can’t save. I just have to hope that
everyone is wrong, that he’ll survive my death.

“Don’t leave me,” I whisper to Liam. I don’t care that I’m far gone
enough to hallucinate, that my brain is using Liam as a crutch as long as he
stays, as long as I’m not alone.

“I won’t. I swear.”

...
 
 
 

D rip. Drip. Drip. I lose track of the hours, the beatings, the questions I
refuse to answer.

Nolon visits twice, or maybe it’s three times.
Life is varying degrees of pain, but Liam never leaves. He’s there every

time I open my eyes, watching, talking me through the torture, holding my
sanity together while simultaneously proving it’s already left.

At least once a day, they chain me into the chair and force the serum
down my throat, blocking me from Tairn. I eat the food they provide
because survival matters most, and I sleep after each mending session, only
to wake and be broken again and again.

My ribs are cracked thanks to a well-placed kick, and my left arm snaps
in the same exact place Varrish broke it the first time, which tells me that
not only am I not at full strength, Nolon isn’t, either.

“We could bring in Jack Barlowe if this doesn’t work.” Nora’s voice
rises, bringing me fully awake from where I’ve dozed off in the chair.
“Gods know he’s been waiting for retribution.”

“Tempting,” Varrish replies. “I’m sure he’d be happy to find new and
inventive ways to motivate her, but we can’t trust him not to kill her. Can’t
trust that kid for anything, really, can we? Too unpredictable.”



“Still can’t believe that fucker survived,” Liam mutters from where he
stands leaned against the wall to the right of the door.

Gods, I’m sore and swollen at the broken places, and discolored on the
bits of skin I can see. Everything hurts. I’m not even sure I’m me anymore
as much as I am pain encased in a failing body.

But Rhiannon isn’t being put through this, or Ridoc, or Sawyer, or
Imogen, or Quinn. Everyone I care about is safe. That’s what I grasp onto.

“You know, Sloane hates me,” I whisper.
“Sloane can be tough.” Liam shoots me an apologetic half smile.

“You’re doing a good job.”
“Yeah, I’m a great role model.” It’s all I can do to keep from rolling my

eyes.
“You asked to see me, sir? Down here? There have to be a dozen guards

in the stairwell.”
That voice. Fear slides down my spine, leaving chills in its wake as

Liam’s head jerks toward the door.
Dain. I’m so fucked. We all are.
“I did,” Varrish responds. “I need your help. Navarre needs your help.”
“What can I do?”
I twist against the straps that hold me captive, but their buckles hold

strong. “Stay calm,” Liam whispers, like any of them can hear him.
“We had a breach of security this week, and classified documents were

stolen. We caught the perpetrator and prevented the loss of intelligence, but
the prisoner...” There’s a dramatic pause. “It’s blatantly obvious by
connection that this rider is working with what we suspect to be a second
rebellion, intent on destroying Navarre. For the safety of every civilian
within our wards, I need this prisoner’s memories, wingleader. You must
extract the truth, or our very way of life will be compromised.”

Well, when he puts it that way. I pull against my bonds again, sending
ricochets of agony through my nervous system. I have no shields. No way
to block him out.

Everyone in Aretia is going to die, and it will be my fault.



“I’m going to warn you,” Varrish says gently. “The prisoner’s identity
may come as a shock.” The door swings open before I can fully prepare
myself.

Varrish walks in, leaving Dain standing in the doorway, his eyes wide as
his gaze sweeps over me, lingering on my swollen, purple-splotched hands,
bound to the arms of the chair, and the face I’m sure matches them. He
can’t even see the worst of it under my uniform, the broken bones and
contusions.

“Violet?”
“Please help me,” I whisper, even knowing I’m begging a Dain that no

longer exists, the one I knew before he crossed the parapet, and not the
hardened third-year in front of me.

“You’ve been torturing her for five days?” Dain accuses Varrish.
Five days? It’s only Thursday?
“Since she stole Lyra’s journal from the king’s private library?” Varrish

sounds bored. “Absolutely. She might have been a childhood friend, Aetos,
but we both know where her loyalties now lie—with Riorson and the war
he’s planning against us. She wants to bring down the wards.”

“That’s not true!” I mean to shout but it comes out more as a whimper,
my voice hoarse from days of screaming. Varrish has twisted everything. “I
would never hurt civilians. Dain, you know—”

“I don’t know shit about you anymore,” Dain counters, his face twisting
in anger.

“There’s a war out there,” I tell him, desperate to break through before
he breaks me. “Poromish civilians are dying, and we’re not doing anything
to help. We’re just watching it happen, Dain.”

“You think we should involve ourselves in their civil war?” Dain argues.
My shoulders slump. “I think you’ve been lied to for so long that you

won’t recognize the truth even when it hits you in the face.”
“I could say the same for you.” Dain looks toward Varrish. “You’re sure

she was trying to take down the wards?”
“I’ve had the journal sent back to the Archives for safekeeping, but yes.

The book she stole gave detailed instructions on how the wards were built



and could be used as a map to unravel them.” Varrish clasps Dain’s
shoulder. “I know this is hard to hear, but people aren’t always who we
want them to be.”

Liam pushes off the wall and walks around the pair, coming to my side
and crouching down. “I don’t think you’re going to be able to stop this.”

Me either.
“Try not to be angry with her,” Varrish tells Dain, his expression shifting

to sympathetic. “We can’t always help who we fall in love with, can we?”
Dain stiffens.
“Riorson pulled her into something she couldn’t possibly understand.

You know that. You saw it happen last year.” He sighs. “I didn’t want to
have to show you this, but”—he pulls my alloy-imbedded dagger from his
own sheath—“she was carrying this, too. That metal you see is what powers
the wards. We think they’ve been smuggling them out to wherever they’re
planning to stage this war from, weakening our wards little by little.”

“Is that true?” Dain’s gaze flies to mine.
I spot Nora leaning against the doorjamb and shudder. “I can explain.

It’s not how he’s portraying it—”
“I don’t need you to explain,” Dain snarls. “I’ve been asking you to talk

to me for months, and now I see why you won’t. Why you’re adamant I
never touch you. You’re scared I’ll see what you’ve been hiding.” He stalks
forward, and I shrink back in the chair.

Xaden, forgive me.
“Remember your ethics, Cadet,” Varrish instructs. “Especially given

your attachment to Cadet Sorrengail. Search like you’ve been practicing but
focus on the word ward.”

“Lieutenant Nora,” a voice calls from the antechamber. “All leadership
is being ordered to assemble. There have been...incidents at the border.”

“By whose order?” Nora demands.
“General Sorrengail’s.”
“We’ll be there shortly,” Nora replies, waving him off.
“We might already be too late,” Varrish says, shaking his head. “Riorson

deserted days ago, according to the reports we received this morning. We’re



gathering the marked ones now.”
My breath seizes. He deserted. He could be safe in Aretia right now,

raising the wards. But Imogen? Bodhi? Sloane? They’re the ones leadership
is gathering.

Liam’s hand settles on my shoulder, steadying me. They’ll kill them all,
and once they know about Aretia, they’ll hunt the rest. “He can search your
memory,” Liam tells me. “But logic says he’ll have to muddle through what
you’re thinking first.”

“What have you done, Violet?” Varrish asks. “Orchestrated another
attack on an outpost? Find out what you can, Aetos. The safety of our
kingdom depends on it. Time is of the essence.”

Dain’s eyes flare, and he lifts his hands.
“You killed Liam,” I blurt.
He pauses. “So you keep saying. But I only searched your memory to

prove my father wrong, Violet, and all you did was prove him right. If the
marked ones died betraying our kingdom, then they deserved what they
got.”

“I hate you,” I whisper, the sound strangled as my eyes prickle and burn.
“She’s stalling,” Varrish snips. “Do it now. And if you see something

you don’t understand, I’ll explain it once we know where their army is
hiding. Just trust me that we are acting in the best interest of every citizen
of Navarre. Our only goal is keeping them safe.”

Dain nods and reaches for me, hesitating at the last second. “She’s
bruised everywhere.”

“Show him what you want him to see,” Liam urges.
“She’s nothing more than a traitor,” Varrish retorts.
“Right.” Dain nods, and I close my eyes the second his fingers push in

on my tender, aching temples.
They may have blocked me from my power, but that stems from Tairn.

The control over my mind? That’s mine, and it’s all I have left.
Unlike last year, I feel Dain’s presence at the edge of my mind this time,

right where my shields should be, and instead of recoiling from the assault,



I grab hold of that presence and throw myself into the memory, dragging
Dain with me.

“Do we have a riot nearby?” Liam asks.
Gravity shifts as I realize my worst nightmare is indeed a living,

breathing monster.
Two legs. Not four. Wyvern.
They’d sent us here to die.
Venin with red veins distending from their eyes, killing helpless people.
Blue fire. Desiccated land. Soleil and Fuil falling.
We’ll never be able to smuggle enough weaponry out to make a

difference.
They’ve kept us in the dark, erased our very history to avoid conflict, to

keep us safe while innocent people die.
Liam— Gods...Liam. I dig my mental fingernails into Dain and hold him

there, making him feel it with me again, the helplessness. The chest-
crushing sorrow. The eye-blurring rage.

It’s been my honor. Liam’s last words to me.
My vengeance in the sky, fighting along Tairn’s back, armed with the

only weapon that will kill the dark wielder doing her best to slay my dragon
and end me.

The moment the dagger slides into my side, I stop pulling Dain and start
shoving, screaming both physically and mentally, filling my head with
every ounce of pain that’s been inflicted upon me in the last four days.

Dain gasps, and his hands fall from my temples.
I throw my eyes open, the sound of my scream still echoing in my ears

as he draws back, horror etched on every line of his face.
“I’m here,” Liam promises. “And I still don’t regret it, Vi. Not one

second.” Wetness tracks down my cheeks.
“Did you get what you wanted?” I manage to ask through my shredded

vocal cords.
“You’re smuggling weapons,” Dain says slowly, searching my eyes.

“Stealing our weapons to aid another kingdom?”
My stomach sinks at my complete, absolute failure.



Out of everything I showed him, that’s what he took?
I wrench my gaze from his to look at Liam, memorizing the lines of his

face and those trademark blue eyes. “I’m so sorry I failed you.”
“You never failed me. Not once,” he whispers, shaking his head. “We

pulled you into our war. If anyone’s sorry, it’s me.”
“As you should be.” Varrish sneers.
If Dain has conquered my memory, seen the weapons runs I’ve helped

with, then he knows it all. A wave of hopelessness rolls over, stealing my
resolve, my determination not to break. All I have left inside of me is pain,
and that isn’t worth fighting for, not if I’ve just given up everything—
everyone—that means anything to me.

“They want us now!” the man shouts from the antechamber.
“Varrish,” Nora prompts. “It’s a summons for all leadership.”
“What did you find?” Varrish turns to Dain, losing his composure.

“Where are they staging from?”
“Give me that knife,” Dain demands, holding out his hand. “I want to

compare it to the one I saw in the memory. The ones they’re stealing from
us.”

“Just don’t kill her. We need to find and question Riorson first, use her
as leverage.” Varrish hands my dagger over to Dain.

He glances over the weapon and nods. “This is the one. They’re taking
them out by the dozen, arming the enemy. I saw everything.” Brown eyes
meet mine. “There’s at least one drift involved.”

My heart plummets. He knows. He saw despite my best efforts.
They’ll question me again—keep me prisoner to lure Xaden, even—but

they’ll never let me leave here alive. This place I called home, the halls I
walked with my father, the Archives I worshipped alongside the gods, the
field where I flew with Tairn and Andarna, the halls where I laughed with
my friends, and the rooms where Xaden held me will be my tomb.

And the boy I used to climb trees with along its river will be my demise.
I sag, the last of the fight draining out of me in defeat.
“Good. Good. Now tell me where they are,” Varrish orders.



Dain grips the dagger in his left hand, spinning it so the blade runs
parallel to his forearm as he brings it to my throat. “You should have trusted
me, Violet.”

I don’t dare to even swallow as I hold the asshole’s gaze. I won’t die
afraid.

“None of this would have happened if you’d just trusted me.” The hurt
in his eyes only feeds my rage. How dare he look wounded. “And now, it’s
too late.”

“Varrish!” Nora yells as shouts fill the antechamber.
Varrish turns toward her, and I feel the knife slip against my skin.
Dain is going to kill me.
“You’re all right.” Liam steadies my shoulder. “I’ll be right here. I’m not

going to leave you.”
Tairn. Andarna. Gods, I hope they survive it. Xaden has to live. He just

has to.
I love him.
I should have told him every day, been honest about my feelings even

through the fights and the doubt.
Now instead of giving those feelings back to Xaden, they’ll die with me.

My vision blurs, and tears streak down my cheeks, but I lift my chin.
Dain whips his arm back, and I wait for the forward surge, the cut, the

pain, the flow of blood.
It doesn’t come.
Varrish staggers backward, holding his side, his eyes bulging as a

roaring sound fills my ears. Dain brings the bloodied knife to the straps at
my wrists, cutting one free, then the other. “I don’t know if we can fight our
way out of here,” he says quickly, dropping down to cut my ankles free.
“Can you move?”

What the fuck is happening?
“Aetos!” Varrish snarls, falling back against the wall, then sliding down

the stone. He leaves behind a fresh trail of red.
“Violet!” Dain shouts, forcing something into my hand. “You have to

move or we’re dead!”



I wrap the fingers of my unbroken hand around the familiar hilt as Dain
draws the sword at his side, holding it at Nora’s throat when she lunges into
the cell. “Let us pass, and you’ll live.”

He holds the blade steady and hooks his other arm behind my back as I
try to stand, holding me upright when my legs try to fail. They’re not newly
broken since Nolon’s last visit, that I can remember, but I whimper at the
pressure against my cracked ribs and the nausea as the room seems to spin.

“I make no such promises.” The low, menacing threat weakens my knees
a second before a hand with a dagger reaches around Nora’s throat, slicing
without hesitation.

She falls, a torrent of blood flowing from the gaping wound in her neck.
I look up into the wrath of Dunne in the form of gold-flecked onyx eyes.

OceanofPDF.com



The only crime worse than murdering a cadet is the unfathomable act
of attacking leadership.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

R age shines in his eyes as Xaden holds his sword in his right hand and a
dagger in his left, both dripping blood, both aimed to strike Dain.

Oh gods.
“No!” I shout, lurching to put myself in front of Dain, but my feet don’t

cooperate and the ground rushes up to meet me.
“Shit!” Steel rattles against the floor as Dain catches me with both

hands.
The edges of my vision turn black as pain threatens to pull me under.

Every inch of my body screams in protest as I find my feet. But it’s not just
Dain’s arms holding me—there are soft bands of shadows at my hips and
beneath my arms. Two Xadens appear, then merge into one as I fight to stay
conscious. “He saved me,” I whisper. “Don’t kill him.”

Stabbing Varrish earns Dain a chance...right?
Xaden’s gaze flickers to mine, and then he does a double take.
“Gods, Violet.” Shadows explode around us, cracking stone and

decimating the wooden slab of a bed marked with my blood.
Guess my face is just as beaten as the rest of me.
“You came.” I stumble forward, and Dain is smart enough to let me go.
Xaden catches me, shadows grasping his sword as he splays his hand

over my back and cradles me against his chest with a light touch, like he’s
afraid I might break. “There’s nowhere in existence you could go that I



wouldn’t find you, remember?” He drops his lips to the dirty, frayed, blood-
spattered remains of my braid and kisses the top of my head.

Leather and mint overpower the iron-and-moss scent of the cell and, for
the first time since Nolon drugged me, I feel safe. Tears soak his chest—his
or mine, I’m unsure.

“Godsdamn,” Garrick says from behind Xaden. “You took off running
and then couldn’t save a single one for me? Took me forever to clear the
barricade of bodies in the staircase.”

My smile splits my lip all over again as I turn my face to rest my cheek
above Xaden’s strong, steady heartbeat. “Hi, Garrick.”

He blanches, dropping his swords to his sides, but covers it with a quick
smile. “You’ve looked better, Violet, but I’m glad you’re alive.”

“Me too.”
“It’s chaos up there,” Garrick tells Xaden, sparing a questioning glance

for Dain. “Leadership is launching all over the place to get to the border.”
“Then it worked,” Xaden states.
Varrish groans and our heads all whip in his direction. “You’re turning

traitor?” he accuses Dain as he struggles to his feet, still holding the wound
in his side.

“Oh, is that what’s happening?” Garrick asks, looking between Dain and
Varrish.

“Your father will be so disappointed,” Varrish hisses through bloody,
clenched teeth. Coughing up blood means he doesn’t have long.

“If he already knows what Violet showed me, then I’m the one
disappointed

in him,” Dain counters, picking up his sword and raising it at Varrish.
“No,” Xaden snarls. “Not you.” His hand flexes at my back, and

shadows wrap around Varrish a second before they drag him across the
floor. Horror widens his eyes as the strands of black dump him into the
chair, then bind his wrists and ankles in place of the shackles. “That honor
belongs to Violet, if she wants it.”

“She does,” I reply instantly.



Xaden shifts his grip, wrapping his arm around my waist and watching
my reactions. “I don’t know where I can touch you.”

“That’s fine,” I promise, gripping the alloy-hilted dagger in my right
hand as my left lies uselessly at my side.

Dain steps back, lowering his sword as Xaden helps me walk, my feet
shuffling over dried patches of my own blood on the stone floor.

Varrish’s eyes narrow despite the pallor of his skin, and Xaden holds me
steady as I lift the dagger to his chest with a trembling, weak grip, resting
the point above his heart, right between his ribs.

“I promised you’d die in this room,” I whisper, but I’m shaking too hard
to push the blade home. It’s taking everything I have just to stay standing.

Xaden’s hand wraps around mine, and he jabs forward, driving the blade
into Varrish’s heart. I memorize the look on Varrish’s face as the life fades
out of him, just so I can reassure myself that he’s really dead when the
nightmares inevitably come.

I stare, and stare, and stare as the weight of everything that’s happened
closes in on me, threatening to steal my air. My throat squeezes shut and my
eyes burn with prickling heat as my thoughts spiral. I just killed the vice
commandant of the quadrant.

What the fuck am I supposed to do now? Go back to class?
And Xaden...Xaden risked everything by coming here.
“Give us a second, and keep Aetos breathing for now,” Xaden orders,

and I hear the room clear before he carefully pivots to face me, turning us
away from Varrish’s body. “You’re alive. No matter what happened in this
room, what was said, you’re alive and that’s all that matters.”

“I didn’t break,” I whisper. “Dain... He saw right before he stabbed
Varrish, but I didn’t break, I promise.” I shake my head, and my vision blurs
then clears as water trickles from my eyes.

“I trust you.” He cradles the back of my head, his beautiful gaze boring
into mine, swallowing me whole. “But it wouldn’t matter to me if you had.
We’re leaving. I’m getting you the fuck out of here.”

I blink. “We can’t go now. They’ll follow us, and Brennan’s not ready.”
My face crumples. “You’ll forfeit access to Basgiath’s weapons—”



“I don’t give a fuck. We’ll figure it out once we’re there.”
“You’ll lose everything you’ve worked for.” My voice breaks. “Because

of me.”
“Then I’ll have everything I need.” He lowers his face, leaning in so he’s

all I see, all I feel. “I will happily watch Aretia burn to the fucking ground
again if it means you live.”

“You don’t mean that.” He loves his home. He’s done everything to
protect his home.

“I do. I’m sorry if you expect me to do the noble thing. I warned you.
I’m not sweet or soft or kind, and you fell anyway. This is what you get,
Violet—me. The good, the bad, the unforgivable. All of it. I am yours.” His
arm wraps around the small of my back, holding me steady and close. “You
want to know something true? Something real? I love you. I’m in love with
you. I have been since the night the snow fell in your hair and you kissed
me for the first time. I’m grateful my life is tied to yours because it means I
won’t have to face a day without you in it. My heart only beats as long as
yours does, and when you die, I’ll meet Malek at your side. It’s a damned
good thing that you love me, too, because you’re stuck with me in this life
and every other that could possibly follow.”

My lips part. It’s all I’ve ever wanted, ever needed to hear. “I do love
you,” I admit in a whisper.

“Glad you didn’t forget.” He leans in and brushes his lips over mine
lightly, careful not to hurt me. “Let’s get out of here together.”

I nod.
“We have to move,” Garrick calls out.
“Clear the staircase!” Xaden orders. “And tell Bodhi to track down

whatever antidote she and the rest of her squad need.”
“On it,” Garrick says.
“My squad?”
Xaden looks back at me. “They’re fine, but they were put under guard in

the interrogation classroom after they tried to mount a rescue mission
yesterday. Can you walk out of here?”



“I don’t know,” I answer truthfully. “I lost track of what’s broken and
what Nolon mended. I know my left arm is fractured, plus at least three of
my ribs on my right side. My hip feels like it’s not entirely where it’s
supposed to be, either.”

“He’ll die for his part.” He pivots and walks us out of the cell, past
Nora’s body and into a fucking bloodbath. There are at least half a dozen
bodies between us and the stairwell. He makes quick work of sheathing all
my daggers where they belong but doesn’t take the one I still have clutched
in my hand.

Dain passes him supplies from a nearby locker, and Xaden splints my
arm as quickly as possible. I bite down on my torn lip to keep from crying
out, and he wraps my ribs over my armor.

“Xaden!” Garrick calls out from the stairwell. “We have a problem!”
“Fuck,” Xaden mutters, glancing between the swords leaned against the

wall and me.
“I can carry her,” Dain offers.
Xaden shoots him a look that promises a slow, painful death. “I haven’t

decided whether or not to let you live yet. You can bet your ass I’m not
trusting you with her.”

“I can walk. I think.” But the second I try, the room tilts. And for the
first time in my life, I feel weak. That’s what that monster did to me in this
room. He took my strength.

“But he didn’t break you, Violet,” Liam says softly from the corner of
the room, and my chest squeezes tight as he takes a step back toward the
shadows. Then another.

“How about this—I promise the next time I’m beaten for five days
straight, I’ll let you carry me out of the prison,” Xaden says, sheathing his
swords behind his back.

“Thank you,” I say—to both men.
Xaden lifts me into his arms, tucking me tight against his chest without

putting pressure on my ribs. “Follow me or die. It’s your choice, but make it
now,” he tells Dain as shadows surround us, forming a circle of blades as
Xaden moves, carrying me up the mage-lit staircase.



My head falls onto his shoulder and I wince, but what does the pain
matter if we’re leaving? If we’re both alive? He came.

“What kind of problem, Garrick?” Xaden asks as we round the corner of
the staircase.

“A general-size one,” Garrick answers, his hands in the air.
My mother’s blade is at his throat.
Oh shit.
I lift my head, and Xaden stops cold, his body tensing against mine.
Her eyes meet mine from where she stands on the step above Garrick,

the lines of her face strained with...wait, is that worry? “Violet.”
“Mom.” I blink. It’s the first time she’s said my name since before

Parapet.
“Who did you kill?” She directs the question at Xaden.
“Everyone,” he responds unapologetically.
She nods, then drops her blade.
Garrick breathes in deeply, moving away from her and putting his back

to the wall.
“Here.” She reaches into the rib pocket of her uniform and draws out a

vial of clear liquid. “It’s the antidote for the serum.”
I stare at the vial, and my heart speeds from a dull thud to a gallop. How

do I know that’s what’s actually in there?
“I would have come sooner if I’d known,” my mother says, her voice

softening along with her eyes. “I didn’t know, Violet. I swear it. I’ve been in
Calldyr for the last week.”

“So your return is just what? Coincidence?” I ask.
Her mouth purses, and her fingers curl around the vial. “I’d like a

moment alone with my daughter.”
“That’s not happening,” Xaden counters.
Her eyes harden when she looks at him. “You of all people know the

lengths I’ll go to in order to protect her. And since I’m pretty sure you’re
the reason we’re getting reports of dragons dropping wyvern carcasses at
every outpost we have along our border, the reason this college is emptying



itself of most of the leadership in a rush to contain the problem, the least
you can do is give me a chance to say goodbye to her.”

“You what?” My gaze swings to Xaden’s, but he keeps his locked on my
mother.

“Would have done it sooner, but it took a couple of days to hunt them
down and kill them,” Xaden replies to her.

“You’ve threatened our entire kingdom.” Her eyes narrow.
“Good. You allowed her to be tortured for days. I don’t give a shit

whether it was by your absence or your negligence. It happened on your
watch.”

“Three minutes,” she orders. “Now.”
“Three minutes,” I agree.
Xaden’s gaze flies to mine. “She’s a fucking monster.” His voice is soft,

but it carries.
“She’s my mother.”
He looks like he might fight me for a second, but then he slowly lowers

me to stand and braces me against the wall. “Three minutes,” he whispers.
“And I’ll be at the top of this staircase.” That warning is given to my
mother as he starts up the steps with Garrick leading the way. “Aetos, did
you decide to follow?”

“Apparently,” Dain says, waiting a few steps beneath me.
“Then fucking follow,” Xaden orders.
Dain grumbles, but he marches up the steps, leaving my mother alone

with me.
She’s the picture of composure, her posture straight, her face

expressionless as she holds out the vial. “Take it.”
“You’ve known what’s happening out there for all these years.” I white-

knuckle my weapon.
She steps forward, her gaze jumping from the dagger in one of my hands

to the splint on the other, then selects a pocket in my uniform top and slides
the vial in. “When you have children, we can discuss the risks you’ll take,
the lies you’ll be willing to tell in order to keep them safe.”

“What about their children?” My voice rises.



“Again.” She hooks her arm around my upper back, sliding her hand
under my shoulder, and hauls me against her side. “When you are a mother,
talk to me about who you’re willing to sacrifice so your child lives. Now
walk.”

I grit my teeth and put one foot in front of the other, fighting the
dizziness, the exhaustion, and the waves of pain to climb the stairs. “It’s not
right to let them die defenseless.”

“I never said it was.” We take the first turn, climbing slowly. “And I
knew you’d never see it our way. Never agree with our stance on self-
preservation. Markham saw you as his protégé, the next head of the scribes,
the only applicant he thought smart enough, clever enough to continue
weaving the complicated blindfold chosen for us hundreds of years ago.”
She scoffs. “He made the mistake of thinking you’d be easy to control, but I
know my daughter.”

“I’m sure you think that.” Each step is a battle, jarring my bones and
testing my joints. Everything feels abominably loose yet so tight I might
split open from the pressure.

“I might be a stranger to you, Violet, but you are far from a stranger to
me. Eventually, you’d discover the truth. Maybe not while in the Scribe
Quadrant, but certainly by the time you made captain or major, when
Markham would start bringing you into the fold, as we do with most at
those ranks, and then you would unravel everything in the name of mercy or
whatever emotion you’d blame, and they would kill you for it. I’d already
lost one child keeping our borders safe, and I wasn’t willing to lose another.
Why did you think I forced you into the Riders Quadrant?”

“Because you think less of the scribes,” I answer.
“Bullshit. The love of my life was a scribe.” Steadily, we climb, twisting

along the staircase. “I put you into the Riders Quadrant so you’d have a shot
at surviving, and then I called in the favor Riorson owed me for putting the
marked ones into the quadrant.”

I stop as the door at the Archives level comes into view. “You did
what?” She didn’t just say what I think she did.



She tilts her head to look me in the eye. “It was a simple transaction. He
wanted the marked ones to have a chance. I gave him the quadrant—as long
as he took responsibility for them—in return for a favor to be named at a
later date. You were that favor. If you survived Parapet on your own, all he
had to do was see that no one killed you outside of challenges or your own
naivete your first year, which he did. Quite a miracle, considering what
Colonel Aetos put you through during War Games.”

“You knew?” I’m going to be sick.
“I discovered it after the fact, but yes. Don’t give me that look,” she

chastises, pulling me up another step. “It worked. You’re alive, aren’t you?
Though I’ll admit I didn’t foresee the mated dragons or whatever emotional
entanglement you’ve involved yourself in. That was disappointing.”

It all clicks into place. That night at the tree last year when he should
have killed me for catching the meeting of the marked ones. The challenge
where he had every opportunity to exact his revenge on my mother by
ending me—and instructed me instead. Nearly intervening at Threshing...

My ribs feel like they’re cracking all over again. He’s never had a choice
when it came to me. His life—the lives of those he holds dearest—has
always been tied to mine. And suddenly, I have to know. “Are those your
knife marks on his back?”

“Yes.” Her tone is bland. “It’s a Tyrrish cust—”
“Stop talking.” I don’t want to hear a single explanation for such an

unforgivable act.
But of course she doesn’t listen. “It seems that by putting you into the

Riders Quadrant, all I did was hasten our own end,” she remarks as we
climb the last four steps, coming out in the tunnel by the Archives.

Xaden reaches for me, and my mother’s arm falls away.
“I trust you’ll use the chaos to get her out?” she asks him, but we both

know it’s an order.
“Planning on it.” He tucks me in against his side.
“Good. Don’t tell me where. I don’t want to know. Markham is still in

Calldyr with the king. Do with that information what you will.” She looks



at Dain, who waits off to the side with Garrick, his face ashen. “Have you
made your choice now that you know?”

“I have.” He squares his shoulders as a group of scribe cadets runs by,
their hoods in disarray, panic written on their faces.

“Hmm.” She dismisses Dain with a single sound, then looks at Xaden.
“And so the war of the father becomes that of the son. It is you, right?
Stealing the weaponry? Arming the very enemy trying to rip us apart?”

“Regret letting me into the quadrant yet?” He keeps his voice
deceptively calm, but there are shadows rising along the tunnel walls.

“No.” Her gaze drops to me. “Stay alive, or this all will have been for
nothing.” She skims the backs of her fingers along my swollen face. “I’d
tell you to take arnica and see a healer, but you already know that. Your
father made sure you’d know everything you needed or where to find it.
You’re all that’s left of him, you know.”

But I’m not. Mira has his laugh, his warmth, and Brennan...
She doesn’t know about Brennan, and in this moment, I have no regrets

about keeping that secret.
The smile she gives me is tight and so full of sadness that I wonder if

I’m hallucinating. It falls as quickly as it appeared, and she turns away from
us, headed back to the stairwell that will carry her up to the main campus.
“Oh, and Violet,” she calls back over her shoulder. “Sorrengails walk or fly
off the battlefield, but they’re never carried.”

Unbelievable. I watch until she disappears up the stairwell.
“No wonder you’re so warm and fuzzy, Violet,” Garrick mutters.
“We’re leaving,” Xaden announces. “Gather the marked ones and meet

us at the flight field—”
“No.” I shake my head.
Xaden looks at me like I’ve sprouted a few more limbs. “We just talked

about this. We can’t stay here, and I won’t leave you.”
“Not just the marked ones,” I clarify. “If Markham is gone and most of

the leadership is flying for the border, then it’s our only chance.”
“To leave?” Xaden lifts his brows. “Good, then we’re in agreement.”



“To give everyone a choice.” I glance at the empty tunnel. “They’re
going to lock this place down once the cadre returns, once they know they
can’t stop the spread of information, and our friends...” My head shakes.
“We have to give them a choice, Xaden, or we’re no better than leadership.”

Xaden narrows his eyes.
“Dragons will vouch for the ones who want to leave for the right

reasons,” I whisper.
He grits his teeth but nods. “Fine.”
“It won’t be safe here for you. Not after what you just did.” I look to

Dain and lift my brows. It’s one thing to protect me in private, or to face
down my mother, whom he’s known his entire life. It’s another to be known
as the rider who ripped this place apart.

“Not that it will be safe for him where we’re going.” Garrick glances
between Dain and Xaden. “You can’t be serious. We’re going to trust this
guy?”

“If he wants our trust, he’ll earn it,” Xaden says.
A muscle in Dain’s jaw flexes, but he nods. “Guess my last official act

as wingleader will be to call a formation.”
 
 
 

“That’s where the leadership is now! Trying to hide the bodies of over a
dozen dead wyvern!” Dain finishes, his voice carrying over the

courtyard a half hour later as we stand on the dais in front of formation, the
other wingleaders to his right. The sun has fallen beneath the peaks behind
us, but there’s more than enough light for me to see the shock, the disbelief
on the face of almost every rider.

It’s only the marked ones and my squad who don’t begin to argue
amongst themselves, some quiet, some outright yelling.

“Was this what you had in mind?” Xaden asks me, his gaze swinging
over the crowd.

“Not exactly,” I admit, leaning heavily on him but managing to stay on
my feet. My uniform is clean, my rucksack packed, and I’m wrapped and



braced from ankle to broken arm, but more than one cadet is staring at my
face. After a quick look in the mirror, I understand why.

Nolon must have only mended the most severe of my injuries, because
my face is a collage of new, purple-black bruises and older, greenish ones,
and that pattern only continues beneath the cover of my uniform.

Xaden damn near shook the entire time it took for me to change.
“If you don’t believe me, ask your dragons!” Dain shouts.
“If their dragons agree to tell them,” Tairn says, on his way back from

the Vale. I’d finally trusted my mother enough to drink the antidote about
ten minutes ago—which Tairn had claimed was the only logical move, and
he bonded me for my intelligence, after all.

“What has the Empyrean decided?” We aren’t the only ones making
choices tonight.

“It will be up to the individual dragon. They will not interfere, nor will
they punish those who choose to leave and take their clutches and
hatchlings with them.”

It’s better than the alternative, which was full-scale slaughter of the
dragons choosing to fight. “Are you really okay?” I ask him again. The
bond between us feels strange, like he’s holding back more than usual.

“I lost Solas in a network of caves while I was hunting him, so I was
unable to kill him and Varrish myself for their actions. When I do find him, I
will prolong his suffering before death.”

I understand the feeling. “And Andarna?”
“Being made ready for flight. We’ll pick her up on our way out.” He

hesitates.
“Prepare yourself. She still sleeps.”
Knots of apprehension twist in my stomach. “What is wrong? What

aren’t you telling me?”
“The elders have never seen an adolescent remain in the Dreamless

Sleep this long.”
My heart plummets.
“You’re lying!” Aura Beinhaven shouts, snapping my attention back to

the current situation as she charges toward Dain, blade in hand.



Garrick steps into her path, drawing his sword. “I have no problem
adding to my body count for the day, Beinhaven.”

Heaton draws their axe at the base of the steps, the purple flames dyed
into their hair matching the shade of my pinkie finger, and faces the
formation alongside Emery, who already has his sword ready with Cianna
protecting his back.

Xaden was busy for the five days I spent in that cell. He came back with
every graduate who bears a rebellion relic and a good share of their
classmates. But not all.

“We’d better hurry this along.” I look up at Xaden. “The professors are
going to be here any minute.” The distraction Bodhi engineered in the flight
field bought us time to meet without teachers noticing, but not much,
especially considering that Devera, Kaori, Carr, and Emetterio are among
those on campus still.

“By all means,” Xaden replies, a look of boredom on his face. “Feel free
to convince them.”

“Share the memory of Resson but nothing further,” I tell Tairn. “It’s the
easiest way for them to all have the same information.”

“I loathe that idea.” He’s complained before that sharing memories
outside of a mating bond isn’t exactly comfortable.

“Have a better one?”
Tairn grumbles, and I can see the moment it happens. There’s a ripple

through formation of tilted heads and gasps.
“There we go.” I shift my weight to the less injured knee, and Xaden’s

hand tightens around my waist, leaving his dominant arm free.
Xaden sighs. “I guess that’s one way to accomplish the goal, though I

wish you’d left some parts out.”
Parts like Liam’s death.
“It’s true!” someone in Second Wing yells, stepping out of formation

and stumbling in shock.
“What the hell are you talking about?” another shouts, looking at the rest

in confusion.



“If your dragons don’t choose—” Dain starts, but his voice is
overpowered by the outbreak of mayhem within the ranks.

“How’s it going there, wingleader?” Sarcasm drips from Xaden’s tone.
“You think you can do better?” Dain turns a slow glare his way.
“Can you stand on your own?” Xaden asks me.
I nod, grimacing through the sharp bites of protest all throughout my

body as I straighten.
He steps forward, raises his arms, and shadows rush in from the wall at

our back, engulfing the formation—and us—in complete darkness. There’s
a glimmer of a caress across my cheek, right where it’s split to what feels
like bone, and more than one cadet screams.

“Enough!” Xaden bellows, his voice amplified, shaking the very dais
under our feet.

The courtyard falls silent.
Shadows recede in a rush, leaving more than one cadet gawking at

Xaden.
“Fucking show-off,” Garrick mutters over his shoulder, still squared off

with Aura.
A corner of Xaden’s mouth rises. “You are all riders!” he shouts. “All

chosen, all threshed, all responsible for what happens next. Act like it!
What Aetos has told you is the truth. Whether or not you choose to believe
is up to you. If your dragon has chosen not to share what some have seen,
then your choice has been made for you.”

Wingbeats fill the air, and a murmur rises among the formation. I lock
eyes with Rhi where she stands at the head of our squad. She nods subtly
toward the rotunda.

I glance that way and catch a trio of figures in cream, led by Jesinia, all
carrying packs. Thank gods, they came. Now I just need three dragons
willing to carry them.

“Already taken care of,” Tairn promises. “And only this once.”
This once is all we need to save their lives.
“Wars do not wait for your readiness,” Xaden continues, “and make no

mistake about it—we are at war. A war in which we are outmatched not



only in strength of signet but air superiority as a whole.”
“Is this your idea of a pep talk?”
“If they need to be roused, they shouldn’t be coming with us.”
Fair point.
“Whatever you decide in the next hour will determine the course—and

perhaps the end—of your life. If you come with us, I cannot promise you’ll
live. But if you stay, I guarantee you will die fighting for the wrong side.
The venin will not stop at the border. They will drain every ounce of magic
in Poromiel, and then they’ll come for the hatching grounds in the Vale.”

“If we go with you, they’ll hunt us down as traitors!” a voice from Third
Wing calls out. “And we would be!”

“Defining yourself as a traitor requires declaring your allegiance,”
Xaden counters. “And as for hunting us down...” His shoulders rise and fall
with a deep breath. “They won’t be able to find us.”

My heart starts to pound with the growing roar of wingbeats in the air.
The door to the Gauntlet and flight field flies open, and a dozen

professors rush out, anger and shock lining their faces.
“What have you done?” Carr shouts, running for us, his wispy hair

flying in all directions as he lifts his hands. “You’ll end us all, over who?
People you’ve never met? I won’t allow it!”

“Bodhi!” Xaden orders as Carr reaches Third Wing.
Fire erupts from Carr’s hands, streaming toward the dais, and my

stomach drops.
Time seems to slow as Bodhi steps forward and twists his hand like he’s

turning a dial.
The fire dies, extinguishing like it was never there and leaving Carr

staring at his hands.
“You taught us well, Professor,” Bodhi says, holding his hand in place.

“Maybe a little too well.”
Damn.
“He can counter signets,” Xaden tells me.
Well, that’s fucking terrifying.



The rest of the professors look upward as dragons fill the skyline, their
wings flaring on approach.

Green. Orange. Red. Brown. Blue. I look up, spotting Tairn’s rapid
descent. Black.

Xaden grabs my waist as the walls shake under the weight of the mass
landing. Claws dig in, shredding the masonry as dozens of dragons—maybe
more—perch on every available space. Some fill the mountainside behind
us, and others claim the top of the turrets in the quadrant, hovering like
living sculptures.

“We won’t stop you,” Devera says to Xaden, then shifts to where her
own dragon perches beside the parapet. “In fact, some of us have been
waiting to join you.”

“Really?” Bodhi grins.
“Who do you think left the news about Zolya all over Battle Brief?” She

nods.
A smile lifts my mouth. She’s exactly who I’ve always thought she is.
“We’re leaving within the hour,” Xaden calls out. “Your choice is as

simple as it is personal. You can defend Navarre, or you can fight for the
Continent.”

We’re in the air less than an hour later, flying south in the biggest riot
I’ve ever seen: two hundred dragons and a hundred and one riders—nearly
half the quadrant—strong. And more are coming, taking a slower route with
hatchlings.

Tairn had lain in front of the dais and begrudgingly allowed Xaden to
help me into the saddle, but we made it. He hooked onto Andarna, the
smaller black dragon’s body frighteningly limp with sleep, and now we’re
flying. I sleep most of the trip, too, draped across the front of my saddle, my
body claiming the rest it sorely needs to knit itself back together.

It was too hectic to catch every face, but I’m proud that every single
member of my squad is with us, even the first-years who are still fighting to
keep their seats. They hold them into the morning and all throughout the
next day, the riot pushing itself to the limit.



Marked ones take position at the edges of the flight formation, hiding us
from Melgren’s sight should he decide to battle us, and we fly the least
populated route possible, but it’s hard to disguise a veritable cloud of
dragons, even at this altitude.

It must not have been just leadership that were pulled to the border. We
don’t encounter a single patrol as we cross into Tyrrendor, flying high over
the Cliffs of Dralor onto the plateau.

“We’re almost there,” Tairn tells me as we pass over the crystal waters
of the Beatha River.

“I’m all right.”
“Don’t bother lying to me. I can feel it all. The exhaustion. The pain.

The crackling of unset bone in your left arm. The chapped wounds on your
face. The throbbing in your left knee that only eases—”

“Point made.” I shift in the saddle, trying to alleviate some of it.
“You’re the one who hasn’t stopped for water in twelve hours.”

“And I could fly another twelve if need be. You’re an incredibly needy
species compared to ours.”

By the time we approach Aretia, I’m all but dead in the saddle.
Tairn and Sgaeyl fly ahead, breaking from formation as we fly over the

town, heading for Riorson House while the rest of the riot flies for the
valley high above.

“You cannot make the hike down in your condition,” Tairn decrees.
I’m too fucking tired to fight him.
My body jolts in protest when Tairn flares his wings, the change in

momentum sending me deeper into the seat as he lands gently in
consideration of Andarna in the middle of the courtyard in front of Riorson
House.

Tairn’s head turns toward the door as it’s thrown open, and mine
follows, slow from weakness and lack of sleep.

“Violet!” Brennan shouts, running down the marble steps.
I undo the buckle of my saddle and force myself to dismount, despite the

agony of feeling my bones grate against one another. Cradling my splinted



arm, I slide down Tairn’s foreleg, right into Xaden’s arms, and nearly
crumple on the spot.

“I’ve got you,” he whispers against my hair, supporting me against his
side as we turn to face Riorson House and the rapidly approaching furious
face of my brother.

Tairn launches behind me before I can turn to see Andarna.
“What the fuck did you get her into this time?” Brennan shouts at Xaden.
“He got me out,” I promise.
“Oh? Then why is it she’s half dead every time you bring her to me?”

The look Brennan levels on Xaden makes me reconsider which of them
might be the more violent one. Brennan reaches for my face but stops just
short of touching me. “Oh gods. Violet, you’re... What did they do to you?”

“I’m all right,” I say once more. I step forward, and Brennan hugs me
carefully. “I could probably use some mending.”

His head tilts as the sound of the wind approaches a dull roar, and I
follow his line of sight as the massive riot approaches the town, en route to
the valley. “What have you two done?”

“Ask your sister,” Xaden responds.
Brennan looks down at me, his eyes wide with shock and a touch of fear.
“I mean...” I try to force a smile, but it only splits my lip yet again. “You

did say that you needed riders.”

OceanofPDF.com



PART TWO

OceanofPDF.com



Half palace, half barracks, but entirely a fortress, Riorson House has
never been breached by army. It survived countless sieges and three
full-out assaults before falling under the flame of the very dragons it

existed to serve.

—ON TYRRISH HISTORY, A COMPLETE ACCOUNTING, THIRD EDITION BY
CAPTAIN FITZGIBBONS



CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

“Bold choice to move so far from what you perceive as the safety of the
wards,” the Sage says, holding me immobile, my feet just inches from

the frozen ground of my own personal torture chamber.
I’m trapped in this fucking nightmare again, but at least I made it farther

across the sunburned field this time.
“Of course, again,” the dark wielder hisses, his face contorting into a

sneer. “You will never be free of me. I will hunt you to the ends of the
Continent and beyond.”

Throat working, I struggle to relax, to calm my heart and change my
breathing in hopes of waking myself up. But it’s only my mind that knows
this isn’t real. My body is very much locked into the illusion.

“You can only hunt me to the wards,” I croak.
“Yet you sleep beyond them.” A grotesque smile tilts his cracked mouth.

“And the longest night has yet to pass.” He reaches for a poison-tipped
dagger—

I blink, my heart slamming against my ribs for the second it takes for me
to shed the vivid nightmare and recognize my surroundings.

This isn’t a wind-torn field or a cold, blood-soaked cell in Basgiath—it’s
Xaden’s light-filled bedroom in Aretia. Big windows, thick velvet drapes,
wall-to-wall bookshelves, massive bed. I’m safe. Varrish isn’t waiting on
the other side of the door to break me again because he’s dead. I killed him.



I’m still alive.
For the first time in days, there’s no pain when I breathe in, or when I

stretch under the thick down comforter, or even when I twist away from the
sun-drenched window to face Xaden.

Now, this is a view I could be more than happy to wake up to for the rest
of my life.

He’s asleep on his stomach, his arms folded under his pillow, his hair
falling over his forehead, his perfectly sculpted lips parted slightly. The
covers only rise to the small of his back, leaving me with miles of inked
skin to admire. I almost never get to see him like this, never get to simply
look at him, and I take advantage of every single second, studying the
angles of his muscled arm, up to his rounded shoulder, and across the faint
silver of the lines that mark his back. He’s always more than enough to
elevate my pulse, but asleep and fully unguarded, he steals my breath.

Gods is he beautiful.
And he loves me.
The black fabric of my thin-strapped nightgown bunches slightly as I

shift up onto my knees, and the comforter falls away when I reach for him. I
trace the silver scars with my fingertips and don’t bother counting the lines.
There are a hundred and seven of them, representative of the marked ones
he took responsibility for to give them a chance at life in the quadrant.

For all that he says he isn’t soft, isn’t kind, he’s also the only man I
know whose back is covered in promises made for other people. Even if his
reasoning was preparing for this war we’re about to wage, he still risked his
own life by vouching for them.

He risked his life to free me. Dain and I never would have made it out of
there alive without him.

Alive. I’m alive.
And that’s exactly how I want to feel.
I lean forward and press my lips to his warm skin, kissing the scar

closest to me, wishing I could undo the damage my mother did to him.
“Mmm. Violet.” His sleep-rough voice makes my lips curve and my

blood heat. His muscles ripple as he stirs awake, and I take my time, kissing



a slow path up the expanse of his back.
He inhales sharply, his arms tensing when I reach the place his neck

meets his shoulder. Rolling, he flips to his back and pulls me astride in one
smooth motion.

“Good morning.” I smile, settling my hips over his. My breath catches at
the feel of him beneath me, hard and ready.

“I could get used to waking up like this.” He looks at me with a hunger
that mirrors my own, and his hand slides from my hip, over the curve of my
waist, and up between the peaks of my breasts to cup the side of my neck
gently, carefully.

“Me too.” My pulse quickens as I lean down and set my lips to his
throat. “But we shouldn’t get used to it,” I tell him between kisses, working
my way to his chest. “They’ll probably put me with the other cadets
tonight.”

Last night, this had been the most private place for Brennan to mend me,
and I’d wanted to sleep next to Xaden too badly to argue against his
suggestion of staying after I’d finally gotten the chance to bathe.

“This is my house.” He spears his fingers into my hair, his other hand
flexing on my hip when I ghost my lips over the three-inch scar above his
heart. “And I sleep where you sleep, which is preferably in this very large,
very comfortable bed. You should still be sleeping.”

I slide down his body, my hands roaming and stroking as I kiss every
ridge of the incredible abdominals that tighten beneath my mouth. His eyes
are my favorite part of him, but damn if the chiseled line above his hip that
disappears into his waistband isn’t a close second. I follow it with my
tongue.

“Violet.” Xaden’s voice is low.
I melt, instantly liquid when he says my name like that, and right now is

no exception.
“Good plan.” I slide my hand under his waistband and wrap my fingers

around the thick length of him. How is every inch of this man perfect?
There has to be a flaw somewhere.



“You’re not recovered enough for the things I want to do to you,” he
growls.

My core clenches at the warning, the promise—whatever it is, I want it.
I want him.

“Yes, I am. All mended, remember?” The craving for him overpowers
any lingering exhaustion. A heady sense of power floods my system when I
stroke my thumb over the head of his cock and his hips buck in response.
There’s nothing sexier than watching his control fray, nothing hotter than
knowing I’m the one who brings him to the breaking point.

And I need him to do exactly that—break—to lose the gentle kisses and
cautious touches and take me with the full force of what he’s capable of. No
holding back. No soft and slow.

“Are you trying to kill me?” His grip tightens in my hair, and I drag my
gaze to his, finding a satisfying, wild glint in his eyes.

Need coils low in my stomach, my body remembering what follows that
kind of look. He hasn’t even touched me and I’m already aching.

“Yes,” I answer honestly, then lower my head, keeping our eyes locked
as I swirl my tongue around his tip. His guttural moan sets my blood on
fire, and I wrap my hand around his base and take him deep.

“Violet.” His eyes slam shut, and he throws his head back, his neck
working as it arches, his body tensing like he’s fighting the pleasure of it
even as his hips jerk for more. “That feels so fucking good.”

I hum in approval and work him harder, flicking my tongue along the
ridge where he’s most sensitive with every bob of my head.

“Fuck, fuck, fuck.” He tugs at my hair, his breaths coming faster and
faster. “You have to stop. Or I’m going to lose it on you.” His stomach
flexes as he lifts his head to watch me. “And I’m not sure I can be gentle.”

“Lose it.” Sounds excellent to me. “I don’t want gentle.”
“Mending bones isn’t instant. You’re still heal—”
I suck him deeper.
He growls. “You really want this?”
“I want you feral.”



The thought barely leaves my head before he pounces, lifting me off him
and rolling me to my back. Then his mouth is on mine, kissing me hard and
deep. It’s all tangled tongues and nipping teeth, carnal and fierce and
exactly what I need.

He slides his hand up my inner thigh, and then his fingers are right there,
pushing my underwear to the side to stroke and tease before dragging them
down my legs. I yank my nightgown over my head as he strips his sleeping
pants off.

Yes. Gods, yes. He’s all I can see, all I feel as he settles back between
my thighs, the head of his cock nudging my entrance. His hand strokes over
my newly mended ribs and his eyes flare, his gaze jumping to mine. “We
should—”

“Please, Xaden.” I cup his cheek. “Please.”
He lifts my hand and kisses the palm, then the place on my forearm that

had been fractured. His brow knits for a heartbeat as he scans my body, like
he’s looking for the safest places to touch me, like he can still see every
bruise, every break.

My stomach knots at the thought that he might stop.
“Feral,” I remind him in a whisper.
His gaze finds mine, and the way he smiles, raising the corner of his

mouth into that arrogant smirk I love so much, makes my heart pound.
Gripping my hips, he flips me over, then yanks my ass into the air, setting
me on my knees.

“You will tell me if it’s too much.” It’s not a request.
I nod, my fingers tangling in the sheets.
Then he lines us up and rolls his hips, pushing in and in and in, until he’s

so deep that I can feel him everywhere. I moan at the stretch, the fit, the
utter perfection of him, muffling the sound in my pillow.

He grabs the pillow and throws it to the floor. “I want them to hear,” he
says, withdrawing slowly, stroking every inch of me, then slamming home
again. “Gods, you’re fucking perfect.”

I cry out. He feels so damned good. “There are hundreds of people in
this palace of a house.” How I can string together more than two words is



beyond me.
He leans over my back, then drags his teeth across the shell of my ear.

“And I want them all to know you’re mine.”
I don’t argue with his logic. I can’t. Not when he slides almost all the

way out of me, then snaps his hips, driving out every thought. He sets a
hard, deep rhythm, turning me into pure, burning pleasure.

This is exactly what I needed—for him to take me, to consume me, to
breathe life into me.

His fingers dig into my hips, pulling me into every driving thrust, and
there’s no way to rock back, to gain leverage, to force him to quicken his
pace. I can only accept what he gives, surrender completely, and simply
feel.

He winds me up, building the coiling pressure within me tighter and
tighter, my cries filling the room along with his growls and whispered
words of praise.

It just gets better, hotter, sweeter, until there is no world outside him, no
existence beyond us. All that matters is the next thrust.

“Xaden.” His name on my lips is a plea as the tension spirals so tight it
borders on pain, power rising within me, white-hot and uncontrollable.

His hand rises along my stomach to my sternum, then lifts me upright so
my back meets his chest. I turn my head, tangling my fingers in his hair,
and he fuses our mouths, kissing me breathless while he drives into me
again and again and again, his movements growing less and less controlled.

He’s close.
“You’re alive.” His voice wraps around my mind as his fingers dip

between my thighs and slide over my clit. “Alive and strong and mine.”
Gods, he knew what I needed without me even telling him. My thighs

lock, then tremble. It’s too much and exactly enough.
“And you’re mine.” I gasp for breath, my pulse racing as he strokes me

right over the edge.
And I fall. I absolutely shatter. Light flashes and is quickly snuffed by

cooling darkness as wave after wave of bliss rolls over me.



He locks his arms around me, holding me close as he shudders, tumbling
into his own release.

We stay like that, wrapped around each other in every way possible, our
breaths ragged as we come back to reality.

A reality in which I wasn’t remotely quiet.
My cheeks flush even hotter.
“You want me to sleep in here with you?” I ask once I can form words.
“Every night.” He kisses me softly.
“You might not be able to ward it yet, but you’d better sound shield this

room today.” I lift my brows so he knows I mean it.
His mouth curves into a heart-stopping smile. “Already done.”
I roll my eyes. “Of course it is.”

 
 
 

By the time we emerge from Xaden’s room an hour later, there are cadets
everywhere.
“This is… ” Words fail as we descend the right side of the sweeping

double staircase to the foyer.
“Noisier than the last time we were here,” Xaden supplies, glancing over

the crowd. Some riders stand in groups while others sit along the walls.
Every single one of them wears an expression that’s a variation of

exactly how I’m feeling right now—what the hell did we do? Aretia wasn’t
ready for this, and yet I brought them anyway.

Xaden may have risked the revolution by coming for me, but I smacked
a giant target on it.

“Can we even fit all these riders here?” I ask Xaden as we pick our way
through the mayhem.

“There are a hundred barracks rooms between the top three floors,” he
tells me. “And that doesn’t account for the family quarters on the second.
The question is if they’re all serviceable. Not everything has been repaired
and rebuilt.”



“Violet!” Rhiannon waves from where she stands with our squad,
waiting in front of the archway that leads into the great hall. Her gaze
sweeps over me. “You look better.”

“I feel better,” I assure her, noticing that Imogen isn’t with them.
“What’s going on?”

“I was hoping you’d know.” She glances over our squad, then leans in,
lowering her voice. “They took a quick roll last night, put us in our rooms,
and fed us breakfast this morning, but that was an hour ago. Now we’re
just… ” She gestures to the foyer. “Waiting.”

“I think we may have caught them off guard,” I admit, guilt hollowing
my stomach.

“Let’s go find out exactly how off guard,” Xaden says. “We’ll get some
answers for you, Rhiannon.” He gestures toward a hallway. “We need to
meet with the Assembly.”

“If you could just make that sound a little less foreboding.” I pause
when we pass Aaric.

He’s standing off to the side of the squad, his arms folded over his chest,
watching everything and everyone around him. “What now, Sorrengail?” he
asks, his mouth tightening.

“He isn’t asking about the schedule,” Xaden says.
“Picked up on that.” I glance from Xaden to Aaric. “Your secret is safe

with us.”
“So presumptuous.”
I shoot Xaden a glare. “It’s up to you if you want to tell anyone about

your family. Right, Riorson?”
A muscle in Xaden’s jaw ticks, but he nods.
“You swear it?” Aaric bites out.
“I do,” I promise.
It’s all I get to say before Xaden takes my hand and tugs me down the

wide hallway, where the crowd finally thins.
“I think I may have fucked up,” I whisper, apprehension growing with

each step we take.



“We may have fucked up,” he says, squeezing my hand and stopping us
in front of a tall wooden door with more than a few angry, raised voices
behind it. “Doesn’t mean we weren’t right.”

“The last time we were here, the people in that room wanted to lock me
up as a security threat.” My chest tightens. “I’m starting to think maybe
they were right.”

“Only four of them did,” he says, his fingers poised on the black metal
door handle. “And I guarantee they’re more pissed at me than they are you.
I didn’t exactly answer their summons last night after Brennan mended
you.” He pulls open the door, and the raised voices become almost shrill as
I follow him in.

“You’ve exposed everything we’ve worked for!” a woman shouts.
“Without so much as a vote from this council!” a man agrees.
“I made the call,” Xaden says once we’re clear of the doorway. “You

want to yell? Yell at me.”
Six members of the Assembly look our way from their chairs at the long

table, as Bodhi, Garrick, and Imogen stand in front of them as if on trial.
We’re all that’s left of the squad that fought in Resson.

“We’re happy to address your choices, Lieutenant Riorson,” Suri says.
“Though I’m not sure what the general’s daughter is doing here.”

“Well, the general’s son is right here,” Brennan counters from the other
end of the table as Xaden and I walk forward, putting ourselves between
Garrick and Imogen.

“You know what I meant,” the woman fires back, shooting Brennan a
frustrated look.

The massive, empty armchair Xaden had sprawled across at our last
meeting has been moved near the others. Guess they’re still waiting on
someone. I glance at the high, intricately constructed back and the figure of
a sleeping dragon perched on its pointed tip, then do a double take. In this
lighting, I realize that one half is a rich, polished walnut, and the other has a
black sheen to it, as if someone polished and sealed burned firewood… as if
the chair has been half burned.

Because it probably was.



“And I think I know why she’s here.” Hawk Nose glares with his one
eye like I’m something that needs to be scraped away from his boot, but at
least he doesn’t reach for the sword at his side when he looks pointedly at
our joined hands.

I pull mine from Xaden’s grasp.
He sighs like I’m his biggest problem and snatches it back. “What’s

done is done. You can stay in here and chastise us all day, or you can figure
out what to do with the hundred riders we brought you.”

“You didn’t bring us riders—you brought us cadets!” Suri shouts,
pounding her fist on the table. “What the hell are we supposed to do with
them?”

“Such theatrics are above you, Suri.” Felix scratches his beard and all
but rolls his eyes at her. “Though the question is valid.”

“I’d suggest you call a formation and divide them into equal wings, for
starters,” Xaden suggests, his tone dripping with boredom. “Though they
may prefer to stay intact. From what I’ve seen, Fourth Wing has the largest
numbers.”

“Because you were their wingleader,” Brennan states. “They were used
to following you.”

“And Aetos,” Xaden replies begrudgingly. “He’s the one who called the
formation after killing the vice commandant.”

“Aetos is another matter.” Battle-Ax runs her finger over the flat side of
her weapon like it’s habit. “He’s confined to quarters until we can ascertain
his loyalty, as are the scribes.”

“Cath is enough to vouch for Dain’s loyalty,” I argue. “And Jesinia is the
only reason we have Warrick’s journal.” My hand tightens on Xaden’s when
all six of the riders startle with surprise. “You do still have Warrick’s
journal, right?”

“You have a journal from Warrick?” Battle-Ax leans forward. “As in
First Six Warrick?”

“I do. Jesinia helped Violet and her squad steal the journal for
instructions on how to use the wardstone,” Xaden says, turning his gaze on
Brennan. “And she was right. It contains cryptic instructions in Old



Lucerish that need detailed, precise translation, but it’s better than nothing. I
was supposed to bring it to you but got sidetracked by her capture.”

“Dad never taught me Old Lucerish, only Tyrrish,” Brennan says to me,
lines forming between his brows, and a quiet woman with shiny black hair
and wideset eyes keeps her diamond-sharp gaze on him. “But if you can
translate it, then there’s a chance we can secure—”

“Secure?” Hawk Nose snaps. “You bring a hundred riders and two
hundred dragons here and have the nerve to say that word?” His eyes
narrow on me. “You may as well have handed Melgren a map of our
location. Or was that what she was truly after?”

“Here we fucking go,” Imogen says under her breath.
“Violet risked her life to help us,” Xaden responds. “And nearly lost it

doing so.”
“She should be confined and questioned,” Hawk Nose suggests.
“Go near my sister, and I’ll cut out your other eye, Ulices,” Brennan

warns, leaning forward and glaring down the table. “She’s been questioned
enough for two lifetimes.”

“That doesn’t change the fact that she’s ruined us!” Battle-Ax declares.
“We’ve already doubled patrols to the border, which leaves no one here to
fight should Melgren launch an attack on us.” She swings a finger at Felix.
“And don’t start with your Melgren doesn’t know we’re here. All the
rebellion signets on the Continent can’t hide a riot the size of a thunderhead.
We have no wards, no forge, and children running amok in the hallways!”

“Cadets who are acting with more composure than you are.” Xaden tilts
his head. “Get a grip.

“Melgren isn’t coming. Even if he knew where we are—which he
doesn’t—he can’t risk his forces coming after us when the kingdom is
reeling from wyvern carcasses we left up and down the border. Half the
riders he plans on having in three years are here. He might want to kill us,
but he can’t afford to. And as for Violet”—he lets go of my hand and rips at
the buttons of his flight jacket, then tugs his neckline down, exposing the
scar on his chest—“if you want to confine her, question her, then it’s me



you start with. I bear the responsibility for her and any decision she makes.
Remember?”

Gravity shifts as I stare at that thin silver line and its precise edges.
It’s… gods, it’s the same length as the ones on his back. Xaden isn’t
responsible for just the marked ones anymore; he’s responsible for me.
Responsible for my choices, my loyalties—not to Navarre, like the marked
ones, but to Aretia.

Imogen tried to tell me that day on the flight field, but I didn’t pick up
on it.

“When did you do that?” I ask.
“About two seconds after I put you in Brennan’s arms after Resson.”
My gaze falls to the floor as they continue to shout in Tyrrish. I brought

the cadets here. I was the one who got caught stealing Lyra’s journal. I’m
the one who forced Xaden’s hand, forced them all into this situation.

“Then you will consider them my guests.” Xaden’s words drag me out
of my self-pity. Shadows fill the floor and curl around the dais. “I do not
ask permission of you—of anyone—to bring guests into my own home.”
Xaden’s tone cools to glacial.

Garrick swears under his breath and rests his hand on the hilt of one of
his swords.

“Xaden—” Ulices starts.
“Or did you forget that this is my house?” Xaden tilts his head to the side

and stares at them in the same way Sgaeyl studies prey. “My life is tethered
to Violet’s, so if you want me in that fucking chair, you’ll accept her.”

Ulices’s skin blotches while I feel the blood rush from mine.
His chair. The empty one. He’s the seventh.
Holy shit. I knew this was his house, of course, but it never really

registered. This is all Xaden’s. No noble has claimed the duchy of Aretia.
They all think the land is ruined, or worse—cursed. It’s all his.

“Fine,” the quiet woman says, her voice soft and calm. “We will trust
Violet Sorrengail. But that doesn’t help us arm the drifts without an
operational forge. In winning this first battle with Navarre by taking half the
Riders Quadrant, you may have lost us this war.”



“And what do we do with all these cadets?” Battle-Ax asks wearily,
rubbing the bridge of her nose. “Gods, you brought us Aetos and scribes.
It’s not like we can send them out to battle wyvern and venin.”

“I also brought you four professors, and it’s not like you’re without your
share of knowledge,” Xaden replies. “I’ve already questioned the scribes.
They can be trusted, and Cath vouches for Aetos. As for the other cadets, I
suggest you get them back into class.”

Something… shimmers, curling around the Archives I keep in my head.
“Violet.” Her soft voice rattles me to my very core, and I grasp Xaden’s

arm to stay upright. Relief, joy, wonder—it all weakens my knees and
stings my eyes.

For the first time in months, I feel whole.
A smile spreads across my face. “Andarna.”

OceanofPDF.com



With all we’ve sacrificed for this kingdom, we’d better be able to
defend it.

—THE JOURNAL OF WARRICK OF LUCERAS—TRANSLATED BY CADET
VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

The valley above Aretia looks eerily similar to the last time I was here, as
though fall at this elevation is meaningless, when there are clear signs of

winter approaching in the town beneath us. But unlike last time, there are
dragons everywhere—the jagged outcroppings of rock above us, the mouths
of the caves to the west, the wide valley to the east… everywhere.

And two of the biggest stand before me like bookends with Andarna
between them.

“I thought you said she was awake?” I whisper at Tairn as if my voice
might wake her, like there isn’t a giant brown stomping his way past the
copse of trees where Andarna is napping, her body curved into an S-shape.
Grass moves in front of her snout with every gust of her exhale, and she
looks quite content with her scorpion tail curled around her. And kind of…
green?

No, her scales are still black. It must be an adolescent thing that they’re
so shiny she reflects some of the color around her.

“An hour ago.” Tairn chuffs and I’m pretty sure Sgaeyl just rolled her
eyes.

“It took me an hour to get out of that meeting, and then I had to hike that
cliff of a trail.” I shouldn’t wake her. The responsible action would be none,
to let her sleep off the remnants of her nearly three-month-long dragon
coma. But I’ve missed her so damn—



Gold eyes flash open.
Relief nearly brings me to my knees. She’s awake.
I grin and feel my world right itself. “Hi.”
“Violet.” Andarna lifts her head, and a puff of steam blows back the

loosened strands of my long braid. “I meant to stay awake.”
“That’s all right. Tairn says you’ll be nodding off for the next week or

so.” Stepping forward, I reach up to scratch her scaly jawline. “You were
out a long time.”

“It felt like nothing.” She arches her neck so I can get the area beneath
her chin.

“Trust me, it wasn’t.” I step back and really look at her. If I had to guess,
I’d say she’s almost two-thirds the size of Sgaeyl. “I think you’re bigger.”

“Naturally.” She huffs, digging her claws into the ground as she stands
upright.

I retreat another couple of steps, looking higher and higher as she shakes
off the sleep, her wings rustling as she swivels her head, taking in the
valley. “What do you want to do? Fly? Take a walk?” There’s so much I
need to tell her.

“Food. We should seek sheep.” She flares her wings out and then
stumbles forward just like she did in the height of summer.

Shit.
I scramble backward through the cumbersome grass, rushing to keep

from being sliced by Andarna’s claws as she finds her balance.
“Could you not crush our human?” Tairn barks.
“I wasn’t even close,” Andarna snaps in return with a quick glare his

direction as she flares her wings with the same result.
“I told you to be patient,” Tairn chides.
The look she levels on him makes Sgaeyl huff in what I think is

appreciation, and Andarna rolls her shoulders, digs her claws in, and tries
again to raise her wings.

My stomach drops, my mind spinning so quickly I can barely catch a
whirring thought as my gaze flicks between the two wings. Her left one



doesn’t fully extend. It makes it halfway, but the remainder of the black
webbing never pulls taut.

She attempts once, twice, then bares her sharp teeth and hisses steam
when it doesn’t snap into place on the third attempt.

Oh gods. Something’s wrong.
I have no fucking clue what to say or do. I’m… speechless. Powerless to

help. Fuck. Am I supposed to ask her if she’s all right? Or do I ignore it as I
would a battle wound on an adult? Is the wing broken? In need of mending?
Or is it part of the growth process?

Andarna’s head whips back toward mine and her eyes narrow. “I am not
broken.”

My heart sinks.
“I never said you were,” I whisper.
Shit, shit, shit. I hurt her feelings.
“Speech isn’t necessary when I can hear your thoughts. I am no more

broken than you are.” Her lip curls and her teeth flash.
Ouch. “I’m sorry. That wasn’t what I meant to imply.” The thought is

barely a whisper.
“Enough.” Tairn lowers his head to her level. “She is allowed to be

concerned for you, as you are for her. Now go eat before hunger
overpowers common sense.”

Sgaeyl stalks past me on the right, the ground lightly shuddering beneath
my feet as she heads for the meadow to the east. Feirge gets out of her way.

“There is a herd that is far better hunted on foot,” Tairn says, a soft
growl vibrating in his throat. “Follow Sgaeyl.”

Andarna tucks her wings, flexes her claws, then walks around me
wordlessly, heading for Sgaeyl. I turn to watch them walk away.

“Adolescents,” Tairn grumbles. “They’re insufferable when hungry.”
“Her wing,” I whisper, wrapping my arms around my stomach.
His sigh ripples the grass around me. “The elders and I will work with

her to strengthen the muscles, but there are complications.”
“Like?” My chest tightens, and I glance up at him.
“Put your shields up and block her out as much as possible.”



I focus, shielding out that pearlescent bond I now recognize as Andarna.
“Done.”

“There are many reasons younglings do not leave the Vale. The mass
expenditure of energy in Resson forced her into a rapid rate of growth. You
know that. But if it had happened here, or at Basgiath where she could have
been quickly, safely sheltered for the Dreamless Sleep, perhaps she would
have grown as usual.” His tone is enough to raise the hairs on the back of
my neck. He’s never this careful with his words, never this careful with my
feelings. “But we flew that critical day between Resson and Aretia,” he
continues. “And then we waited again to fly to Basgiath, and even then she
woke several times. The elders have never seen a dragon remain Dreamless
that long. And now her growth is unpredictable. There is a second set of
muscles along the fronts of our wings that forms during our growth. Hers
did not. The elders believe she’ll still fly… in time. Once she’s strengthened
the existing muscle to compensate.”

“Can Brennan mend her?” It’s my fault because I used her power in
Resson. Because we’d flown that day. Because we’d had to return to
Basgiath. Because she bonded when she was a juvenile and I interrupted her
Dreamless Sleep. I could list reasons all day.

“You cannot mend what does not exist.”
I watch her quicken her pace to catch up to Sgaeyl, snapping her teeth at

a bird that immediately regrets flying too close with a squawk.
“But she’ll fly?” I’ve learned enough about dragons to know that a life

without flight is more than a tragedy.
“We believe she can eventually train the existing muscle to bear the

weight of her wing,” he assures me, but there’s a note of something else in
his tone that has me bracing.

“You believe.” I turn slowly to glare up at the second-biggest dragon on
the Continent. “Which means you’ve had time to discuss. How long have
you known?”

“Since she woke here in the high summer.”
My heart stops sinking and flat-out plummets to the grass. She hadn’t

fully extended her wing then, either, but I’d thought nothing of it, since she



seemed generally… clumsy.
“What else aren’t you telling me?” There’s no way he’d have cut her out

of the conversation unless he was worried about my reaction to the
information— or hers.

“What she herself has not recognized.” He lowers his head, his great
golden eyes locking with mine. “She’ll fly, but she’ll never bear a rider.”
 
 
 

She’ll never bear a rider. Tairn’s words repeat through my head for the
next three days while we’re tossed back into classes, headed by the

professors who flew with us to Aretia, as well as a few members of the
revolution and the Assembly. Even translating Warrick’s journal can’t keep
the thoughts out, and every time his prediction runs through my mind, I
immediately think of something else just in case Andarna is listening in.

“Iron… rain,” I say, writing the words on parchment as I finish
translating the passage for the third time. I’ve come up with the same
process every time, no matter how… odd it is.

“Iron rain mean anything to you?” I ask down the bond, closing the
notebook on Xaden’s desk and reaching for my pack. I’m going to be late if
I don’t hurry.

“Should it?” Tairn replies.
“Clearly, or she wouldn’t be asking.” I can practically feel Andarna’s

eyeroll. “Ooh… sheep.”
“They will not stay down if you keep stuffing them in like”—Tairn sighs

— “that.”
I bite back a smile and race to meet my squad.
Have to give it to Brennan and the Assembly. We might be sharing

books and cramming ourselves into every open room on the first floor for
lectures, but every cadet is clean, fed, housed, and learning.

History is held in what I think was Xaden’s father’s office, and we
started a new unit on the Tyrrish Rebellion yesterday so everyone can know



what really happened six years ago, but we’ve only gotten far enough to
cover the political landscape of the years before the rebellion.

Instead of challenges and hand-to-hand, Emetterio has us running the
steep, rocky trail to the valley every day until our aching lungs adjust to the
altitude, but he’s warned us not to get too comfortable slacking off. Pretty
sure the number of cadets vomiting beside the trail would indicate we’re
not, but the urgency in his tone pushes us to run harder.

“Hawk Nose” Ulices has taken over physics, which only gives him
another reason to spend an hour every other day glaring at me. And “Battle-
Ax” Kylynn is set to take on flight maneuvers once the Assembly agrees
we’re safe enough to let the riot rise from the hidden protection of the
valley, which means we have more than two hundred restless dragons.

Suri, the member of the Assembly with the silver-streaked hair who
blatantly hates me, flew off with Xaden and the other lieutenants two days
ago. Not knowing where he is, wondering if he’s in danger, worrying every
single second that he might be in battle, has me breathing through another
wave of nausea as we file into the rebuilt theater in the northwest wing of
Riorson House.

The sight is more than impressive. Not just that there’s enough seating
for every cadet, but that of all the things they could have rebuilt in the last
six years… they chose a theater.

“Welcome to Battle Brief,” Rhiannon says, leading us halfway down the
steps on the right and into our seats.

“Good. Maybe they’ll tell us what’s happening in Navarre,” Visia says
from the row ahead of us. Besides Aaric and Sloane, there are four other
first-years, whose names I have yet to learn.

Unlike our usual Battle Brief, we’re seated as if in formation: by wing,
section, and squad. And unlike the map at Basgiath, this one is the height
and width of the large stage where the curtain would hang, and it includes
the isles— the five large and thirteen smaller islands that surround the
Continent in every direction.

“Those red and orange flags,” Ridoc notes from my left, pointing up at
the map. “Are those… ”



“Enemy territory, I’m guessing,” Sawyer remarks, sitting next to Ridoc.
“Not like Poromish enemy.” Ridoc takes his pen and parchment out of

his pack, and I do the same, balancing the bound notebook on my lap.
“Like… dark wielder enemy.”

“Right. Drained land, destroyed cities like Zolya. Red is old movement
and orange is new.” Nearly all of the Krovlan province remains untouched,
but the enemy is just a day’s flight from our border. The only movement I
notice since viewing this map in midsummer is up the Stonewater River—
toward Navarre. “Did you guys get letters to your families?”

My friends couldn’t give out our location, but they could warn their
loved ones to leave the border region, or just leave. I wouldn’t put it past
Melgren to start executing the families to punish those who deserted.

And it’s all my fault. I’m responsible for Andarna’s wing, for forcing the
exposure of the truth before Aretia was ready to act, for bringing a hundred
riders here without permission, for the worry etched in Brennan’s forehead
about boosting the sheep population for all the dragons I led here, and for
putting a target on my friends’ families’ backs. I grip my pen so tight it
groans under the strain.

How could I make every right decision last year and every wrong one
this year?

They all nod, with Rhiannon adding, “I’m hoping it convinces them to
move.”

Aaric doesn’t bother turning from his seat directly in front of me. “I
declined the offer to correspond,” he says over his shoulder instead.

“I bet you did.” I force a small smile. His father would shit himself if he
knew Aaric had not only joined the quadrant but turned against Navarre.

“Any luck on the wardstone?” Rhi asks, and every head turns. Even
Aaric and Sloane look over their shoulders.

“I’ve translated the section we need three times, and I think I’m close.”
My smile echoes theirs because I think I might actually have it. “I know it’s
been three days, but I’m a little rusty, and it’s the oddest form of magic I’ve
ever read about, which is probably why it’s never been done twice.”

“But you think it will work?” Sloane asks with blatant hope in her eyes.



“I do.” I nod, straightening my shoulders like the weight of their
expectations is physical. “I just need to be sure it’s right.” And I’d better be
right. Those wards are our best defense if wyvern crest the Cliffs of Dralor.

“Let’s get started!” Professor Devera says from the stage, her voice
carrying over the hundred of us easily, and everyone turns to face her.

“It’s just like being at Basgiath,” Ridoc says with a smile. “But you
know… not.”

Rhi leans in and whispers, “Odd magic?”
“I… ” My face scrunches. “I think the First Six practiced some kind of

blood magic,” I whisper even quieter than she had. I’ve translated the
passage three times and come up with the same words every time, but I’ve
never heard of using blood in… anything.

Her eyebrows rise. “You sure?”
“As I can be. Jesinia came up with the same translation for the passage,

but I think I should probably go over it one more time. Just in case.”
“Yeah. Just in case.” She nods.
“Welcome to your first official Battle Brief as traitors,” Devera

announces.
That gets everyone’s attention. A pit forms where my stomach used to

be.
“Get used to the sound of the word,” she says unapologetically, her gaze

scanning over us. “Because that’s what Navarre now considers us. Whether
or not that’s how we feel about the choice we made to defend those who
cannot defend themselves, that is how we will be seen by the friends and
loved ones we left behind. But personally, I’m proud of every single one of
you.” Her eyes find mine. “It’s hard to leave behind everything you know,
everything you love, because your honor demands it. With that said, please
welcome Lieutenant Colonel Aisereigh, who will take the place of the
Scribe Quadrant Curator, since we don’t have them here.”

Markham’s position. Will Jesinia or the two other cadets start their own
quadrant here without anyone to teach them? The Assembly finished
debriefing and clearing Dain for attendance this morning, so he’s sitting in



the front row with the section leaders. I’m glad he’s out of isolation but also
glad he’s keeping his distance.

“We believe in sharing information here in Aretia,” Brennan says as he
takes the stage with Devera.

“Still can’t believe he ditched your last name,” Sawyer says under his
breath.

My year-mates are the only ones who know who Brennan is, and it
seems Devera and Emetterio are going along with the name change as well.
Maybe Kaori would have, too, if he’d come with us, but he’d looked at me,
clearly torn, and said his place was with the Empyrean.

Everyone who stayed had their reasons. At least that’s what I’m telling
myself.

“He had to. Besides, I like his name. It’s Tyrrish for resurrected,” I reply.
He’s still just Brennan to me.

“First,” Brennan begins, “we’ve done as you’ve asked and kept you in
your respective wings. Second Wing and Third Wing, you know that Eleni
Jareth and Tibbot Vasant are now your respective wingleaders. We expect
any missing section leaders or squad leaders to be replaced by tomorrow,
and you’ll notify Devera of your choices.”

My eyebrows shoot up.
“You won’t choose for us?” someone from First Wing asks. That’s the

protocol at Basgiath.
“Are you saying you’re not capable?” Brennan challenges.
“No, sir.”
“Excellent. Moving on.” He turns our direction. “We double-checked the

rolls to be sure, but it appears that not only does Fourth Wing currently
boast this year’s Iron Squad—”

The first-years seated in front of us holler, since that honor of boasting
the largest number of surviving first-years after Threshing is ours for the
second year in a row. Baylor, the stocky one with the skull-trimmed black
hair, shouts the loudest, and the corner of my mouth rises when he shoulder
bumps Aaric into joining in.



“—but Flame Section has the unique honor of being completely intact.”
Brennan looks down at Bodhi. “Durran, you brought every single cadet. I
guess that would make you the Iron Section.”

Holy shit. I don’t even bother trying to suppress my grin, now. I knew
that Fourth Wing brought the most cadets, but we kept our entire section
together?

“I’m assuming you’d like a patch?” Brennan asks, a smile tilting his lips.
“Fuck yes, we do!” Ridoc shouts, coming out of his seat, and our entire

section cheers loudly, even me.
“Yes, sir,” Bodhi says once we calm, glancing over his shoulder at us

like he can’t take us anywhere nice.
“I’ll see what we can do.” Brennan glances up at me and grins. “Now to

real business. We’ll start with your update from Navarre. As far as we can
tell from our sources, the public doesn’t know.”

What? How? Rhi and I exchange a look of pure confusion as a ripple of
hushed comments rolls through the theater.

“To our surprise, the outposts have successfully dispatched with the
wyvern Lieutenant Riorson gifted to them, and General Melgren has kept
the news from reaching the general public, though obviously all present
military now knows. And unfortunately, they are still turning away every
Poromish citizen at the border.”

My heart plummets, and the tiny part of me that had hoped our leaving
would prompt action and reflection dies a painful, disillusioning death. But
once we have wards, we’ll be a safe option for the Poromish citizens
Navarre still won’t take.

“Our forces have doubled their patrols at the borders of Tyrrendor”—he
rubs his thumb along the bottom of his jaw—“but we feel confident that our
location is still secret.”

“Even with flying the Continent’s largest riot across Navarre?” someone
from First Wing asks.

“Tyrs are loyal,” Sloane says, her chin rising. “We lived through the last
rebellion. Whatever we see, we’ll keep to ourselves.”



Brennan nods. “The good news is: as far as our extensive sources can
tell, your families have not been targeted, and we are reaching out with not
only your letters but offers of sanctuary. If they’re willing to risk stepping
into the unknown, we’ll work to get them here.”

The lump in my throat makes it hard to breathe for a second. Dad would
be proud of him.

“What does this lack of troop movement tell us?” Devera asks, shooting
Brennan a little side-eye. “Or do you not remember how Battle Brief
works?”

“My apologies.” Brennan puts his hands up and stands back. “Been a
few years.”

“They’ve been too busy cleaning up the mess Riorson dumped at the
border to bother with us,” Dain answers.

“For now,” Brennan agrees with a nod. “They might be in shock, but
don’t doubt that we’ll be fighting a war on two fronts as soon as they can
get their bearings and decide how much they can risk the public knowing.”

“When do we get to fight them?” a guy from Third Wing asks, pointing
up at the map. “The dark wielders?”

“When you graduate,” Brennan answers, lifting his brows in a no-
nonsense expression that makes him look just like Dad. “We don’t send
cadets to die, and that’s exactly what will happen to you if you try to take
on a dark wielder before you’re ready. You will die. Are you really so
anxious to start a new death roll?”

“Sorrengail and the others didn’t die,” he responds.
“Two of us did die,” Imogen snaps, and the rider slides down in his seat.
“When you wield lightning, come and talk to me,” Devera counters.
“Before you graduate, you’re going to learn how to take on a dark

wielder and survive,” Brennan promises. “It requires a different style of
fighting, and honing your signets, which you may have noticed are a bit
testy up here. Remember, magic is a little wild out here beyond the wards,
but we’re currently deciphering Warrick’s journal in order to get our wards
operational as quickly as possible. We’re also working on getting our forge



up and running to supply both our forces and the gryphon fliers with
weaponry, which is part of our mission—”

A grumble of disapproval ripples through the auditorium.
“Knock it off,” Brennan chastises. “Fliers are dangerous, but they are

not the enemy you’ve been raised to fear, though some are still hostile
toward us, as evidenced by the attack on Samara four days ago.”

Fliers attacked Samara? My pulse stutters. Mira.
“Which brings us back to Battle Brief,” Devera continues. “One dragon

was injured, but no riders were lost in the attack, according to our sources,
mostly because there was only one dragon present at the outpost during the
attack— political turmoil, remember? The wards did not fail, but a drift of
fliers infiltrated the post, killing a dozen infantry before two of them were
killed in the lowest level of the fortress.”

No riders were lost. She’s all right. Once my heart falls out of my throat,
I can think again.

“They were looking for weaponry,” I whisper. “That’s where the armory
is.” Navarre’s citizens might not know that we’re gone, but the drifts do.

“Say it,” Rhiannon urges quietly.
I shake my head, unwilling to follow my thoughts to their logical

conclusion.
“What questions would you ask about the attack?” Devera cuts in. “This

one’s been briefing officers for too long and doesn’t remember the art of
teaching.” She cuts another mean side-eye at Brennan.

“Fuck it. I’ll say it,” Ridoc mutters. Then asks at full volume: “Were
they looking for weaponry?”

“Absolutely.” Brennan nods. “That’s the only reason for fliers to attack
Navarrian outposts directly.” He glances at me like he knows the question
was really mine, and then stares in that challenging look of disapproval he
mastered before the age of fifteen, daring me to rise, to stop avoiding the
consequences of my own actions.

Fine. “Did the fliers attack Samara before or after the news of our… ”
Gods, what are the right words for what we did? “Departure from Basgiath
leaked into Poromiel?”



Brennan’s stare softens in approval.
“After,” Devera answers.
The lump in my throat swells painfully, threatening to rip apart what

facade of calm I have left. They attacked because they know we can’t
supply them. They’re defenseless.

“It’s not your fault,” Rhiannon whispers.
“Yeah, it is.” I focus on taking notes.
Brennan turns to the map. “On to enemy movements. In the last week,

venin have taken the town of Anca. Not surprising, given its proximity to
the recently fallen Zolya.”

I don’t bother looking at Anca. My gaze is locked on Cordyn, where
Viscount Tecarus has the only other known luminary. It’s the next largest
city between Zolya and Draithus, and still outside venin-controlled territory.
The seaside city was a two-day flight from Basgiath, but from here? I bet
Tairn could make it in twelve hours.

“Ten,” he corrects me. “But it’s not entirely safe,” he states, but it’s not
an argument.

“So Xaden says, but neither is being here beyond the wards without a
forge to arm anyone, including ourselves.” Good thing we’ll have the
wards up soon.

“She makes a good point,” Andarna agrees. “Can you carry a
luminary?”

“That question insults me.”
“Can you carry a luminary while insulted?” she prods.
Tairn growls.
“What’s concerning is that it appears the town was drained, and then the

dark wielders pulled back to reassemble in Zolya,” Devera says. “What
does that tell us?”

“They’re organized and basing out of Zolya,” Rhiannon answers. “It’s
like a supply trip for an ongoing campaign.”

“Silver One!” Tairn’s tone changes. “A riot approaches!”
My breath seizes as my head swings toward the back of the theater, as if

the small windows there will give me any clue of what’s coming.



“Yes. They’re not just consuming but occupying territory for the first
time. Good—” Brennan quiets, no doubt talking to Marbh, then focuses as
the entire theater falls silent. “Everyone get to the great hall and wait there,”
he orders, turning to Devera as the auditorium descends into quiet chaos.

“How many?” I force myself to breathe through the terror and shove
everything into my pack and stand as everyone around me does the same in
a hushed panic.

“Are they coming for us?” Ridoc asks quietly. “Navarre?”
I thought we’d have more time. How can this already be happening?
“I don’t know,” Rhiannon answers.
“Can Tairn take Codagh?” Aaric asks as I throw my pack onto my back.
My mouth opens and shuts as I think of General Melgren’s dragon. I

don’t even want the answer to that question.
And Tairn is suspiciously quiet.
“Shortest revolution in history.” Sawyer mutters a swear word and yanks

the drawstrings of his pack tight.
“Forty. Sgaeyl is approaching as well, but she’s too far out to—” Tairn

pauses. “Wait. Teine leads the riot.”
Teine?
Mira. Fear knots my stomach.
Fuck waiting.
I push past Sawyer to the outer aisle of the theater and then run, ignoring

every voice that calls after me, even Brennan’s. Running every morning for
the past three months has bolstered what advantage I already had on most of
the riders in this room—speed.

“Ready the crossbolts!” Brennan shouts above the fray.
Mira will get herself killed. Or maybe she’s come here to kill us. Either

way, she’ll have to look me in the eye before she does it.
Legs pumping, I race across the back of the theater, cutting First Wing

off from the exit and sprinting through to the main hallway. Statues and
tapestries blur as I run by, my lungs burning as I dart past the guards and
riders flowing into the thoroughfare.



Please, Dunne, do not let her incinerate this house before I get the
chance to talk some sense into her.

I sprint past Emetterio as he shouts for me to get into the great hall, then
nearly slip turning into the foyer, not daring to break my stride even when
my heart pounds hard, protesting the altitude. The guards hold the doors
open, no doubt so riders can mount, and I fly straight through, my feet
barely skimming the marble steps into the courtyard just in time to see
Teine’s wings flare directly in front of me to halt a rapid descent.

That knot of fear lurches into my throat, and I skid to a stop about thirty
feet outside the front door, my feet making furrows in the gravel.

Rock flies in a dusty barrage from the impact of the Green Clubtail’s
claws, and I throw up my arms to cover my face as Teine lands directly in
front of the courtyard doors, blocking the exit into the town, and two others
flank him, their landings just as abrupt.

I cough as the dust clears and immediately spot an angry-looking orange
and glaring red facing me, their teeth bared.

Fuck me, four more land on the outer walls, shaking the masonry.
They’re everywhere.

My stomach sinks. We’ve been betrayed. Someone’s told Navarre our
location.

“Tairn—”
“Here,” he answers a moment before dropping out of the sky like a

damned meteor. The ground shudders with the force of his landing to my
left, and the shade of his wing blocks out the sun overhead. He roars so
loudly my teeth rattle, then lowers his head, his neck only inches from my
shoulder, and streams a river of fire in a clear warning shot across the legs
of the dragons.

Heat blasts my face for the length of a heartbeat before he draws back,
his head darting in a serpentine motion.

Teine steps forward, and time feels like it slows to milliseconds as Tairn
lunges, opening his massive jaw and latching onto Teine’s throat just like he
had Solas’s.

“Tairn!” I scream in raw fear. If Teine dies, so does Mira.



“For fuck’s sake, Violet!” Mira shouts.
“I have his throat, but I have not broken his scales,” he assures me like

I’m the dramatic one here.
“Well, as long as it’s just a threat,” I reply sarcastically. “Dismount

peacefully and Teine lives!” Others rush into the courtyard behind me, their
feet loud on the gravel, but I keep my eyes locked on Teine and Mira.

She dismounts with enviable ease and strides toward me. Her cheeks are
red with windburn, and her eyes are wild as she lifts her flight goggles to
the top of her head. “We all come peacefully. It was Riorson who came for
us. How else would we have found you?” She glances up at the house
without breaking pace. “Gods, I thought this place was ash.”

Xaden?
“It’s not.” My fingertips brush the hilts of my daggers. I’m not sure I can

lift them to kill my sister, but I sure as hell won’t be killed by her.
“Sgaeyl confirms,” Tairn says, releasing Teine’s throat and drawing

back to my side. “They’re in range.”
Oh, thank the gods. My breath rushes out in a sigh of relief a second

before Mira wraps her arms around me. “I’m sorry,” she says into my hair,
squeezing me tight. “I’m so sorry I didn’t listen to what you were trying to
tell me at Samara.”

My shoulders dip, and I relax into her, slowly returning the hug. “I
needed you,” I whisper, unable to keep the hurt from leaching into my
voice. There are so many other things that need to be said, and yet that’s
what comes out. “I needed you, Mira.”

“I know.” Her chin bumps the top of my head before she pulls back,
clasping my shoulders. For the first time since I started at Basgiath, she
doesn’t scan my frame to see if I’m injured. She looks me straight in my
eyes. “I’m so sorry. I let you down, and I promise it won’t happen again.” A
ghost of a smile pulls at her lips. “You really stole half of Basgiath’s cadets?
And killed the vice commandant?”

“Dain killed the vice commandant. I just finished him off. Well, Xaden
helped. It was more of a team effort,” I admit, shaking my head to clear it.
“Did you know? When I tried to tell you and you said I needed more sleep,



did you know?” The thought of her trying to convince me it was all in my
head if she knew better is unbearable.

“I didn’t know. I swear, I didn’t know.” Her wide, brown eyes search
mine. “Not until the wyvern was dropped at the front gates of Samara. Mom
arrived about ten hours later and told me the truth—told all of the riders the
truth.”

I blink through the shock. “She just…told you.”
“Yes.” Her chin dips as she nods. “She probably figured out there was

no lying her way around a giant dead wyvern.”
And we’d already been on our way here.
“Xaden.” I reach out, not because I don’t trust my sister, but because I

trust him more.
“If she said your mother confessed, then she’s telling the truth. We’re at

the edge of the city now, just flying with the stragglers.”
“And what, she just let all forty of you leave?” I step out of her hug and

gesture at the dragons perched on the walls around us. There’s no way
they’d let dozens of riders desert.

“She gave us an hour to decide, and half of us chose to leave. We flew
into other riders on the way who’d been given the same ultimatum.
Leadership decided letting us go was a safer choice than letting us stay and
talk the others into leaving, or worse, leaking information, and besides, it
wasn’t really our choice, was it?” She glances back at Teine.

That’s… not right. Why would Mom and Melgren let them just… go?
“I think she knew I’d find—” She looks over my shoulder and freezes,

then starts to tremble as her pupils blow wide.
“Mira?” I glance back to the house and see exactly what’s shaken her.
Brennan hurries down the steps, his mouth curving into a smile I can’t

help but mirror. All three of us are here, and there are no words for how
complete it feels. My eyes burn, blinking back the bittersweet yet wholly
joyous emotion that threatens to overwhelm me.

We’re finally together again.
“Brennan?” Mira croaks, and I move back a couple of steps to give them

room. “How?”



“Hey, Mira.” He’s less than a dozen feet away, his grin widening.
“You’re alive?” She stumbles forward, shaking her head. “After…I

mean… It’s been six years, and you’re… alive?”
“In the flesh.” He opens his arms. “Gods, it’s good to see you.”
She draws back her fist and punches him straight in the face.

OceanofPDF.com



The blood of life of the six and the one combined and set the stone
ablaze in an iron rain.

—THE JOURNAL OF WARRICK OF LUCERAS—TRANSLATED BY CADET
VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

So. Much. Blood. “Get to the great hall and tell Ridoc Gamlyn that I
need ice now!” I shout at a guard as we pass through the foyer.

“I’m fine!” Brennan manages to say around the handkerchief stanching
the river of blood trying to pour down his face. He tests the cartilage and
cringes. “Damn it, Mira, I think you broke it!”

“I heard a distinct crunch.” I glare at my sister over my shoulder as we
walk into the office where we have history class. It’s set up for cadets, with
a dozen chairs surrounding a hastily constructed table.

“You deserve it,” Mira calls out, shaking off the guard who reaches for
her. “Don’t fucking touch me.”

“Leave my sister alone,” Brennan orders, sitting back against the edge of
the table. “It’s a family matter.”

“Family? Family doesn’t let each other think they’re dead for six years.”
Mira leans against the wall to my right, putting me square between them.
“The only family in this room is Violet and me.”

“Mira—” I start.
“Lieutenant Colonel?” Ulices interrupts, pushing through the guards,

and this time his eye isn’t narrowed on me.
“Lieutenant Colonel?” Mira’s gaze swings from Ulices to Brennan, and

she folds her arms across her chest. “At least playing dead for six years
earns you rank.”



Brennan shoots her a look before turning toward Ulices. “I’m fine.
Everyone can relax. I’ve had worse injuries sparring.”

“Wouldn’t be the first time I broke his nose.” Mira offers a saccharine-
sweet smile to Ulices, whose eye narrows on my sister.

A guard squeezes past Ulices, handing me a piece of cloth wrapped
around a thick icicle, and I’ve never loved Ridoc’s signet more. “Thank
you,” I tell him. “And tell the same to Ridoc, please.”

“Deploy every rider currently not scheduled to scout the Tyrrish outposts
as quietly as possible,” Brennan orders Ulices. “We need to know if other
riders are deserting, or if they’re surging here in preparation to strike.”

“With all the extra riders we have,” Ulices mutters.
“Switch.” I issue an order of my own to Brennan, holding out the ice.
“What about the new riot?” Ulices asks. “Same procedure as the cadets’
arrival?”
“Riorson vouches for them, according to Marbh, but make sure the

dragons do as well. Get them up to the valley.” Brennan nods, and blood
trickles off his chin.

Gross.
“Switch,” I say again, waving the ice so he sees it.
Ulices glances at Mira. “You’re sure—”
“I can handle my own sister,” Brennan assures him.
“Don’t be so sure about that,” Mira counters, arching an eyebrow as

Ulices departs, leaving the doorway empty but guarded outside.
“I can’t believe you hit me,” Brennan mutters. “Do you know how hard

it is to mend myself? You? No problem. Doing it for myself? A giant pain
in the ass.”

“Oh, do cry for me, big brother.” Mira scrunches her face as she mocks
him. “You know, the way we cried for you.”

And suddenly, I feel ten again, the smallest personality in a room of
giants.

“I knew you wouldn’t understand.” Brennan jabs his finger in Mira’s
direction and flinches. “Shit, I’m going to have to set the cartilage.”

“Understand? Understand that you let us burn your things?”



“I’ve already had this fight with him,” I assure her.
“Let us watch our mother become a shadow of herself?” she continues

over me. “Let us watch our father’s heart give out because your death broke
him?” Mira pushes off the wall, and I hold up my hand, palm outward, like
I have even a prayer of stopping her if she decides to hit him again.

“Maybe I didn’t go quite that far.” Not that she isn’t speaking the truth,
but damn, that’s harsh.

“Our father would understand what I’ve been doing.” Brennan’s voice
turns nasal as he moves the blood dam.

“Would you please switch cloths?” I ask, water dripping from my fist to
the stone floor.

“And as for our mother.” Brennan stands. “I hope my death haunts her
every damned day. She was so willing to sacrifice my life for a lie.”

“That’s not fair!” Mira snaps. “I may not agree with what she did, but I
understand how she thought it was best to keep us safe.”

“Us safe?” Brennan’s eyes narrow. “You weren’t killed!”
They’re screaming at each other like I’m not even here. Yep, definitely

morphed back into the little silent sister.
“Neither were you!” she yells. “You hid up here like a coward instead of

coming home when we needed you!” She gestures at me. “You chose
complete strangers over your sisters!”

“I chose the good of the Continent!”
“Oh for fuck’s sake! Stop it!” I shout, silencing them both. “Mira, he

was a brand-new lieutenant, and what’s done is done.” Pivoting toward
Brennan, I shove the ice into his hand. “Brennan, put the fucking ice on
your face before you stain the floors, you stubborn ass!”

Brennan slowly lifts the ice to his nose, looking at me like he’s never
seen me before.

“And to think, I used to wish I had siblings,” Xaden says from the
doorway, leaned against the doorframe casually, like he’s been watching us
for a hot minute.

All the fight within me transforms to pure relief, and I walk straight to
him, careful not to slip on the blood Brennan has left splattered all over the



place. “Hi.”
“Hi,” Xaden replies, wrapping his arm around my waist and tugging me

against him.
My pulse skips like a rock thrown across a glassy pond as I soak in

every detail of him. No new cuts or bruises on his face, but who knows
what’s under his riding leathers. “You’re all right?”

“I am now.” His voice softens to that tone he only ever uses with me,
weakening my knees as he lowers his mouth to mine, giving me all the time
in the world to protest.

I don’t.
He kisses me slowly, gently, and I lean up on my toes to get closer,

cupping his stubbled cheeks between my palms.
This right here makes everything worth it. The world could disintegrate

around us and I’m not sure I’d notice—or care—as long as I have him in
my arms.

“Seriously?” Brennan remarks. “Right in front of me?”
“Oh, this is tame for them,” Mira replies. “Wait until they decide to

basically climb each other in a public place. You can’t burn that shit out of
your head, trust me.”

I smile into Xaden’s kiss, and he deepens the pressure but keeps his
tongue firmly behind his teeth—much to my chagrin. He pulls back
reluctantly, but there’s more than enough promise in his eyes to make my
blood heat.

“So what are the Sorrengail siblings going to do now that you’re all
reunited?” Xaden asks, lifting his head to look at my family.

“We’re going to beat the shit out of our brother,” Mira answers with a
smile.

“Survive,” Brennan chimes in.
I let my hands fall from Xaden’s face, then glance at my brother and

sister.
Everything I really, truly love—everyone I can’t live without—is here,

and for the first time in my life, I can protect them. “I need the blood of the
six most powerful riders.”



Brennan’s brows fly upward, and Mira’s nose wrinkles like she’s just
swallowed sour milk.

“Ever? Or living now?” Xaden asks without batting an eye.
“Why?” Brennan asks, water dripping from his fist.
“In residence, I think,” I reply to Xaden, then turn to face my siblings

and take a steadying breath. “I know how to raise the wards.”
 
 
 

N ine of us—the Assembly, Bodhi, and myself—walk out the back door
of Riorson House five hours later and start up a path cut into the

ridgeline above, climbing the trail in pairs.
“You’re certain about this?” Ulices asks my brother as they walk in front

of Xaden and me.
“My sister’s certain, and that’s good enough for me,” Brennan replies.
“Yes, by all means, let’s waste our time catering to the whims of a

cadet,” Suri calls up from where she walks with Kylynn.
“A cadet who can raise the wards,” Xaden counters.
No pressure.
Shivering, I shove my hands into the pockets of my flight jacket to ward

off the chill as the sun sets behind the mountain. Finally, the trail levels out
and we approach a set of somber guards who step aside so we can pass,
following the gravel path that leads into the mountainside, becoming a man-
made canyon open to the sky above.

Mage lights flicker on as we pass through the chasm, and my stomach
flutters with nervous energy. No, that’s apprehension. Nope… nervous
energy. Whatever it is, I’m glad I skipped dinner.

“We should be using this time to discuss the negotiations with Tecarus,
since we’re all here.” Ulices looks pointedly at my brother.

“Missive arrived today. He wants us to come to his aid when called,”
Brennan says. “The seaside drifts are to be armed first, and he says he’ll let
us bring the luminary back to Aretia—”



“He won’t,” Xaden interrupts.
“—if he can see Vi wield,” Brennan finishes.
“Looks like we need to seek another luminary, because he’ll meet Malek

before Violet,” Xaden says in that calm, icy tone he uses when his mind’s
made up. “Unless you’re eager to never see your sister again. He’ll keep her
as a weapon. You and I both know it.”

“I can talk him out of any thoughts that direction.” Brennan’s jaw ticks.
“If there was another luminary, don’t you think we’d be negotiating for

that one?” Kylynn retorts.
“Then offer him a full armory, because Violet isn’t up for negotiation.”

Xaden looks back and levels a glare at her.
“I don’t mind going.” Our shoulders brush as the path narrows and the

walls of the canyon rise even higher around us. “You need it.”
“I mind it. The answer is no. There is always another way.”
It’s a good thing we’re about to have wards, then. It doesn’t solve our

issue with protecting Poromiel, not until we can build extensions like
Navarre, but at least everyone here will be safe.

About twenty feet in, the canyon opens into a circular chamber that
could easily fit all ten of our dragons, and my eyes are immediately drawn
upward, to where a series of runes lead to the sky. “How have I never seen
this while flying overhead?”

“Very old, very complicated masking runes.”
The riders in front of us part, and the wardstone comes into view.
My lips part, because… wow.
The shimmering black pillar rises to over twice the height of Xaden and

would take all nine of us holding our arms outstretched to surround it.
Etched in the very center, at least six feet across, is a series of circles, each
fitting within the next and boasting a rune carved in along its path. It’s
almost the same pattern as on the pages of Warrick’s journal.

I move toward it, soaking in every detail. “Is it onyx?” I ask Xaden. It’s
massive. Too heavy for even a dragon to carry. They had to have carved it
in this very chamber.



“We can’t say for certain, but my father thought it was polished iron,” he
answers.

Iron rain. My heart jolts. This is really it. We’re about to have wards.
“Let’s get this done.” Ulices’s voice booms through the chamber,

echoing off the high stone walls.
“And what are we doing, exactly, to raise the wards?” Bodhi asks, taking

my other side as everyone forms a half circle around the stone.
“One second.” I pull Warrick’s journal from the protective leather pouch

inside my flight jacket and flip to the translated parchment I left at the
passage before glancing up at the stone to compare the drawings. The
symbol Warrick drew isn’t identical, but it has the runes in the same
positions, so that’s a good sign. “Here we go. ‘And we gathered the six
most powerful riders in residence,’” I read from the parchment, “‘and the
blood of the six and the one combined and set the stone ablaze in an iron
rain.’” I glance around the line. “Six”—I point to the stone—“and the one.”

“You want us to bleed on the wardstone?” Felix asks, his silver brows
rising.

“I’m just telling you how Warrick and the First Six did it.” I hold the
journal up. “Unless there’s someone here more capable of translating Old
Lucerish?”

No one speaks.
“Right.” I dip my chin and study the rest of the translation.
“By our best calculations,” Brennan says, rubbing his hands together to

keep warm, “the six most powerful riders currently in Aretia are Xaden,
Felix, Suri, Bodhi, Violet, and me.”

“Looks like there’s something to be said for family lines,” Suri notes.
“According to Warrick, the First Six bled their life—” I start.
Every head swivels my direction.
“I don’t think it means to death,” I quickly clarify. “Clearly the six lived

on after they constructed Basgiath’s wards.” There’s a definite sigh of relief
around me. “With any luck, it’ll be a quick cut across the palm, place our
hands on the wardstone, and we should have wards.”

“In an iron rain,” Bodhi says slowly.



Suri draws a knife from her side. “Let’s get this done.”
The six of us move to the wardstone, and I tuck the journal into my

flight jacket.
“Anywhere?” Bodhi asks, lowering his own knife to just above his palm.
“The journal didn’t specify.” Brennan draws his dagger over his palm,

then presses his hand to the wardstone, and we all follow.
Hope swells in my chest, rising with my pulse, and I hiss through my

teeth at the bite of pain as I slice. Blood wells, and I push my cut palm
against the stone in line with the others. It’s colder than I expect, warmth
quickly leaching from my hand as blood drips down the shimmering black
surface.

The stone feels frozen. Lifeless. But not for long.
I glance down the line to be sure everyone has their palms flat against

the stone and see six narrow streams of blood snaking their way down the
iron.

“Is it working?” Bodhi asks, bleeding a couple of feet away.
My mouth opens, but I quickly shut it.
No one answers.
Come on, I beg the stone, like I can will the damn thing to life.
There’s no hum, no sense of power—nothing but cold, black stone. It’s

nothing like the awareness that comes from being close to the wards at the
outposts or even holding the alloy-hilted dagger in my hand.

There’s… nothing.
My stomach falls first, then my heart, and finally my shoulders as my

head droops.
“I’m done.” Suri pulls her hand off the stone. “The rest of you can sit

here and bleed all night, but this clearly isn’t working.”
No, no, no.
Felix, Brennan, and Bodhi drop their hands.
Failure clogs my throat, leaving a bitter taste in my mouth. I did

everything right. I researched, and read, and stole a primary source. I
translated and double-checked. This is supposed to be the solution. It’s



everything I’ve been working on for months, the key to keeping everyone
safe.

Did we bleed the wrong six riders? Is there an element of magic I
missed? Something more to the blood? What did I miss?

“Violence,” Xaden says quietly.
Slowly, I turn my head to look up at him, expecting disappointment or

censure but finding none in his eyes. But there’s no pity, either.
“I failed,” I whisper, my hand falling away.
He watches me for a heartbeat, then two before dropping his own.

“You’ll try again.”
It isn’t an order, though, just a fact.
“Violet, I can—” Brennan starts, reaching for my hand.
I shake my head, then stare down at the blood welling in the cup of my

palm.
If he mends a cut this fresh, I doubt it will leave a scar. I won’t even

have that to show for the last three months.
The sound of tearing fills the space, and Xaden tightly wraps a cut piece

of his uniform around my palm to stanch the bleeding. “Thank you.”
“You’ll try again,” he repeats, wrapping another strip of fabric around

his own hand.
I nod, and he turns to talk to Kylynn, keeping his voice low.
“Now can we please discuss how we plan to actually acquire that

luminary?” Suri’s tone rises with annoyance.
I stare up at the blood-marked stone, searching for answers it won’t give

me.
“It’s a lost magic,” Bodhi says softly, appearing at my side. He rubs his

thumb over his newly mended, scarless palm. “Maybe there’s a reason this
stone never worked. It might be broken.”

I nod again, incapable of speech. Bodhi. Xaden. Mira. Rhi. Brennan.
Ridoc. Sawyer. Imogen… The list of people I’ve failed goes on and on.
We’re only here because I made my friends steal the journal in the first
place, and then… nothing? Anger sparks in my chest, and power rushes in,
heating my skin.



I don’t fail. I’ve never failed anything in my life. Well, that first RSC
land navigation, but that doesn’t count. That was everyone. This is me.

“Offer the viscount twice the number of weapons he asked for,” Ulices
says, his voice fading with his footsteps.

“I’ll send a missive tomorrow,” Brennan promises as the others walk out
of the chamber.

We have no wards. No weapons. Almost no experienced riders. All
because I acted recklessly.

Power builds, vibrating my fingertips.
Felix moves to my side, his somber gaze studying me before he holds

out his hand.
I blink, glancing at his palm, then up to his face.
“Your hand.” He lifts his brow.
I hold my uninjured one out, and instead of touching me, he tilts his

head and watches the slight trembling of my fingers.
“I suppose we’d better start tomorrow.” He sighs. “Skip the run. We’ll

be training your signet.” His bootsteps echo in the chamber, and I turn,
watching him walk out, my gaze catching on the tight lines of Xaden’s
mouth as Kylynn lectures him with quiet words, the mage lights reflecting
on the steel of her battle-ax strapped to her back.

Xaden was right. War requires weapons.
“Take me to Tecarus,” I demand.
His gaze flies to mine and his jaw flexes. “I would rather die.”
“We all will if you don’t.”
“Not going to happen. Subject closed.” He folds his arms across his

chest and goes back to his discussion with Kylynn.
Fuck this.
I walk straight past him, taking the path out of the chamber. There’s no

way I’m going to leave my friends defenseless when I’m the reason they
got dragged into this.

“Violet!” Brennan shouts, running to catch up with me.
“Go away,” I snap at my brother.
“With that look on your face? I don’t think so.”



“What look?” I shoot a glare in his direction, even though I know this
isn’t his fault.

“The same one you had at eight years old, when you stared Mom down
over a plate of squash for twelve straight hours.”

“I’m sorry?” Rocks crunch underfoot as we make our way down the
path to Riorson House.

“Twelve. Hours.” He nods. “Dad said to let you go to bed, that you
weren’t going to eat them, and Mom said you weren’t going to sleep until
you did.”

“What’s your point?”
“When I got up the next morning, Mom and Dad were both asleep at the

table, and you were snacking on bread and cheese. I know that face, Violet.
When you dig in about something, you’re more tenacious than all of us put
together, so no, I won’t be going away.”

“Fine.” I shrug. “You can be the tagalong sibling for once.” Within
minutes, we’re in through the guarded back door of Riorson House, walking
through the network of hallways to the main corridor. “Tairn.”

“Oh, this should be fun,” Andarna answers.
I feel Tairn’s sigh long before I hear it.
“You know it’s the only way.” Another turn later, we walk into the

overwhelming noise of the great hall. Long trestle tables line the space, and
my gaze skips over each one, bypassing the one where my squad sits and
locking onto the table of new riders who arrived today.

“I will consider it,” Tairn begrudgingly agrees.
“Thank you.” I move through the sea of black with Brennan on my

heels, locking eyes with Mira as I approach where she sits at the end of her
table with her friends.

“Violet?” Her gaze narrows on my bandaged hand before she sets her
pewter mug down.

“I need your help.”

OceanofPDF.com



His first true action of rebellion was to seek allies, the first of which was
Viscount Tecarus of the Poromish province of Krovla.

—THE TYRRISH REBELLION, A FORBIDDEN HISTORY

BY COLONEL FELIX GERAULT



CHAPTER FORTY

X aden vetoed my second pitch to head to Cordyn like an overprotective
asshole, and then I happily took him to bed, content with my own

plans. He was gone again to look for more Navarrian deserters before I
woke up this morning.

If I didn’t feel him in my swollen lips and every sore muscle in my body,
I’d almost think I dreamed him coming back yesterday.

Guess this is our new normal.
“Well?” Felix folds his arms over his barrel chest and lifts a silver brow

at me.
Crisp, snow-scented wind whips at my cheeks as we stand between our

dragons, a thousand feet over the tree line on a bowl-shaped mountainside
about a ten-minute flight from the valley above Aretia.

“Those boulders?” I point across the ridge to a stack of three boulders as
Tairn shifts his weight, the snow crunching under his claws.

“Would it help if I painted them?”
I refrain from rolling my eyes. “No, it’s just that Carr never cared where

I struck, as long as I increased the number of strikes in an hour.” I roll my
shoulders and open the gates on Tairn’s power, feeling it rush through my
veins and heat my skin.

Felix looks at me like I’ve grown another head. “Well, I guess we’ll see
what that technique has gotten us.”



“I can wield twenty-six an hour on a good day, and I’ve been pushed
over forty, but that last strike broke that mountain and… ” The memory
steals my words.

“And you were nearly burned alive?” he asks. “Why in Malek’s name
would you ever push yourself to that limit?”

“It was a punishment.” I lift my arms as power rises to a sizzling hum.
“For what?” He watches me with an expression I’m too jaded to call

compassion.
“I ignored a direct order so I could protect my dragon.” The sizzle heats

to a burn, and I flex my hands, letting the strike rip free.
The cloudy sky cracks open and lightning strikes on the opposite side of

the bowl, hitting far above the tree line, easily a quarter mile from the
boulders.

Felix blinks. “Try again.”
Reaching for Tairn’s power, I repeat the process, letting it fill me, then

overflow and erupt, wielding another strike that lands halfway between the
first and the stack of boulders. Pride makes my lips curve. Not bad timing.
That was a pretty quick strike after the first.

But when I look at Felix, he isn’t smiling. He slowly brings his stunned
gaze to mine. “What was that shit?”

“I did that in less than a minute after the first strike!” I counter.
“And if those boulders were dark wielders, you and I would be dead by

now.” Two lines knit between his eyebrows. “Try again. And this time, let’s
try the revolutionary tactic of aiming, shall we?”

His sarcasm fuels my frustration, and another strike rips free, hitting
between us and the boulders.

“It’s a wonder you haven’t hit yourself,” he mutters, rubbing the bridge
of his nose.

“I can’t aim, all right?” I snap at him, reevaluating my previous thoughts
that he and Trissa—the petite, quiet one—were the nice members of the
Assembly.

“According to the reports filed about Resson, you can,” he retorts, his
deep voice rising with that last word. “You can aim well enough to hit a



dark wielder atop a flying wyvern.”
“That’s because Andarna stopped time, but she can’t do that anymore, so

I’m left with what got us through the other portion of the battle—the good
old strike-and-pray method.”

“And I have no doubt that in a field of that many wyvern, you did some
damage with sheer luck.” He sighs. “Explain how you hit that last strike in
Resson.”

“I… It’s hard to explain.”
“Try.”
“I pulled it. I guess.” I wrap my arms around my waist to ward off the

worst of the chill. Usually, I’d be warming up right about now, not feeling
my toes start to lose feeling. “I released the strike, but I wrestled it into
place while Andarna held time.”

“What about smaller strikes?” He turns fully to face me, his boots
crunching the rock beneath us. “Like those that flow from your hands?”

What the fuck? My face must read the same because his eyes flare.
“Are you telling me that you’ve only wielded full strikes”—he points

upward—“from the sky? That you just started throwing around bolts and
never refined the skill?”

“I brought down a cliff on a classmate—that didn’t kill him—and from
then Carr’s concern was how big and how often.” I lift my hands between
us. “And lightning comes from the sky, not my hands.”

“Wonderful.” He laughs, the sound deep and… infuriating. “You just
might wield the most devastating signet on the Continent, but you know
nothing about it. Nothing about the energy fields that draw it. Instead of
shooting your power like an arrow—precise and measured—you’re just
heaving it around like boiling oil, hoping you hit something. And lightning
comes from the sky or the ground depending on the storm, so why not your
hands?”

Anger reddens my skin, raises my temperature, prickles my fingers, and
pushes the power within me to a roar.

“You are slated to be the most powerful rider of your year—perhaps
your entire generation—and yet you are just a glorified light show—”



Power erupts, and lightning flashes close enough that I feel the heat.
Felix glances to the right, where a scorch mark still smokes about twenty

feet away.
Fuck. Shame races in to overpower the last vestiges of anger.
“And not only can you not aim, but you have no control,” he says

without skipping a beat, like I didn’t almost torch us both.
“I can cont—”
“No.” He drops down to the pack at his feet and begins sorting through

it.
“That wasn’t a question, Sorrengail. That was a fact. How often does

that happen?”
Whenever I’m angry. Or in Xaden’s arms. “Too often.”
“At least we found something to agree on.” He stands and holds

something out to me. “Take it.”
“What is it?” I glance at the offering, then pluck it gingerly from his

outstretched hand. The glass orb fits comfortably in my palm, and the
decoratively carved silvery metal strips that quarter it meet at what appear
to be the top and the bottom, where a silver medallion of alloy the size of
my thumb rests upright inside the glass.

“It’s a conduit,” Felix explains. “Lightning may appear from various
sources, but Tairn channels his power through you. You are the vessel. You
are the pathway. You are the cloud, for lack of a better term. How else do
you think you can wield from a blue sky? Did you never realize it’s easier
for you to wield during a storm, but you’re capable of both?”

“I never thought about it.” My fingers tingle where they meet the metal
striping.

“No, you were never taught it.” He gestures around the mountainside.
“Your lack of aim, of control, is not your fault. It’s Carr’s.”

“Xaden only moves shadows that are already there,” I argue, fighting
down the rising emotions I’m worried will lead to another embarrassing
strike.

“Xaden can control and increase what already exists. It’s why he’s more
powerful at night. No two signets are alike, and you create something that



was not there before. You wield pure power that takes the form of lightning
because that’s what you’re most comfortable shaping it as. Apparently Carr
never taught you that, either.”

“Why wouldn’t he?” I look from the orb up to Felix as the first flakes of
snow flutter down. “If I was the best weapon?”

A corner of his mouth lifts into a wry smile. “Knowing Carr, I’d say he’s
scared shitless of you. After all, you just took half of their cadets without
even a plan. You brought down Basgiath on a fucking whim, no less.” His
laugh is more incredulous than mocking this time, but it still rubs me the
wrong way.

“I didn’t do that.” My fingers curl around the orb. “Xaden did.”
“He hunted riderless wyvern, deposited them on Melgren’s front door,

and exposed Navarre’s greatest secret to the border outposts before noon,”
Felix agrees. “But you were the one who demanded he give the cadets a
choice. In that moment, you wielded him, our unyielding, uncompromising,
headstrong heir apparent.”

“I did no such thing.” Energy buzzes, and I roll my shoulders as it
vibrates through my limbs, building to a breaking point. “I presented a
humane option, and he took it. He did it for the sake of the other cadets.”

“He did it for you,” Felix says softly. “The wyvern, the exposure,
breaching Basgiath, stealing half its riders. All for you. Why do you think
the Assembly wanted to lock you away in July? They saw what you were.
In that way, I suppose you’re just as much a danger to Aretia as you are to
Basgiath, aren’t you? Power isn’t only found in our signets.”

“I’m not powerful just because he loves me.” The bitter taste of fear fills
my mouth a heartbeat before power breaks free, cracking through me like a
whip, but lightning doesn’t flash. At least not in the sky.

I blink at the glowing orb, then marvel at the string of lightning that runs
from where my forefinger rests against the metal strip to the alloy pendant
inside. The bolt vanishes a breath later.

“No. You’re powerful and he loves you, which is even worse. Your
power is too closely tied to your emotions,” Felix notes. “This will help. It’s



not a permanent solution, but it will keep everyone in Aretia safe from your
temper for now.”

“I don’t understand.” And I can’t stop staring at the orb, like the tiny
lightning bolt will reappear at any second.

“The runes etched into the conduit are woven to draw specific power. I
wove these specifically for you the last time you were here, but you were
forced to leave before I could teach you how to use it. I’d hoped you
wouldn’t need it, honestly, but it seems Carr hasn’t changed much in the six
years I’ve been gone.”

“Runes?” I repeat like a bird, staring at the etched shapes.
“Yes. Runes. Wielded power woven for set purposes.” He exhales

slowly. “Which you know nothing about because Basgiath doesn’t teach
Tyrrish runes, even if the college was fucking built on them. Guess we’ll
ask Trissa to teach that class. She has the most patience out of the
Assembly.”

I yank my gaze from the orb to Felix. “This… siphons my power?”
“Somewhat. I made it as a simpler way to imbue power into alloy. It will

draw it from you when it threatens to overpower you or when you choose to
direct it. Hopefully”—he lifts his brows—“in small, controlled amounts.
Practice this week. You have to learn control, Sorrengail, or you’ll continue
to be a threat to everyone around you. God forbid you’re flying in the
clouds with your squad the next time you lose your temper.”

“I’m not a threat.”
“What you want to be doesn’t change what you are without work.” He

picks up his pack and slings it over his shoulders. “You never learned how
to start small, like the rest of your squad, and then move to the bigger,
harder strikes. You have to master the basics you were never taught. Small,
precise strikes. Small strands of your power instead of”—he gestures to the
sky—“whatever in Dunne’s name that was.”

“I don’t have time to master small, precise strikes. I need help today,” I
argue. “We need Tecarus to give us a luminary or—” I cut myself off.

“Or you and Xaden fucked the entire movement on that whim I
mentioned earlier?” He lifts both brows at me.



“Something like that. It was a lot easier last year when all I had to worry
about was keeping myself alive, and not the entire Continent.” And I failed.

“Well, they do say second year makes or breaks you.” He delivers the
joke with a straight face, but there’s a definite light in his eyes. “As for
Tecarus, he wants to see you wield, not necessarily see you wield well. Your
biggest obstacle there is convincing Xaden to fly with you, since I hazard to
guess he’s not budging on the topic of you going. He already shut down the
possibility in July.” He shrugs. “But we’re done for today. We’ll meet again
in a week, and I’ll be able to tell by the amount of power stored in that alloy
whether or not you’ve been practicing. Store enough, and I’ll continue to
teach you.”

“And if I don’t?” My fingers curl around the orb.
“I won’t,” he answers simply over his shoulder as he walks toward his

Red Swordtail. “I’m not interested in wasting my time on cadets who don’t
want to be taught when there are over a hundred who do.”

The scorch mark behind him. The untouched boulders. The blast sites
across the ridge. They all capture my attention. He’s right. I’m a light show
with deadly consequences, and the amount of times I’ve unleashed while
close to my friends, close to Xaden… My throat tightens. I’m the menace
everyone thinks Xaden is.

He might be a weapon, but I’m a natural disaster.
And I’m done letting everyone around me suffer because I can’t get my

shit together.
“I want to learn,” I call after him. As soon as I get back.
“Good. Show me.”

 
 
 

“A re you sure about this?” Mira asks as we enter the valley under the
brightest moon this month. Every blade of grass is coated with

predawn frost, reflecting back at us like glittering gems.
“‘Sure’ is a relative term.”



“How relative?” She lifts her brows at me. “Because what we’re about
to do could have some pretty major consequences.”

“I’m sure this is the only way we’ll be able to make the weapons we
need.” I fasten the top button of my flight jacket to ward off the late-
October chill. “And sure that if we stay on task, we can be back in two days
max. I’m definitely sure that this will stop the gryphon attacks on Navarrian
outposts. But am I sure that we won’t fail or end up permanent guests of
Viscount Tecarus? No.”

“Well, I’m sure Xaden is going to lose his shit when he finds out you
went behind his back,” Mira lectures as we make our way to our dragons.

“Yeah, well, Xaden will forgive me as soon as he realizes we’re back in
the venin-slaying business. I’m only doing it this way because he refuses to
do what needs to be done in the name of protecting me.”

“Just so you know, I’m only doing this because doing everything you
ever ask for the rest of our lives still wouldn’t make up for me not believing
you. I happen to like protective Xaden. Makes me worry about you less.”

I kind of miss when he wanted to kill me. At least then he didn’t insist
on hovering.

“And I’m only doing this to make sure neither of you die,” Brennan
chimes in from the right.

“Please.” Mira scoffs. “You’re only here because of the rank on your
uniform.”

“Neither of you can negotiate an arms deal on behalf of the Assembly.
You both know this could go very badly, right?” He shoves his hands in the
pockets of his flight leathers.

“Is there a risk?” I nod and ignore the jump in my heart rate. “Yes. But
he wants to see me wield for a luminary. Even Xaden said the biggest threat
is him keeping me, not killing me.” And if I have to stay in Poromiel so my
friends and family can be safe, then fine. As long as Brennan and Mira get
to leave with the luminary, it’s a fair trade.

“Feel free to stay in the place you’ve called home for six years,” Mira
challenges Brennan, then shrugs a shoulder. “I’ve always been better than
you with a sword, anyway. I’ll bring Violet home without a scratch.”



“No.” I glance between them. Have they always bickered like this?
“We’re not fighting the entire way there, and we sure as hell can’t fight
once we get there. This is dangerous enough as it is. Pull yourselves
together and quit squabbling.”

“Yes, Mom,” Mira mocks.
Mom. What would she think of the three of us working together?
We all fall silent, the quiet only broken by the frost crackling beneath

our boots.
“Too soon?” Mira asks.
“I’d say so,” I answer, tightening the straps on my pack.
“Definitely,” Brennan adds.
All three of us are faintly smiling when we reach the dragons.
“You sure you can find the way?” I ask Tairn after I secure my pack

behind my saddle.
“I’m going to pretend you didn’t ask that.”
“And Sgaeyl?” I shift forward and buckle into the saddle, flinching as

the cold seeps through my leathers.
“She’s out of range, but her emotions are calm.”
“And you promise not to tell her until we’re back?” I clutch the pommel

and glance around the valley, looking for any sign of Andarna, but she’s
nowhere to be seen.

“She’s already gone, and the Hungry One has been seething since this
afternoon when she found out she wasn’t coming.” Tairn crouches low, then
springs into the sky. The ground falls away with every powerful beat of his
wings, and I foolishly hold my breath as we pass over a sleeping Aretia, as
if the sound of my inhale might wake my friends.

Rhiannon is the only one who knows we’re going, and she’ll cover for
us as much as possible. But even though I might be dispensable for a day, I
have no doubt someone will notice Brennan is missing.

My cheeks are numb before we make it past Aretia, and my legs lose
feeling by the time we reach the Cliffs of Dralor a couple of hours later.
Flying for any amount of time this late in fall isn’t for the faint of heart.



Tairn flies through the morning, holding back his speed for Teine and
Marbh as we glimpse Krovla’s second most populous city, Draithus, to the
south and continue into the darkness ahead. The feeling seeps back into my
limbs the lower in elevation that we fly and the higher the sun climbs.

“Sleep, Silver One. It’s not me Tecarus wants to see perform like some
kind of pet.”

I take his advice and get as much rest as possible, but my jittery nerves
have me shifting in my seat as we fly over land I’ve only seen in paintings.
Amber fields ready for harvest give way to pale beaches and blue-green sea
as the day passes into afternoon.

The closer we fly, the tighter the anxiety in my chest coils. This is either
the best idea I’ve ever had… or the worst. By the time a drift of three
gryphons appears, flying directly toward us in a standard V attack
formation, I decide that we’re definitely leaning into worst idea territory.

Just because they’re smaller doesn’t mean they can’t deal Tairn some
real damage with those talons.

“It’s all right. They’re escorting us into Cordyn,” Tairn tells me, but
there’s a shift in his tone that tells me he’s not happy about the entourage or
the speed he has to slow to in order to accommodate them. They spread out,
flying in a formation that surrounds the six of us. “See that sorry excuse for
a fortress on the eastern side of the farthest peak?” he asks as we follow
the line of the beach. I’ve never seen water that color, like it can’t quite
decide if it’s turquoise or aqua.

“You mean the palace that looks like it’s glowing?” The structure is a
sprawling, glistening combination of white pillars and blue pools that
cascade in five distinct terraces down the gentle slope of the hills above the
beach.

“It’s just the sun reflecting off the white marble,” he grumbles. “The
entire thing is ridiculous and indefensible.”

How… beautiful. What a luxury to build a place like this, designed
purely for aesthetics. No high walls or portcullises. Tairn’s right. It’s utterly
indefensible, and it will fall should venin choose to take it, but my heart
clenches at the thought that I’ll never experience peace long enough to live



somewhere like it. I can even make out a vast, colorful garden as we
approach over the riverside city beneath.

The gryphon ahead of us dips into a sharp descent and Tairn follows
suit, tucking his wings and getting just close enough to the gryphon to let
him know he’s no match.

“Stop intimidating them.” The last thing we need is an incident before
we can even ask Tecarus for the luminary.

“I can’t help their inferiority.” There’s a definite smile in his tone, but
his mood shifts as we level out near a manicured lawn in front of the third
terrace of the palace. “You will not be happy with the welcome we’re about
to receive.” He lands behind the gryphon and his flier, who hops down to
face us.

“I’m sure we’ll be fine. You worry too much.”
“We’ll see about that.”
I make quick work of removing my pack, but damn do my stiff joints

ache as I slide down Tairn’s foreleg to land in the soft, green grass.
“Are you all right?” Mira asks, already waiting for me because she’s that

much quicker.
“Just sore from sitting in one position for so long.” Gods, it’s hot down

here.
“Maybe we should have sent word ahead. They look like they’d rather

fight than negotiate.” She turns her attention forward, to the line of three
gryphons and their fliers, who all face down our dragons despite being
drastically overpowered, forming a wall of feather and talons that blocks us
from proceeding to the palace.

“They’re certainly brave, I’ll give them that,” I mutter as Brennan
reaches our sides, putting me between him and Mira. Some things never
change.

“They’re also expecting us,” Brennan notes quietly as we start forward.
“You think?” Mira asks, her gaze scanning our surroundings.
I keep my focus on the fliers and their hands.
“There are at least three dozen people watching from the balconies

above, and there’s another group behind the gryphons,” Brennan states.



“They were waiting.”
“Plus, no one’s screaming at the sight of our dragons,” I add quietly.
Mira grins. “True.”
“Be careful what you say in here. Tecarus will hold us to whatever deal

we make. He doesn’t take kindly to broken words. And keep your shields
up, though I’m not sure they’ll do much good,” Brennan orders when we’re
less than a dozen feet from the fliers. “Fliers might not wield signets, but
most of their lesser-magic gifts involve mindwork, and it’s the one area
where they have the upper hand on us.”

“Noted.” I don’t even need to check my shields. They’ve been locked
into place since we left Aretia.

The gryphons stare down at us with dark, beady eyes as we approach
and click their razor-sharp beaks in a rhythm that reminds me of speech.
The aggressive snaps of the one on the right make me glad I can’t
understand what they’re saying.

Two of the fliers wear the same brown leathers I’ve seen before on
Syrena, but the guy on the left with the patchy beard has a lighter-colored
one and different symbols embroidered on his collar.

“Cadet?” I ask Tairn.
“Yes.” He pauses. “According to the feathered ones, a third of their

ranks took shelter here. Cliffsbane Flight Academy was in Zolya.”
Brennan says something in Krovlish, his tone changing into the curt one

he uses when his rank is more important than his name.
“We know who you are,” the tall flier in the center interrupts in the

common tongue, studying the three of us as if assessing which is the biggest
threat. His attention lands on my wind-ravaged coronet braid and his
posture changes slightly, taking on the most casual of battle stances.

Guess I win.
Mira moves closer to my side and stares him down, her hand resting just

above the hilt of her sword.
“And you speak Navarrian,” Brennan notes.
“Of course. Not every kingdom thinks theirs is the only language that

should be spoken,” the flier on the left says, her fingers drumming along her



sword.
Solid point.
“Give us one truth, and we’ll allow you to meet with the viscount,” the

central flier says, his reddish brows knitting.
“You’re a truth-sayer.” Like Nora. It’s a guess, but I know I’m right

when his pale eyes flare. So, some of our powers are the same. Interesting.
“Unlike riders, we do not label ourselves by our abilities, but yes, I have

the gift of telling when someone is lying,” he corrects me.
“Noted,” I say for the second time in the last five minutes. I fucking hate

being disadvantaged by ignorance, but it’s not like the Archives were
stacked with tomes on fliers or what they’ve gone through for the last six
hundred years.

“Seeing as you’ve arrived without invitation, we require you have
honest intentions before traveling farther.” His hands flex near his daggers,
and Mira palms the hilt of her sword.

We’re one misstep away from drawing weapons, and we all know it.
“I’m here to wield lightning in return for asking your viscount for help.”

May as well start us out.
He cocks his head to the side, then nods, glancing toward Brennan.
“I’m here to broker a deal for your luminary in return for weaponry,”

Brennan declares.
The flier nods and looks at Mira.
“Fine.” She sighs. “Make one wrong move toward my sister, and I’ll gut

you like a fish. That goes for everyone in this city. How is that for honest?”
My mouth opens slightly as I glance sideways at my sister.
“Damn it, Mira,” Brennan growls.
The flier’s mouth curves into a toothy smile. “I can respect that.” He

glances up at the gryphon above him, and the trio parts, revealing the figure
waiting directly behind them.

A figure dressed entirely in black.
His jaw flexes, his hands curl at his sides, and his beautiful face… Well,

he hasn’t looked at me with that much anger since discovering my last



name at Parapet, back when he wanted to kill me. Guess I should be careful
what I ask for, because I’m so fucked.

“You aren’t where I left you, Violence.”

OceanofPDF.com



Having refused every proposal from the isle kingdoms, Queen Maraya
has named her distant cousin, Viscount Tecarus of Cordyn, as her heir.
As the viscount is living in his fifth decade and has no direct heirs of his

own, the decision has not been a popular one.

—ON THE ARISTOCRACY OF POROMIEL

BY PEARSON KITO



CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

“Where you left me?” I whisper under my breath at Xaden as we walk
across the guarded lawn, passing by a half dozen more fliers on

our way to a row of open doors made entirely of glass. How utterly
impractical and sublimely gorgeous. “Like I’m some kind of pet who
should stay curled up on your bed because you said so?”

Fuck him.
“The thought isn’t entirely unpleasant,” he fires back.
I breathe in through my nose and out through my mouth to keep my

power from rising, refusing to unpack the conduit from my bag.
“Save it for behind closed doors, lovebirds,” Brennan orders from

directly behind us. “We need a united front.”
“I can’t believe you brought her here,” Xaden retorts, shooting an icy

glare at Brennan.
“I can’t believe you think you outrank me,” Brennan says, his tone

sharpening.
“I do in every way but one.” Xaden looks forward, anger radiating from

every line of his body.
“The one is all that matters,” Brennan counters.
“They really grow grass ornamentally?” Mira changes the subject as we

approach two guards in crimson uniforms near the door.



“You should see the butterfly garden,” Xaden says, nodding to the guard
on the right as we pass through the open doorway.

Wait. Why aren’t we being escorted by fliers? And how the hell does
Xaden know this place has a butterfly garden?

“How long have you been here?” I ask, entering the palace.
And holy shit, what a palace.
Every surface seems to shimmer, the white marble interior reflecting not

only natural light but a soft glow of white mage lights far overhead and
deep into the structure, where I can make out several seating groups of low-
backed furniture. The ceilings are the height of Sgaeyl, the space divided by
not only columns thick as Tairn’s legs, with murals intricately carved into
each circular block, but a wide staircase that must lead to the next story.

Pretty sure if I were to call out my name loudly enough, it would echo
back in here, if not for the crowd of people in many different forms of attire
milling about near a set of graduated pillars in various shades of black.
Brown is definitely the dominant clothing color, and we are definitely the
topic of conversation as we pass by.

“We landed a few hours ago,” Xaden answers. “We changed direction as
soon as Sgaeyl felt Tairn on the move.”

You will not be happy with the welcome we’re about to receive. That’s
what Tairn said when we landed.

“You and I are going to have a discussion,” I send his direction. “You
promised.”

“I promised not to tell, not that she couldn’t sense me.”
Fucking dragon semantics.
“Is that…a pool?” Mira stares at the winding turquoise path that curves

around the staircase and disappears out onto the terrace.
“You get used to them,” Xaden remarks, leading us over a flat, marble

bridge wide enough for two people. “Just be careful if you’ve been
drinking. No railings.”

“We won’t be here long enough to drink.” Brennan’s words slow with
our steps as a group of a dozen people descends the staircase in front of us.



But Xaden’s been here often enough to drink? To have fallen into this
pool?

“Here we go.” Xaden’s voice lowers. “Try not to set the place on fire.”
Two crimson-uniformed guards station themselves at opposite ends of

the curling bannister, and a tall, dark-haired man in a deep blue tunic with
gold brocade walks forward, looking over us with rapt fascination. His
uniform is tight about the waist, his flushed cheeks soft and round.

“Viscount,” Xaden addresses him. “This is Cadet Violet Sorrengail and
her sister, Lieutenant Mira Sorrengail. I believe you and Lieutenant Colonel
Aisereigh are already acquainted.”

“We are.” He flashes impossibly white teeth as he smiles at me, etching
deep lines into his forehead and at the edges of his eyes. “But it’s you I am
most curious about, Violet.” The unnerving amount of glee in his gaze
makes it nearly impossible to stand still as he studies me, drawing out his
words until he finishes his perusal. “Is it true that you call lightning from
the sky?”

“I do.” I keep my focus on the viscount, but I feel the weight of his
entourage staring behind him.

“How wonderful!” He clasps his hands in front of his chest, his rings
twinkling with heavy gemstones.

“Shall we—” Brennan starts.
“It’s poor etiquette to discuss business until dinner. You know the rules,

Riorson,” Tecarus says, glancing Xaden’s way. “They certainly can’t attend
as they are. They’ll need to be dressed suitably, as will you.”

Xaden nods once.
“You know the rules?” I ask Xaden. “Exactly how many times have you

been here?” And what part of our uniforms isn’t suitable for dinner?
“I don’t exactly keep count.”
“Don’t worry if you haven’t brought anything fit for the occasion,”

Tecarus says to me. “I took the liberty of having a selection of clothing
pulled from my best collection once Riorson told me you were inbound. My
niece will see you properly attired, won’t you, Cat?” he calls back over his
shoulder.



My stomach hits the sparkly marble floor.
You have to be fucking kidding me.
“Of course, Uncle.” Catriona steps down from the front row of the

entourage, dressed in a purple, long-sleeved gown that shows her elegant
figure to its best advantage. I’d thought she was beautiful from a distance,
but up close, her features are truly so flawless that she’s completely,
utterly…devastating.

Suddenly, I understand exactly why Xaden’s been here too many times
to keep count.
 
 
 

“Ididn’t expect you to be here,” Xaden says to Cat in that clipped, cold
tone he uses when annoyed as they lead us down another hallway two

stories above where we entered.
“Where did you think I’d be after dark wielders destroyed Zolya and

took up residence at Cliffsbane?” Cat questions, pausing in front of one of
the dozen doors in this wing.

Mira shoots me a look, lifting her eyebrows as we stop in the middle of
the hallway, Brennan only a few feet behind.

Later, I mouth at her.
Cat reaches for the golden handle. “Why don’t you take Aisereigh to

dress for dinner while these two wash up?” She gives Xaden a longing look,
and my eyebrows rise. Is she seriously eyeing him up in front of me? “We
kept your room exactly how you left it, of course.” She opens the door,
revealing a sizable bedchamber with two large beds and a matching gold
brocade sofa between them, then walks inside, leaving Mira and me to
follow.

Wait. He has a room here?
What else has he not told me? Or what haven’t I asked might be the

better question.



“Why don’t you come get dressed in my room?” Xaden asks, and it
doesn’t sound like a suggestion.

“Your room? I think I’d like a little space.” Heat simmers beneath my
skin, and I breathe deeply to keep the power caged. Now is not the time to
lose control, not that I have it to begin with.

“Violet.”
I turn in the doorway to face Xaden and grasp the door handle, lifting

my brows at him as Mira edges around me into the chamber.
“I’m the next door down,” he assures me, then glances over my

shoulder. “Close enough to hear you scream.”
“Good to know.” I force a smile and his eyes narrow.
“Surely you can’t be worried that she’s in any danger from me?”
I roll my eyes at the incredulity in Cat’s tone.
“Violet can—” Xaden starts.
“Violet can handle herself,” I interrupt, startling Xaden.
“I never wanted you to have to. Not here.” He lowers his head and his

voice, narrowing the conversation to the two of us, anger and all. “Tecarus
might want to keep you, but every other flier in this palace will happily slit
your throat—and Mira’s—in the name of revenge against your mother.
Brennan’s anonymity is all that saves him here. You have no idea how much
danger you’re in, the lengths I’ve gone to in order to keep you safe—”

“Stop keeping me safe!” I immediately regret raising my voice with Cat
in the room and try to steady my ire with a deep breath. “You never would
have pulled this bullshit last year. You never held me back, never caged me
in the name of protecting me. You were the one telling me to find another
way on the Gauntlet, watching me fight off other cadets at Threshing—”

“I wasn’t in love with you then.” His hand grasps the nape of my neck,
and his thumb skates over the pulse in my throat. “During Gauntlet,
Threshing…I had no idea what you would become to me.” And he couldn’t
kill me thanks to the deal he made with Mom—the deal he still hasn’t
trusted me with. “I sure as hell hadn’t sat by your bedside for three days,
knowing my life—if it even existed beyond yours—would mean nothing



without you in it.” The gold flecks in his eyes catch the light, and I can’t
help but blink at what I see there.

“You’re…scared, aren’t you?” I grasp the door’s edge to keep from
reaching for him.

“Of losing you? More like terrified. And when Sgaeyl told me Tairn was
headed this direction I nearly lost my fucking mind.”

Shit. What do I say to that? “My plan to raise the wards failed, and you
need the luminary. I’m not going to sit tucked away in Aretia just because
you’re worried something will happen to me. If I did, I wouldn’t be the
woman you fell in love with.”

“Your first attempt at translation fails, so you sneak off with your
siblings into enemy territory?” His anger is palpable, matching mine as he
lifts his head. “Make no mistake—this is enemy territory.”

“We both know we need the luminary, and I wouldn’t have had to sneak
if you’d been remotely reasonable. We could have had it months ago.” I
take a step back into the room, leaving him in the hallway. Months ago
would have prevented the attacks on the outposts and so many deaths.

“Reasonable?” His voice drops to that icy-calm timbre. “For looking for
another way before serving you up to Tecarus? Let’s get one thing straight.
If I ever see a way to keep you safe? I’ll take it.”

The fuck he will. “Do you know who you sound like right now?”
“Please, enlighten me.” He folds his arms across his chest.
“Dain.” I shut the door in his face.

 
 
 

“Thank you,” I tell Zara, the lady’s maid we’ve been assigned, as I
smooth the lines of my waist, awestruck she was able to find

multiple gowns in my size on such short notice. Even the lightweight black
slippers on my feet fit. “You’re sure this is how everyone dresses for
dinner?”

“With the viscount? Every night.”



How…impractically beautiful.
“Done.” Zara motions to the opening, and I step out from behind the

dressing screen.
Mira chose the black velvet gown with the square neckline and sheer,

gauzy sleeves, but I know it was the deep pockets that sold her. I can’t help
but grin as I see her tuck two of her daggers into the folds.

“I don’t think I’ve seen you out of uniform in years.”
“Well, it’s black, so close enough.” She grins as I move to peek in the

mirror. “You look gorgeous.”
“The dress is spectacular.” I’ve never worn anything like it, and it suits

my mood perfectly. The bodice, which plummets in a deep V to the base of
my ribs, is made of woven, black leaves, never bigger than the size of my
palm, narrowing above the swells of my breasts to single vines that drape
tiny leaves over my shoulders and down the sides of my back, leaving the
majority of my spine and all of my relic exposed. “What kind of material is
this?” I ask Zara, fingering the sheer black fabric that falls from my waist to
the floor in a multitude of layers. Were it just the one, the gown would be
see-through.

“It’s Deverelli silk,” Zara says. “So fine it’s nearly transparent.”
“From the isle?” It’s softer than any fabric I’ve ever touched. “You still

trade with them?” Navarre hasn’t in centuries.
She nods. “We did until the last few years, but the merchants think it’s

too dangerous to come here now. Anyway, the viscount likes to keep the
most exquisite of objects for himself.”

“So, it’s true the viscount collects rare objects?” Mira asks, coming to
stand behind me.

“He does.”
“What about people?” I ask softly.
Her eyes flare. “Only if they agree to be collected.”
“Kidnapping isn’t his thing?” I take the sheath and alloy-hilted dagger

Mira hands me, then reach into the long slit at my thigh to fasten it against
my leg. Hopefully one weapon is enough to make it through dinner. If the



viscount doesn’t abduct people, then why was Xaden so scared to bring me
here?

Someone knocks.
“No.” Zara shakes her head and walks toward the door. “He won’t lock

you away, but he will make you a proposal that will tempt you to be
collected. Singers, weavers, storytellers—they all eventually remain,” she
says as she opens the door.

There’s nothing Tecarus could offer me, but Xaden must think there is.
“You went with black?” Cat stares from the doorway.
“I’m a rider.”
“Of course.” She tilts her head to the side. “I just would have chosen

something more colorful. Xaden always laments how…monotone
everything is at Basgiath. There’s still time to change if you would like.”
Her smile is anything but kind.

And that’s it. I officially loathe her.
“Xaden doesn’t lament anything.” An ugly, insidious flame ignites in my

stomach, and it takes every ounce of restraint I have to keep from flicking a
dagger at her snide head. Or at least close to it. “And are you capable of
having a discussion that doesn’t revolve around him?”

“Sure. If it makes you more comfortable, we can discuss how your
mother has perpetuated a lie that’s cost thousands of Poromish lives, some
of which your own sister is responsible for taking.”

My brows rise. Did she really just—
Mira catches my eye, confirming that she did. “I was going to remind

you that it’s probably bad manners to stab our hostess, but you know
what?” She shrugs. “Fuck it. We don’t need a luminary.”

Cat blinks at Mira.
“Stop being a wretch, Cat.” Syrena steps into the doorway, dressed in a

navy-blue formal tunic that’s hemmed asymmetrically to a higher line in the
front and embroidered with gold feathers. “Nice to see you off your dragon,
Sorrengail. Is Riorson hiding somewhere in there, or did he actually let you
out of his sight?”



“Good to see you, Syrena.” A smile curves my mouth at her teasing
tone, and the fire in my stomach dissipates a little. “And he does get a bit
protective, doesn’t he?”

“He wouldn’t be if he thought you were strong enough to stand at his
side,” Cat counters.

Never mind. It flares brighter than ever, hot, nauseating, and annoyingly
strong.

Syrena levels a look at Cat that almost makes me pity her.
Almost.
“Syrena, this is my sister, Mira.” I change the subject.
Syrena’s mouth tightens as she studies Mira. “Your reputation precedes

you. I had friends at Strythmore.”
Well, shit. From tense to…tenser.
“I have no remorse for winning battles.” Mira sheathes the next dagger

at her waist in plain sight. “And if you’re Syrena Cordella, then your
reputation reaches across the border as well.”

“Dining amid hundreds of fliers that root for your death, and you choose
to wear a gown?” Syrena arches a brow. “Where is the shrewd judgment
I’ve heard so much about?”

“I can kill just as easily in a gown as leathers. Want to see?” Only a fool
would call Mira’s expression a smile.

Syrena laughs, her shoulders shaking. “Ah, I see why little Sorrengail is
so tough if she had to grow up with you. Let’s get going. The men are
already there.”

I shoot Mira a look once the fliers’ backs are turned, and she shrugs
unapologetically.

We move into the hallway, and regret stabs deep at my choice of gowns
when I see Cat’s in the light. Her hair is pinned in an intricate style and
she’s wearing a bold, red silk that leaves her shoulders bare and matches the
color she’s painted on her lips.

Suddenly, I feel a little washed out.
Doubt makes my steps unsteady. Maybe I should have gone with color.

Maybe she was telling the truth and Xaden is sick of all the black. Maybe



she knows him better than I do.
“You all right?” Mira asks as the fliers lead us down the hall, making us

the most unlikely foursome to ever walk the Continent.
“Yes.” I roll my shoulders, trying to shake off the feeling. What the hell

is wrong with me? I never judge myself against other women when it comes
to how we look. How we fight? Sure. Ride? Definitely. But nothing ever as
shallow as…appearance.

Being pretty doesn’t save you at Basgiath.
“I hear you have an older brother,” Mira says to Syrena when we reach

the first staircase.
I keep the marble bannister in a death grip as we start down. The last

thing I’m going to do is trip and fall in front of Cat.
“You’re thinking of Drake,” Syrena says over her shoulder. “Same last

name, but he’s our cousin, and come to think of it, you’re just his type. He
likes women who might actually kill him.”

“Too bad I don’t go for gryphon fliers,” Mira responds as we round the
corner to the next flight of stairs.

“Yeah, he’d probably draw the line at a dragon rider.” Syrena laughs, but
it’s short-lived. “He’s with the nightwing drift in the north, along the
Braevick border.”

I don’t know their unit terminology, but the Braevick border means he’s
on the front line.

We make it to the middle terrace—the one we first arrived at this
afternoon— and they turn left, away from the winding pool of water and
past a line of guards.

“Did Zara not know how to attend your hair?” Cat asks with a pitying
glance back at me as we approach a guarded set of double doors. “Surely,
she could have come up with something a little more refined than just
leaving it down like that. I thought you always wore it up in case of a
fight?”

How does she know that? I’ve had enough.
“It would be a pity to kill her now. I’m hunting ten minutes away and I’d

miss the show,” Tairn says.



Power surges within me.
“Control it. Now,” Tairn demands, all trace of sarcasm gone.
Swallowing hard, my fingernails biting into my palms, I fight the urge to

blast her. What is it about Cat that brings out the irrational in me? “How
sweet of you to worry about me, but you’re not the one I’m picking a fight
with tonight,” I assure Cat.

“With Xaden?” Her eyes narrow, then drip with false sympathy. “If you
don’t already know that he’s not the kind of man who gets flustered or loses
control, then there’s really no hope for you. Save yourself the energy,
because he’ll simply think any fight you pick is childish.”

Shit. She’s right. What am I doing? Xaden doesn’t get flustered, and
definitely not by me.

Wood groaning as it splits, then shatters. The sound of daggers
clattering to the floor. The feel of my heart pounding, my breath stuttering
as bliss settles in the marrow of my bones. “I’ve never lost control like
that.” The flash of memory rocks me to my core, clearing my head just
long enough to breathe around the insufferable jealousy I feel toward a
woman I don’t even know.

The guards nod at the fliers and move to open the doors.
“Give it a rest.” Syrena’s tone sharpens at her sister. “You’re all of a year

older than Violet, and it’s been longer than that since you two were together.
He’s just a man, but she’s the best weapon we have against the dark
wielders.”

“Are you all right?” Mira asks, her worried gaze skimming my face.
“No,” I whisper. “But I don’t know what’s wrong, either.”
The doors swing open, and we walk into the largest dining room I’ve

ever seen. The glass doors that line the back wall are propped open to the
terrace despite the threatening clouds darkening the sky. A humid evening
breeze flickers the candles along the table as the guards shut the door
behind us. There must be over fifty people at the long, ornately decorated
table that runs the length of the space.

And every single one of them has turned to look at the four of us.



My gaze finds Xaden’s in under a second, and it’s not because he’s
seated at the center of the table, or because he’s one of only two men
dressed in black, or even because he’s turned around as if he sensed me
coming—which he probably did. I locate him within a heartbeat because
he’s the center of my gravity.

As pissed as I am that he lectured me, that he refused to bring me, that
there are years of history behind both of us we haven’t discussed, that the
tunic he’s walking toward me in isn’t just tailored to perfection but
obviously made for him, it doesn’t change the fact he’s a fucking magnet for
my heart.

“That dress…” His gaze sweeps over me and heats with an intensity that
makes my cheeks flush, my pulse race. “You’re playing dirty, Violence.”

But why is he headed for me when the obvious choice is the woman in
red just a few feet away?

“I’m still really damned angry with you.” I lift my chin, just as furious
with myself for getting into this position, for feeling whatever all this
bullshit is.

“Feeling is mutual.” He slides one hand into my hair, then sucks a
breath through his teeth when his fingers meet skin at the base of my spine.
“But it’s possible to be angry while still madly, wildly, uncontrollably in
love with me.”

His mouth crashes into mine in the same instant the world goes dark
around us, blocking out everything—everyone—but Xaden. We might as
well be the only people in the entire province. My body ignites. Gods, the
chemistry between us is the only thing stronger than the anger. There’s only
the press of his lips parting mine, the quick, thorough claiming of his
tongue, the jolt of instant need that has me gripping the fabric of his tunic as
he kisses me breathless.

Just like that, the hottest of my jealousy, the infuriating insecurity that
had me second-guessing myself is gone. It’s as if the wall of shadow he’s
thrown up—

“What did you do?” I break the kiss, breathing deeply, and he leans his
forehead against mine, keeping us cocooned in total darkness.



“What I should have done the second I saw you this afternoon.” His
hand tightens in my hair, tugging slightly. “And probably shocked Cat
enough to make her stop fucking with your head.”

“What do you mean?”
“She has the gift of heightening the emotions of the people around her,

and she’s exceptionally powerful. If you hadn’t blocked me out all evening, I
would have told you sooner.”

My jaw hangs for a heartbeat before I snap it closed. First at the
knowledge that I actually managed to block him out, and second—no
wonder I can’t get a grip on myself. She’s been waging a war I didn’t even
realize we were in. Wait. He would have told me sooner? He’s had weeks to
tell me.

“You win,” Xaden whispers. Shadows fall away as quickly as they
appeared as he lifts his head, locking his eyes with mine.

“I haven’t even started fighting with you.” I drop my hands from his
chest and throw the new rush of power rising within me into my shields.
How the hell did she get past them in the first place? If they blocked out
Xaden, surely they’re strong enough for her.

“Fine. We can fight as much as you want later tonight. Just know that
you’ve already won. I heard what you were saying.” His grip softens in my
hair, and he slides his hand to the nape of my neck. “I’m sorry I didn’t listen
to you. Sorry that I’ve been overreacting since pulling you out of that
interrogation chamber—hell, since Resson. When Sgaeyl told me they were
torturing you, and I couldn’t get to you…” His eyes close for a second, and
when they open, the fear I spotted earlier is front and center. “I can’t
fucking breathe when you’re in danger, but that’s not your fault. I should
have brought you here when you asked me to.”

My lips part and I blink, certain I misheard him.
“Now it’s your turn. Can you admit that you should have waited for me

to bring you so we could have formulated a plan?” His fingers trail
deliciously up my bare back.

“No.” I shiver at the touch. “I’m sorry for not telling you but not sorry
for coming. We need that luminary now.”



A corner of his mouth quirks up. “Figured.”
“If you two wouldn’t mind joining us? You’re essential to this evening’s

discussion,” the viscount states over the hushed room, mild annoyance in
his tone.

Oh. Every single person is out of their seats, waiting for us by the open
glass doors.

“Be ready for anything,” Xaden says before turning toward Tecarus. “I
make no apologies.” He laces his fingers with mine, and we walk around
the table toward the crowd where Tecarus waits. “Maintaining control is
nearly impossible around Violet.”

My face heats. What the hell? Did he hear her out there? That’s
impossible.

Cat stiffens next to her uncle, her face falling like Xaden’s just delivered
a killing blow in a battle I hadn’t realized they were in.

“So I’ve heard.” Tecarus motions to follow him outside, and we do,
stepping onto a marble patio, Mira and Brennan filing in closely behind us.
“Word traveled fast when you ruined that little war college of yours for
her.” Tecarus tips his wineglass my direction as if saluting me. “Split your
quadrant right down the middle. Bravo. Been trying to take that place down
for years, and you did it in what? Six days?”

Guilt settles on my chest with the weight of a dragon.
“Five.” Xaden’s hand tightens on mine as we cross the patio, coming to

the top of a wide staircase—no. Not a staircase: seats. The entire north side
of the sloping hill has been carved into rows, forming an oval-shaped
outdoor arena the depth of Tairn’s height and twice his length.

“Five days.” Tecarus shakes his head in disbelief, then turns to me.
“Marvelous. Now, I assume you’d like to discuss acquiring the luminary I
have in my possession?”

“And I assume you’ve brought us out here to see me wield before you
open yourself to discussion?” I ask as the thick, rain-scented wind blows
my hair back. We’re minutes, if not less, from a downpour.

“It’s only prudent that I see what you’re capable of before entering into
negotiations for such a valuable item.” He motions toward the mage light–



illuminated arena.
“Seems fair.” My hand slips from Xaden’s, and I reach for my power.
“Oh, not from up here.” Tecarus shakes his head as others join us, lining

the edge of the patio, drinks in hand. “Down on the field. It’s a performance
after all, isn’t it? Would be a shame to waste the gaming arena, since it took
me years to construct. It’s quite special. All the stone was quarried from
Braevick, from east of the Dunness River. Oh look, they’re wheeling out
your target.”

Target? Oh shit.
A foursome of uniformed guards pushes a metal chest the size of an

armoire into the middle of a grassy field in the base of the arena. I can’t
even hit the trio of boulders Felix pointed me at, and I’m supposed to hit
that chest? This is going to be over before discussions even begin.

“You might recognize the Rybestad chest, Xaden. It’s the very one your
father brought me when we were in negotiations for what some might
consider a greater treasure.”

“That chest belonged to your father?”
“It was one of the most valuable items he owned.” Xaden tenses. “I’ll

walk her down.”
“No,” Tecarus says, his voice devoid of emotion.
Both our heads turn in his direction.
“How would I know what she’s capable of without you?” Tecarus’s eyes

narrow on Xaden. “My offer is simple. As long as you don’t step foot into
the arena, Riorson, and she doesn’t leave the field until she strikes the
target, we’ll open discussions for your luminary. Take the deal or leave it.”

“We’ll leave—” Xaden starts, his voice clipped.
“Deal.” I look up at Xaden. “You don’t have to protect me from my own

signet. If he wants me to blow up your father’s chest, I’ll blow up your
father’s chest.”

His gaze narrows for a second, and then he sighs. “Point made.”
I gather the layers of my skirts in my hands and start down the steps.

Nerves tighten my ribs, but I shake them off. If I wield enough strikes,
certainly one of them will hit.



Wasn’t that what got us through Resson before Andarna arrived?
“I’m coming,” Mira announces from behind me. “It’s not like I have

anything to do with her signet,” she yells back at Tecarus as she catches up
to me.

The viscount doesn’t argue.
“And mine isn’t effective this far from the wards,” she finishes in a

whisper. “I tried earlier and nothing happened.”
“Don’t worry. We don’t need you to shield. Just dodge the chest if it

explodes,” I respond, giving her a tight smile. “What greater treasure was
your father negotiating for?” I ask Xaden once we’re about halfway down
the sand-colored stone. I can’t even imagine how long it would have taken
to quarry enough stone to build this, let alone bring it back from the edge of
Braevick.

“An alliance my father made that I officially denied last year. The chest
is priceless. If he wants you to destroy it with lightning, then this is more a
statement about me and less about you.”

“Why am I not surprised?” My hands crush the delicate silk of my
gown as I put the pieces of a sickening puzzle together. “Would that
alliance have anything to do with Cat?”

The hesitation I feel along our bond answers before he does.
“Yes.”
“That information would have been valuable before arriving.” To say

the fucking least. No wonder she despises me. I’m not self-centered enough
to think I’m the reason he called off whatever alliance they had, but I’m
definitely a barrier to resuming it now. Her uncle wants me to blow up the
very symbol of whatever it is they’d agreed upon.

“Still fighting. Got it.”
Mira and I reach the grass as the first raindrops fall.
“We should have worn leathers,” she mutters, keeping pace with me.
“I can’t aim,” I tell her quietly, pausing what feels like twenty feet from

the chest, just close enough to see runes carved into the thick doors. “Carr
focused on quantity over quality, and Felix and I just started lessons, so this
might take a while.”



Two of the guards move to the front of the chest that’s taller and thicker
than both of them. Thank Amari it’s huge. A bigger target will be easier to
hit. A guard pulls a small item from his pocket that I can’t quite make out
from here.

“I don’t think they’re interested in how long it will take.” Mira nods to
the top of the arena. Dozens of bow-wielding gryphon fliers have
surrounded the top row of seats, all with arrows nocked our direction.
“They’re probably worried you’ll strike Tecarus instead of the target.”

“Right. No pressure.” Lifting my hands, I reach for Tairn’s power. Funny
how the normally brutal heat of it is a comfort after so many days under
Varrish’s torture without it. “You guys might want to move,” I call out to
the guards as the stocky one in front holds his fist to the front of the chest
like he thinks he has a shot at stopping it if the giant iron box shifts and
topples onto him…or like he has a key.

A shiver of apprehension skates along my spine.
“The Arctile Ocean to the south is known for calm, warm waters and

what were once lucrative trade routes,” I recite, calming my racing heart.
“You still do that?” Mira lifts her brows at me.
“Only when I’m—”
The double doors of the chest burst open, sending both guards sprawling

across the ground with startling force as a man jolts forward and falls to his
hands and knees on the grass. His maroon tunic and trousers are tattered,
like he’s been kept prisoner for weeks.

“What the fuck?” Mira mutters.
His head jerks up to look at us, and my heart seizes with pure,

immovable terror.
Distended red veins branch out from bloodshot eyes.
“Violet!” Xaden roars.
Venin.

OceanofPDF.com



Though her extraordinary signet allows her to extend the wards
around herself and her dragon, Cadet Sorrengail lacks the consistent
ability to produce her own wards without extreme emotional distress.

I’m sorry to report I doubt this ability will develop in time.

I had such hopes for her.

—MEMORANDUM FROM PROFESSOR CARR TO GENERAL SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

“I s that…” Mira whispers, already palming her daggers as the dark
wielder digs his hands into the soft green grass of the arena floor,

laughing maniacally. Breathe. I have to breathe. But there’s no air.
Purple robes billowing. Soleil charging forward, Fuil running behind

her. The spread of death and decay reaching them both. The fall. Their
bodies becoming nothing more than husks, drained of power and life.

“Silver One!” Tairn’s roar splits my head, ripping me from the past
before it swallows me whole. Rain splatters the ground around us, falling in
heavy but sporadic drops. This isn’t Resson, this is Cordyn, and I have to
protect Mira.

“Move!” I scream at the guards, two of whom run while one other
scrambles backward, leaving the last to stare in frozen shock. “Get out of
here,” I order Mira, sizzling heat filling my veins as I open the floodgates
on Tairn’s power.

“I’m not leaving you with that thing!” She flicks her dagger.
“No!” I shout, but it’s too late—the dagger lands in the venin’s shoulder.

He hisses, ripping the weapon free and grabbing for the petrified guard in
the same breath.

“Great, and now he has a knife!” I lift my hands and release the energy
burning through my limbs.



Lightning cracks, so white it’s almost blue, and I throw up my hand to
shield my eyes as it strikes the iron chest as though drawn to it. Sparks
shower the arena, one singeing the back of my hand before I can brush it
off.

“Tairn, I need you!”
“On the way.”
Panic threatens to grab hold of me, and I waste precious seconds looking

over my shoulder at where Xaden is already lunging for the steps. “Stay put
and keep your emotions to yourself. We need that luminary.”

“Violence—”
“I can do this.” If I can’t take on one emaciated venin, then what chance

does the Continent stand?
The wind shifts, blowing my hair into my face, and I twist to see the

venin’s hands wrap around the guard’s neck, but I don’t need to watch to
know exactly what’s about to happen.

“Only the alloy-hilted daggers can kill him,” I tell Mira, yanking my
dagger from its sheath and slicing through a strip of fabric in my hem. If I
can’t aim, this is coming down to hand-to-hand.

The screams of the guard cut straight through me.
“Holy shit… He’s really… What’s the plan, Vi?” Mira asks, gripping her

other knife.
“Kill him before he kills us, and whatever you do, don’t let him get his

hands on you.” I grab my hair into a low ponytail and wrap the fabric from
my dress around it to secure it quickly. I’m dead if I can’t see.

The venin holds the guard like a shield, blocking me from any potential
knife throw. The screams stop as the man slowly desiccates before my eyes.
At least two of the other three are already off the field.

Letting Tairn’s power consume me, I wield again and again, scorching
the grass around the venin without fucking hitting him. The guard falls to
the ground, parts of him flaking off as the rain pelts harder and faster.

“Damn it!”
“It’s you,” the dark wielder says over the growing noise of the storm.

“The one who commands the sky.” His eyes widen in eerie excitement.



“Oh, how I’ll be rewarded when I return with you.”
“And here I was thinking I was the only Sorrengail with a reputation

beyond the border.” Mira takes a fighting stance, keeping only inches
between us.

“By your Sage?” I ask him, tracking his movements as rain falls in
sheets. Shit, I can’t chance throwing my dagger. If I miss, I’m defenseless,
and it’s not just me on this field. “I need daggers.”

“Which Sage? I promise, you’ll wish—” he starts, raising his arms.
“For death?” I interrupt. “Already heard it. I killed that messenger, too.”

But I wasn’t in a cumbersome ball gown. This thing is a fucking liability.
“Behind you,” Xaden says.
I glance back and see two alloy-hilted daggers embedded in the ground

five feet away. “Mira!”
She follows my line of sight and is already moving when I flip my

dagger to its tip and flick my wrist, throwing for the dark wielder’s throat.
The dagger sinks into his side.
Shit, I didn’t account for the downward pressure of the driving rain.
The venin shouts in pain, yanking the dagger loose as Mira hands me

one of the two Xaden flung our way. My fingers grip the water-slick handle,
and I prepare myself for the worst when the venin lifts his hands.

But it’s not the daggers he throws.
The Rybstad chest hurtles toward us, coming so quickly that I barely

have time to knock Mira to the ground before it passes by, close enough that
I hear it split the air.

A dagger immediately follows, then another, missing me but pinning the
left side of my dress to the ground. I use our momentum to keep rolling, the
diaphanous silk tearing away as I’m pulled to my feet by Brennan—who’s
decided to join us, I guess.

Gods, no. I can’t lose them both in this.
“We need to surround him,” Brennan says, grabbing the alloy-hilted

dagger from the sodden grass. Water collects quickly, soaking my feet, my
hair, and what’s left of my dress.



“And how would you like to do that if we can’t see him through this
shit?” Mira asks.

“I’m minutes out!” Tairn bellows.
We might be dead in those minutes, but we’re all dead eventually if I

don’t secure that fucking luminary.
“We have to keep him on the field, no matter what. One of them is

capable of draining everyone in the palace,” I tell my siblings. Back-to-
back, we scan the field, and my breath catches when the dark wielder comes
into view, dropping to a knee about twenty feet away.

No. Time slows to sluggish heartbeats as I watch him reach for the
ground.

There’s no time to run. We won’t make it.
My worst nightmare is seconds away from becoming reality.
Our mission is going to kill my brother and sister.
“I’m so sorry.” It’s barely a whisper.
His fist slams into the ground, and through the storm, I watch in

breathless horror as his eyes burn fire red, the grass around him shriveling
into brown blades.

“Mira!” Brennan shouts. “Shield!”
“I…I can’t this far from the wards!” Her mouth drops as death races for

us, the ground rippling as it surrenders its magic.
“Shield or we’re dead!” Brennan grabs onto us both and yanks us into a

tight hold.
I tuck in, hoping to make our trio as small as possible, while Mira

throws her arms up over us. Her body trembles, and Brennan and I wrap our
arms around her back to keep her steady. She screams as though she’s being
ripped apart.

She’s going to burn out.
Shadows stream toward us, but they won’t make it.
“I love you.” I push the thought Xaden’s way and wait for my power to

bleed out, wait for my death to make the venin unstoppable.
But it doesn’t come.
“You will live!” Xaden orders, as if it’s that simple.



Mira collapses, and Brennan takes the brunt of her weight as I scan our
surroundings.

The entire field is dead with the exception of the tiny circle we occupy.
She saved us. But it’s just the field that’s drained. The spectators are all
alive and well above the steps from what I can see through the downpour.
All the stone was quarried from Braevick, from east of the Dunness River.
Isn’t that what Tecarus said?

I wipe the water from my eyes and stand to face the dark wielder.
He rolls his shoulders in satisfaction, a blissful smile distorting his

features as he throws his head back.
“If you can’t strike him with lightning, then we’ll have to get close

enough to engage. He can’t take both of us,” Brennan says, lifting an
unconscious Mira into his arms.

“How far are you?” I ask Tairn. Rain doesn’t strike the remains of the
grass as much as it splashes into water that has yet to run off.

“Less than a minute.”
“I don’t have to strike him,” I whisper as the idea hits, scanning the

flooded field. “Get Mira to the steps. You’ll be safe there.”
Brennan looks at me like I’ve just suggested our world is flat. “Until the

next time he drains—”
“I need you to trust me. Get our sister to the steps.” I glance up at my

brother and soak myself in Tairn’s power, giving it free rein, letting it fill
every inch of my body.

“Violet—” There’s so much love and worry and fear in his gaze that I
can’t help but force a smile.

“I know what I’m doing. Now, run.” I take the alloy-hilted blade from
Brennan and turn away from them both.

“What the fuck are you doing, Violence?” Xaden demands.
“Shh. I’m concentrating.” I slam my shields up, blocking him out as the

venin pivots.
The asshole smiles wider when he sees me.
“You’ll be quite the prize,” he calls out over the rain, striding toward me

as if we have all the time in the world. “And to think, you’ll bring a dragon



with you! You can’t be parted for long, can you?”
I grasp an alloy-hilted dagger in each hand and wait.
If I lose my temper, I’m dead.
Charge him and lose? I’m dead.
Wait too long and let him get his hands on me? Yep, dead.
The female I killed on Tairn’s back watched my fighting style and

instantly adapted, which means I have to wait until the last possible second
to show my hand.

Rain sizzles as it hits my heated skin. If I reach for much more, I’ll lose
the ability to control it and burn out, so I hover on that edge as I hear
another sound overpower the rain.

Wings.
“I don’t need to stress the importance of timing, do I?” Tairn asks.
“My timing will be perfect.” The pounding of my heart steadies with

each step the venin takes, sure of my course. There’s no room for error. I
glance right just long enough to see that Mira and Brennan made it off the
field.

“I expect nothing less.”
The dark wielder is only feet away, his gaze raking over me, no doubt

looking for my weaknesses, when I feel the gust of wind from Tairn’s wings
at my back.

Now. I throw the daggers at the venin simultaneously, this time
calculating for the force of the rain. The instant I see them slice through his
boots, pinning his feet to the ground, I whip my arms out to the side,
releasing all my power in a scalding torrent of lightning.

I stiffen my arms and lock every muscle.
Tairn’s talons wrap over my shoulders and grasp tight exactly as

lightning strikes behind the enraged venin, lighting up the sky in a brilliant
flash—and charging the water that covers the arena and the venin’s feet
with lethal energy.

The dark wielder shrieks in agony, then falls dead, splashing into the
field as we fly overhead.

I did it. Dunne be blessed, I did it.



“You cut it close.”
I roll my eyes and breathe deeply despite the rain that runs down my

face as Tairn banks left, taking us along the curve of the arena, back to the
palace.

Sgaeyl, Teine, and Marbh have all taken up defensive perches on the
terrace above, positioning themselves to incinerate the crowd.

“I will devour anyone who makes a move against you. My patience has
ended.” Tairn’s wings beat slower as we approach the patio.

“I’ll be sure to warn them.” Tairn waits until I have my balance on my
soaked, slippered feet, then stalks forward through the crowd to the cries of
fliers and aristocrats alike, cracking the marble beneath his claws until he
reaches the grass and pivots, swinging his tail like the weapon it is and
completing the four-cornered defense the dragons have structured.

Brennan falls into step with me, Mira propped under his arm but
walking on her own beside him.

“You all right?” I ask under my breath as we pass nobles with umbrellas.
This was fucking entertainment for them.

“We’re not the ones you should be concerned for,” Brennan mutters as
the last line of aristocrats—including Cat and Syrena—parts, revealing a
situation far more dangerous than the one I was just in.

Xaden’s lifted hand is raised at his chest, clenched in a partial fist, and
wrath chills his eyes as he stares up at the viscount, whose feet kick for the
ground.

Tecarus tears ineffectually at the shadows strangling his neck and, from
the garbled sound of his breathing, he’s slowly asphyxiating.

“Xaden, please don’t!” Cat cries.
Xaden’s grip only tightens as the rain dissipates to a drizzle.
Tecarus gurgles, and fliers draw their weapons, but one growl from

Sgaeyl is enough to keep them from advancing on Xaden.
I lower the portion of my shields that allows Xaden in, then send every

ounce of my love down the bond. “I’m all right.”
He tears his gaze from Tecarus, the barely caged fury in his eyes making

him nearly unrecognizable.



“Loosen your grip on his throat,” I say calmly. “He can’t answer
questions if he’s dead.”

Two lines appear between Xaden’s dark brows, and his grip eases.
Moving to his side, I make sure that my shoulder brushes his arm, that he
can feel me physically as well as mentally. “You’re lucky you’re not dead,”
I say up at Tecarus’s blotchy face. “If you’d put Xaden in that kind of
danger, I’m not sure I would have been as merciful.”

“You call this mercy?” Tecarus asks through gasped breaths, still kicking
for the ground.

“Yes,” Xaden says softly.
“You quarried the stones from east of the Dunness River, the land that

borders the Barrens. It had already been drained of its magic.”
“Yes!” Tecarus shouts.
Xaden swears under his breath.
“You built a pit for them, which means you’ve captured more than just

that one.” Puffs of steam rise from my skin, but at least I don’t feel like I’m
burning alive.

“I’ll tell you everything we know,” Tecarus assures us. “Just let me
down.”

“And we’re supposed to trust you?” Brennan asks from my other side.
“We were able to keep that one from feeding for days—”
“Because the runes on the Rybstad chest hold items placed inside

suspended in midair,” Xaden interrupts. “He couldn’t reach the ground to
drain it until you opened the chest. I don’t need you to tell me things I
already know.” He drops his hand, and the shadows evaporate.

Tecarus slams into the marble patio, grasping for his throat.
Xaden crouches down. “If you ever want to have words about why I

severed that alliance, then you come for me. Violet is beyond your reach. If
you so much as look her direction with anything but the utmost kindness
and respect, I’ll kill you without a second thought and let Syrena take her
place as your heir. Do you understand me?” His voice has that icy softness
that sends chills up my spine.

Tecarus nods.



“Apologize.”
“I’m fine.” He’s taking this too far. This man is second in line to the

Poromish throne.
“You do not take punishments designed for me.”
“You have my most sincere apology, Violet Sorrengail,” Tecarus croaks

through abused vocal cords. “Now where does this leave us, Riorson?”
Xaden stands. “Now we negotiate.”

 
 
 

An hour later, we’re fed and changed into dry flight leathers, the four of
us sitting across the cleared dining room table from Tecarus, Cat,

Syrena, half a dozen aristocrats, and one general immediately to Tecarus’s
left.

Every person in the room is unarmed with the exception of Xaden and
me, but our signets make it so we’re never defenseless.

“May I present my offer first?” Tecarus asks, tugging his collar away
from the red welts across his throat.

“You may,” Brennan answers.
Xaden’s hand slides over my left thigh and stays there. He’s had one

hand on me since leaving the patio. It’s amazing I managed to get into my
flight leathers, but I get it. If I’d just watched him face down a venin, I’d
probably be in his fucking lap right now.

“Your power is…astounding.” Tecarus shakes his head slowly at me, as
if awestruck. “And you’re still untrained. Just think of what you’ll be a few
years from now, or even one.”

Xaden’s hand splays wide, and I lace my fingers over his.
“That doesn’t sound like an offer.” I keep my voice as level as possible,

trying like hell to ignore that this man nearly killed not only me but
Brennan and Mira.

Anger rises to boiling wrath swiftly—too swiftly.
I glance at Cat. “Stay out of my head or I’ll start wielding inside.”



She leans back in her chair, but that narrowing of her eyes isn’t defeat.
Oh no, she’s sizing me up as a worthy opponent.

Game on.
“Do you know why I’m such a successful collector?” the viscount asks,

practically vibrating with excitement. “I have a gift for knowing what it is
people want, what motivates them to give up their treasures.” Gods, he’s
Varrish’s opposite. Our signets really aren’t that different than mindwork. “I
think you and I could strike a deal if you consider that I could deliver your
wildest dreams.”

Xaden strokes my thigh absentmindedly, but it helps keep me grounded.
“And what do you think my wildest dreams are?” I ask.

“Peace.” Tecarus nods, his movements growing more erratic the more
excited he becomes. “Not for you, of course. That’s not what motivates you.
Peace for the people you love.”

Xaden’s fingers still.
“Peace for him,” Tecarus finishes.
My next breath is shaky. “I’m listening.”
He presents his offer, and I have to admit, for a second, it’s tempting.

Spending a few years as his personal guard dog, monitoring the riderless
wyvern who have begun flying over routinely in patterns that look
suspiciously like control, in return for living out the rest of my days with
Xaden, our dragons, and my loved ones on an isle committed to peace
sounds perfect. It’s also the coward’s way out and completely unfeasible.
The isles don’t accept Navarrians even as visitors.

“Running away from the Continent to whatever land you’ve secured
from the Deverelli isn’t going to help the people I like or the ones I don’t
even know. It’s just that—running away.”

Tecarus’s jaw flexes, and I get the impression he’s not used to being told
no.

“Even if I give the luminary to Tyrrendor?” He glances at Brennan.
“Word spread quickly that Navarre let your cadets go without so much as a
drop of blood spilled. Though I do wonder why that is, don’t you?”

Yes. Every day.



“Dragons owe you no explanation.” Brennan shrugs. “And my sister just
earned the luminary. Or are you going back on your deal?”

“I would never break my word.” Tecarus glances Xaden’s way and leans
forward onto the heavily embroidered forearms of his tunic. “Everything we
know about the dark wielders.” He nods at the silver-browed general, who
slides a leather-bound book across the table to Brennan. My fingers
immediately itch to open the cover. “But I never said I would give you the
luminary if she wielded. I said we would enter discussions.”

You have to be fucking kidding me. My hand tightens over Xaden’s, like
that’s going to stop him from strangling the viscount with shadows or me
from losing absolute control of my power. I should have brought the
conduit into the meeting.

“Then let’s discuss. What do you want in exchange for us leaving with
the luminary today? Weapons?” Brennan asks. “Because that’s what we’re
offering. The luminary is useless here, but we’ll put it to use supplying your
drifts with the weapons they need for the venin you can’t capture.”

Hopefully the details of how they managed to catch that one are in the
book.

“Weapons are a good start,” Tecarus agrees with a nod, his gaze sliding
to Cat. “And you take the hundred flier cadets I’ve given shelter to after
their academy was destroyed back to Aretia with the luminary.”

I’m sorry…what the fuck?
“And what would you like us to do with your cadets?” Xaden asks,

tilting his head slightly. “Gryphons don’t fare well at altitude.”
“They’ve never been given the chance to adjust,” Tecarus argues. “And I

want you to educate them just as I assume you are doing with the rider
cadets. Keep them safe, teach them to work together, and we might have a
chance of surviving this war. We’ve seen riderless wyvern patrolling the
skies, no doubt reporting what they see instantly to their creators, in the last
few weeks. Our reports say they’ve ventured as far west as Draithus. It
won’t help the fliers to stay safe here in the south—not when they want to
fight. And who better to teach the fliers how to kill wyvern than dragon
riders?”



Train with gryphon fliers? Take Cat back to Aretia? I would rather face
down a dozen venin. Unarmed. Without Tairn or Andarna.

“There’s no way to fly them into Tyrrendor,” Mira points out.
A muscle in Xaden’s jaw flexes. “There is. But there’s no guarantee

they’ll survive it.”
“We’ll take the chance,” Syrena answers. “It’s the cadets’ best shot at

living long enough to fight the dark wielders.”
“This is my offer. Take it or leave it,” Tecarus demands.
There’s no way—
“Done,” Brennan answers. “As long as each flier we take brings a

crossbolt with them.”
I’m going to throttle my brother.

OceanofPDF.com



From the dangerous waves of the Arctile Ocean to the lowest plains of
the Tyrrendor plateau, the Cliffs of Dralor rise to over twelve thousand

feet in places, making them unflyable by gryphon. While there are
three well-carved paths within Navarre to ascend the plateau, along the
Krovlan border exists only one…and it is deadly to both gryphon and

flier.

Do not attempt under any circumstances.

—CHAPTER TWO: THE TACTICAL GUIDE TO DEFEATING DRAGONS BY
COLONEL ELIJAH JOBEN



CHAPTER FORTY-THREE

My neck aches as I stare up, and up, and up the Cliffs of Dralor to
where they disappear into a thick layer of cloud cover.

It’s been four days since we struck the deal with Tecarus. Three nights
ago, we delivered the luminary—a ring nearly as tall as Sgaeyl of vibrant
blue crystals—to an offshoot of the valley above Aretia where the new
forge is located. Yesterday, all cadets were ordered to get a good night’s
sleep, pack for a three-day mission, and assemble for flight formation at
four in the morning, and now we’re standing in a field west of Draithus,
eyeing the drifts gathered on the other side of First Wing as the sun burns
off the early morning haze.

“He can’t be serious,” Ridoc says beside me in formation, his neck
craned at the same angle as mine. Between the hundred Aretian cadets and
an equal number of fliers packed into this grassy field, I’d guess ninety-five
percent of us look exactly the same, gawking at the steep, barely visible,
narrow trail my brother just pointed at with absolute incredulity.

The series of ledges and switchbacks carved into the granite cliff looks
more suitable to a mountain goat than a gryphon and blends so well into the
terrain that it’s no wonder the Medaro Pass has been kept secret.

Until now.
“Agreed.” Visia nods. “He has to be kidding. That’s not a trail—it’s a

death trap.”



The path Brennan’s so excited about isn’t wide enough to support a full
wagon, let alone the width of a gryphon…and he wants them to hike it? For
us to hike it with them while dragons fly patrol?

“Pretty sure he’s serious or we wouldn’t all be here,” Rhiannon says
over her shoulder.

“What the hell does he expect us to do besides climb with them?” Aaric
asks, keeping his voice down.

“Catch them if they fall off?” Ridoc suggests.
“Right, because we’re capable of catching a gryphon,” Imogen remarks.
My brow furrows as I study the steep trail. It’s not the narrow path or

even the gryphon traps Brennan described that worry me, but my own
endurance. Twelve hours of constant climbing is going to torture my knees
and ankles.

“Watch your back,” Xaden warns, his voice already fading as he flies
east with Sgaeyl on a mission I’m not privy to. “I didn’t have time to
question every flier about their intentions.”

As if his personal recommendation would help the lack of trust between
our two colleges.

“You’ve already warned me,” I remind him, feeling him slip away.
“Don’t die. I’ll see you in a few days.” There’s a rush of warmth, and then it
fades along with his shadowy presence in my mind.

Ahead of me, Baylor covers a jaw-cracking yawn with his fist as
Brennan continues to lecture us about the length of the journey ahead from
where he stands on a bound stack of crossbolts, amplifying his voice over
the field. “The journey should take you twelve hours, though I recommend
taking time to rest along the trail.” His gaze scans over us, as if gauging our
reaction, which is mostly…speechless.

The only sound is the fall breeze rustling the leaves from the scrub oak
trees at the south end of the field. Even the dragons and gryphons fall silent
around us, as if they can’t quite believe what’s being suggested, either.

“So they can push us off?” a rider from Third Wing asks, and I don’t
think he’s joking.



“That question is exactly why you’ll be going with them,” Brennan says,
avoiding my gaze entirely as Syrena climbs up the pile of bound crossbolts
to stand with him. “Not only have the wingleaders been given the locations
of the gryphon traps to disarm them, but you need to learn some mutual
respect and trust before you can be educated together. No rider will respect
a cadet who hasn’t crossed the parapet.” He gestures at the trail behind him.
“Behold a parapet for them to cross.”

“It’s narrow, but it’s not that narrow!” Ridoc calls out, earning a few
scoffs of agreement from the riders around us.

“And if we were just risking ourselves, perhaps it would be appropriate
to deem it inferior to your death bridge at Basgiath,” Syrena states, clasping
her hands behind her back and facing the riders’ half of formation. Sunlight
catches on the palm-size metal rings that fall at the fronts of her shoulders,
connected to the leather above. “But consider while you climb, while you
decide if you’ll truly accept fliers into your ranks”—her gaze catches mine
—“that while this trail is perfectly safe for humans, it’s perilous for
gryphons. And ask yourself if you would risk the lives of your dragons
climbing a trail built specifically to kill them into hostile territory so you
can learn how to better destroy your enemy with the very people you
considered your enemy up until last week.”

Riders all around me shift their weight.
“She’s right,” I tell only Tairn, since Andarna is more than a three-hour

flight away, no doubt in the midst of her morning training with the elders.
Yesterday she almost managed a full wing extension. Almost. “I wouldn’t
risk either of you.”

“Of course you wouldn’t. Why would you, when I’m quite capable of
carrying you all over the world?” I can feel his eyes roll. “You did not bond
the inferiority that are gryphons. You bonded dragons. Take them for a walk
and let them prove themselves.”

“The way the fliers look at us is more like they expect us to prove
ourselves.”

“You were chosen by dragons. That is enough.”



“Each squad will be paired with a drift of equal strength to make the
ascent,” Brennan says. “Hopefully by the time you reach the top, you’ve
found some mutual ground on which to build a framework of partnership.”

This is all in the spirit of comradery?
“Highly doubt it,” Ridoc mutters.
“In the meantime, your dragons will remain close,” Brennan asserts.
“I’ll never be more than a minute’s flight away,” Tairn promises. “Have

fun hiking.”
I hold him to it when we’re given our assignment—Cat’s drift.

 
 
 

Three hours later, my calves are screaming from the constant climb, and
the silence in our small, forced group has grown from uncomfortable to

painfully awkward. Removing my right hand from the sheer rock wall, I
adjust the weight of my pack on my shoulders to ease the growing protest in
my spine and check on Sloane. She’s climbing steadily a few feet in front of
me, giving the gryphon ahead of her plenty of room to flick its lionlike tail.

We’re climbing single file, with Fourth Wing leading the way. Only
Claw Section is above us.

The trail itself is challenging although not unpassable, and while up to
six feet wide at parts, it narrows to a quarter of that in places where the path
has disintegrated, leaving gaping holes that have the humans hugging the
cliff wall to get by. Every time we reach one, the gryphons stretch their
grappling talons across while balancing on clawed back paws, and I find
myself holding my breath that they make it. Considering the ones we’re
walking with are easily a couple of feet wider than the path, I’m surprised
only two have fallen that I know of. They’re able to catch themselves for
now, but at higher altitudes? It could get ugly.

I look back at Maren, the flier I’ve been paired with until evening, and
her gryphon as we approach an already triggered trap, the battering-ram-



size log now lying harmlessly along the cliff wall where the path narrows.
“Be careful here.”

“Right at chest height. Nice.” She offers me a pressed-lipped smile.
She’s petite for a flier, though still taller than me, with a heart-shaped face
under dark hair woven into a long single braid that falls along the bronzed
ochre skin of her neck. Her dark, hooded eyes meet mine without hesitance
every time I look back to make sure she’s still following, which earns my
respect, but she’s also Cat’s best friend, which has me watching my back in
more ways than one.

I look back again to make sure they pass safely.
“I’m not going to fall off the cliff,” she promises as we make the sharp

turn of the fourth switchback. Or maybe it’s the fifth. The curves are the
only places on the trail wide enough to walk in pairs. “Neither is Dajalair.”

The brown-and-white gryphon’s front left claw slips off the trail, and her
talon screeches against rock with the most godsawful sound I’ve ever heard
as she regains her balance.

Sloane and I trade a look that’s surprisingly empty of hostility.
“Are you certain about that?” I ask Maren as all three of us pause,

watching to see if any stones break off the rocky terrain. Anything that falls
can be deadly to those climbing below us.

The gryphon arches over Maren and snaps its beak in my direction.
Yeah, that thing could definitely crush my head.
“Got it, you’re certain,” I say, putting up my hands and praying to

Dunne that gryphons don’t punish humans for speaking to them like
dragons do.

Maren nods and scratches the feathered chest of the gryphon. “She’s
surefooted and a little temperamental.”

The gryphon makes a chortling sound, and we begin walking again.
The narrow ledge is exactly why they aren’t allowed to fly any portion

of the cliff. There’s no guarantee they’ll be able to stick a landing without
causing a rockslide and killing everyone beneath them.

“Even if she fell from this height, we’d just have to fly down and start
again,” Maren says like a peace offering. “It’s the upper portion of the trail



that worries me. Another five thousand feet, and she’ll struggle to beat her
wings. She’s not meant for the summitwing drifts.”

“Summitwing drifts?” I can’t help but ask.
“Those best suited for altitude, for flying the summits of the Esben

range,”
she explains. “Daja might not want to admit it, but she’s a lowland girl.”

Her smile brightens even as the gryphon snaps her beak rapidly a foot away
from Maren’s ear. “Like you wouldn’t rather be stationed with the seawing
drifts after graduation?” She laughs softly, no doubt at something the
gryphon said. “That’s what I thought. Trust me, we don’t want to be headed
into Tyrrendor any more than you want us to be there.”

“So why come?” Sloane asks, walking too close to the next gryphon and
getting flicked in the face by its tail.

“Like Syrena said, it’s our best chance of survival—not just for us but
for our people, too.”

After another few minutes of tense silence, I ask, “So where are you
from?”

“Draithus,” Maren answers. “I’d ask about you, but everyone knows you
grew up moving outpost to outpost until your mother was assigned to
Basgiath.”

My footsteps almost falter.
Sloane glances back at me with raised eyebrows.
“You’ve been a hell of a ransom target,” Maren explains as we come to a

series of carved steps meant to deter wagons. “Honestly, most of us figured
Riorson would nab you after harvest his first year and gift you to us.”

“You mean Cat figured.” Sloane’s tone has suspicious bite.
“Cat definitely figured,” Maren agrees.
“Harvest?” I ask, skipping over the whole Xaden-should-have-

kidnappedme insinuation. “You mean Threshing?”
“Right.” Maren checks on Daja’s progress on the stairs before

continuing upward. “Whatever it is you call it. When your dragons either
kill you or choose you.”

“So, our entire first year.” Sloane laughs.



“Imagine our surprise when he shows up ready to defend you to the
death last year.”

I look back at her because I don’t hear the animosity I’d expect. There’s
none of it in her eyes, either. “Were you disappointed?”

She shrugs, the metal rings at her shoulder catching the sunlight with the
motion. “I was disappointed for Cat, but I wasn’t exactly rooting for that
toxicity any more than you would for your best friend. She’s the one up
there with Cat, now, right? Your squad leader?”

I nod, moving forward along the narrowing stairs, keeping my body as
close to the cliff wall as I can without scraping up my flight jacket.
“Rhiannon doesn’t want Cat trying to hurl me off the trail.”

“She probably would have,” Maren admits, a smile in her voice. “She’s
a little…”

“Unhinged?” Sloane offers, keeping a good ten feet between her and the
gryphon ahead of her with Ridoc, Visia, and the flier. I think that one is
Luella, but I’m not completely sure. “Hopefully she doesn’t try any of her
mindwork on Rhiannon, or she might find herself dangling off the edge. Rhi
isn’t someone to mess with.”

My eyebrows rise.
“Shocked?” Sloane says over her shoulder at me, keeping her hand on

the cliff wall as we reach the end of the stairs. “Don’t be. Liam didn’t hate
many people, but Cat was on that list.”

Right. Because he and Xaden were fostered together. He would have
met her.

“Angry,” Maren corrects her. “I was going to say ‘angry.’ And relax,
Sloane— none of us would dare channel power from our gryphons when
they need to stay completely focused on not falling to their deaths.”

“At least it’s not just me you hate.” I bite back a smile at Sloane.
“I don’t hate you,” Sloane says so quietly that I almost question hearing

it. “It’s hard to hate you when Liam didn’t.” My confused look must be
enough for her to continue. “I’m in the October letters now.”

“Ah, when Xaden forced him to become my bodyguard.” We turn at the
switchback and start the next ascent, this one cut a little steeper into the



harsh gray rock of the cliffside. I look up and immediately regret the
decision, my stomach churning at the view that’s nearly identical to the one
below. It’s cliff and more cliff.

“We both knew my brother well enough to say for certain that no one
forced him,” Sloane replies, her shoulders dipping. “I just wish Xaden had
asked someone else. Anyone else.”

“Me too,” I admit in a whisper, focusing on my footing where the path
has crumbled to nothing more than a few yards.

“Look out!” Panicked voices call out above us.
Our attention jerks up.
The sky is gray and falling rapidly toward us.
It’s not sky. It’s a boulder.
We’re about to become debris thanks to a triggered trap.
“Take cover!” I shout, throwing up my hands and pushing back against

the cliff wall, making myself as small as possible while I reach for Tairn’s
power as a boulder hits the edge of the ledge an ascent above and barrels
toward us.

My heart beats in my ears. It’s just like turning a door handle. Just like
twisting a lock. It’s a lesser magic. I can do lesser magics…

With a boulder the size of a feathertail?
I envision the boulder changing course and twist my hands—
Black streaks through my vision a second before an explosion sounds

above me, and I cover my head with my hands as pebbles rain down.
Tairn pulverized the boulder with his tail.
“Thank you.” I sag back against the rock wall and take a couple of deep

breaths to slow my hammering heart.
“Vi!” Rhiannon yells from up ahead.
“We’re all right!” I shout back.
“Holy shit.” Maren leans next to me, her hand on her chest.
“Morningstartail?” Sloane asks.
“Morningstartail,” I confirm, watching Tairn level out, then fly back our

direction.



Within seconds, he’s hovering in front of me with precise beats of his
wings, his golden eyes narrowing.

Maren ducks her head, and Sloane looks away.
“Hey, that wasn’t my fault. I didn’t slip.” I lift my brows at him.
“It would be a shame to have gone through the last year just to have you

kill us on a measly hike.”
I scoff. “Noted.”
He flexes his wings, air gusting against my cheeks before he dives again.
“Is…um…that normal?” Maren asks as we resume the trudge, my heart

pounding through the surge of adrenaline.
“Which part? Tairn saving my ass? Or being grumpy about it? Because

yes, both are normal.”
“When you walk your parapet, there are rocks thrown at you?” she

clarifies.
“Oh.” I shake my head. “No. You just have to cross it, which is harder

than it sounds. What do you go through to be chosen?”
“We walk to the edge of Cliffsbane, look out over the river—it’s about

thirty feet deep at that point—and wait for the drifts to fly by.” Her tone
lightens, and when I glance back, she’s smiling. “When they approach, we
jump.”

“You jump?” Sloane whips her head back, her eyes wide.
Maren nods, and a dimple forms in her cheek. “We jump. And if we can

land on a gryphon, climb into position, and hold on, they bond us.” She
reaches up and scratches under Dajalair’s chin where beak turns to feather.

“That’s pretty badass,” Sloane admits begrudgingly. “What happens if
you miss? Do the bodies wash up on the shore?”

We both pause, turning fully to watch Maren respond. Have to admit,
I’m curious, too.

Maren blinks. “Bodies? No one dies. It’s just like cliff jumping. If we
miss, we swim to shore, dry, and shake off the embarrassment—and pick
another branch for service. Infantry and artillery are popular.”

Sloane and I exchange another look. “You just…swim to shore,” I say
slowly. “Yeah.” Maren nods, then points between Sloane and me. “And



before you ask, it’s you all who are the weird ones, killing cadets on your
conscription day.”

I draw back, letting her words sink in.
“Technically, they’re candidates,” Sloane mutters. “We’re only cadets

once we cross.”
“Well, I guess that makes it better,” Maren quips sarcastically.
“Hey, are we moving or what?” Sawyer calls from behind us.
“Moving!” I answer, then turn and keep hiking up the incline as a pulse

of star-bright energy courses down the bond from Tairn.
“Whoa,” Sloane says, putting her hand over her heart. “What was that?”
“I felt it, too.” Maren blinks.
“Aretia’s first hatchling has chosen to emerge,” Tairn tells me, his tone

clipped, considering the news.
“We have hatchlings?” I grin. “Why don’t you seem happy about it?”
“The hatchling’s choice transforms the valley back into a hatching

ground. It changes the magic. Every channeling creature within a four-hour
flight of the valley will know.”

“That’s just us. We’re on the edge of about three hours away.” I glance
around, noting that the others seem to be in conversation with their bonded
ones, too. “Well, us and the fliers, and they’d find out once we get there
anyway.” My smile widens at the thought of an Aretian-born feathertail.
“We have to trust them for this to work.”

“I suppose we do.”
 
 
 

By late in the afternoon, I’d rather commend my soul to Malek than take
another fucking step up this never-ending trail. No wonder Tyrrendor

never suffered an invasion from Poromiel. Their troops would either be
exhausted or dead—picked off by patrolling dragons—by the time they
reach the top.



Every muscle aches, somehow simultaneously burning with exertion yet
stiff from how calculated my steps have become the higher we’ve climbed,
a result of the dizziness I can’t quite shake. Even reciting facts in my head
isn’t making it feel connected to my body anymore. My heart beats at a
humming, stressed pace, and I would give almost anything to lean against
the cliff on my right, stop, and rest for an hour. Or two. Or four.

We’ve halted at least twice in the last hour. The gryphons are slowing to
a pace that’s starting to make me worry about reaching the top at all, but at
least none have fallen to their deaths.

And the fights breaking out between fliers and riders aren’t helping,
either. We’ve had to stop the march three times just to switch up where
certain cadets are walking. Brennan might be right that we’ll respect the
fliers for having climbed, but a daylong hike isn’t going to solve the years
of hatred we’ve borne for each other.

The afternoon is extra fun as we enter a thick layer of cloud that only
allows a dozen feet of visibility and our progress slows to what feels like a
crawl.

“Hopefully these clouds mean that we’re close to the top, right?” Maren
asks, glancing with concern at Daja, whose steps have grown slower with
each ascent. Her head hangs and her feathered chest rises faster, shallower
with every step. Hypoxia. Maren’s in the same condition, as is the pair in
front of us, Cibbelair and his flier, Luella. His silver-specked wings aren’t
just tucked in at his side; they’re drooping.

While we riders have been conditioned in the mountains surrounding
Basgiath and often fly at twelve thousand feet, the fliers can’t say the same.
The highest mountain in Poromiel tops out around eight thousand feet,
which explains why only the summitwing drifts would carry out the high-
altitude village raids we heard about in Battle Brief.

Even Sloane looks worried.
“Let me check how much farther we have to go,” I tell Maren, softening

my tone. “Please tell me we’re almost off this damned cliff?”
“You feel closer. Perhaps three or four ascents from the top,” Tairn

answers. “But none of us can see a thing through the fog. Claw Section is



cresting now.”
“I think we have less than an hour left.” I offer Maren what I hope is an

encouraging smile but probably looks like a weary grimace. “You sure you
can’t just pick them up in your claws like the crossbolts and fly them to the
top?” I ask Tairn.

“They’d never tolerate the indignity of it. Besides, all they have to do is
crest the cliffs. We have wagons waiting to carry the ones who will allow
it.”

Right. Because they can’t fly to Aretia. Not in this condition.
“We can make it an hour,” Maren says between huffed breaths. “Luella,”

she calls ahead. “It should be about another hour! Are you holding up?”
“We’ll make it,” a weak voice responds ahead of the silver-specked

gryphon.
Sloane braces a hand on the cliff and looks back at me. “She and Visia

have been arguing,” she whispers. “It’s getting quieter, but I can’t tell if it’s
because they worked out their differences or because Luella can’t breathe.
And I think she just threw up.”

“Altitude sickness,” I respond just as quietly.
“And you don’t have to whisper,” Maren states. “Gryphons have

remarkable hearing.”
“Just like dragons,” I mutter. “No privacy.”
“Exactly.” Maren scratches just above Daja’s beak, reminding me of that

spot above her nostrils that Andarna likes. “Gossiping busybodies,” she
says with affection. “Don’t worry, Luella will win her over. She’s the nicest
of us.”

“I wouldn’t be so sure.” Sloane slows, waiting for us to come up with
her. “Visia’s family was killed in the Sumerton raid last year.”

“Lu wasn’t even a cadet when that happened,” Maren argues between
shallow breaths.

“If riders torched Draithus,” Sloane quips, arching a brow, “would you
care if you were walking with someone from the Northern Wing? Or would
you simply loathe all riders?”



“Good point,” Maren admits. “But it’s hard to hate Luella. Plus, she
bakes really good cake. She’ll win Visia over with butterscotch once we get
to Aretia— just watch.”

A flash of dragon wing appears through the fog, cutting through the
cloud like a knife before disappearing again.

“At least they’re still trying to do patrols,” Sloane says as we continue
forward.

“Brave, considering they can’t see the cliff’s edge,” I add.
A wave of tension…of awareness barrels down my bond with Tairn.

Guess he’s not too happy about the lack of visibility, either.
“Not there!” a familiar voice shouts up ahead, and the line halts. “You’ll

trigger it!”
Dain.
“What the fuck is he doing back here?” Sloane mutters. It doesn’t matter

how many times I explain that Dain didn’t understand the consequences of
stealing my memories; Sloane still despises him.

There’s an overwhelming part of me that still does, too.
Cibbelair begins moving, picking his way carefully up the path, and we

follow, eventually coming to where Dain stands rigidly against the cliff
wall, making himself as small as possible so the gryphon will be able to
pass by.

“There’s a pressure trigger,” he warns, gesturing to a section of the trail
just ahead of him with a map clutched in one hand and holding out his other
arm so Ridoc and Luella don’t continue. “We know it sends out arrows but
don’t know from where, so we can’t disarm it. Hence why I’m standing
here, warning everyone about that particular section.”

I glance up the cliff wall, noting the numerous cracks in the face that
could hide any number of munitions, then back to the trail, where a rope has
been laid across the rock to mark the untouchable area. It looks to be five,
maybe six feet across, which would already give me a little pause on the
ground, but jumping an area that big on an unforgiving ledge, at our level of
fatigue—let alone the gryphons’—is flat-out intimidating.

And I can barely see a damned thing past the rope in this fog.



“We have to jump,” Ridoc says, eyeing the trail.
“Everyone’s made it across so far.” Dain nods.
“Luella?” Maren leans out over the cliff to see past Cibbelair.
A small flier with pale, nearly white hair and freckles that remind me of

Sawyer looks back. “I don’t know. It’s farther than I’ve ever jumped
before.”

“She’s the smallest of us.” Maren doesn’t bother whispering.
“Like you,” Sloane adds, looking my way.
“Ridoc, can you and Dain throw her across?” I ask.
“You mean can I throw you across?” Ridoc asks with his typical

sarcasm.
I snort. “I’ll be able to jump it.” Like hell is Ridoc going to throw me.
Luella’s head draws back in offense.
Shit. “I’m used to the altitude,” I remind her, hoping to cover my

accidental insult. “What has everyone else done?” I ask Dain.
“Running leap,” he answers. “We’re just making sure whoever’s on the

other side is done recovering first so there’s no impact.”
Gods, I wish Xaden were here. He’d simply pluck Luella up with

shadows and ferry her across. Then again, he just might let her fall. I never
quite know when it comes to other people.

Rhiannon can’t retrieve something as big as a person. Cianna, our
executive officer from last year, is up there, but wind wielding isn’t going to
help here, either. Our signets are useless for this.

“You jump first, Ridoc,” Dain orders.
“So I’m not throwing Luella?”
“She either makes it or she doesn’t, just like Parapet,” Visia says, tying

her shoulder-length hair back. “I’ll go first.”
“Cibbe says he goes first,” Luella announces, then all three flatten

themselves against the cliff wall next to Dain so the gryphon can pass.
Sloane’s right. Luella’s physically similar to me, small and shorter than

average. She’s even my age, since fliers start a year after riders. But she’s
suffering from altitude sickness, and I’m not.

I’m just lightheaded, which might be a death sentence up here.



The tip of another dragon wing appears in the mist, the flight pattern
coming from the opposite direction. A brown, maybe? “Is that Aotrom?” I
ask Ridoc. At this point, I’m about to beg for his aid, flier pride be damned.

“No. He’s up top with the others. They just finished carrying the
crossbolts and complaining about being treated like packhorses.”

A corner of my mouth rises. “Sounds about right.”
Cibbelair rocks back on his fawn-and-ochre haunches, then launches

forward, clearing the trap and skidding on his landing.
Luella sucks in a breath as Cibbe’s talons skim the edge, but he quickly

sags against the cliff, his back rising and falling with stuttered breaths.
I’m torn between sighing with relief that the gryphon made it and

acknowledging the growing pit in my stomach that tells me there’s no way
Luella will.

“Mind asking him if he’d serve as a railing?” I ask the flier. “We’re both
going to have to run and leap, and he’d be good at keeping us both from
falling off the cliff.”

Cibbe’s head cranes back at an unnatural angle, and he chortles
aggressively in my direction.

“He…” A small smile tugs at Luella’s mouth. “He reluctantly agrees.”
“Visia and Ridoc, get over there,” Dain orders. “We need to keep the

line moving.”
Visia backs up to where we stand, bounces up on her toes, and runs,

pumping her arms and legs, then launches herself across the roped-off area
and lands cleanly on the other side.

“See, if she can do it, we’re fine,” I assure Luella, hoping it’s not a lie.
“She’s six inches taller than us and not nearly as winded.” Luella

swallows. “And no offense, but you look like you’re about to pass out.”
“I’m not,” I lie, taking a second to adjust the slipping wrap on my left

knee. I haven’t had enough water or enough time off my feet today, and my
body is more than happy to let me know about the neglect.

Gods, I never would have made it through Gauntlet if I’d felt like this
that day.

Gauntlet. An idea takes hold.



“I’ll—” Ridoc starts.
“Wait a second.” I brace my right hand on the cliff to keep from losing

my precarious balance and study the area above the trap, noting one of the
thinnest cracks in the rock. Ridoc’s the best climber we have, so it just
might work.

“What are you thinking?” Dain asks. “Don’t tell me nothing. You have
those little lines between your eyebrows.”

“I’m wondering how attached Ridoc is to his sword.” I breathe through
the nausea that always accompanies the dizziness.

“It’s standard issue,” Ridoc replies, then follows my line of sight. “Oh.
You’re thinking…”

“Yep.” I glance at Luella so he catches on, and he nods slowly.
“I can’t guarantee it will hold.”
“Try.” I lift my brows.
Ridoc reaches for his sword.
“No.” Dain draws his shortsword, leaving the long one sheathed. “Use

this one. It has a longer pommel, and it will be easier to work in.” He hands
the sword to Ridoc, then looks over at me. “I still know how your mind
works.”

Sloane scoffs.
Ridoc takes Dain’s shortsword and sheathes it in the empty spot at his

left, then climbs up a few feet before scrambling horizontally across the
cliff face.

“What is he doing?” Luella asks.
“Watch,” I say quietly so I don’t startle Ridoc.
Hand over hand, he carefully moves across the rock, then plants his feet

on a foothold that I can’t even see, let alone trust, about halfway across. He
frees the shortsword, drawing his elbow back as far as he can without losing
his balance, then jabs it into the cracked rock with full force. The
screeching sound is worse than a pissed-off gryphon.

“Rock,” he says to Dain, reaching back with his right hand.
Dain picks up a loose one the size of my fist, then stretches his long

arms out toward Ridoc, handing it to him.



Ridoc slams the rock against the pommel, hammering it deeper into the
cliff until almost every inch of the blade has disappeared, and I don’t miss
the slight flinch on Dain’s face. Ridoc grips the hilt and tests it with one
palm, then two.

I hold my breath when he drops all his weight onto it, and thank Dunne,
it doesn’t give. He rocks his body backward, then swings forward, letting
go at the height of his arc and landing on the other side of the rope.

This might work.
“And suddenly this is the Gauntlet, not Parapet,” Sloane mutters.
“Easy,” Ridoc says, then pivots to face me and holds out his arms. “Let’s

go, Vi. I’ll even catch you.”
“Fuck off.” I lift my middle finger but grin across the haze at him. “I’m

really hoping you’re right-handed,” I say to Luella.
She nods.
“Good. That hilt is eight inches—”
“Seven,” Dain corrects.
“Imagine a man actually shortening a girl’s estimate,” Maren teases.
I can’t help but smile. “Right. Seven inches. Just have to jump far

enough to grab it, then swing across like Ridoc.”
Luella looks at me like I told her we’ll be climbing the rest of this cliff

by hand.
“Want me to go first?” I offer.
She nods.
“Please take the dizziness and I swear I’ll build you a bigger temple in

Aretia,” I pray to Dunne. But maybe that plea should be aimed at Zihnal,
because damn do we need some luck. Butterflies attack my stomach.

“You’re sure?” Dain asks.
I level a glare at him.
“You’re sure.” He restates it as fact, then backs up to give me more

room.
I bounce up on the balls of my feet, then spring forward, planting that

last step just before the rope and leaping toward the hilt.
I feel every beat of my heart marking time as I’m airborne.



Reach it. Reach it. REACH IT!
My right hand makes contact first, and I grip hard, slamming my left

into the available space and holding tight as my body swings so I don’t fly
forward and trigger the trap.

“You’ve got this!” Ridoc shouts, holding out his arms.
“I will kick you in the face if you try to catch me!” I warn.
He grins and backs up a few steps as I take breath after breath, pushing

back the blackening edges of my vision with sheer will, refusing to let the
dizziness win.

I will not fucking die today.
Rocking my body back, I start to swing just like I’m on a Gauntlet

obstacle, whipping my feet forward and back. When I have enough
momentum, I mutter another prayer and let go, flying toward that rope line.

I hit the other side, and pain explodes in my knees as I fall forward,
catching myself with my palms. You made it, you made it, you made it, I
chant, forcing the pain into a neat little box and shoving a lid over it and
stumbling to my feet. A quick sweep of hands tells me I haven’t dislocated
my kneecaps, though the left argues that it came damn close to abandoning
ship.

“See?” I force a smile to my face and turn. “You can do it.”
Maren pats Luella on the shoulder, and whatever she says makes the

smaller flier nod as I back up, moving toward the center of the ledge and
giving her space to land.

She takes the obstacle just like I did, her feet kicking for distance before
she reaches the hilt and holds tight.

“There you go!” I shout. “Now swing until you feel you have the force
to carry you.”

“I can’t!” she cries out. “My hands are slipping!”
Shit.
“You can,” Dain encourages. “But you’d better move now.”
“Move, Luella!” Maren yells.
Luella starts the same rocking pattern Ridoc and I used, swinging her

feet to gain momentum, then lets go.



I hold my breath as she hurtles toward the line of safety.
Her feet land just before the rope and her eyes lock on mine, widening

with terror as she throws herself forward, like the trap won’t notice her
misstep if she’s quick enough.

Oh, fuck. Maybe Dain’s wrong. Maybe the trap is twelve inches before
the rope line. Maybe she’s in the clear. Maybe we all are.

But clearly I have prayed to the wrong god.
Everything somehow slows and yet happens at once.
Luella dives forward, hurling her body where she was looking—at me

instead of Cibbelair—and I barely have time to open my arms before she
impacts, driving me backward at an angle into Visia…toward the edge of
the cliff.

“Vi!” Ridoc shouts.
I try to pivot, to heave as much of our weight toward the safety of the

wall as I can, but there’s not enough time or strength, and we flounder,
tangled in one another.

Feet trip other feet, and I start to fall. We all do.
A hand grasps the waistband of the back of my leathers and pulls,

changing the direction of my fall. Ridoc. My feet lose traction as my
momentum shifts, and I hit my knees near the edge of the cliff just in time
to see Visia and Luella start to slide over.

And I can no longer stop time.
“No!” I scramble forward, rock scraping over my torso, and throw out

my arms, reaching for whoever is closest as a sound like gushing wind
rushes over my head.

Visia grabs hold of my left hand and Luella grips my right wrist, the
weight of both women nearly taking me to join them. My right shoulder
pops from the socket, and agony rips from my throat with a scream.

Visia fumbles for a handhold along the cliff wall, but Luella has both
hands locked on my wrist, her feet kicking for purchase.

“Pull me up!” Luella shrieks, and I’m in too much pain to verbalize that
I can’t.



“Ridoc!” I shout as the edges of my vision blur, then blacken. “Help
me!”

Feet pound, but Luella’s grip slips from my wrist to my hand, and I
chance a look back over my right shoulder, hoping for rescue as Visia’s
weight disappears, plucked from the side of the cliff by a giant beak.

Cibbe.
Visia was in his way. The gryphon dumps the rider on the ledge and then

cranes his enormous neck toward Luella as bootsteps race down the ascent.
But all I see is Ridoc, staggering backward toward the wall, two arrows

piercing the side of his abdomen.
“I’m all right.” He nods quickly, glancing down at the arrows, blood

trickling from his mouth.
No. No. NO.
I scream up the cliff for the only person who can save him now.
“BRENNAN!”

OceanofPDF.com



When a gryphon bonds, it does so for life.

Guard your life as you would your gryphon’s, for they are forever

intertwined.

—CHAPTER ONE, THE CANON OF THE FLIER



CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR

Booted feet scurry toward me from both directions, and Sloane grabs
hold of Ridoc as Dain hits his knees beside me, then lunges forward,

reaching for Luella at the same moment Cibbe does.
I rip my gaze from Ridoc’s and focus on Luella’s hazel eyes as she slips

down my limp fingers.
“Hold on!” I demand. They just need another second.
But she slips farther, and Cibbe’s beak closes on nothing as she loses her

grip and falls, the cloud swallowing her whole.
“Luella!” a woman shouts from the left.
Cibbelair screams, and the shrill sound vibrates through my chest as I

stare and stare and stare at the space where Luella was, as if she’ll somehow
emerge from the mist.

As if there’s any chance she’s alive.
“Damn it!” Dain quickly pushes back onto his knees. “Vi—”
“I can’t move.” My voice drops to a whimper. “My shoulder’s out.” Any

second, the adrenaline will wear off and the true pain of the injury will hit.
“All right.” His tone immediately softens. “I’ve got you.” His hands

wrap around my rib cage, and he carefully lifts me to my feet, my right arm
hanging uselessly at my side.

Cibbe’s screams become a keening wail.
“Something feels wrong,” Tairn says.



“It’s all fucking wrong.”
“You dropped her!” Cat charges toward us from the other side of Cibbe,

fury rightfully etched in every line of her scowl.
“I never had her.” My chest crumples under the unbearable weight of the

guilt because she’s partially right. I may not have dropped her, but I didn’t
save her, either.

“Cat, no.” Maren hurries around us, putting her hands out as if to block
her best friend. “I saw it happen. It’s not Violet’s fault. Luella almost killed
both of the riders because she couldn’t jump the trap.”

“You fucking dropped her!” Cat surges against Maren. “Cibbe saved
your precious rider, and you dropped our flier! I will kill you for this!”

“Knock it off!” Maren shouts. “You kill her, you kill Riorson. Everyone
knows it.”

Fuck, it always comes down to that, doesn’t it?
“I can—” Cat starts.
“Take one step toward Violet, and I’ll throw you off this fucking cliff

myself,” Dain warns, his voice low and menacing. “Unlike Riorson, I don’t
give a shit who your uncle is.”

“I’ll do it just for fun,” Sloane adds.
“Ridoc,” I manage to say around the pain that throbs from my shoulder

then devours the rest of me.
“Alive,” he answers weakly.
“Cat, let it go. Cibbe doesn’t have long,” Maren says, her hand

trembling as she reaches for the gryphon.
Cat breathes deeply, then nods, moving to the gryphon’s side.
“Gryphons die with their fliers,” Maren explains, her tone softening as

she strokes the line where feathers turn to fur.
Like Tairn and me.
Cibbe lets loose a stuttered, three-beat cry, and the entire cliff, both

above us and below, echoes it, as though the gryphons grieve the loss of the
flier as one.

The beat of wings approaches as Dain leads me back from the edge, and
I watch the mist, waiting for a flash of orange, for Marbh and Brennan to



arrive.
“Put my shoulder back in.” My voice croaks as I glance at Dain.
“Shit. Are you serious?” He lifts his brows.
“Do it. Just like when I was fourteen.”
“And seventeen,” he mutters.
“Exactly. You know how to do it, and we don’t have any healers

nearby.”
“You don’t want to wait for Brennan?” Dain takes hold of my arm.

“Brennan will try to mend me first, and Ridoc is dying. Now do it!” I snap,
bracing for the pain.

A strap of leather appears in front of my face. “Bite down,” Maren
orders over Cibbe’s cries.

I can’t look at him, can’t watch his healthy body die just like Liam’s had,
so I face forward and bite.

“One.” Dain lifts my arm slightly and adjusts. “Two.” He brings my arm
out to a ninety-degree angle.

My teeth mark the leather as I fight the scream working its way up my
throat. Ridoc has been shot with two arrows. I can handle this.

“I’m so fucking sorry,” Dain whispers, putting his other hand between
my neck and shoulder. “Three!” He rolls my arm forward and I clench my
jaw, my eyes squeezing shut as white-hot pain sends stars flashing across
my vision and he puts the joint back into place.

The relief from the worst of the pain is instant, and I remove the leather
from between my teeth. “Thank you.”

“Never thank me for that.” He lifts my arm above my head, making sure
it’s in place, rotates it back down, then bends my elbow, tucking my arm
across my chest before sliding his belt off and fashioning a temporary sling.
“How is he?” he asks over his shoulder.

“Losing blood,” Sloane answers as an orange claw lands on the ledge
where the trap had been and Brennan executes a perfect roll-on landing.

“Are you—” He comes running at me, scanning me for blood.
“I’m fine! Save Ridoc!”
“Fuck.” Brennan levels a look at Dain’s leg. “You’re next.”



“It’s just a graze.” Dain glances down at me. “It just caught the edge of
my thigh.”

Brennan crouches next to Ridoc and starts working.
“It’s all right,” Maren tells Cibbe as the gryphon collapses, his head

hanging over the edge of the cliff as his cries grow softer. “You have earned
an honorable death.”

Another set of wingbeats fills the air, and I face the mist, waiting for
Tairn’s disapproving scowl. But I don’t feel him any closer than before.

“You did not ask me to fetch you,” he says sternly.
The mist parts like a scene from a nightmare, and gray, gaping jaws fill

my vision, opening wide to reveal dripping teeth that snap closed around
Cibbe’s neck, snatching the gryphon from the ledge before falling back into
the mist.

My heart stops.
“What the fuck—” Sloane whispers.
“Wyvern,” I manage to whisper, my head swiveling toward Maren and

Cat. They’re the only people here who’ve seen one. “Wyvern, right?”
“Wyvern,” Cat replies, her eyes wide with shock. Maren is still as a

statue.
“Wyvern!” Dain bellows, and all hell breaks loose.
“We can’t see anything in the cloud cover,” Tairn growls.
“But they can see well enough to eat us!” I can already feel him on the

move. Thank gods Andarna is in Aretia. “Get up the cliff!” I shout at
Maren, grasping her shoulder with my uninjured hand and shaking her to
snap her out of it. “Get Daja up the cliff!”

She blinks, then nods. “Daja!”
Dain yanks me out of the path as the gryphon charges forward, and I can

only hope the adrenaline rush is enough to get them up the last couple of
ascents.

“I can’t move him,” Brennan says, his sight solely focused on Ridoc’s
wounds. “I’m blocking most of his pain, but I can’t move him, Vi.”

“And we’re sitting ducks here,” Sloane mutters, looking at the mist as
more riders and gryphons push by.



“Go,” Ridoc whispers, opening his eyes and finding mine. “Get off this
trail.”

I kneel beside him and take his hand. “We made a deal, remember? All
four of us live to see graduation. We. Made. A. Deal.”

“Ridoc?” Sawyer pushes toward us, his eyes bulging with fear as he
brings up the last of our squad and Tail Section begins.

“They can’t see,” Brennan says, his voice tensing as his hands move,
snapping one arrow in half, and then the second. “Aetos, the dragons can’t
see!”

“On it!” Dain looks up the cliff, and I hold Ridoc’s hand tight as
Brennan slides the first arrow out of his abdomen.

“You’re on what exactly?” Sawyer snaps at Dain.
“Cath is relaying to Gaothal that Cianna needs to wield some wind so

the riot can see,” Dain responds. “You can’t do anything here, Henrick, so
get the others to safety!”

Sawyer clenches his fists. “If you think I’m going to leave my
squadmates—”

“Sounds like your wingleader gave you an order, cadet,” Brennan says,
his tone flat.

“Take Sloane.” I look over at her as she draws back, clearly offended. “I
had to hold Liam while he died, his dragon already eviscerated by the jaws
of a wyvern, and I will not watch his sister suffer the same fate. Get up the
fucking cliff!”

Sawyer all but lifts Sloane to her feet, and the two join into the steady,
hurried march as the clouds begin to thin.

“How powerful is Cianna?” I ask Dain quietly, absorbing the pressure of
Ridoc’s squeezing hand as Brennan works the second arrow free.

His tense expression answers the question for him.
The visibility may be improving, but it’s not nearly enough to see what

we’re up against, and even if it were, without crossbolts, I’m the best
weapon we have.

“I’ve already come to that conclusion.” Gusts of air hit my back from
the force of Tairn’s wings.



“Right.” I let go of Ridoc’s hand and brush his hair back up his forehead.
“You will not die. Do you understand?”

He nods, his dark brown eyes fluttering closed as I stand.
“Where do you think you’re going?” Brennan asks, his concentration

wavering.
“I’m the best shot you’ve got. We both know it.”
“Fuck,” Brennan mutters.
“Find every wind wielder we have,” I tell Dain as I walk to the brink of

the ledge, temporarily stopping traffic as Tairn swings his massive body
around to face Poromiel. “I think there’s a storm wielder in First Wing. Not
as powerful as my mother, but if we can raise the temperature it should help
clear the clouds.”

“Violet!” Brennan calls out. “If we can’t clear the clouds, then use them
to your advantage! No one here is as powerful as General Sorrengail. Come
up with another plan.”

Ever the tactician.
“We could send the entire riot in,” Dain suggests.
“And if there’s one rider on that wyvern, we could lose the entire riot.” I

shake my head.
“You’re wounded. You know that, right?” Dain questions me, glancing

at his belt.
“And you’re a memory reader.”
His gaze narrows.
“Oh, were we not stating obvious facts?” I study the clouds around us,

looking for any break, any sign of blue sky. “Hate to break it to you, but
your signet isn’t exactly helpful in this situation.”

“No time for this.” Tairn lays his massive tail beside the ledge while
keeping a steady hover.

“Would Riorson let you rush off into a battle against gods know how
many wyvern—or worse, the venin who created them—when you’re
wounded?” His eyebrows rise.

“Yes.” I step out onto the midpoint of Tairn’s tail, my stomach settling at
the familiar territory beneath my boots as I look back over my shoulder at



Dain. “That’s why I love him.”
I don’t wait for his response, not when Tairn is a giant target. He holds

remarkably steady as I walk forward, navigating his spikes and scales with
ease.

“The flier’s death is not your fault,” Tairn tells me as I find my saddle
and lower into the seat.

“We’ll save that for another day.” I fumble with the belt for precious
seconds. This fucking thing is nearly impossible with one arm, but I
manage by holding the strap in my right hand and fastening with my left.
“You know I can’t wield with one hand, right?”

“You don’t need me to tell you your limits.” Tairn dives and I’m thrown
forward in my seat as we plummet through thousands of feet of dissipating
clouds.

“You can’t feel them, can you?”
“I was aware something felt off, but if I could accurately detect wyvern

—if any of us could—without seeing them, we wouldn’t be in this position.”
Fair point.
Wind bites at my face, and tears streak from my eyes, but I’m not going

to waste precious arm movements on getting my goggles from my pack. We
emerge from the cloud cover and level out just beneath it.

“The ascents are clear,” Tairn says. “We will not risk the high ground if
there are no riders to defend.” With great beats of his wings, we jolt
upward, back into the mist.

“Are there other dragons out here?” I reach for the buckle of Dain’s belt
and carefully pull the leather aside to slip my arm free. I’m going to need it
as soon as we’re done. “I don’t want to hit anyone by accident.” Even if
hitting the wyvern would probably be an accident, given my aim.

“They’re all above, guarding the riders.”
“Good.” We fly straight through the thickest parts of the cloud, but

there’s no trace of the wyvern.
Until they—as in two of them—fly by on either side of us, streaks of

gray in the otherwise endless white.
“Shit.”



Tairn flies high, pushing up into blue sky.
Clouds stretch from the cliffs over the surrounding landscape. No

wonder the riot didn’t see the wyvern. They have the perfect cover.
And Cianna isn’t powerful enough to dissipate all this.
Use it. That’s what Brennan suggested.
Wyvern aren’t just alive…they’re created. They carry a form of energy

forced into them by dark wielders.
“I have an idea.”
“I approve.” Tairn sails into the cloud cover. “I’ve told Gaothal to

instruct his rider to stop eliminating the clouds and instead push them away
from the cliff.”

“Just from where the path is. Until then, keep the wyvern distracted.” I
clutch the pommel of the saddle with my uninjured hand and shove my
right hand into my flight jacket between the buttons to stabilize my
shoulder as much as possible.

Then Tairn dives back into the mist.
“Only two that Aotrom can see,” Tairn announces, his wings beating the

clouds into little swirl patterns behind us. “The cover has thinned enough to
the north to make out their shapes.”

“A patrol?”
“Riderless,” he confirms.
“Thank you, Zihnal.” I lean forward as tears streak from the corners of

my eyes. “I know, I know. Dragons pay no heed to our gods.”
Tairn snorts, following a pattern of swirls similar to his own. He’s

tracking the wyvern.
“You’re faster than they are, right?” Fear licks down my spine.
“Don’t insult me when we’re headed into battle.”
“Right,” I mutter to myself.
“Feel like using the conduit?” Tairn asks as two tails appear ahead.
“Nope. Aiming is detrimental to the goal.”
“Understood.” His wings beat faster, propelling us to a speed that leaves

my stomach behind and narrows my vision as he pulls up above the wyvern
to catch their attention.



It works, and my stomach hollows as we switch from the predator to the
prey.

“If there were only one, I’d rip his throat out and call it a day.”
“I know.” But there’s no guarantee that there are only two.
“Hold on, Silver One.”
I buckle down, making myself as small as possible and lying across the

saddle to minimize air resistance as Tairn moves at a pace I’ve never
experienced. It takes all my effort to breathe, to fight the night at the edge
of my vision, to just stay conscious as he bolts out of the clouds, then
plummets back into the cover a breath later.

“They followed.”
“Great.” My fucking teeth are rattling. “How is that cloud cover?

Because I can’t wield if I’m passed out.”
“They are almost clear.”
I grit my teeth and ignore the throbbing ache of my shoulder. The clouds

have to clear the path, or there’s every chance I’ll kill Ridoc and Brennan if
they’re still on the trail.

“We’re rolling,” he warns me a second before he does so, executing a
move that disorients me thoroughly, a move most riders can’t hold their seat
for.

My stomach lurches into my lungs as he levels out, flying back the
opposite way and dropping us directly under the wyvern. “I know we’re not
supposed to question dragons—”

“Then don’t.”
A set of pointed gray claws falls rapidly toward us. “Tairn!”
He banks hard right, then climbs quickly. “The clouds have cleared the

trail.”
My heart speeds to a gallop. “Make sure they’re following us.”
“Don’t turn around, or you might actually pass out,” he instructs, flying

faster.
I slide my hand out of my jacket with a wince, then gasp with pain as I

rotate my palms downward and open myself to Tairn’s power. It flows



through me, filling my muscles, my veins, the very marrow of my bones
until I am power and power is me. My skin starts to hum, then sizzle.

We break through the clouds, and I throw my arms wide, pushing past
the pain and screaming with it all in the same breath, setting the molten
energy within me free, and for the first time in my life, I force the power
downward.

Energy erupts through me, searing my skin on the way out as lightning
strikes within the cloud below us, webbing out like the many branches of an
overgrown briar patch, twisting and turning, drawn to the energy harnessed
within the wyvern.

Four distinct shapes light up beneath us, two directly under and two
closer to the edge of the cliff, flashing brightly with the endless stream of
power.

“Break free!” Tairn demands.
I force my palms shut and shove the Archives door in my mind closed,

blocking the endless torrent of Tairn’s power before I end up in the same
condition I’d been in at Basgiath under Carr and Varrish’s punishment.

The flashing stops.
“Go!” I shout down the bond, clutching my right arm with my left as

Tairn banks deeply to the left and dives for the ground.
This time, the wind is a welcome reprieve from the heat of my skin and

the burn within my lungs as we pass through the cloud and emerge on the
other side.

Four wyvern carcasses litter the ground, one in the middle of the very
field we’d stood in this morning. Tairn flies over each just long enough to
be sure that they are, in fact, riderless, and we’re joined by four others in
the riot on one last sweep of the area.

Then we climb again, soaring through the clouds and coming out at the
edge of the cliff, where everyone has gathered. Some gryphons load into
heavy wagons with stumbling steps while others appear to have lost
consciousness on the ground, but the fliers are all standing, as are the
squads of riders.



Tairn quickly locates ours, and riders scurry as he drops to an abrupt
landing.

“You could have crushed someone,” I lecture.
“Could have, but alas, they moved.”
I spot Rhiannon and Sawyer with Ridoc braced between them, walking

him toward Aotrom, and breathe a sigh of relief.
“What? You thought I’d let your friend die?” Brennan asks, folding his

arms and tilting his head up at me from where he stands next to Bodhi and
Dain to the right of Tairn’s foreleg.

“Never doubted you for a second.” I force a smile.
“Want to get your ass down here and let me mend that shoulder?” He

wields the older brother disapproving stare like the professional he is.
“Not particularly.” I grimace and haul Dain’s belt back into position,

refusing to take the chance that I won’t be able to mount again if a mending
session knocks me out.

“So fucking stubborn,” Brennan mutters, shoving his hands through his
hair. “How did you know you could kill them like that?”

“I didn’t.” I breathe through the wave of pain that threatens to pull me
under as I let the weight of my shoulder fall into the makeshift sling.
“Wyvern are created with dark wielder magic, and Felix said something to
me about energy fields the other day. I took a chance that the lightning
would be drawn to their magic, and Tairn agreed to try.”

Brennan’s jaw drops slightly and Dain bites back an uncharacteristic
smile, reminding me of the years when he cared more about climbing trees
than our curfew.

“Chance panned out,” Bodhi says, flat-out grinning.
“It did.” I nod. “Aren’t you going to tell me how brilliant that idea

was?”
Tairn scoffs. “I chose you last year for that brilliance, and now you’d

like to be congratulated like it’s something new? How odd.”
“You’re impossible to impress.”
“I’m a dragon, a Black Morningstartail. The descendent of—”
“Yeah, yeah.” I cut him off before he makes me recite his entire lineage.



“Cath said there were four of them in there.” Dain deftly changes the
subject. “At least they were riderless. Could you imagine if dark wielders
knew we were joining forces with fliers and moving them into Tyrrendor?
Where a dragon just hatched? They’d see us as a ripe little draining target.”

Bodhi’s face falls.
Oh shit. “That’s why you were worried.”
“There’s no telling who is within a four-hour flight.” Tairn bites out

those last words.
“They already know.” My stomach twists. “That’s why they’re using

riderless wyverns to patrol.”
Brennan stills completely, and the color drains from his face.
“What?” Dain glances between us.
“Venin share a collective conscious with the wyvern they create,”

Brennan says quietly. “That’s what Tecarus’s book says.”
“The book you haven’t let me read in the four days you’ve had it?” I

touch my fingertips to my head as the dizziness returns.
“It’s only been three days, and you apparently already know,” Brennan

counters. “And some things are beyond your clearance, cadet, especially
information we haven’t finished analyzing.”

“I know because I read the book my father gave me,” I argue, and I
almost regret the emphasis when he flinches. He didn’t just separate himself
from Mom when he changed his name—he distanced himself from Dad.
“And Bodhi knows because it’s how I killed an entire horde of them at
Resson.”

“I didn’t know,” Dain interrupts. “So if one of them felt that energy
pulse… If one of them knows what it means…”

“Whoever created them knows,” I finish for him, turning my gaze to
Brennan. “And you can bet they’ll come for us now.”

OceanofPDF.com



It was only in the last fifty years that we realized they were no longer
solely coming from the Barrens. They’d begun to take recruits,

teaching those who never bonded a gryphon to channel what was not
theirs to take, to upset the balance of magic by stealing it from the very

source.

The problem with mankind is we too often find our souls to be a fair
price for power.

—CAPTAIN LERA DORRELL’S GUIDE TO VANQUISHING THE VENIN
PROPERTY OF CLIFFSBANE ACADEMY



CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE

“Coralee Ryle. Nicholai Panya,” a newly pinned Major Devera calls
out over the frost-covered courtyard, reading from what’s become

the new death roll. For the first time since entering the quadrant, the names
called every morning for the last week haven’t been cadets, but active riders
—and fliers—on the front lines, fighting to fortify the villages along the
Stonewater River. Trying to divert the venin’s attention from our valley,
where four new dragons have hatched.

Don’t say Mira. Don’t say Mira. Don’t say Mira. It’s become my
personal prayer to whatever god will listen while standing in formation.

I feel so fucking useless. Unlike the last two weeks, there’s no luminary
to fetch, no wards to fail at. There’s a real war down there, and we’re up
here learning history and physics.

“We lost two yesterday?” Aaric tenses in the row ahead.
Rhiannon glances back over her shoulder at me, sorrow haunting her

eyes for a heartbeat before she composes herself with a grace I can never
seem to manage and straightens her shoulders at Sawyer’s side. Two riders
in one day is unfathomable in active service. The entirety of the Aretian
Quadrant will be dead in less than two months at this rate.

“I think that’s Isar’s brother,” Ridoc says from beside me. “Second
Wing.”



We both glance left, past Third Wing. Isar Panya bows her head from the
middle of her squad in Tail Section.

I blink back the burning in my eyes, and my fingers squeeze tight around
the conduit in my left hand.

“He was a lieutenant,” Imogen says quietly.
“Two years ahead of us,” Quinn adds. “Great sense of humor.”
“This is cruel,” I whisper. “Telling us that our siblings, our friends are

dead this way is fucking cruel.” It’s harsher than anything we’ve been put
through at Basgiath.

“It’s no different than morning formation,” Visia says over her shoulder.
“Yes, it is,” Sloane argues. “Hearing someone from a different wing

died, or hell, even our squad, isn’t the same as being told your brother’s
gone.” Her voice cracks.

A lump swells painfully in my throat. Brennan is inside, no doubt
arguing with the Assembly about where to find game for the tsunami of
predators we’ve brought here over the last month or coordinating shipments
from the now-functioning forge. He’s safe.

Every commissioned rider that isn’t here teaching has been sent in shifts
to man the outposts along the Cliffs of Dralor, like Xaden, Garrick, Heaton,
and Emery…or to hold the front, like Mira.

Devera clears her throat and exchanges the roll for the one Jesinia holds.
My shoulders dip, a breath of relief clouding the freezing air. Mira’s

alive. Or at least she was last night when the rotational rider brought the
news in. Morning formation doesn’t scare me when it comes to Xaden—I’d
know instantly if he…

Gods, I can’t even think it.
“Chrissa Verlin,” Devera begins reading from the commissioned fliers’

roll. “Mika Renfrew—”
“Mika!” A low, guttural scream erupts from our right, and every head

turns to a drift near the center of the fliers’ formation as a guy falls to his
knees. The rest of his drift turns, covering him with comforting arms.

“I’m never going to get used to hearing them do that,” Aaric mutters,
shifting his weight.



“Hearing them what?” Sloane counters. “Have emotions?”
“Sorrengail knows what I mean. You’ve been out there—” Aaric says to

me.
“And I cried like an infant while Liam died. Turn around.” Shit, isn’t

that at odds with everything I told Rhiannon when we fought beside the
Gauntlet? The deaths are supposed to harden us, so why do I agree with
Sloane on this one? There’s something infinitely more…human about the
way the fliers react.

Even the way they conduct their own Threshing at Cliffsbane is
considerably less cruel than what we endure at Basgiath. Now I can’t decide
if it makes us stronger…or simply harder.

“— and Alvar Gilana,” Devara concludes. “We commend their souls to
Malek.”

I glance right—just like I do every morning—and see Cat’s posture
soften, her eyes close briefly from her drift on the closest edge of their
formation. Syrena is still alive, too.

She looks over at me and I nod, which she returns, even if it’s curt. It’s
our one daily moment of truce, the only time we seem to recognize each
other as little sisters instead of enemies, and it’s over in less than a
heartbeat.

Her gaze shifts into a glare as formation breaks.
Swear to Amari, Cat’s hell-bent on making my life as miserable as

fucking possible every other minute of the day and tries twice as hard on
the days Xaden is here. Her loathing makes Sloane look downright warm
and fuzzy—and worse, her entire drift seems focused on our squad, with
five of the remaining six—Maren being the exception—blaming me for
Luella’s death and loudly proclaiming that I chose the rider over the flier.

The tall guy with shoulder-length brown hair—pretty sure his name is
Trager—swung for Ridoc on the valley’s flight field two days ago and
ended up with Rhiannon’s fist in his face when he ran his mouth about her
particular border village turning away refugees. His lip is still scabbed.
Guess our little hike up the cliffs didn’t bond us like they’d hoped.



“What did she do this morning?” Rhiannon asks, looking Cat’s direction
with a raised brow.

“Knocked on my door before dawn, then got all annoyed when I actually
answered the damned thing.” Just the thought of it has my hand warming
along the conduit. Felix has replaced the alloy in my conduit twice this
week, but at least my inability to control my own power is helping imbue
alloy for daggers, so in a way, I’m helping the war effort, since my attempt
at activating the wardstone failed. I roll my right shoulder, hoping to ease
the ache now that I’ve ditched the sling, but it still protests.

“Is she running out of bullshit to pull on you?” Ridoc asks as we start to
move toward the door. It takes twice as long to get out of formation here
than at Basgiath, considering Riorson House was built for keeping people
out, not letting them in. “That doesn’t sound as bad as Saturday, when she
posted that list of all the fliers Mira has taken out over the years.”

That day had been a treat and definitely soothed relations between riders
and fliers. We’d had at least a dozen more fights than usual break out in the
hallways.

“She was wearing a Deverelli silk robe when I answered the door.” I
grab my pack from the ground and swing it over my shoulders, grimacing at
the weight. “How do I know it was Deverelli silk, you ask? Because it was
pretty much see-through.”

“Oh, damn!” Sawyer cringes. “Why would she… Are you…”
Rhiannon, Quinn, and even Imogen stare at him as the first-years head

inside.
“Think about where she sleeps!” Ridoc smacks the back of Sawyer’s

head.
“Ow! Right. You’re still in Riorson’s room,” Sawyer says slowly,

blatantly turning his back on Cat as she walks by with her drift. “I forgot.
Roll has you listed in Rhiannon’s room.”

Bringing an extra hundred cadets here meant doubling up, and
technically, I shouldn’t be sleeping in a lieutenant’s room—not that either of
us care or leadership is going to say anything to the man who owns the
house.



“Which I appreciate.” Rhiannon rests her hand over her heart. “As it
gives me a little privacy for whenever Tara and I actually get time to see
each other.”

“Happy to help.” I crack a smile.
“Have to give it to the girl.” Imogen shakes her head, sighing as she

looks past me toward Cat and her drift. “She’s tenacious.”
Every head swivels in her direction.
“Hey.” Imogen puts her hands up. “I’m Team Violet. Just saying that I

bet if Xaden ever called it quits, you’d fight to get him back, too.”
Ugh. When she puts it that way…
“Do not humanize that walking piece of terror,” Rhiannon counters. “I

climbed the entire cliff with her, and I’m starting to think we’d be better off
having Jack Barlowe up here instead.”

He’s one person I’m glad stayed behind, no matter how nice he’d been
to me. I still don’t trust that guy. Never will.

“Is Cat being…Cat again?” Bodhi asks, walking over as the courtyard
empties.

“It’s fine. She’s fine. I’m fine.” I shake my head, lying through my teeth
so he doesn’t tell Xaden that I can’t handle myself. “Rhiannon and I have
somewhere to be.”

“We do?” Rhi’s eyebrows rise. “We do.”
“Right.” He turns to Rhiannon. “Well, Professor Trissa just chose your

second-years for a new class. Tomorrow at two in the valley.”
Trissa? She’s the petite, quiet member of the Assembly.
“We’ll be there,” Rhi promises.

…
 
 
 

now falls in Aretia earlier than it does at Basgiath, and by the first week in
November, a thin blanket of white covers the rapidly growing town but not



S the valley above, thanks to a combination of the natural thermal heat of
the mountain range and the magic channeled by gryphon and dragon
alike, which only seems to be increasing.

I glance toward the worn path at the end of the valley that leads down to
Riorson House, anxiety churning in my stomach.

“This is awkward.” Sawyer folds his arms and levels a bored look across
the fifteen feet of valley grass that separate the second-year riders in our
squad from the second-year fliers in Cat’s drift.

Looks like we’ve both been summoned.
But if the line of dragons standing behind us and the gryphons behind

the fliers can manage not to attack each other, surely we can be civil.
“Agreed.”
“Civil is overrated,” Andarna notes, flexing her claws in the grass. “I’ve

never tasted gryphon—”
“We do not eat our allies,” Tairn lectures. “Find another snack.”
Looking right, I catch Sawyer glancing between Andarna and Tairn over

and over, like he’s comparing the differences. “Don’t worry, I feel like I see
double all the time.”

“It’s not that. Did she grow again?” he asks, pulling at his collar. “I feel
like she grew.”

“I think a few inches this week.” I nod. “We had to add a link to her
harness on each side.”

“Soon I’ll be able to fly without it,” Andarna notes with a huff.
Ridoc pivots to make his own observations, smiling up at Andarna. “The

little Mini-Tairn is becoming ferocious, isn’t she—”
“I am no one’s miniature.” Andarna’s head darts toward him, and she

snaps her teeth less than a foot in front of his face.
My heart bolts. “Andarna!” I shout, turning quickly to put myself

between her and Ridoc as she withdraws.
“Damn!” Ridoc throws his hands up, his hair blowing back from the

force of what can only be described as the frustrated huff of Tairn’s…sigh.
“Big,” Ridoc blurts. “Meant to say big.”



“No more spending time with Sgaeyl.” I point at her, stopping short of
tapping her chin before looking up at Tairn, who’s lowered his head over
her like he might actually put her between his teeth and yank her off the
field like a puppy. “I mean it. She’s rubbing off on you.”

“I could only be so lucky.” Andarna lifts her head, preening, and Tairn
grumbles something in his own language.

“Holy shit,” Maren mutters from behind me.
“Sorry about that. Adolescents.” I shrug at Ridoc.
“Still can’t believe feathertails are kids,” Sawyer says, taking a step

away from Andarna. “Or that you bonded two black dragons.”
“That one caught me off guard, too.”
I glance toward the path again, but there’s no sign of Rhiannon. If

Professor Trissa gets here before Rhi, she’ll be in major trouble. Trissa
might be the softest-spoken member of the Assembly, but she’s also the
sharpest-tongued when pissed, according to what Xaden told me before he
flew out for the border again this morning with Heaton and Emery. At least
we’d had a night together.

The third-years went, too, patrolling the Cliffs of Dralor for wyvern and
Navarrian riders.

Wyvern we wouldn’t have to worry about if I hadn’t failed to raise the
wards.

“Which part’s worse?” Ridoc muses, tapping the dimple in his chin.
“Them silently glaring at us like we have any fucking clue why they’re up
here, too? Or their menacing escorts?” His gaze locks on the gryphons
standing guard over their fliers.

Dajalair wobbles slightly, still clearly not adjusted to the altitude. I have
yet to see a single gryphon fly in the week that they’ve been here.

“Both.” Sawyer unbuttons his flight jacket. “Is it me or is it getting
hotter up here?”

“Hotter,” I agree, breathing a sigh of relief when Rhiannon appears,
flashing me an excited smile as she hikes toward us from the other side of
the field. I add to Ridoc, “And be nice. I like Maren.”



“I like Maren, too—but her best friend needs to get tossed off this cliff,”
Sawyer notes under his breath.

“The gryphons are up and about faster than I thought,” Ridoc observes.
“Most of them were still sleeping off the altitude a few days ago.”

The gryphon standing behind Trager, the guy with the shoulder-length
brown hair and crooked smile—notices Ridoc’s appraisal, and snaps his
sharp, two-foot beak in warning.

Trager smirks.
Aotrom blows a hot gust of steam over our heads, blasting all three fliers

in the face with not just steam but a healthy layer of…is that snot?
“In their defense, we brought our own escorts,” I note as Andarna stalks

forward, her claws sinking into the grass on either side of me in clear
warning. Her talons grow sharper by the day, and she fully extended her
wing for the first time this morning, making her extra bold this afternoon.

“Elders say I’ll be flying within a few weeks.” A growl aimed at the
gryphon works up her throat, and his beady eyes flare, then blink.

“You’re baring your teeth, aren’t you?” I don’t bother hiding my smile.
“I don’t trust them,” she answers. “Especially the one in the center who

looks to be plotting your death.”
“Don’t let her bother you.”
Cat’s eyes are indeed narrowed on me as usual.
“She bothers you.” Andarna takes a single step forward, putting her

chest scales just over my head.
“And she’ll get used to it, or she’ll kill her,” Tairn answers from behind

us where the other three—no, four—dragons wait now that Feirge has
arrived. “Either is acceptable.”

“I thought you were against us killing allies?” I glance over my
shoulder as his shade envelops me thanks to the afternoon sun. Maybe it’s
Sliseag moving closer on her right, but there’s a reddish sheen to Andarna’s
scales, and I can’t help but wonder when that shimmer will dull to a shade
more like Tairn.

“She has yet to prove herself an ally,” Tairn notes.
“She still blames me for Luella’s death.”



“Hey, while we’re just standing here…” Sawyer rubs the back of his
neck, and his cheeks redden. “I…”

“You…?” I lift my eyebrows at the clearly unfinished question.
“I was wondering if you…” He cringes, then sighs. “Never mind.”
“He wants you to teach him how to sign,” Ridoc finishes, rocking back

on his heels in clear boredom.
“Ridoc!” Sawyer glares his way.
“What? You made that way more painful than it had to be. For fuck’s

sake, it was like you were leading up to asking her out or something.” He
visibly shudders.

“What if he had been?” I counter.
“Then I’d be stuck cleaning little pieces of him off our shared floor

when Riorson ripped him to shreds.” Ridoc shakes his head. “So messy.”
“First, Xaden has more than enough confidence to survive me being

asked out.” I glance up at Sawyer. “And yes, I’ll teach you to sign. Why
would that be embarrassing?”

“I should have learned years ago.” Sawyer drops his hand. “And…
obvious reasons.”

“I’m not fluent enough to make a good teacher, apparently.” Ridoc rolls
his eyes.

“You’d teach me the sign for sex and tell me it was hello, just to see
what happened when I used it,” Sawyer fires back.

“What? I’m not a total dick.” A smile curves Ridoc’s mouth. “I would
have waited until you asked about the word for dinner—that way, when you
asked her if she wanted to grab a bite with you—”

“Oh!” I blink, putting the pieces together. Jesinia. “Don’t worry, Sawyer.
I’ve got you. Rhi signs fluently, too. So do Aaric and Quinn, and—”

“Everyone but me.” Sawyer sighs, his shoulders dipping.
“Almost didn’t make it in time,” Rhiannon says, slightly out of breath as

she reaches us.
Trager’s eyes narrow even further on Rhi as Professor Trissa rounds the

corner behind her.
“How’s the lip?” Rhiannon asks, winking at Trager.



He moves to step forward, but Maren blocks him, shaking her head.
“I would have covered for you. Did you get your family settled?” I ask

Rhi.
They’d arrived late last night, travel-weary and with only the items they

could fit in a narrow wagon capable of making it up the Precipice Pass, the
winding trading route up the northeast side of the Cliffs of Dralor, bordering
the Deaconshire province.

“Yeah.” Rhi grins and drops her pack in the surprisingly supple grass
next to mine. I swear, it’s like the seasons are reversing up in this valley.
“Thank your brother for me. He assigned their houses right next to each
other near the market square, and they’ve already picked out a spot to set up
shop.”

“Will do. And Lukas?” Just the thought of her nephew’s perfect, chubby
cheeks has me smiling wide.

“Still the cutest boy ever.” She unbuttons her flight jacket and shrugs it
off her shoulders. “They’re exhausted, but they’re safe. And the fact that I
get to see them whenever I want now? Amazing. Plus, I got to show off my
signet, and they were appropriately awed.”

“That’s phenomenal. I’m really happy for you.” My posture relaxes, and
I take a truly deep breath. Families have been arriving in Aretia for the last
week, led in small, unnoticeable groups by the members of the revolution
who delivered their offers of sanctuary. Ridoc’s dad should arrive any day,
but we haven’t had word from Sawyer’s parents yet.

“You might be wondering why we’re meeting in the valley,” Professor
Trissa says, her breaths perfectly even as she reaches into her pack and pulls
out seven printed illustrations, then hands them out to the seven of us.

Another smile tugs at my lips. Jesinia and the others got the printing
press up and running.

The illustration’s a depiction of a Tyrrish rune, not unlike those in the
weaving book Xaden left me when he graduated. After a closer look at the
illustration, I recognize it. The series of graduated squares is nearly
identical to the hilt of the dagger on my right hip.



“As you are currently the top squad and drift, we have chosen your
group as our…test of sorts.” Professor Trissa steps back so she can see both
lines of us. “You can channel?” she asks the fliers.

“About half power since yesterday morning,” Cat answers.
“Mindwork?” the professor asks with a tone of curiosity.
“Not yet,” Maren answers.
“But soon,” Cat says, staring straight at me. “The drifts are getting

stronger every day.”
As if I’d forget what it was like to have her running amok in my head.
“So, back to arts-and-crafts hour?” Ridoc asks, folding his arms.
“Who knows how mage lights are powered?” Professor Trissa asks,

ignoring his question and reaching into her pack. She removes eight small
wooden boards, no bigger than a plate. She puts them in the center of our
little stand-off. “Well?”

“Lesser magic,” Maren answers.
“The ones you create yourself.” Professor Trissa nods. “What about the

ones that run continuously in, say, the first-year dorms. The ones that work
before you can channel?”

Every rider looks at me.
“They’re powered by the excess magic both we and our dragons

channel,” I answer. “It comes off us naturally, like…waves of body heat,
but it’s such a small amount that we don’t even notice it.”

“Exactly,” the professor agrees. “And what is it that makes that kind of
magic possible? Magic tied to objects instead of a wielder?” She looks us
over with expectant, dark-brown eyes, then rubs the bridge of her nose.
“Gods, I thought Felix was joking. Sorrengail, you’re practically covered in
them.”

I glance down, glimpsing the shimmer of my dragon-scale armor
beneath the V-neck of my uniform top, then lock onto the daggers Xaden
gave me. “Runes?”

“Runes,” Professor Trissa confirms. “Runes aren’t just decorative.
They’re strands of magic pulled from our power, woven into geometric



patterns for specific uses, then placed into an object, either for immediate
work or usage at a later date. We call the process ‘tempering.’”

“That’s not possible.” Maren shakes her head. “Magic is only wielded.”
“It’s still wielded.” Professor Trissa all but sighs in disappointment at

our ignorance. “But just like we store food for winter, a wielder can temper
a rune using as much or as little power as they choose, then place it into
something.” She bends down and picks up one of the boards and waves it in
our general directions. “Like wood, or metal, or whatever object the wielder
chooses. That rune will activate when triggered and perform whatever
action it was tempered for. Unlike alloy, which houses power, runes are
tempered with power for specific actions.”

Rhi and I exchange a confused glance.
“I see we’ll need some convincing.” Professor Trissa drops the board

and lifts her hands. “First you separate a strand of your power.” She reaches
forward and pinches air between her thumb and forefinger. “Which can be
the most complicated step to learn, honestly.”

“Is she pretending?” Ridoc whispers.
Professor Trissa shoots him a sharp-eyed glare. “Just because you can’t

see my power doesn’t mean I can’t. Or are you unfamiliar with the process
of grounding? Like your shields, your power is only visible to you when
you give it form, whether it’s the shape of your signet as a rider, or lesser
magics, which you are all capable of.”

“Point taken.” Ridoc puts his empty hand up in defeat.
“Power can be shaped.” Her hands move quickly, pulling at pieces of air,

then using her fingers to form invisible shapes. Circles? Squares? Was that
a triangle? It’s hard to tell when we can’t see. “Every shape has meaning.
The points where we tie the power change that meaning. All of which you
will need to memorize.” She reaches into the air again, then creates…a
rhombus? “The shapes we combine layer the meanings, changing the rune.
Will it activate immediately? Sit in suspended state? How many times can it
activate before the rune depletes? It’s all decided here.” She seems to flip
whatever she’s working on, then pulls another string and does…something.



“Fucking weird,” Ridoc mumbles under his breath. “It’s like when
you’re little and you ask your parents to drink from the teacup, knowing
there’s no actual tea in it.”

Rhiannon shushes him.
“Once it’s ready”—Professor Trissa bends and grabs the board, then

stands— “we place the rune. Until it’s placed, it has no meaning, no
purpose, and will fade quickly. It’s tempering the rune that makes it an
active magic.” She grabs what I assume is the rune she’s been tempering
with her right hand, then pushes her palm into the wooden board. “This
particular one is a simple heating rune.”

“That was simple?” Sawyer asks.
The board smokes, and I lean forward, my eyes widening.
“And there you have it.” She turns the front of the board toward the

fliers, then shows us. “Once you understand which shapes combine to make
what symbols, the combinations are nearly limitless.”

My jaw hangs open for a moment. The shapes have been burned into
what I would have said was a decorative rune about ten minutes ago. I
glance down at the illustration in my hands and wonder what the hell the
dagger on my hip is supposed to do.

Every shape has meaning. The points where we tie the power change
that meaning. I take another look at the multifaceted shape before she flips
the board, holding it to face skyward, and my eyes widen with realization.

“It’s a logosyllabic language,” I blurt. “Like Old Lucerish or
Morrainian.”

Professor Trissa lifts her eyebrows as she looks my way. “Very similar,
yes.” Her mouth curves into a smile. “That’s right, you can read Old
Lucerish, too.” She nods. “Impressive.”

“Thank you.”
“She’s ours,” Ridoc says to the fliers, pointing at me.
Not sure I’m anything to brag about, considering I barely passed the

history quiz this morning. At least I’m solid in math, but then again, math
doesn’t change overnight.

“You’re an ice wielder, are you not?” Professor Trissa asks Ridoc.



He nods, and she holds out her hand.
Ridoc uncorks the skin strapped at his hip, then draws the water out

from the mouthpeice in a frozen cylinder before walking it to Professor
Trissa.

She places the ice on the board, and my gasp isn’t the only one heard as
the ice dissolves in a matter of seconds and water drips from the sizzling
wood. “Be careful of the medium you choose to hold the rune. A bit more
power and that board would have gone up in flames.”

“Why does no one teach this?” Maren asks, glancing from her
parchment to the board.

“It’s a skill the Tyrrish once controlled and perfected, but it was banned
a couple hundred years after the unification of Navarre, even though many
of our outposts and Basgiath itself were built upon them. Why?” She lifts
her brows. “I’m so glad you asked. You see, riders are naturally more
powerful, given the amount of magic we channel and the signets we wield.”

Trager rolls his eyes.
“But runes are the great equalizer,” Professor Trissa continues, setting

the board on the grass now that it’s stopped sizzling. “A rune is only limited
to how much power you choose to temper, how long you want it to last, and
how many uses it has before it depletes. They banned runes so they
wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.” She glances at the fliers. “Your hands,
specifically. Get good enough at runes, and you can compete with a fair
amount of signets.”

“So, you want us to…temper this?” Cat asks, studying the illustration
with an arched eyebrow. “Out of…magic?”

I hate to admit it, but I’m with Cat on this one—and by the looks on the
faces around me, we all are. Even Rhi is glancing at the drawing with
trepidation. This feels…overwhelming.

“Yes. With the power you’ll learn to separate from yourselves, just like I
showed you.” Professor Trissa opens her pack and dumps another pile of
boards onto the first.

She made it look so easy.



“We’re going to start with a simple unlocking rune. Easy to build, easy
to test.” She glances between our lines.

“We can all unlock doors with lesser magic,” Trager notes.
“Of course you can.” Professor Trissa sighs. “But an unlocking rune can

be used by someone who doesn’t possess lesser magic. Now let’s go. I
expect your first runes woven before sunset.”

“There’s no way we’re going to learn how to do that before sunset,”
Sawyer argues.

“Nonsense. Every marked one has learned a simple unlocking rune the
first day.”

“No pressure,” Rhi mutters.
“Sloane and Imogen can do this?” I ask.
“Naturally.” Professor Trissa shakes her head at me.
This is why Xaden had me practicing runes with fabric. Is that man ever

going to learn to just tell me things outright? Or am I always going to have
to dig information out of him? “‘I’ll answer any question you ask,’” I mock
under my breath. It’s hard to ask questions I don’t even know exist.

“You’re supposed to be the best of your year, so stop gawking and get to
work,” Professor Trissa lectures. “The first thing you’ll need to do is learn
to separate a piece of your own power. Let it fill your mind, then reach in
and visualize plucking a thread of it from the current.”

Rhiannon, Sawyer, Ridoc, and I exchange a series of what-the-fuck
glances that are echoed by the fliers across from us.

“Advice?” I ask Tairn and Andarna.
“Don’t blow anything up.” Tairn shifts his weight behind me.
“At least blowing something up would be interesting,” Andarna notes,

eliciting a growl from Tairn.
“Now,” Trissa demands, then holds up a finger. “Oh, and be careful.

Power gets temperamental when you pull from it. That’s why your bondeds
are here. The closer the source, the easier it is for the first time.” She looks
us over, then folds her arms across her chest. “Well, what are you waiting
for?”



I shut my eyes and envision my Archives and the swirling power that
surrounds it. The blazing, molten stream of Tairn’s power that flows behind
his giant door looks capable of consuming me, but the pearlescent flow of
Andarna’s power just beyond the windows feels…approachable.

Steadying my breath, I reach for Andarna’s power—
Boom. An explosion sounds, and my eyes fly open, every head whipping

toward Sawyer as he flies backward. He lands just short of Sliseag’s claws,
a scorch mark left smoking in the grass where he’d been standing.

“And that is why we’re having this class outdoors.” Professor Trissa
shakes her head. “On your feet. Try again.”

Ridoc walks back and helps Sawyer to his feet, and then we do just that.
Try again. And again. And again.
Before sunset, I manage to weave an unlocking rune, but I’m not the

first.
Cat has that honor and, unlike the rest of us, no scorch marks beneath

her feet.

OceanofPDF.com



It is somewhat fitting that the only weapon capable of killing a dark
wielder is the same thing that drove them to soullessness…power.

—CAPTAIN LERA DORRELL’S GUIDE TO VANQUISHING THE VENIN
PROPERTY OF CLIFFSBANE ACADEMY



CHAPTER FORTY-SIX

“Runes?” Xaden asks a few days later, leaning over my shoulder as I
sit at the desk in his room, practicing today’s assignment, a

triangular piece of torture that’s supposed to somehow boost hearing. He
picks up one of my five discarded attempts, burned into hand-size wooden
disks, and I breathe deeply, savoring the scent of soap on his freshly washed
skin.

A private bathing chamber is definitely one of the perks of sleeping in
his room.

“We’re the trial squad. I meant to tell you last night.” I take the delicate
strand of pearlescent power and bend it into the third shape in the pattern
Professor Trissa gave us for homework, then let it burn brightly in front of
me while I gently reach for another. Now that I know what to look for, I see
the flow of power clearly before me, somehow both solid and insubstantial,
glowing strands that flex under my touch. Seeing it doesn’t make pulling
individual strands any easier, though.

“I meant to tell you a lot last night, too,” he says, setting the disk back
down on the desk with the others. “But once I found you in bed, my mouth
was otherwise occupied.”

My lips curve at the memory as I form the next triangle, this one smaller,
and set it within the larger ones floating in front of me. He’s been gone
more than he’s been home, running the weapons from our forge to the front



lines near the Stonewater River and filling Tecarus’s armory. This trip lasted
an extra day when he and Garrick found themselves caught in an attack.

“Do you want my help?” he asks, skimming his mouth down the side of
my neck.

“That is…” My breath catches when he reaches the collar of my armor.
“Not helping.”

“Pity.” He kisses the side of my neck, then stands, leaving me to my
homework. Good thing, too, since I have class in a few minutes.

“This is why you left me that book in Navarre, isn’t it?” I take the next
strand and form the circle that should stabilize the shapes within and place
it around the rune. That should do it.

“I wanted you to have a head start,” he says, picking up Warrick’s
journal from where I abandoned it on the desk and thumbing through it.

“Thank you.”
“This is impossible to read,” Xaden mutters, closing the journal and

setting it back on the desk before walking to where his uniforms hang next
to mine in the large armoire.

I grin at the domesticity of it. There’s nothing I wouldn’t do to keep it
just like this between us. “My father taught me.” I shrug, examining my
rune for anything I might have missed. “And Dain and I used it as a secret
code when we were kids.”

“Never pictured Aetos as the Old Lucerish type,” Xaden notes.
Picking up the wooden disk in my left hand, I gently move the buzzing

strands of power, pressing them into the disk. Much better than the last five.
“You put runes into my daggers,” I say, turning in the wooden chair.

My lips part and I blatantly ogle Xaden as he pulls his uniform from the
armoire, a towel wrapped around his hips. How did I not notice he’d been
basically naked behind me this whole time? Such a missed opportunity…

“Keep looking at me like that and you’re not making it to class,” he
warns, his eyes darkening as he crosses the floor and tosses his clothing on
the bed.

I force myself to turn away. Brennan warned Xaden that the first time I
was late for class because of my sleeping arrangements, I’d be back in my



assigned room. “You put an unlocking rune into my dagger, didn’t you?” I
ask, sliding all the disks besides the one I just finished into my pack,
ignoring Warrick’s journal, which mocks me from the edge of the desk.
“That’s how we got out of the interrogation chamber.”

“A variation of it, yes.”
Holding the best rune of my attempts, I lift my pack to my shoulders and

slip my arms through the straps as I stand, turning to face him. His torso is
still gloriously bare, but unfortunately—or fortunately for my schedule—he
has pants on. “Care to elaborate?”

To my consternation, he goes for his socks instead of a shirt.
“You can do the unlocking rune. It’s simple enough.” He shrugs. “I

added an element of need into the rune. So, you can’t walk up to any door
and open it just because you want to, but if the dagger’s on your body and
picks up on the need for a door to unlock, it will. If you’d made it up to the
forge at Basgiath, it would have opened to your need.” Sitting on the edge
of the bed, he puts on his boots.

“I had the key the entire time?” My eyebrows rise, and if I didn’t already
love him, I would have fallen right then.

“You did. Are you feeling adventurous with questions today?” A corner
of his mouth quirks.

I grip the disk and sink my teeth into my lower lip. The problem with
being happy amidst the utter chaos we’ve caused is that I’m terrified to ask
even a single question that might jeopardize it. “What’s the rune on the
stone you keep by the bed? That’s what it is, right?”

“Yes, a complicated one at that.” He sits up and reaches for the little
gray stone, then offers it to me as he stands. “There’s not a person alive who
knows how to replicate this. Colonel Mairi was the last.”

Liam and Sloane’s mom. I take the palm-size stone and study the
intricate lines of the rune. “It had to have been giant when she tempered it.”

“I assume so. She must have collapsed it to fit when placing them into
the stones.”

“Stones?” I look up at him. “As in more than one?”
“A hundred and seven,” he answers, watching me with expectation.



The marked ones. He wants me to ask.
“What does it do?” I rub my thumb over the blackened design.
“Did. It’s a protection rune, but it was only intended to be used once.”

He runs his hand through his damp hair and pauses. “As you get better with
runes, you can pull elements into them. Things like strands of hair or even
other full runes for locating things. Or protecting them. This particular rune
was made to protect someone of my father’s bloodline.”

“You.” I look up and hand the stone back. “You’re his only child, right?”
Xaden nods. “Each of the children of the officers were given them

before our parents left for the Battle of Aretia. We were told to carry them
at all times, and we did, even to the execution.” His fingers brush mine as
he takes the stone.

I damn near stop breathing, keeping my eyes on his.
“It was designed to counter the signet of the rider whose dragon would

kill them.” He swallows. “But it could only activate when killed by
dragonfire.”

“Which is the primary method of execution for traitors,” I whisper.
He nods. “I kept it closed in my fist—we all did—as we stood there,

watching our parents put into lines for execution. And the second they
were…” His shoulders rise as he takes a deep breath. “…burned, heat raced
up my arm. The next time I felt anything like that was after Threshing.”

My eyes widen, and I close my hand over his. “The rebellion relics?”
That must be why the swirling marks always start on the marked ones’
arms.

He nods. “Our parents knew they’d die one way or another, and the last
thing they did was make sure we were protected. I keep it purely for
sentimental reasons.” Leaning toward me, he kisses my forehead, then turns
away, putting the stone on his bedside table. “I like it when you ask me
questions,” he says, leaning over to grab his uniform shirt. “Anything else
you want to know?”

It’s on the tip of my tongue to question why he didn’t tell me about the
deal he made with my mother and ask if it influenced his feelings for me.
But then he stands, and my gaze catches on those silver scars on his back—



the scars she put there—and I just can’t ask. He told me that he’s loved me
since the first time we kissed. That should be enough. I shouldn’t need to
know anything more about the deal than what she said to me… Or maybe I
don’t want to, not if there’s any chance it could shake our relationship.

“Violence?” He tugs his shirt on and turns.
“Nothing else to ask.” I force a smile.
“Everything all right?” Two lines appear between his brows. “Bodhi

mentioned that Cat isn’t making it easy on you, and you’ve had a couple of
lightning strikes—”

“Bodhi needs to butt out.” There’s no chance I’m letting Xaden worry
about me before heading out for multiple days. Rising up on my toes, I kiss
him softly. “I’ll see you tonight.”

Disappointment flashes through his eyes right before he cups the back of
my neck and slants his mouth over mine for another blissful second, then
pulls back. “You’re close, but you need a directional cue for that rune.”

“My rune is great, and I’ll ask for help if I need it.” I kiss him quickly
just because I can, then rush out the door so I can make it to class in time.
The second I’m in the hallway, I lift the disk to my ear.

Noise rushes in. Bootsteps pounding above me, doors closing ahead of
me, people shouting beneath me—there’s too much input to make any sense
of it.

“I hate it when he’s right,” I mutter as I skid into class.
Naturally, Cat has tempered her rune perfectly when I get there, which

makes me almost want to ask for Xaden’s help, but he’s already gone before
I’m done with my classes for the day.
 

…
 

“W e’ve given you two weeks to figure out how to integrate
peacefully, and you have yet to do so, much to our

disappointment,” Devera lectures us the next week from the side of the



center mat, Emetterio and one of the flier professors by her side. The
sparring gym is only a fraction of the size of Basgiath’s—fitting nine mats
total—and it’s packed with every cadet in Aretia standing shoulder to
shoulder.

Including the fliers.
Until now, we’ve only been put together for rune lessons in very small

increments and mealtimes, which usually end with at least one thrown
punch.

“What the hell do they expect?” Rhiannon folds her arms next to me.
“We’ve been killing each other for centuries, and we’re supposed to what…
weave flowers into each other’s hair and confess our deepest, darkest
secrets all because they gave us a luminary and hiked a cliff?”

“It’s a little tense,” I agree, holding the conduit in my right hand and
rolling my aching shoulder, hoping it will forgive me for daring to sleep on
it wrong. I have a lesson with Felix in two days, and I’m cramming as much
power into the little glass orb as I can.

My power’s been flaring all too frequently, with the fliers hurling insults
every chance they get, insinuating that I dropped Luella to her death instead
of Visia.

There’s a clear divide in our ranks: a sea of black on my right and a
swath of tan on the left, with a wide strip of bare floor between us. More
than a dozen cadets wear bruises from the brawl that erupted yesterday in
the great hall between Third Wing and two drifts.

“Yesterday’s outburst of violence was absolutely unacceptable,” the
fliers’ professor starts, her auburn braid sliding over her shoulder as she
turns her head, addressing all cadets, not just the fliers. “Working together
is what’s going to make a difference in this war, and it has to start here!”
She turns her finger on the rider cadets.

“Good luck with that,” Ridoc says under his breath.
“We’ll be making significant changes,” Devera announces. “You will no

longer be separated for classes.”
My stomach pitches, and a mumble of discontent rolls through the gym.

“Which means—” Devera raises her voice, quieting our side of the



makeshift formation. “You will respect one another as equals. We may be in
Aretia, but as of today, we’ve decided the Dragon Rider’s Codex still
applies to every cadet.”

“And as their guests,” the flier professor says, placing a hand on her
ample hip, “all fliers will abide by it.” A disgruntled murmur rolls through
their half. “Is that clear?”

“Yes, Professor Kiandra,” they respond in unison.
Damn. That’s kind of impressive, even if they do sound like infantry.
“But we acknowledge that we cannot move forward without addressing

the hostility among you,” Emetterio says, his gaze shifting between the
groups. “At Basgiath, we had a method for addressing grievances between
cadets. You may ask for a challenge—a sparring match that ends when one
of you is unconscious or taps out.”

“Or dies,” Aaric adds.
The fliers collectively gasp, and the majority of us roll our eyes. They

wouldn’t last a day at Basgiath.
“Without killing your opponent,” Emetterio continues, talking directly at

Aaric before moving on, “for the next six hours, every request—between
cadets of the same year—for challenge will be granted. You will address
your grievances once on these mats, and then you will put them behind
you.”

“They’re going to let us beat the shit out of them?” Ridoc asks quietly.
“I think so,” Sloane whispers in response.
“It’s going to be a phenomenal afternoon.” Imogen grins, cracking her

knuckles.
“They’ve been trained to fight venin,” I remind them. “I wouldn’t

underestimate them.” When it comes to signets, we can blast them out of
the fucking skies, but hand-to-hand? There’s a good chance we’re
outmatched.

“You may only challenge one opponent, and each cadet may only be
challenged once,” Emetterio says, holding up his forefinger and lifting his
thick brows. “So choose carefully, because tomorrow, the rider or flier you
hold contempt for may be off-limits.”



Oh shit. My stomach drops. There’s only one reason someone couldn’t
call a challenge, but they wouldn’t…would they?

“Challenges between squadmates are forbidden under the Codex,”
Devera explains to fliers, then turns to us. “And tomorrow each squad of
riders will absorb one drift of fliers.”

Guess they would.
Anger flushes my cheeks, and Rhiannon and I exchange a perturbed

glance, which is mirrored by everyone in our squad, especially Visia.
“Note that I said absorb.” Devera stares pointedly at us. “You will not be

teamed up or partnered with. You will fuse, you will meld, you will unify.”
This goes against everything we’ve been taught. Squads are sacred.

Squads are family. Squads are born after Parapet and forged through the
Gauntlet, Threshing, and War Games. Squads aren’t merged unless they’re
dissolved due to deaths—and we’re the Iron Squad.

We do not bend. And we definitely do not blend.
“And if you don’t”—Professor Kiandra’s tone softens as her gaze

sweeps over the gym—“we will fail when it’s time for combat. We will
die.”

“We’ll take your requests now,” Emetterio says, concluding the lecture
portion of today’s festivities.

Lines form for those requesting challenges, and it doesn’t surprise me
that most of the queue is wearing brown. They have far more reason to hate
us than most of us do to hate them.

“We are the Iron Squad, and we’ll act like it,” Rhiannon orders as the
last of the line approaches Emetterio. “We stick together and travel mat to
mat with any challenge leveled on us.”

All eleven of us agree.
The first challenges are called, and I’m not surprised when Trager names

Rhiannon to come to the mat. No doubt he’s still pissed about the punch she
delivered on the flight field.

She wins in less than five minutes, and his lip is bleeding again.
The third-year leader from Cat’s drift, the stocky one with the necklace

of scars, Bragen, knocks Quinn unconscious with a punch combination that



leaves my mouth hanging.
Once Imogen is called to the mat by Neve—another third-year in Cat’s

drift, with short strawberry-blond hair and deep-set eyes—I sense the
pattern.

“This is about me,” I say quietly to Rhiannon when Imogen lands a solid
kick to the other girl’s head.

“That makes it about us,” she responds. “Please tell me you’re wrapped
and wearing your armor.”

I nod.
Imogen and Neve exchange precise, calculated blows until Devera calls

it a draw after they’re both bleeding.
“Catriona Cordella and Violet Sorrengail,” Devera announces. “Disarm

and take the mat.”
“Don’t do this.” Maren tries to talk Cat out of it, but there’s nothing but

determination in her narrowed gaze.
“Of-fucking-course.” I hand the conduit to Rhiannon.
“Why am I not surprised, Cat?” Imogen glares across the mat before

turning toward me.
“It’s fine. Predictable but fine.” One by one, I unsheathe all thirteen of

my weapons and hand them to her.
“She’s got at least five inches on you, so watch for her reach,” Rhiannon

says quietly.
“From what I remember, she’s quick on the attack and won’t leave you

much time to react, so commit to your moves. Don’t hesitate,” Imogen
adds.

“All right.” I breathe in through my nose and out through my mouth,
fighting like hell to steady the nerves that have my stomach doing
somersaults. If I’d known this was where today was headed, I would have
acted earlier, maybe laced her breakfast with the fonilee I saw growing on
the ridge just beneath the valley.

“You’ve got this,” Rhiannon says with a nod. “You were trained by the
best.”

“Xaden,” I whisper, wishing he was here and not on the border.



“Me.” She nudges me with her elbow and forces a smile.
“Violet?” Sloane moves to Imogen’s side. “Do me a favor and kick her

ass.”
My mouth tugs into a real half smile, and I nod at her before stepping

onto the mat. Guess nothing unites foes like a common enemy, and for
some reason, Cat has decided I’m hers. The mat has the same density as the
ones at Basgiath, the same feel under my boots as I walk to the center,
where Cat waits with a malevolent smirk.

“Scratch her eyes out,” Andarna suggests. “Really. The eyes are the
softest tissue. Just jab your thumbs in there—”

“Andarna! Use some common sense,” Tairn snaps. “The kneecaps are a
much easier target.”

“Quiet time, now.” I slam my shields up, muting Tairn and Andarna as
much as possible.

“No weapons. No signets,” Devera says. “Match ends when one of you
is—”

“Unconscious or taps out,” Cat finishes without taking her eyes off me.
“We know.”

“Begin.” Devera steps off the mat, and I block out the noise around me,
giving all my focus to Cat as she takes a familiar fighting stance.

I do the same, keeping my body loose and ready for movement. If she’s
quick on the attack like Imogen said, then I’ll need to play defense.

“This is for Luella.” She comes at me with a combination of punches
that I block with my forearms, shifting my body so the blows glance off
without their full impact. It’s…easy, like I know the choreography. Like it’s
muscle memory. Her stance adjusts, and I jump back a second before she
kicks out. Connecting only with air, her balance falters as I land, and she
stumbles sideways.

Holy shit. She fights like Xaden.
He trained both of us.

OceanofPDF.com



Defeating a dark wielder begins with knowing where they rank in age
and experience. Initiates have reddish rings to their eyes that come and
go depending on how often they drain. Asims’ eyes fluctuate in degrees
of red, and their veins distend when riled. Sages’—those responsible for
initiates—eyes are permanently red, their veins perpetually distended
toward their temples, expanding with age. Mavens—their generals—

have never been captured for examination.

—VENIN, A COMPENDIUM BY CAPTAIN DRAKE CORDELLA, THE
NIGHTWING DRIFT



CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN

So much for thinking I have the advantage.
Her eyes flare, like she’s come to the same conclusion as we circle

each other, and then they narrow in a way that makes my stomach clench.
Devera may have set the rules, but something tells me Cat is about to break
them.

“Does it bother you?” she asks, lowering her voice as she raises her
hands. “Knowing he taught me first? That I had him first?”

“Not at all, since I have him now.” I swallow the sour jealousy that rises
with the burn of bile in my throat.

“Really?” She jabs, and I weave. “The thought that I know what he
tastes like?” She throws another combination that I block, then retreats as if
it was nothing but a test. “How his weight feels above me?”

I will not vomit on this mat. I refuse.
“Nope.” But shit if that picture doesn’t play out in my mind as vividly as

a nightmare.
Her hands on his skin, her mouth on the curling lines of his rebellion

relic. Envy and anger roar in my ears, dulling my senses, and I blink rapidly
to clear the image, but heat prickles my skin as power rises within me.

She comes at me again, and I throw my forearm up in a block, but she
shifts unexpectedly, and when I block for the cross, she nails me with a left
hook.



Pain explodes in my cheek, right on the bone, and I stagger backward,
touching my face reflexively to check for blood, but she hasn’t split the
skin.

“I think it does bother you,” she says softly as we circle again. “Seeing
me here, where I belong. Sleeping right down the hall. I bet it keeps you
awake at night, knowing I’m a better match for him in every way, counting
the seconds he tires of your frail excuse for a body and comes back to the
woman who knows exactly what he likes and how he likes it.”

Every word she speaks raises my temperature, but I refuse to take the
bait, so I’m ready when she charges forward this time, twisting as she jabs
for my face. I manage to counter, landing my blow in the same location
she’d hit me.

Pain shoots up my wrist, but I’m happy for the sting.
“You know what bothers me?” I ask as she bounces back on her toes,

cursing when the back of her hand swipes at her cheek and comes away
bloody. “That you’re obsessed with fighting over a man.” Rage fuels my
movements when I go on the attack, but she’s ready for every combination I
have.

Because they’re all fucking his.
“You going to do something about this?” I hear someone ask from

outside the haze of anger that’s slowing my reaction time.
“She wouldn’t want me to.” The answer comes from the edge of the mat

as Cat lunges toward me, and I’m too focused on her hands to block her feet
when they sweep mine out from under me.

I’m airborne for a heartbeat, and then my back hits the mat, rattling my
bones and stealing my breath.

Cat follows me down, leaning her forearm against my throat and cutting
off my air supply as she leans in, her mouth right next to my ear. “You seem
angry, Violet. Are you just now realizing you’re nothing special? That
you’re just a convenient placeholder he can fuck?” Her laugh is low and
cruel. “I know how good he is. I’m the one who taught him that little trick
he does with his fingers. You know, the one where he curls—”



I see red and throw every ounce of my rage into the punch I deliver to
the side of her ribs, right where Xaden taught me to stab, and then I draw
back and do it again, savoring the dull sound of the crack of her ribs and the
jarring pain that shoots through my hand, along my wrist, and up my arm
because I know I just delivered ten times worse.

She cries out, falling off me to her uninjured side, and I gasp, filling my
lungs before hurtling my body after hers, rising onto my knees and
slamming my fist into the side of her face with a satisfying thud before she
can recover. Now she has my mark on both sides.

“What the fuck is wrong with you?” I snap. “It is not my fault that he
doesn’t love you!”

“Of course he doesn’t!” She grabs hold of my arm and rolls with
astonishing speed, twisting it behind my back.

White-hot agony streaks through me, making my mouth water.
“He’s not capable of loving anyone,” she hisses in my ear. “You think

I’m so petty that I’d attack another woman over love?”
“Yes.” I force the word out through gritted teeth as she shoves me

downward, controlling me by the arm she could easily break, the shoulder
she’s an inch away from dislocating in this position. The side of my face
smashes into the mat.

Think. I have to think. But fuck, all I can do is feel. Anger and envy
pound through my veins with every heartbeat, strangling logic until I’m
nothing but rage.

“You’re too short-sighted for him,” she says quietly, like she’s afraid of
being heard. “He thinks ahead, just like me. Gods, do you even know why
he didn’t kill you that first year? I do. Because he trusted me to look ahead
with him.”

She knows about the deal with my mother. He told her.
My fingers tingle, and I know I’ll lose feeling in the entire limb soon,

but that doesn’t stop my body from trembling with fury…with rising power.
Think. I have to think. She knows all my moves, at least the ones Xaden

taught me.



“Look at where we are. Riorson House.” Her mouth is close enough to
my ear that I can feel how hard she’s breathing. “Who wouldn’t love all that
power and the case it comes in? But I’m sure as hell not fighting you over a
man’s affections. I’m going to war with you for a crown. That was the
reason we were engaged. It was promised to me, and I’m not giving it to a
damned Sorrengail who chose to drop the flier instead of her squadmate.
Your entire family deserves to die for what you’ve put us through.”

A crown? Engaged? My chest aches because it all makes sense. Two
aristocratic families in need of an alliance. And I’m nowhere near nobility.

“And gods, get some control over your emotions, would you? You’re so
fucking weak it’s pathetic.” Her words are a string of hisses.

Fuck her.
Rhiannon trained me, too.
I rear back with my head as hard as I can, cracking cartilage from the

sound of it, and the pressure vanishes from my arm and shoulder, freeing
me.

She yelps, the sound slightly muffled, and I thrust my uninjured elbow
backward, hitting the soft tissue of her stomach just like Rhi taught me.

Blocking out the pain, I burst up onto my knees, then twist, throwing my
weight onto her. She topples backward, and I take advantage of the opening,
driving my knee into her sternum, then reaching for her throat.

I’m going to fucking kill her. How dare she come after me, like I had a
choice in Luella’s fall? Like I had anything to do with Xaden’s choice to
leave her? Fuck that. How dare she come after what’s mine. He isn’t a
crown. He isn’t a stepping stool for power. He isn’t a tool to elevate her
standing. He’s everything.

Her face turns a mottled shade of red, and her eyes widen with panic.
“Violet!” someone shouts. A woman. A friend, maybe?
Power sears my veins and lifts the hair on the back of my neck, rising

with the force of a tornado. Her hands tear at mine, but I only squeeze
harder.

“Damn it, Cat!” someone else yells from the opposite side. “Tap out!”
Tap out? I don’t want her to submit. I want her to cease existing.



“I honestly don’t care if you kill her, Violence.” Xaden’s voice filters
through the rage that holds me with the same unbreakable grip I’m using to
choke the life out of my opponent. “But you will.”

I blink as his words clear just enough of the fog for me to feel the
slowing of her pulse beneath my hands, but I don’t release my grip.

“Tap!” multiple people shout.
“I respect whatever choice you make.”
But I’m not making a choice. There is no choice. There’s only the

swirling, chaotic vortex of anger and jealousy and—
She’s fucking cheating, using mindwork.
“Get out of my head!” I scream so loudly my throat burns.
Cat glares up at me, and the anger burns even hotter as she tries to work

her thumbs beneath my hands, wrath burning in her eyes.
She’s not going to tap out. She’d really rather die than lose to me.
“I don’t want to kill her.” I have to let go. But my hands don’t get the

signal.
“Then don’t.” His voice wraps around my mind, and the anger ebbs just

enough to let me realize he’s here. It’s been a week since I’ve seen him, and
he’s here.

And I love him more than I hate her.
I yank my hands from her throat, but I can’t make my body move any

farther than that. “I need your help.”
Cat wheezes for breath as heavy bootsteps approach from the left.
Xaden’s arms surround me, lifting me to my feet, and I cling to the love

I feel for him with my fucking fingernails to keep from letting the anger
consume me.

“I didn’t tap out!” Cat croaks as she scurries backward, her neck bearing
my handprints.

“Riorson!” Devera snaps. “Why would you interfere in a chall—”
“Because she cheated!” Imogen shouts. “She used mindwork!”
“She’s the one who’s unhinged!” Cat’s voice breaks multiple times, and

she jabs her finger at me.



“I’m unhinged? I’ll show you unhinged when I kill you for fucking with
my head!” I lunge against Xaden’s arms, but he holds tight.

“Let me know if you actually mean it.” He lifts me off my feet.
“Catriona!” Professor Kiandra forces her way through the line of fliers.

“Tell me you didn’t…” She glances from Cat to me and back again. “Let
go, Cat!”

“Fuck her!” Pure hatred emanates from every line of Cat’s body and
only fuels the fire beneath my skin. “And fuck her entire family. I hope you
all die for what you’ve done to us!”

Surging against Xaden’s strength does no good. He has me locked down.
But power whips through me and releases with a searing crack.

Lightning strikes simultaneously with thunder, flashing white across my
vision. Cadets scream and the scent of smoke fills the air.

Xaden flings a hand outward, and shadows stream toward the wooden
bleachers, snuffing out the quickly growing flames.

“Bragen! Maren! Escort Catriona to her room,” Kiandra orders. “Her
gift is limited by—”

“Distance. I know.” Xaden swings me up over his shoulder like I’m a
bag of grain.

“Riorson!” Rhiannon calls out, catching his attention before tossing the
conduit to him.

He catches it one-handed, nods, then strides for the exit.
Every instinct tells me to kick, to thrash, to beat him into letting me go,

but I force myself to stay completely still as he carries me out into the hall,
past the gaping faces of leadership who line the walls, waiting for the
challenge period to be over.

“It will ease,” Xaden promises.
And it does. The fog of Cat’s power fades with every step, leaving me

raw, like the ruins of a beach after a tidal wave recedes. Gods, how am I
going to keep this from happening again?

Xaden doesn’t even break a sweat as he walks past the great hall, then
surprises me when he doesn’t turn into the foyer. Nope, he carries me



straight into the Assembly chamber, startling the four who are gathered
there, including Brennan.

And I’m in control of enough of my emotions to feel every ounce of the
embarrassment that heats my face, but my body still vibrates with anger. At
least it’s my own genuine anger this time.

“What are you—” my brother starts.
“Get out,” Xaden demands, crossing the room and climbing the steps of

a new dais, where the chairs of the Assembly sit behind the long, formal
table. “All of you. Right fucking now.”

They glance at one another, then shock me to my toes by doing exactly
that—grabbing a stack of parchment from the corner table and leaving,
shutting the door behind them on their way out.

Xaden tosses the conduit into the massive middle chair before lowering
me, my body sliding against his until my toes touch the dais. When our
gazes collide, he arches his scarred brow. “She got you good.” He reaches
for my face, turning my head gently to examine my cheek. “But I think you
got the last word.”

“And how many of those humiliating words did you hear?” I don’t want
the answer, but I need it.

“All of them.”
Fuck.

OceanofPDF.com



As a result of the Treaty of Aretia, the power to represent the province
of Tyrrendor in the King’s Senarium has hereby been transferred from

the House of Riorson to the House of Lewellen.

—PUBLIC NOTICE 628.86, TRANSCRIBED BY CERELLA NIELWART



CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT

“The things she said…” I clench my aching fists and notice I’ve busted
the skin across my knuckles.

“I know.” His gaze rakes over me in a look I know all too well—
assessing me for injuries.

“She said I’m just a convenient placeholder for you to fuck.”
“I heard. How hurt are you?”
“I’m fine.” Unless he’s asking about my pride. “My shoulder’s a little

pissed, but I think my face took the worst of it.”
“All right.” He wraps his arm around my waist, pulls our lower bodies

flush, and moves forward, forcing me to step back so the backs of my
thighs hit the chair behind me. “Sit.”

“Sit? I just lost my shit and threw my control out the window in front of
the entire quadrant because of the venom she spewed—the emotions she
shoved down my throat—and all you have to say is sit?”

He lowers his head, invading my space. “Nothing I could say right now
is going to erase her words from your head, so sit, Violence. We’ll do the
talking afterward.”

“Fine.” I sink down onto the thick cushion, and my feet come off the
ground. This particular piece of furniture was definitely built for someone
Xaden’s height. Two of me could sit in this thing. “She wants you for your
name.”



“I know.” He braces his hands on the arms of the chair and leans in,
brushing his lips over mine. “And you love me in spite of it. That’s one of
the many reasons I will always choose you.” He drops to his knees in front
of me and works the laces on my boots with quick, efficient movements.

“What are you doing?”
His mouth curves in a wicked smile that instantly elevates my pulse and

transforms the heat of anger simmering in my blood into an even hotter fire.
My lips part as one boot hits the dais, the other following immediately

after.
“In here?” I glance over his head at the empty hall. “We can’t—”
There go my socks.
“We can.” He flicks his wrist, and the clicking sound of a lock echoes

off the stone. “My house, remember? They are all my rooms.” His eyes lock
with mine, holding me willingly captive as his hands slide up the length of
my legs, caressing my inner thighs, waking every nerve ending along their
path before he reaches for the buttons of my sparring pants.

My breath catches.
“My house. My chair. My woman.” He punctuates each claim with a

flick of his thumb, popping button by button free. Need floods my body,
flushes my skin with a heady, addictive rush.

He grips my hips with both hands and yanks me to the edge of the chair,
then cups the back of my neck and pulls me into a devastating kiss. My lips
part, and the second he licks into my mouth, his tongue stroking mine, my
core fucking melts.

The kiss is slow and sensuous, our mouths meeting again and again as I
weave my fingers through his hair and completely, totally surrender. He
senses the shift, growling low in his throat, and the kiss spins out of control
in less than a heartbeat, turning wild and urgent, tasting of that sweet
madness that only exists between us.

He’s the only person in this world I can’t get enough of. The only one I
constantly crave. Love. Chemistry. Attraction. Desire. Everything between
us keeps me constantly burning like an ember; a single touch is all it takes
to send us both up in flames. By the time he breaks the kiss, his breathing



ragged as he orders me to lift my hips, I don’t care where we are as long as
he puts his hands on me. The whole Assembly could walk through those
doors and I wouldn’t notice, not with the way Xaden’s looking at me. The
heat in his eyes could melt iron.

He hooks his fingers into the waistband of my pants and my underwear,
then tugs them down my legs, kissing the tops of my thighs, the curves of
my knees, and every inch of skin he uncovers, drawing soft sighs and
impatient whimpers from my lips.

Fabric hits the dais, leaving me bare from the waist down.
“Xaden.” My fingers tug at his hair, my heart pounding so hard I can’t

help but wonder if he can hear it, if the whole world can.
Instead of rising so I can get my hands on him, he pushes my knees

wide.
I gasp at the cold rush of air between my thighs, but an instant later, his

mouth sets me on fire as he drags his tongue from my slick entrance to my
clit. White-hot pleasure streaks through my body like lightning, and I cry
out, the sound filling the hall.

“This is what I fantasize about when I’m away from you,” he says
against my heated skin. “Your taste. Your scent. The little gasps you take
right before you come.” He settles in, his hands splaying wide on my inner
thighs, pinning me in place as he uses his tongue to rob me of every
thought. He swirls around that sensitive bud over and over, teasing,
arousing, driving me higher and higher, but denies me the very touch I
need. “Is this what you think about? My mouth between your soft thighs?”

Gods, how can he think, let alone form coherent sentences?
He scrapes his teeth over me delicately, and I gasp at the sensation, then

whimper when his tongue follows. I can only moan when he slides a long
finger inside me, and his answering groan vibrates through every nerve in
my body.

“Yes.” It feels so exquisite that I muffle my next cry with my fist.
“More.”

It’s always more when it comes to him.



He alternates between quick, teasing flicks and long, lazy licks, building
an ever-tightening spiral of pleasure deep within me. Another finger joins
the first, stretching me with a delicious burn, and my hips rock as he thrusts
them in a slow, hard rhythm that makes me crave every part of him.

Power rises, scalding my already flushed skin, crackling in the very air
around us.

Without stopping, he releases my thigh and reaches around my hip, then
retrieves the conduit. “Take it.”

“I want you.” My fingers slide from his hair to grasp the orb, my hips
chasing every stroke he gives me, my breaths coming in uneven pants.

“You have me.” I whimper at the mindless pleasure that rushes up my
spine. “And I have you exactly where I need you.”

Even my hand can’t muffle the primal sounds he drags from me as his
tongue matches the rhythm of his fingers, pleasure whipping through me
with every stroke, gathering, building, stringing my body tight as a bow.

Gods, the sight of him kneeling, fully clothed, the leather of his flight
jacket against my bare thighs, pushes me all the way to the edge and burns
itself into my memory.

My thighs tremble when he curls his fingers inside me, stroking that
sensitive wall that makes stars blink in my eyes. “Xaden…” My breaths
stutter.

“Right there. Those gasps. That’s what I hear when I wake, already hard
for you.”

With the next caress, pleasure and power crest through me, over me, in
simultaneous waves that crash again and again. There’s no thunder, no
strike, only the hum of energy in my hand that flares with the strokes of
Xaden’s mouth and fingers.

But there’s no release, either. No gentle letdown. Only the waves of
infinite ecstasy that come without breaking.

He lifts his head, keeping me in a suspended state of indescribable bliss
as his eyes lock with mine.

“I can’t take it,” I manage to say as the waves come and come with no
end in sight.



“Yes, you can. Look at where you are.” He grasps my hip and surges
upward, propelling me deeper into the chair until my back hits the
blackened wood, and still, he keeps stroking, holding me prisoner with my
own pleasure. Brushing his lips over mine, he smiles. “Look at how
beautiful you are, Violet, coming for me on Tyrrendor’s throne.”

Holy shit. I’d known that’s where we were, but I hadn’t known.
He grasps one of my thighs and drapes it over the arm of the throne, then

braces his knee at the edge of the cushion and lifts my other leg over his
shoulder as he slides down my body, lowering his head as he works his
fingers ceaselessly, beckoning the endless waves.

Oh gods. I’m going to die. Right here. Right now.
“Every time I have to sit with the Assembly, I’ll be thinking about this,

about you.” He slides his hand under my ass and lifts me to his mouth, then
replaces his fingers with the thick stab of his tongue.

Searing pleasure rips through me, arching my back, and there’s no time
to muffle the cry he wrings from me, but he doesn’t exactly stifle his deep
moan, either.

“I can’t.” My heart has to give out at some point.
“You can and you will.” He strums his thumb lightly over my swollen

clit, and my hips jerk.
The pleasure is sharper than a knife.
Shimmering onyx wraps around my mind and everything intensifies. A

driving, pounding, uncontrollable need courses through me with every beat
of my pulse, demanding an outlet, demanding I rip through the confines of
the leather and trade her sweet taste for the incomparable perfection of
sinking into her when she comes.

Xaden. I gasp for breath, gripping the conduit so tightly I prepare for the
sound of breaking glass. It’s his desire flooding our bond, compounding my
own. His desperation. His power brushing against mine.

I need to fuck her, to flip her over the arm of this throne and drive into
her, but I can’t. I need her nail marks in the wood, need her cries filling this
whole fucking house, need her knowing what I can be for her—anything
and everything she needs. She’s heaven in my mouth. Flawless. Mine. And



she’s almost there. Gods, yes, her legs are shaking, her walls are fluttering
around my tongue. I love her so fucking much.

I shatter, splintering into a million glittering shards of bliss as I scream
out his name. Power and light course through me without burning, and I
arch again and again, coming apart at the seams of what I think is me but
might be him.

He untangles from my mind, and I mourn the loss even as my body
slackens. It’s my lungs I feel draw air, my own power that crackles through
the orb in my hand before settling, my own heartbeat that finally slows as
the last of the orgasm fades.

“What the hell did you do?” I lift my head, my eyes flaring when I
realize Xaden isn’t tangled with me.

He’s three feet and a million miles away, backed against the Assembly’s
table, gripping the shadow-covered edges with white knuckles, his eyes
squeezed shut so tightly I wince.

“Xaden?”
“Just need a second.”
I manage the awkward task of sitting up and move to stand.
“Stay right there.” He holds his hand out.
Every line of his gorgeous body is drawn tight, and his leathers… Gods,

that has to be painful.
“Come here,” I whisper.
“No.”
My head draws back. “You can’t possibly think I’m going to let you get

me off twice, let alone whatever the fuck that last time was, and not—”
“That’s exactly what’s happening.” His eyes flash open, and the heat, the

longing, the desperation I see there feels like it could be my own…because
a few seconds ago, it was.

“I felt how much you need me.” I shift forward to the edge of the chair
— throne—whatever. “You want me over the side of the throne, right?
Grasping onto the arm so my nails scar it.”

“Fuck.” The table groans under his grip. “I should not have done that.”



“Oh, you definitely should have. It was quite possibly the hottest
moment of my entire life. You ever want to bring me to my knees or win an
argument? That’s a sure bet.”

A tight smile curves his mouth at the reference to his words from last
year.

My toes touch the dais. “You gave me what I fantasize about—”
“Please don’t.” The words are forced through gritted teeth. It’s the

“please” that stops me in my tracks. “I’m hanging by a thread, so I’m
begging you. Please. Don’t.” He hangs his head, and shadows slip across
the dais, pushing my clothes toward me.

Confused is an understatement, but I stand up and quickly get my
clothes back on down to my socks, then pick up my boots. “Do you want to
clue me in on why you’re keen on torturing yourself?”

He exhales just a shade short of a sigh. “Because I need you to see I’m
more than capable of worshipping your body without reciprocation. You’re
not a convenient placeholder for me to fuck.”

This is about Cat?
“I know that.” So much for the afterglow of the world’s longest orgasm.

I’m right back to pissed.
“But you don’t.” He releases his death grip on the table and points at the

throne. “Sit.”
“For a repeat performance?”
A corner of his mouth quirks upward. “So I can help you with your

boots. You’re too short for the chair.”
“Well aware,” I mutter, sitting back on the throne and letting my feet

dangle. “I don’t like…not reciprocating.”
He lifts my left foot, slipping on my boot.
“I don’t like you thinking you’re not the center of my fucking world, yet

here we are. And before you start another argument, I’ll fuck you later
tonight. Trust me. I’m making a momentary point, not a lasting vow of
masochism.” He braces my foot on his thigh and ties the laces.

The sight eases some of the tension in my chest. No one would ever
believe that scary, badass Xaden Riorson would tie anyone’s shoes.



“I thought you were going to kill her,” he says quietly.
Right. Back to Cat.
“I almost did.” I lower one foot, then raise the other at his cue. “Would

that have been unforgivable to you?”
He finishes tying my boot, then lets go of my foot. “Nothing you could

ever do would be unforgivable to me.” Stepping back, he leans against the
edge of the table again. “And I don’t particularly care if Cat lives, but I’m
not cheering for her to die, either. She’s a necessary yet volatile ally, and
Syrena would be a disastrous enemy to make. But I do care that you would
have regretted killing her.”

And in that rage, I would have if he hadn’t shown up.
“How could you ever love someone like her?”
“I didn’t.” He shrugs. “You are the first and only woman I’ve ever

loved.”
“You were just engaged to her for…” I pause. “I don’t even know how

long you were engaged for.” I feel…stupid.
“I would have told you if you’d asked. That’s the problem here, Violet—

you don’t ask.”
“It’s not like you ask me about my exes.” I cross my legs.
“Because I don’t want to know, which I suspect is the same reason you

continue to not ask me about the things that actually bother you, but let’s
just ignore that like we usually do. Seems to be working out for us.” He lays
the sarcasm on thick.

I look away because he’s right, damn him. Avoiding the potentially
devastating questions, like why he’s never told me about the deal he made
with my mother, seems prudent when there’s a possibility of losing him
over a wrong answer.

He moves on when I fall quiet. “Cat and I weren’t engaged, we were
betrothed—and yes, there’s a difference to me.”

“Now who’s arguing semantics? Let alone on behalf of the woman who
just warped all of my emotions and turned me into an abyss of rage.” Some
of which is creeping back in.



“We’ll get to that in a second. The betrothal clause of the alliance kicked
in when she turned twenty.” The table creaks as he fully sits back against it.
“We tried it out for about three-quarters of a year, but we weren’t
compatible, and it came to light that Tecarus was never going to let us have
the luminary anyway. He wanted us to use it there. I ended the betrothal,
which, as you know, caused some problems.”

“Weren’t compatible?” I can’t blame the insidious stab of jealousy on
Cat this time. That burning sensation in the pit of my stomach is all me.
“That’s not exactly what she implied about your sex life.”

“You don’t have to like someone to fuck them.” He shrugs.
My jaw slackens, considering what we just did.
His head tilts as he watches me. “As I recall, you didn’t exactly like me

the first time—”
“Do not finish that sentence.” I jab my finger in his direction.
“On the other hand, I was already in love with you.”
My posture softens. That right there is why I’m hopelessly in love with

him. Because no one else gets to see him like this. Just me.
“Hardly seems fair, now that I think about it.” He drums his fingers on

the table. “And I wanted you too badly to care that you didn’t feel the same
way about me, not that I’d given you any reason to. Fuck, I wanted you to
run in the opposite direction.”

“I remember.” Our gazes lock, and my fingers curl with the need to
touch him. I reach for the conduit instead.

“Good. Maybe you’ll remember that the next time Cat goes digging
around your head.”

“Digging? She made me jealous!” The word is bitter on my tongue.
“She didn’t make you anything.”
Felix won’t miss the conduit if I throw it at Xaden’s head, will he? “Oh

really? You heard what she said. How would you feel if one of my previous
lovers had you on the mat for a challenge, then told you that he knows how
I taste?”

He tenses.



“How I feel on top of him?” I lower my tone, letting sex slide over every
single word. “How he had me first and insinuates that he plans on having
me last, too?”

His jaw flexes, and shadows curl around the legs of the table. “She
wasn’t my first by a long shot.”

“Not the point. You want me to ask more questions? Then don’t avoid
them.”

“Fine. None of your previous lovers are riders, unless there’s history I’m
unaware of when it comes to Aetos, so they’d never have me on the mat.
I’m guessing infantry, but again, I don’t want to know, so I don’t ask.”

“I didn’t sleep with Dain.” But he’s ridiculously on the mark with the
infantry guess.

“I knew that the second he kissed you after Threshing. It looked
awkward as fuck.” He shoves his hand through his still-mussed hair. “And
to answer the question, I’d feel jealous, which is something you have a
unique ability to bring out in me. And then I’d kick his ass, partially
because that’s what I do when someone challenges me, and more
importantly for implying there’s any other future besides the one where you
and I are endgame.”

My breath abandons me in a rush I refuse to call a sigh. Gods, he ruins
me when he says things like that.

“What else were you feeling on the mat?” he asks.
“Anger.” I glance up at the high, beamed ceiling in defeat. “Inferiority.

Insecurity. She threw everything she had at me, and it worked.”
“Anger, I understand. She said a lot that pissed me off, too.” He shakes

his head. “But inferiority is something you’ll have to explain, considering
you’re more powerful than any other cadet.”

“It has nothing to do with signets.” I gesture to the giant chair I’m seated
on. “She pointed out that you’re a Riorson.”

“You’ve known that since Parapet.” He taps the rebellion relic along his
neck.

“That’s not what I mean. You just called this chair a throne.”



“Because it is. Or it was before the unification.” Another infuriatingly
casual shrug.

I blink as realization smacks me straight in the face. “Wait. Are you…
are you the king of Tyrrendor?”

“Fuck, no.” He shakes his head, then pauses. “I mean, yes, technically,
I’m the Duke of Aretia by birth, but Lewellen’s on our side and doing just
fine at governing the province. Even if Tyrrendor became independent, I’m
more useful on the battlefield than on a throne. We’re off topic. I know
damn well you don’t feel inferior to me, so who? Cat?”

I press my lips between my teeth. “I think I liked you better before you
decided that feelings were something we need to discuss.”

“Sorry to inconvenience you, but this year the role of Violet
Sorrengail”—he points to me—“will be played by Xaden Riorson”—he
taps his chest—“who will drag her, kicking and screaming if he has to, into
a real relationship with real discussions, because he refuses to lose her
again. If I have to evolve, you do, too.” He folds his arms across his chest.

“Is he done talking in third person?” I pick at the metal band around the
orb. “Cat was right in one regard. She is the better match. She’s noble by
birth, brave for becoming a flier, driven, ruthless, and mean as hell, just like
you.” Fuck, they’re pretty much the same person.

His eyes flare, then narrow. “Hold on. Do you somehow think that I find
you inferior to her?”

My shrug isn’t exactly nonchalant.
He shifts like he’s about to move toward me, then stops himself, putting

his hands firmly back on the table. “Violet, you were just in my thoughts.
You know I think you’re perfect, even when you frustrate the shit out of me.
Now tell me about the insecurity. I thought we handled that last year.”

“Sure, before I knew you were leading a revolution, and before you
declared you’d always keep secrets, and way before some beautiful
aristocrat who you used to be betrothed to but conveniently was never
mentioned appeared with her big brown doe eyes and sharp-ass claws at our
bedroom door half naked—”

“She what?” His eyebrows rise.



“—and then has the nerve to tell me I’m not special just because you
like to fuck me.”

“I do like to fuck you.” A slow smile curves his mouth. “I love it,
actually.”

“Don’t side with her!” My nails dig into the cushion beneath me. “Ugh!”
The shout echoes off the rafters, and I cover my face with my hands. “Why
does she turn me into such a fucking mess? And how do I make it stop?”
I’ll end up killing her before solstice.

I hear his bootsteps, then feel his warm hands gently clasp my wrists.
“Look at me.”
Slowly, I lower my hands, and he holds them in his as I open my eyes.

He’s right where we started this chat, on his knees in front of me.
“I don’t want to have this discussion again.” He uses the wingleader

voice, then softens. “But I will. You’re about to get some hard truths,
because I wasn’t clear enough in Cordyn.”

My shoulders straighten.
“You raged today because you were angry.” He strokes his thumbs over

my pulse. “You got jealous because you were jealous. You grappled with
inferiority because for some reason I can’t understand, you feel inferior.
And you lashed out with insecurity because I think both of us are just
figuring this out as we go. Own your feelings like you did last year and be
honest with me. Cat can’t plant emotions, warp them, or even sway them
unless you are already headed that way. Cat can only amplify what you’re
already feeling.”

I swallow, but the lump forms in my throat anyway. It’s all…me.
“Yeah, it’s a shitty realization. I’ve been there.” He laces his fingers with

mine. “She can take you from irritation to full-on rage in the span of a
minute or two. And yes, she’s really fucking powerful, but so are you. But
the only weapons she wields are the ones you hand her. You want to keep
control of your emotions? You need to have control in the first place.”

“I can’t…” A pit forms in my stomach. “I haven’t been in control since
Resson,” I admit in a whisper. “I let Tairn’s emotions take over. I’m
carrying around a conduit so I don’t set your house on fire with my own



damned power. I failed at the wards and now nearly failed tests, making shit
decisions, fucking up left and right, and people’s lives are in the balance. I
keep hoping I’ll find my feet, but…” I shake my head.

He lifts a hand to my cheek, avoiding the swollen lump where Cat hit
me. “You have to find your center again, Violet. I can’t do it for you.” He
holds my gaze, letting his words sink in, before adding, “You are a creature
of logic and facts, and everything you know got turned upside down and
shaken. You’ll never know how truly sorry I am for that. But you can’t just
sit there and hope. You want it to change, then you have to figure it out, just
like Gauntlet. You’re the only one who can.” He says it a hell of a lot kinder
than he did last year.

“But how do I find my center while in the middle of a Cat storm?” I
moan.

He glances away. “Look, Cat got to you because you weren’t wearing
your daggers. The one with the intertwined Vs? It’s runed to protect you
from her gift. Keep them on until you find your feet, and she can’t fuck
with you. Same thing happened in Cordyn. You took them off to wear that
lacy thing you called a dress. Fuck, I wanted to rip it off with my teeth.” His
jaw ticks.

“You gave the daggers to me last year.” My hand slides to his wrist.
“I figured she’d find a way to make my life difficult for breaking the

agreement, and that would inevitably involve you.” He leans in. “I love
you. She will never sit in this seat. She will never wear a Tyrrish crown.
She’s never had me on my knees in front of her.” His mouth curves into a
wicked grin that makes me instantly ready for it to be tonight. “And I’ve
also never fucked her with my tongue.”

My lips part and heat stings my cheeks.
“Now, can we consider this matter discussed? Unfortunately, I have a

briefing to get to.”
I nod. “I have class.”
“Right. Physics?” he guesses as we both rise to our feet.
“History.” I take his offered hand and we walk off the dais. “Which I’m

surprisingly awful at, it turns out. Something about having read all the



wrong books.”
“Maybe you should find the right ones.” His smile mirrors mine, and for

a blissful second, it all feels…normal. If that’s a word that could ever apply
to us.

“Maybe.”
When we reach the bustling hallway, he cups the back of my neck and

pulls me in for a quick, hard kiss. “Do me a favor?” he says against my
mouth.

“Anything.”
“Come to bed early tonight.”

OceanofPDF.com



Fliers and riders are held equal in every regard with the exception of
wing structure.

Riders will maintain their wings, sections, and squads, as well as retain
their commands.


Every drift will be absorbed by a squad, and their leader will replace
the squad’s current executive officer for unit cohesiveness and

efficiency.

—ARTICLE TWO, SECTION ONE THE ARETIA ACCORD



CHAPTER FORTY-NINE

“I feel like you’re the only one who isn’t surprised,” Imogen says as we
stand in the courtyard after formation the next morning.

“We’re the strongest squad. They’re the strongest drift. I don’t know
how the rest of you are surprised.” I shrug, glancing over at Cat’s drift, who
all seem to be turning various shades of purple and green from yesterday’s
challenges.

Same goes for our squad.
“Here we go.” Rhiannon hands six of us familiar green patches.
“Do we really have to give them these?” Ridoc’s lip curls at the patch

we worked our asses off for, the patch the first-years fought to hold on to.
“Yes,” Rhiannon chides. “It’s the right thing to do. As of this moment,

they’re part of our squad, whether we like it or not.”
“I choose to not,” Sloane remarks.
Laughing, I run my thumb over the patch.
“I’ll take one to Cat,” Rhiannon says quietly. “You don’t have to—”
“I’ve got it.” I give her what I hope is a reassuring smile. “Let’s do this.”
“Let’s do this,” she repeats. “Second squad, time to move.”
We cross the frost-covered courtyard together, and I tap the dagger at my

left hip, making sure it’s right where I left it.
Xaden loves me. He chose me. I will be the most powerful rider of my

generation.



Cat only has the power I choose to give her, with or without my dagger.
The six fliers tense as we approach.
“I think they’ve chosen to not as well,” Sloane mutters to Aaric.
Cat narrows her eyes on Sloane, and I step between them, offering Cat

the patch. “Welcome to Second Squad, Flame Section, Fourth Wing, also
known as the Iron Squad.”

Similar greetings are given around us, but I keep my eyes locked on Cat
as she stares at the patch like it might bite her. “Take the patch.”

“What are we supposed to do with them?”
“We sew them onto our uniforms,” Ridoc answers from beside me,

making a back-and-forth motion with his hand to simulate pulling a needle
through his uniform—as though explaining a patch to children.

“Why…?” Her gaze sweeps over us, catching on the different patches
like she’s never noticed them before.

I point to my collarbone. “Rank.” Then my shoulder. “Wing. Iron Squad.
Signet. Patches are earned, not given. Riders, and fliers now, choose
whatever location they want for every patch besides wing and rank, none of
which are worn on flight leathers, which is probably why you never saw
Xaden wearing them. He generally abhors patches.” There. That wasn’t so
bad. I can be civil.

“I knew that.” She snatches the patch out of my hand. “I’ve known him
for years.”

Rhiannon lifts a brow from my other side.
I note the twinge of jealousy that she’s been privy to parts of his life that

I haven’t, but there’s no rage, no sour jolt of insecurity, and no self-loathing.
I fucking love my daggers for a whole new reason.

Her eyes widen slightly as if she senses that she can’t touch me, then
narrow into malicious slits. Civility is definitely not on her agenda.

“Like I said.” I offer her a bright smile. “Welcome to the quadrant’s only
Iron Squad.” Pivoting, I hook my arm through Rhiannon’s, and we start to
walk away with the rest of the riders in our newly enlarged squad.

“Being in the same squad doesn’t change the fact that it’s still my
crown,” she blurts.



“Let’s feed her to Sgaeyl,” Rhiannon whispers as we pause.
I look at Cat over my shoulder. “Did you know that Tyrrendor hasn’t had

a crown in more than six hundred years? Turns out they melted them all
down to forge the unification crown, so good luck with that.”

“It’s going to be fun making your life as miserable as you’ve made
mine.”

Oh, fuck civility.
“Gods, she really can’t help herself, can she?” Rhiannon says under her

breath.
“Cat, stop it,” Maren chastises. “You’re being ugly. I’ve told you over

and over that she didn’t drop Luella. She fell. It’s as simple as that.”
“You’re welcome to try and make me miserable,” I tell Cat, letting go of

Rhiannon to walk back to the flier. “Oh! And one more thing.” I lower my
voice just slightly, well aware of every head within our squad that turns our
direction.

“What?” she snaps.
“That trick you mentioned? You know, with the fingers?” A slow smile

spreads across my face. “Thanks.”
Cat’s eyes bulge.
Imogen laughs so hard she snorts as I walk back to Rhiannon.
“Damn. Just…damn.” Rhi claps a few times.
“I fucking love you.” Ridoc throws his arm around my shoulders.

“Anyone hungry? I woke up somewhere I hadn’t exactly planned on and
missed breakfast.”

“I would,” I tell him, “but I have plans in the library.”
“The library? Then me too,” Sawyer chimes in, following quickly.
“I’ll go with,” Rhiannon says with a nod.
“If the three of you are going, then so am I,” Ridoc adds.
“You guys don’t have to come with me,” I say once we’re halfway

through the foyer.
“Oh, we needed to get away from Cat.” Ridoc waves me off. “You’re

just the excuse.”



“Her abilities are…horrifying,” Sawyer concludes. “What if she decides
to make me hate you?”

“Make Xaden hate you?” Rhiannon’s eyebrows rise.
“She can’t.” I shake my head.
“Or make you instantly horny for some random flier, and then you’re not

the only one in that bed when Xaden rotates back,” Ridoc muses. “Her
signet—or whatever they call it—is fucking terrifying.”

“She can only amplify the emotions you already have,” I explain to
them.

“We could kill her.” Sawyer reaches for the door handle. “All the fliers
are still struggling with the altitude, and their gryphons are still sleeping
half the day, according to Sliseag, so they’re probably at their weakest.”

We all fall quiet, not out of shock but because we actually consider it for
a few seconds. At least, I do. “We can’t kill her. She’s our squadmate.”

Wait, is that really the only ethical line there?
“You sure?” Sawyer tilts his head. “Say the word and we’ll bury a body.

We still have a couple of hours before we’re due in Battle Brief.”
“Good idea. I could use a snack.” Andarna’s tone is indecently excited.
“We do not eat our allies,” Tairn lectures.
“You never let me have any fun.”
I crack a genuine smile. “I appreciate the offer.”
We walk into the library, and I breathe in deeply. The scent in the two-

story room is different than the Archives. Parchment and ink still smell the
same, but there’s no earthy undertones because we’re aboveground, with
light streaming in through the windows. Only the shelves of the first floor
are filled with books, but I’ve made it my personal mission to see that the
second floor looks the same within the next decade.

Stone may not burn, but books do.
“What are we doing here, anyway?” Ridoc asks as I swing my pack off

my shoulder, picking the first empty table I see to rest it on. He gestures at
Sawyer, who is scanning the back of the library. “I mean, we all know what
he’s doing here.”



“Finding my center.” My answer earns me two very perplexed looks.
“Tecarus sent some books back for me with Xaden after the weapons run
yesterday, probably still hoping to get on my good side.” One by one, I
remove the six books he gifted, stacking them on the table and placing the
protective bag with Warrick’s journal on top. “Krovlish is not my strong
suit.”

“Krovlish isn’t anyone’s—”
I grin as Sawyer cuts off mid-sentence at the sight of Jesinia.
“Good morning,” he signs at me. “Is that right?”
“You’ve got it.”
He takes off in her direction.
“Would have been more fun my way. She’s got a great sense of humor,”

Ridoc mumbles.
“He’s learning to sign!” Rhiannon smiles and sits on the edge of the

table. We shamelessly turn to watch Sawyer greet Jesinia.
“And he’s already coming back?” Ridoc’s brow furrows.
I glance at the clock. “He only knows about four phrases, but he’s

catching on.”
“So is Krovlish Jesinia’s specialty?” Rhi asks, picking up the top book,

which is an accounting of the first emergence of the venin after the Great
War. At least, I think it is.

“No.” I shake my head as the library door opens exactly at seven thirty.
Right on time as always. “It’s his.”

“Seriously?” Ridoc mutters as I walk away from the table.
“You asked to see me?” Dain folds his arms across his chest. “Of your

own volition? No orders or anything?”
For a second, I hesitate. Then I remember that he stabbed Varrish, he

called the formation to split the quadrant, and when the truth came to light,
he chose exile with a group of people who despise him because it was the
right thing to do. “I need your help.”

“All right.” He nods without waiting for an explanation.
And just like that, I remember why he used to be one of my favorite

people on the Continent.



 
 
 

“That’s not the word for rain,” Dain says the next day, tapping a symbol
in Warrick’s journal with the bottom of his pen as we sit in the

wardstone chamber, our backs against the wall, our legs stretched out in
front of us. The noon sun beats down on us, but it’s still cold enough to see
my breath.

“I’m pretty sure it is.” I lean in, studying the journal that’s equally
balanced on his leg and mine.

“Did you ask Jesinia?” he asks, turning from the ward-centered entries
of the journal back to the beginning.

“She thought it was rain, too.”
“But she specializes in Morrainian, right?” He tilts his head and studies

the first entry.
My eyes widen, jumping to his profile.
“What?” He glances at me, then abruptly turns his attention back to the

journal. “Don’t look so shocked that I remember Jesinia’s specialization. I
listen when you talk.” He flinches. “At least I used to.”

“When did you stop?” The question leaves my mouth before I can catch
it.

He sighs and shifts his position slightly, just enough to tell me he’s
nervous. Two years in the quadrant couldn’t rid him of that tell. “I don’t
know. Probably when I said goodbye to you on Conscription Day. Mine, of
course, not yours.”

“Right. You said hello to me on mine.” A smile tugs at my lips.
“Actually, I think you asked what the hell I was doing there.”

He scoffs, then leans his head back against the wall and looks skyward.
“I was so pissed…and scared. I finally made it to second year, gained the
privilege of visiting other quadrants so I might be able to see you, and
instead of being tucked away safely with the scribes, you show up dressed
in black for the Riders Quadrant on your mother’s orders, so dizzy that I



still have no idea how you made it across the parapet.” His throat works as
he swallows. “All I could think was that I’d just survived a year of hearing
my friends’ names called on the death roll, and I was going to make damn
sure yours wasn’t. And then you hated me for trying to give you what you’d
always told me you wanted.”

“That’s not why I hated—” I press my lips in a tight line. “You wouldn’t
let me grow up, and you were so fucking pigheaded that you knew what
was right for me. You were never like that as a kid.”

He laughs, the self-deprecating sound echoing in the chamber. “Are you
the same person you were when you crossed the parapet?”

“No.” I shake my head. “Of course not. First year hardened me in
ways…” I catch his look, complete with raised eyebrows. “Oh. Guess it
changed you, too.”

“Yeah. Living only by the Codex will do that to you.”
“Part of me wonders if that’s why they push it on us so hard. They

transform us into their perfect weapons, teach us to critically think about
everything except the Codex and the orders they give.”

He scratches the brown scruff of his beard and looks down at the
journal. “Where are your translations for the beginning? Maybe we can
compare the symbols.”

“I skipped ahead to the ward entries, seeing as that’s what we needed.”
He blinks. “You…skipped? You, out of all people, didn’t read a book

from start to finish?” The flash of a smile he tries to hide hits me
somewhere in the vicinity of my stomach, reminding me of the days when
he’d been my best friend, and suddenly this is too much.

I scramble to my feet, dust my leathers off, and walk toward the stone.
“Vi,” he says quietly, but the cavernous space amplifies it so he may as

well be shouting. “We finally going to talk about what happened?”
The stone is the same empty cold under my hand as it was the night I

failed to raise the wards. “Do you know how to imbue?” I ask, ignoring his
question.

“Yes.” His sigh feels strong enough to knock the wardstone over, and
when I glance over my shoulder, I see him set the journal down on my pack



and rise to his feet. Seconds later, he’s standing next to me. “I’m sorry,
Violet.”

“It feels like it should be imbued, don’t you think?” I drag my fingertips
over the biggest of the etched circles. “Reminds me of the way raw alloy
feels. Empty.”

“I’m sorry for the role I played in their deaths. I’m so fucking sorry—”
“Did you steal my memories every time you touched my face last year?”

I blurt out, letting the cold seep into my palm.
Silence fills the chamber for a long moment before he finally responds

softly. “No.”
I nod and pivot to face him. “So just when you needed information you

couldn’t ask me for.”
He lifts his hand and puts it against the stone mere inches from mine,

splaying his fingers wide. “I did it by accident the first time. I was just so
used to touching you. And you’d gotten close to Riorson, and my father had
pretty much bragged about the way your mother cut into him. I knew he had
to be after revenge, but you wouldn’t listen to me—”

“He was never out for revenge. Not with me.” I shake my head.
“I know that now.” He squeezes his eyes shut. “I fucked up.” A deep

breath later, he opens them. “I fucked up and trusted my dad when I should
have trusted your judgment. And there’s nothing I can say or do that’s going
to bring them back—bring Liam back.”

“No, there isn’t.” My eyes water, and I force out a grimace of a smile
that quickly falls.

“I’m so sorry, Violet.”
“It’s not all right,” I whisper. “I don’t know how to even start making it

all right. I just know that I can’t think about Liam and look at you at the
same time without…” I shake my head. “I don’t want to hate you, Dain, but
I’m not sure I’ll ever be able to—” My attention shifts to my hand. My very
warm hand next to his on the stone. “Are you imbuing the stone?”

“Yes. I thought that’s what you wanted.”
“It is.” My head bobs. “How long do you think it would take to fully

imbue something this big?”



“Weeks. Maybe a month.”
I move my hand, then return to my pack and crouch to stuff everything

inside. “I need your help with the journal. And that’s not fair, because I
need to know that we won’t talk about this—about Liam and Soleil—again.
At least not until I have a lot more distance.” Once it’s all put away, I stand,
facing Dain again.

His shoulders droop, but his hand is still on the stone. “I can do that.”
“Thank you.” I glance up at the overcast sky stories above us. “I’m

usually free for about a half hour this time of day.”
“Me, too, and I’ll work on imbuing the stone.”
“I’ll ask Xaden to help, too.” I slip my arms through the straps and settle

the pack on my shoulders.
His hand falls from the stone. “About Riorson—”
My entire body tenses. “Be very careful with your words.”
“Are you in love with him?” he asks, his voice breaking on the last word

as he pivots to face me fully. “Because Garrick and I heard the end of what
he said in the interrogation chamber, and trust me, I might be in love with
him after that declaration, but are you? Really and truly?”

“Yes.” I hold his stare long enough that he knows I mean what I say.
“And that’s never going to change.”

Dain’s jaw flexes and he nods once. “Then I’ll trust him as much as you
do.”

I nod back slowly. “I’ll see you tomorrow.”
“Tomorrow,” he agrees.

OceanofPDF.com



Mastery of one’s signet does not occur at Basgiath,

nor in the years directly after.


No rider alive truly believes they’ve reached the

limitations of their power.


The dead ones may feel differently.

—MAJOR AFENDRA’S GUIDE TO THE RIDERS QUADRANT (UNAUTHORIZED
EDITION)



CHAPTER FIFTY

“B etter.” A week later, Felix pops a grape into his mouth, then motions
to the stacked rocks and the tendrils of steam at the base that only

last a second before they’re whisked away by the wind and snow. “You
almost hit it that time.”

I clench the energy-warmed conduit in my hand. “I did hit it.” I sway on
my feet and shake off my exhaustion. Too many late nights have been spent
translating Warrick’s journal from the beginning, too many lunches have
been eaten in that cold wardstone chamber, and I’ve definitely spent too
much time with Dain.

I’d almost forgotten how good he really is with languages, how quickly
he catches on.

“No.” Felix shakes his head, then plucks another grape from the bunch.
How are those things not frozen? The ground has accumulated about six
inches of snow in the hour we’ve been out here. “If you’d hit it, the rocks
wouldn’t be there anymore.”

“You said to use less power, remember? Smaller strikes. More control.”
I shake the orb in his direction. “What would you call that?”

“Missing the target.”
Snowflakes sizzle into steam as they land on the bare skin of my hands,

and it’s all I can do to not glare at the professor.



“Here.” He shoves the bunch of grapes into the pack at his feet, then
reaches for the orb, plucking it from my hand. “Strike the conduit.”

“I’m sorry?” My eyes bulge as I swat a loose tendril of hair from my
face.

“Strike the conduit,” he says like it’s the simplest task, holding the
metal-and-glass orb only inches away from my fingers.

“I’d kill you.”
“If only you could aim,” he teases, his smile flashing white. “You clearly

understand how energy and attraction work, as evidenced by how you took
those wyvern out, right?”

“I struck into the cloud.” My brow crinkles. “I think. I can’t really
explain it. I just knew that lightning can exist within a cloud, and when I
wielded, it was there.”

Felix nods. “It’s about the energy fields. It’s quite similar to magic that
way. And you”—he touches my hand with the orb—“are the greatest energy
field of all. Summon your power, but instead of letting the conduit have it
all, cut it off yourself.”

I shift my weight and swallow hard, fighting the tide of fire that lifts the
hairs on my arm. Imagining the Archives doors shutting all but the last few
inches, I allow only a fraction of Tairn’s power to reach my hands.

My fingertips graze the metal of the orb, and it crackles with the familiar
sight of whitish blue tendrils of pure energy branching from my fingertips
against the glass and gathering into a single, delicate stream at the alloy
medallion in the center of the conduit. Unlike the shimmering strands I pull
from Andarna’s power to temper runes, this is physical, like a tiny,
sustained lightning strike. A smile tugs at the corners of my mouth as I let
the power flow from me into the conduit just like I do every night, imbuing
stone after stone now that I know how to change them out once they’re
fully imbued. “I love watching it do that.”

It’s the only time my power is beauty without destruction—without
violence.

“You’re not watching it, Violet. You’re doing it. And you’re supposed to
love it. It’s better to find joy in your power than it is to fear it.”



“I don’t fear the power.” How could I when it’s so beautiful? So varied?
I’m afraid of myself.

“You shouldn’t be,” Tairn lectures. He’s been commenting off and on the
last hour—whenever he hasn’t been trying to get Andarna to stop chasing
the two new flocks of sheep Brennan had moved into the valley. “I chose
you, and dragons make no mistakes.”

“What’s it like to go through life so self-assured?”
“It’s…life.”
I manage not to roll my eyes by keeping all my focus on limiting Tairn’s

power.
“Good. Keep going. Let it flow, but think trickle, not flood.” Felix

slowly draws the conduit away. “Don’t stop.”
Every muscle in my body tenses, but I do as he asks and don’t cut the

stream of power. Tendrils of that same white-blue energy stretch the inch of
airspace between my fingers and the orb.

“What…” My heart starts to pound so hard I can feel it in my ears, and
the five separate filaments of power pulse in time with its beat.

“That’s you,” Felix says softly, gentler than he’s ever been with me as he
draws the orb away another inch, then another. Then again, I’d be careful
with me right now, too, if I were him. “Increase slowly.”

The doors to my Archives open just another foot or so, and the power
stretches with no pain and only moderate heat, evaporating any unlucky
snowflakes in its path.

“You’re starting to get it now, aren’t you?” Felix retreats a full step, and
my hand begins to tremble as I fight to amplify the power just enough to
reach the conduit but not strike.

“Get. What?” My arm is full-on shaking now.
“Control.” He grins, and I startle, my gaze swinging back to his.
Power bursts through the doorway and rips through me in a streak of

scalding heat, and I throw my hands up—and away from Felix—a second
before the strike splits the clouded sky, singeing the mountain on impact
less than thirty feet up the ridge.



Felix’s Red Swordtail puffs steam in agitation, but all I feel from Tairn is
pride.

“Well, you had control.” Felix hands the conduit back to me. “But at
least that means you’re capable. For a while there, I wasn’t sure.”

“I wasn’t, either.” I study the orb as if I’ve never seen it.
“You wield your power like a battle-ax, and sometimes that’s exactly

what’s needed. But you of all people”—he gestures to the daggers sheathed
in my flight jacket—“should understand when a dagger is called for, when
only the precise cut will do.” He lifts his pack from the ground and slings it
over his shoulder. “We’re done for today. By Monday you’ll be able to keep
that power flowing from—shall we say ten feet?”

“Ten feet?” There’s no fucking way.
“You’re right.” He nods, turning toward his antsy dragon. “Make it

fifteen.” His head tilts to the side, and he pauses as if he’s talking to his
dragon. “When you get back to the house, tell Riorson we’ll need both of
you in the Assembly chamber at five o’clock.”

“But Xaden isn’t—” I lower my shields and sure enough, there he is.
The shadowy pathway between our minds is strong with proximity and
heavy with… weariness?

“You’re home early. Everything all right?”
“No.” He doesn’t give any details, and his tone doesn’t invite further

questions.
“Is Sgaeyl all right?” I ask Tairn as I walk up the forearm he’s dipped

for me.
“She’s unharmed.” Frustration and anger simmer, then quickly scald our

bond, and I swiftly shield him out to keep from losing control over my own
emotions.

A half hour later, after flying back to the valley and watching Andarna
show off her developing ability to extend her wing while counting to thirty
with enthusiastic applause, I walk into the chaotic halls of Riorson House
and head straight for the kitchen.

Once I have a plate of what I need, I start up the sweeping staircase and
find Garrick, Bodhi, and Heaton talking on the second-floor landing. The



look on Garrick’s soot-covered face matches the ominous weight of
Xaden’s mood, and when Heaton turns their head, I nearly fumble the plate.

The right side of their face is one giant contusion, and their right arm is
splinted from the elbow down.

“What happened?”
Garrick and Bodhi exchange a glance that makes my stomach sink, even

knowing that Xaden is alive—and not in our bedroom on this floor, but four
stories above me.

“They took Pavis,” Heaton tells me quietly, looking to see that we’re not
overheard.

I blink. That can’t be right. “That town is only an hour’s flight east of
Draithus.”

Heaton nods slowly. “Took seven of them and a hoard of wyvern. Town
was overrun before we even got there. Your sister—she’s all right, just
taking Emery to the healers for a shattered leg. She ordered us out after—”
Their voice breaks, and they look away.

“After Nyra Voldaren fell during our mission today,” Garrick finishes.
“Nyra?” She was the quadrant’s senior wingleader last year and was

damn near invincible.
“Yeah. She went in to defend a group of civilians that had taken shelter

near the armory, and…” His jaw works. “And there was nothing left of her
or Malla. It was just like Soleil and Fuil, completely drained. I’m sure
they’ll update everyone in Battle Brief tomorrow, but they recalled all first
and second lieutenants to Aretia to regroup.”

“I think they’re going to change the wing structure,” Heaton adds.
“They have to,” Garrick agrees. “Leaving the less experienced riders

back from the front doesn’t do a damn thing when the front is this fucking
fluid.”

“Did they take Cordyn?”
Garrick shakes his head. “Skipped right over it and hundreds of other

miles. They targeted Pavis and stayed there.”
“It’s a good staging point”—Bodhi drops his voice when a trio of fliers

out of First Wing walk by—“for Draithus. Has to be.”



They’re coming for us.

OceanofPDF.com



Many of our most esteemed tacticians have tried to estimate the
approaching tipping point—where the outcome of the war may have

been decided even though we still fight. Many believe it will come in the
next decade. I fear it will arrive much sooner than that.

—CAPTAIN LERA DORRELL’S GUIDE TO VANQUISHING THE VENIN
PROPERTY OF CLIFFSBANE ACADEMY



CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE

W e split as the hallway grows too crowded, and I continue up and up
the stairs, climbing to the fifth floor, then nodding to Rhi and Tara as

I pass by the open door to Rhi’s room. Clearly, by their wide smiles, they
don’t know yet, and I decide to give them a few more minutes of blissfully
ignorant happiness and keep walking down the long hallway to the back
stairs.

The service stairway is dark, but mage lights wink on as I climb the
steep, wrought-iron spiral staircase to its end. I open the door with lesser
magic, then step out onto the narrow walkway that runs along the apex of
the roofline and close it behind me.

Xaden sits on the edge of the small defensive turret thirty feet away, and
the only shadows surrounding him are the ones the dying afternoon light
casts. If I didn’t feel his turmoil saturating the bond between us, I’d think he
was up here for the view, the very picture of control.

Step by careful step, I cross the eastern line of the roof, careful not to let
the breeze rip the plate from my hand or screw with my balance.

“What did I tell you about risking your life in order to talk to me?” he
asks, his gaze focused on the town below.

“I’d hardly call that risking my life.” I set the plate on the wall, then
climb up to sit next to Xaden. “But I do now understand how you’re so
damn good at Parapet.”



“Been practicing since I was a kid,” he admits. “How did you know I
was up here?”

“Other than being able to track you through the bond? You told me in a
letter that you’d sit up here waiting for your father to come home.” I reach
for the plate, then hold it in front of him. “I know chocolate cake isn’t going
to fix this, but in my defense, I got it for you when I’d just thought you’d
had a shit day, before I knew what really happened.”

He glances at the slice, then leans in and brushes his mouth over mine
before grabbing it. “I’m not used to people taking care of me. Thank you.”

“Get used to it.” The cold seeps into my leathers from the wall beneath
us, and I note the heavy gray clouds moving in from the west. “It’s already
snowing up the pass. I bet we get seven inches tonight.”

“Maybe more if you’re good.” A corner of his mouth lifts as he cuts into
the cake with the fork.

“You’re making dick jokes?” I brace my hands on the top edge of the
wall.

“You’re talking about the weather.” He takes a bite, then cuts another
one and hands me the fork.

“I was being considerate and giving you the option of not talking about
what happened. Would you rather I talk about how translating is going with
Dain?” I take the offered bite and give the fork back. Damn, no wonder he
loves this cake. It’s better than anything we had at Basgiath.

“I’d rather you stop being considerate and ask.” His gaze locks with
mine.

I swallow, getting the feeling he’s not just talking about today’s loss.
“Were you there?”

“Yes.” The fork clicks against the plate as he sets it in his lap.
“Tairn didn’t tell me.”
“I think Sgaeyl somehow blocked him out.” He cocks his head to the

side. “Pretty sure we’re both blocked out right now, which means—”
“They’re fighting.” There’s a hard wall beyond my own shields.
“Garrick and I flew in from Draithus once Emery put out the call, but by

the time we got there…” He shakes his head. “Imagine Resson, but about



ten times the size. Ten times the number of civilians.”
“Oh.” The cake settles in my stomach like ash, and we both fall quiet. A

long moment passes before I rise to the challenge in his eyes and ask,
“What are you up here thinking about?”

“We’re outmatched.” He looks away and flexes his jaw. “Outmatched
and spread too fucking thin to be anything but a nuisance to them. We can’t
communicate fast enough. We aren’t effective or any kind of real barrier
when we’re sending out riots of three.” His gaze shifts eastward. “They can
take the rest of Poromiel—take us—whenever they want, and I have no clue
why they don’t. We have no idea how many of them are assembling in
Zolya or where the fuck all these wyvern are hatching from. There’s no plan
except hold the line, and the line isn’t holding.”

“We weren’t ready.” I look out over the rapidly growing town, noting the
dozens of new roofs under construction and the uncountable number of
chimneys letting out smoke from the homes within.

“We never could have been ready,” he counters, lifting the fork, then
stabbing it into the cake. “So don’t go adding this to the list of things you
blame yourself for. Even if we’d waited to come after the forge was
running, after we had enough riders to imbue the alloy and temper runes for
the daggers…” His shoulders dip in a sigh. “I’ll never say this in front of
the others, but we’re fifty years too late.”

The next breath I take is heavy and strained by the tightness in my ribs.
“What do we do about it?” Besides the obvious—Dain and I have to

translate faster, just in case there’s any actual hope of raising the wards. We
already know that one of the symbols I translated originally was incorrect.
Rain isn’t rain. It’s flame. Which, of course, helped us not at all.

“What we do isn’t my decision. Your brother’s the tactician, and Suri
and Ulices command the army.” He shoves a bite into his mouth.

“It’s your city.” His province, really.
“The irony is not lost on me.” He hands me another forkful of cake, but

this bite has lost its sweetness and goes down like sand. “Your sister
ordered me off the field.”

My eyebrows rise.



His laugh has a hard, sarcastic edge. “She ordered me. I had killed one
of them and was retrieving my dagger—another problem, I might add—
when the second one channeled right behind Sgaeyl. If she’d launched a
second later, this cake would have gone to waste.” He sets the fork down.

My heart starts to pound erratically. There’s not a mark on him, and yet
I’d almost lost him without even knowing he’d been that close to never
coming home again. The thought is so unfathomable that I’m stunned silent.

“She swept me up in a claw, but your sister saw what happened and
that’s when she called it a loss. Not because Nyra died, or the three fliers
from the footwing drift, or because we only had five dragons left.” He
shakes his head. “She called it because I was with them, and she wouldn’t
risk you.”

“Is that what she told you?” The first flakes of snow descend.
“She didn’t have to tell me. It was pretty fucking obvious.”
“Then you don’t know—”
“I do,” he counters, then immediately closes his eyes. “I know. And

through the anger and the horror of watching all those civilians flee,
watching them die, I realized she treated me like every marked one has
treated you since Threshing. Like you’re just a vulnerable extension of me.”

“I don’t think anyone would ever mistake you for vulnerable.” I reach
for his hand and lace our fingers. “But yes.”

He finds my gaze and closes his hand around mine. “I’m sorry.”
“Thank you, but as annoying as it is, I get it. We’re tethered.” I shrug.
He kisses me quiet, hard, and quick. “For the rest of our lives.”

 
 
 

By the time a week passes, no one bats an eye at the sight of Dain and
me huddled at a library table long after most cadets have found their

beds for the night. We’re still meeting at noon as well, and Xaden stops in
when he can to help imbue the stone. And that little strand of lightning
Felix has pushed me to sustain? Turns out that can imbue, too.



Desperation sinks her claws into me by the week after. We have nearly
the entire journal translated, but the passage about raising the wards still
isn’t different enough from my first, failed interpretation to act on. We
definitely get that Warrick insists that once the blood from one of the six
powerful riders is used on one stone, it can’t be used on the other he’s
referenced carving.

“Have you noticed his phrasing is so much more casual in the rest of the
journal compared to the one section we actually need to understand?” Dain
rubs his eyes and sits back in his chair beside me. “Like he’s deliberately
fucking with us from the grave.”

“True.” There are only four entries left. What in Malek’s name will we
do if the answer isn’t in one of those? “He has no issue doling out advice on
authoring the Codex—

“Or detailing whatever mess of relationships the six of them got into.”
Dain nods, cracking a huge yawn.

“Exactly.” I glance over at him. “You should get to bed.”
“You should, too.” He glances over at the nearby clock. “It’s almost

midnight. I’m sure Riorson is wondering—”
“He’s not here.” I shake my head and sigh with entirely too much self-

pity. “His squad is watching over Draithus this week. But you really should
get some sleep. I’m only going to stay another few minutes.”

His brow knits.
“Go,” I urge him with a reassuring smile. “I’ll see you tomorrow.”
He sighs but nods and pushes his chair back, standing, then stretching

his arms above his head. “Don’t tell him I said so”—he drops his arms
—“but the way I’ve heard he wants to reorganize the combat squads by
strengths, since the active riders don’t have a full wing to pull from, is
brilliant.”

“I’ll be sure not to tell him,” I promise, a corner of my mouth tugging
upward.

Dain takes his pack off the table. “See you tomorrow.”
I nod, and he walks out.



The library is comfortably quiet as I pour over the next entry, translating
into what we call our draft journal. “The air has grown cold enough,” I say
out loud as I write the words into the draft journal, “to see my blood in the
mornings.”

I blink, then stare at the symbol for “blood.” My mind spins at the
possibility, and then I turn back to earlier entries, just to be sure. Every
single time we translated the symbol “blood”…the word breath fits even
better. We have the wrong word.

The blood of life is actually the breath of life, and setting the stone
ablaze in an iron flame…

I close the journals and sit back in my chair. The six doesn’t refer to
riders.

“They’re dragons,” I say out loud in the empty library. Dain. I should
tell—

No. He’ll act only on the rules, not taking the ethics into account.
There’s only one person I trust to always do the right thing.

I stuff my things into my pack, sling it over my shoulders, and race out
of the library, then climb four flights of stairs. My heart races as I knock on
Rhiannon’s door.

“Hey,” she says when she opens the door, her bright smile faltering
when I don’t return it. Without another word, she steps back, ushering me
into her room.

I glance at the spartan decor as I start to pace the length of the room,
taking in two plain desks, two doorless armoires, and two beds with simple
black sheets that have been awkwardly shoved into a space obviously meant
for one—the result of the fliers’ arrival. A single window illuminates the
room with morning light. We’re due in formation shortly.

“That one is supposed to be yours,” Rhi says, gesturing to the bed on the
right. “Just in case you ever want a night away from Riorson.”

I press my lips between my teeth, searching for the right words as I wear
a path in Rhiannon’s floor. “I need to tell you something.”

“All right.”



Stopping suddenly in the middle of the room, I turn toward her. “I know
how to raise the wards. I’m just not entirely sure we should.”

OceanofPDF.com



The breath of life of the six and the one combined and set the stone
ablaze in an iron flame.

—THE JOURNAL OF WARRICK OF LUCERAS —TRANSLATED BY CADETS
VIOLET SORRENGAIL AND DAIN AETOS



CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO

Rhiannon slides a mug of warm apple cider across her sister’s dining
room table the next day, then takes the empty seat between Ridoc and

Sloane. The house has the same scent as most of the barracks in Riorson
House—newly cut wood and a faint hint of stain. The carpenters have been
working around the clock to turn out serviceable furniture.

I refuse to believe that it could all go up in flames if those dark wielders
decide to test their wyvern at altitude. Four hours. That’s all it would take
for them to reach us from Draithus.

“Thanks.” I take the mug and lift it to my face, breathing in the
comforting scent before drinking. Looking over my mug, into the connected
living room of the townhouse, I smile at the sight of Sawyer sitting with
Jesinia on a blanket near the fire, an intense look of concentration on his
face as he signs—

Shit, he might have just told her that he thinks her turtle is blue, but I’m
not getting in the middle of that.

It’s the second time this week Raegan has opened her home to our squad
at Rhi’s request, and the first time Jesinia’s joined us. I have to give it to
Rhi—her idea was genius. Getting our entire squad—eighteen of us—
together outside the academic setting of Riorson House hasn’t solved the
tension between riders and fliers, but it’s a step in the right direction.



Even Cat, who’s sitting as far away from me as possible in the corner of
the living room, isn’t sneering as she and Neve talk to Quinn. She still hates
being in Second Squad, but at least she’s civil about it to everyone but me.

We’ve fallen into a routine over the last couple of weeks of November—
now the first of December—adjusting our formation to include the fliers,
attending classes together within our years, and even making it through our
first sparring session where no one spilled blood yesterday. Rhiannon laid
down the law last week, and now we run together every morning and sit
together at Battle Brief and meals. She even assigned us study partners
hoping that proximity might lead to mutual understanding or at least
tolerance. Thank gods Maren is my study partner, but I still feel shitty that
Rhi took on Cat to spare me.

“Any chance you speak Old Lucerish?” I ask Aaric at the end of the
table. His tutoring would only be second to mine, considering Markham
was my mentor. I’d feel better if someone else quadruple-checked the
translation, someone other than rule-following Dain, but I’m pretty sure we
have it. Otherwise, why would we be here?

“Absolutely not.” He shakes his head and focuses on his new ink pen,
his forehead lined with concentration. All of our first-years are channeling,
and though they have yet to manifest a signet, they have a bet going about
who will be able to master the lesser magic needed to work the writing
implement first. Pretty sure Kai—the lone first-year flier without Luella—is
going to beat them all.

He’s currently on the couch between a couple of first-years, his spiky
black hair bobbing, a dimple forming in his bronze cheek as he laughs at
whatever story Bragen—the driftleader and our new XO—is currently
telling. Other than Maren, Bragen is the easiest of the fliers to get along
with. He also spends a lot of time shooting longing looks Cat’s way.

“Why would Aaric speak Old Lucerish?” Visia asks from the opposite
end of the table, looking up from her physics homework. “Aren’t you from
Calldyr?”

My face freezes. Fuck, I need to be more careful.



“Yep.” Aaric looks up at me, his features a perfect, polished mask. “You
have me confused with Lynx. He’s from Luceras.”

“Right. Of course.” I nod, thankful for his quick cover.
“At some point, you’re going to have to actually get to know the first-

years. They’re people now,” Ridoc teases, his smile tight. He agrees with us
about what we’re about to do, but he’s understandably worried about the
fliers’ reactions.

“Can’t blame her,” Imogen says, carrying a mug out of the kitchen with
Maren following close behind. “We’ve added six first-years and six fliers to
the squad in the last six weeks.”

“We’ve been in the squad since July,” Visia argues.
“You didn’t count before Threshing.” Imogen shrugs, glancing across

the room. “Guess I’ll go save Quinn from Cat.”
“No blood on my sister’s floor.” Rhiannon shoots her a look that says

she means it.
“Yes, Mother.” Imogen mock salutes with her empty hand and then

heads toward Quinn.
Maren takes the seat next to me, and Rhiannon lifts her brows at me in

subtle question.
My throat tightens. Here we go. This is the whole reason we planned

tonight’s get-together, so why am I suddenly anxious?
Because I haven’t discussed my decision with Xaden, not that he’s been

around more than one day a week since he and Brennan decided to
reorganize how the combat squads operate.

“You’re doing the right thing,” Andarna says.
“The honorable thing,” Tairn chimes in.
“Do it,” I say to Rhiannon, gripping my mug with both hands.
“Listen up!” Rhi calls out as she stands, quieting the house, her gaze

touching on every cadet. “For riders, squads are more than a unit. We’re
family. In order to survive, we have to trust each other on the battlefield…
and off it. And we’re trusting you to do with this information what you
will.” She looks to me.



What we’re about to do is borderline treason, but I can’t imagine doing
this any other way.

I take a steadying breath. “I’ve been translating Warrick’s journal—one
of the First Six, who built Basgiath’s wards,” I clarify just in case they’re
not familiar with our history. “In the hopes that we can get the wards up in
Aretia before the approaching wyvern decide we’re the next target… And I
think I know how to do it. But that’s why we wanted to talk to you, because
it will mean you fliers wouldn’t be able to wield.”

The fliers stare, stunned. Even Cat’s eyes flare wide with what almost
looks like fear.

“We know two other Poromish towns have fallen in the last two weeks,
leaving Draithus vulnerable, and the Assembly wants the wards up and
functional now,” Rhiannon continues. “Which we think you deserve to
know.”

“Know what?” Cat stands, her chair screeching against the hardwood
floor. “That you’re about to kill our ability to channel? Our gryphons are
still struggling to adjust to altitude, and now you’re going to make us
powerless?”

“Protective wards were our goal long before you came here.” Imogen
pushes off the wall and casually sets her hand on her hip, near her favorite
dagger, angling her body toward Cat, and Quinn sidesteps to flank the angry
flier.

“But we’re here now,” Cat retorts. “If my uncle had known you would
tie a hand behind our back, he never would have made that deal!”

“Control yourself, Cat.” Bragen keeps his tone level, but his brown eyes
are sharp as he stands, putting his left arm out to block Cat from advancing
on us. “How long until they’re up?” he asks me.

“As soon as I tell the Assembly what I’ve found.” As of this morning,
the stone has a distinct hum, a vibration in that chamber that reminds me of
the way Xaden described the armory at Samara, housing the alloy-hilted
daggers.

“And when are you doing that?” Cat snaps.



“If you weren’t here, it would be done already,” I retort in the same tone
she’s giving. No doubt the majority of the Assembly will condemn me as a
traitor for this, and maybe they’ll be right. “But you are here. You do
matter.”

Maren shifts in her seat beside me, and though I refuse to slip my hand
toward my daggers, Ridoc doesn’t hesitate, folding his arms to give him
quick access to the sheath along his shoulder.

“And how long are you giving us?” Bragen asks me, tilting his chin and
exposing the vertical silver scars down his neck that disappear into his
collar.

Every gaze shifts in my direction.
“I won’t lie to Xaden. The moment he’s home, I’ll have to tell him,” I

admit. Multiple curses ripple through the fliers. “But I’ll also tell him that I
think we should hold off as long as possible to give you a chance to decide
if you still want to stay, knowing you won’t be able to channel.”

“And you honestly think he’ll listen to you.” Cat’s hands curl at her
sides.

“The good, the bad, the unforgivable.” That’s what he said to me when
he put my safety above the best interest of the movement. And he may want
the wards up because I’m here and he isn’t, but he also has a province to
think of.

“No.” I shake my head slowly. “I think he’ll act in the best interest of
Tyrrendor”—I leave myself out of the equation—“and want them up as
soon as possible, but I can still try.”

“We’re no good to our people if we can’t channel,” Maren says, looking
past Aaric to the window and drumming her fingers on the table.

“Yeah, well you’re no good to them if you’re dead, either,” Imogen
counters, keeping an eye on Cat. “And by not raising those wards right now,
we’re exposing all of Aretia—the riots, the drifts—hell, all of Tyrrendor
beyond Navarre’s wards to danger that’s no longer necessary. So you’d
better decide if you’re willing to stay, knowing that it can happen at any
moment, or if you’re better off taking shelter in Cordyn, where you’ll have
power and dark wielders.”



I don’t envy them the choice, but at least we gave it to them.
“And if you stay, we won’t leave you powerless.” I reach under the table

and retrieve my pack, then set the black leather bag on the table and
unbutton the top. “Turns out alloy isn’t the only thing we can imbue.” I take
out the six conduits Felix gave me yesterday after I trusted him with the
truth, each containing an arrowhead like the ones I’ve been imbuing for
weeks.

“What’s in that?” Bragen asks, two lines etched between his brows.
“The kind of ore we don’t use to make the alloy. It’s not quite as rare as

Talladium but it’s about ten times as explosive. Trust me, I’ve seen this stuff
blow sky-high raw, let alone imbued.” I glance at Sloane, who slowly
smiles before she responds.

“Maorsite.”
 
 
 

I ’m suspended again over that sunburned field, the death wave a heartbeat
from overtaking me once the Sage releases me from his hold, and he will.

He does it every time.
I recognize the scenario for what it is now—a recurring nightmare—and

yet I’m still held powerless, still too slow to reach Tairn, still can’t force my
consciousness to snap me awake.

“I grow weary of this. Now wield,” the Sage whispers, his robes purple
tonight. “Rip free. Show me the power you used to slay our forces above
the trading post. Prove me right that you are a weapon worth watching,
worth retrieving.” His hand hovers over mine but doesn’t touch me. “The
one who watched thinks you’ll never yield, that we should kill you before
you grow into your full abilities.”

My stomach turns, my mouth watering with nausea as the bony hand
drifts upward, pausing at my neck.

“Usually, jealousy sways the tongue of young wielders.” He drags a
single, long fingernail down my throat, exposing an expanse of tan arm



under his robes, and I twitch, fear accelerating my heartbeat.
I force my mouth to open, but no sound comes out. Touching me is new.

Touching me is terrifying.
“The rest turn for the power,” he whispers, coming so close I can smell a

hint of something sweet on his breath. “But you will turn for something
much more dangerous, much more volatile.” He wraps his hand around my
throat loosely.

I manage to shake my head in denial.
“You will.” His dark, eyelash-less eyes narrow, and the jagged

fingernails slice into my skin with an all-too-real bite of pain. “You’ll tear
down the wards yourself when the time comes.”

The temperature plummets, and my next exhale is visible in the frozen
air. I blink and snow covers the ground. The only warmth is a quickly
cooling trickle along my neck.

“And you won’t do it for something as trite as power or as easily satiable
as greed,” he promises in a whisper, “but for the most illogical of mortal
emotions— love. Or you’ll die.” He shrugs. “You both will.”

He flicks his wrist, and a bone-jarring crack tears me from my sleep.
I jolt upright in bed, reaching for my throat and gulping lungful after

lungful of air, but there’s no cut, no ache, and when I turn the mage light on
with lesser magic and a twist of my hand, I see there’s no blood, either.

“Of course there isn’t,” I whisper aloud, the raw sound cutting through
the silence of my bedroom as the first hints of sunlight lighten the sky to
purple beyond my window. “It’s just a fucking nightmare.”

There’s nothing that can touch me here, Xaden asleep beside me.
“Stop talking to yourself,” Tairn grumbles, as though I’ve woken him.

“It makes us both seem unstable.”
“Do you see my dreams?”
“I have better things to do than monitor the machinations of your

subconscious mind. If a dream bothers you, then leave it. Stop allowing
yourself to be tortured like a hatchling and wake yourself like an adult.” He
cuts off conversation before I can tell him that human dreams don’t always



work like that, and the bond dims, a sign that he’s already gone back to
sleep.

So I lie back down, curling my body around Xaden’s, and his arm wraps
around my back and pulls me closer like it’s a reflex, like this is the way
we’ll sleep for the next fifty years. I settle in against his warmth and lay my
head on his chest, above the most comforting rhythm in the world besides
Tairn’s and Andarna’s wingbeats—Xaden’s heart.
 
 
 

S ix days later, there are six new names on the death roll. The December
snow makes flying absolutely miserable outside the valley, and at

Basgiath, the dragons would simply refuse to train due to discomfort—
theirs, of course, not ours—but we can’t afford not to fly at every available
opportunity, so here we are in the flight field, waiting for orders, facing off
against Claw and Tail Sections for the squad exercises Devera and Trissa
have organized.

“You’d think we were in the Barrens, it’s so fucking hot in this valley,”
Ridoc mutters, unbuttoning his flight jacket to my right. “And it’s only
eleven.”

A bead of sweat races from the hairline at the nape of my neck to the
collar of my flight jacket, so it’s not like I can disagree with him. Winter
flight leathers aren’t exactly meant for the Vale…or the valley.

“It won’t be the second we’re in the air.” Sawyer’s eyes briefly narrow,
staring ahead of us, where Rhiannon, Bragen, and the other squad leaders
meet with Devera and Trissa.

“You all right?” I ask quietly, so the first-years ahead of us can’t hear.
“It’s for the good of the squad, right?” Sawyer forces a tight, closed-

lipped smile. “If they can stay and tolerate knowing we might strip their
powers away at any second, I can deal with losing my position as executive
officer.”



“I want to go with you,” Andarna says for the tenth time in the last
fifteen minutes, and I look over my shoulder to see her flexing her claws
beside Tairn, her talons digging into the earth. Her black scales shine with a
green hue this morning, reflecting the grass around her. Maybe it’s the
result of lingering gold, and breathing fire will steal the last of the shimmer.

“I have no clue how far they’ll want us to fly.” I keep my voice as gentle
as possible.

“Longer than you’re capable of, Little One,” Tairn adds.
“I made it an hour yesterday,” Andarna argues, because that is what she

does now. Tairn could tell her the grass is green, and she’d eviscerate yet
another sheep on it just to change the color.

I lift my brows at Tairn, who simply huffs—whatever the hell that
means.

“Trouble in double dragon land?” Ridoc asks, and Cat glances my way
from his other side, Maren following suit now that we stand in rows of four.

“She wants to fly with us,” I answer.
“I am flying with you,” she insists, digging more than just her physical

claws in. “And this matter isn’t up for debate amongst your human friends.
Dragons do not consult humans.”

“I’m starting to wish I’d protested your right of benefaction when you
asked the Empyrean to bond,” Tairn grumbles.

“Good thing you’re not the head of my den, then, isn’t it?”
“Codagh should have known better—” he starts.
“What are the other adolescents doing today?” I interrupt, hoping to

distract her. The last thing I want to do is climb to any altitude she can’t
handle and have her wing fail. Gods, the consequences of such a mistake
would be incomprehensible.

“The other adolescents are not bonded and do not understand me.”
I swear I can feel Tairn roll his eyes.
“You’d rather risk all the work you’ve done with your wing to play war

than actually…” Shit, what do adolescent dragons do all day, anyway?
“Play?”

“I would rather test my wing on a training mission, yes.”



Rhiannon and Bragen head back our way, locked in discussion, both
gesturing with their hands in motions that look like maneuvers. There’s a
sheen of excitement in Rhiannon’s quick smile, and I find myself mirroring
it. “She looks happy.”

“Maybe they’re finally going to let us fly farther than a half hour…you
know, without making us hike up the Cliffs of Dralor after,” Ridoc remarks.
“Gods, I miss flying.”

“That would be nice,” Sawyer agrees, shooting me a teasing smirk. “Not
all of us get to take a pleasure flight to Cordyn, you know.”

“Hey, that joy ride got us a luminary.” I glance meaningfully at the
sheath at his side, which holds an alloy-hilted dagger. One for one. That
was the deal Brennan struck with the Assembly when it came to supplying
the drifts, and we’ve finally made enough to equip every rider in Aretia
with multiple daggers.

“Listen up, Second Squad,” Rhiannon says, looking over our group.
“Our mission is simple. You know the summoning runes Trissa has been
working on with us?” Even the first-years nod. They might not be able to
weave runes, but at least they know what they are, which means they’re a
step ahead of where we were last year. “There are thirty of them hidden
within twenty miles along the western range. This isn’t just a test for us, but
for our dragons to sense them.”

“Can you—”
Tairn growls in response.
Point made.
“Winner gets a weekend pass. No training. No homework. No limits.”

She glances at Bragen, whose lips twitch into a smile.
“We’ve been given permission to fly wherever we want. If your gryphon

feels comfortable flying the cliff wall, that means you can go anywhere.”
He looks at Cat. “Even Cordyn, though you’d only have a few hours there
before you’d have to start the flight back. If you win, of course.”

“Oh, we’re winning,” Maren says, shoulder-bumping Cat the same way
Rhiannon does me.



“Good. You want that pass? We’ll need to find and close more of those
runed boxes than they do.” She nods back toward Claw and Tail Sections.

“They return,” Tairn says as wingbeats fill the sky.
I look up, a slow smile spreading at the sight of Sgaeyl soaring overhead

with Chradh and eight other dragons, but I only recognize the three bonded
to Heaton, Emery, and Cianna. Xaden’s home…with a full riot of ten.

“I’m guessing you got your way with the new structure?” I ask Xaden as
they land behind our line of gryphons and dragons.

Tairn breaks away as if we aren’t about to be sent on a training mission.
“Bragen and I will divide you up into groups of four according to your

abilities,” Rhiannon continues.
“In a way,” Xaden answers, executing a perfect dismount and walking

toward us. My pulse leaps and the worry that seems to live in my chest lifts
a fraction when I don’t see any new injuries or blood.

“Sorrengail, you paying attention?” Rhi calls me out.
My head swivels back to the front of formation, where she’s arching an

eyebrow at me.
“Teams of four. Split by ability,” I repeat with a nod, then give her a

blatantly beseeching look that absolutely abuses her status as my best
friend.

“We’ll have an hour once we launch,” Bragen says.
Go, Rhi mouths once the squad’s attention is on him.
I smile in thanks, then step out of formation and walk past Andarna and

Feirge, over the trampled grass, straight to Xaden. The scruff on his jaw is
thick with days of growth, and there are circles under his eyes as he reaches
forward, surprising me by tugging me against his chest in front of all of
Fourth Wing.

The cold beard tickles as he buries his icy face in my neck and breathes
deeply. “I’ve missed you.”

“Same.” I wind my arms around his torso, sliding my hands in the space
between the swords he wears crossed at his back and his flight jacket, then
hold tight to help warm him. “I need to talk to you.”

“Bad news?” He pulls back and searches my eyes.



“No. Just news that’s best shared when there’s time to discuss.”
His brow knits.
“Good to see you, Vi,” Garrick says as he walks by, tapping me on the

shoulder. “You definitely need to make him tell you about the venin he took
down just outside Draithus.”

“You what?” My stomach pitches sideways.
“Thanks for that, asshole.” Xaden glares at Garrick.
“Just doing my part to help your communication skills thrive in a stable

relationship.” Garrick turns and walks backward, lifting his hands in a
shrug.

“Like you have any room to talk about stable relationships,” Imogen
counters from behind him, the squad formation obviously having broken to
ready for the mission.

“I’m going to skip the obvious pun to be made about plenty of mares in
my stable.” He flashes a grin, then turns and heads toward the path at the
end of the valley. “Seeing as I’m no longer a cadet but a mature, responsible
officer.”

She scoffs as he walks by. “We need to go, Sorrengail.”
“You took down a venin?” I pivot, keeping my attention on Xaden.

“Outside Draithus?” It’s the last Poromish stronghold before the Cliffs of
Dralor.

“You have lengthy news to discuss?” he replies, lifting his brows.
“Are you all right?” I slide my hands to his face, scanning him like that

tiny bit of exposed skin will tell me if the other ninety-five percent is
unharmed. Being able to raise the wards won’t mean anything if he isn’t
safe—at least it won’t mean anything to me.

“News?” His eyes narrow.
“Violet!” Rhiannon calls.
“I have to fly out.” I drop my hands reluctantly, and he catches one in his

as I retreat a step. “We’ll talk when I get back.”
“Tell me now.”
“The wingleader voice doesn’t work on me.” I squeeze his hand and let

go.



His eyes flare. “You figured out how to raise the wards.”
I blink, then scowl. “I hate it when you do that. Is my face really that

easy to read?”
“To me? Yes.” He looks toward the rocky path that leads down to

Riorson House. “We should go now. How long will it take to raise them?”
“No.” I shake my head and turn toward my squad, seeing Sloane, Visia,

and Cat clearly waiting for me. Guess I don’t need to ask where I’ve been
assigned. “We’ll talk about it later. Discussion paused.”

“At least tell me what was missed the first time.” Xaden quickly catches
up to me.

“Dragons.” I pat Andarna’s foreleg as we approach the trio of waiting
cadets. “‘The six most powerful’ refers to dragons, not riders.”

“In that case, I can have them up before you get back.”
“No, you can’t.” I shoot him a glare.
“Are you two fighting silently?” Cat asks, glancing between Xaden and

me, her perfectly arched brows rising slowly.
“They do that,” Sloane informs her.
Xaden ignores them both completely, keeping his gaze locked onto mine

as we reach them. “And just why can’t I?”
I lean up and brush my lips over his cool cheek. “Because you’ll need

Tairn. Now go warm up. I have a mission to fly.” Without another word to
him, I turn to my squadmates. “Let’s go.”

OceanofPDF.com



The art of imbuing comes naturally to only a handful of signets, and
automatically only to one: the siphon.

—A STUDY ON SIGNETS BY MAJOR DALTON SISNEROS



CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE

Forty minutes later, the four of us are hiking down a steep, snow-covered
ridgeline to a cave only accessible by foot in the sector our group has

been assigned to, and Lucky Me is in the lead, which leaves Cat at my back.
At least Andarna’s there to protect it should the flier get any stabby ideas

about how to get me out of Xaden’s bed.
“This is not what I had in mind when I said I wanted to fly with you.”

Andarna huffs at the powdery snow, scattering a portion in a shimmering
cloud of frozen misery.

“This is what the mission called for, and you need your strength to fly
back,” I tell her, trudging forward through the knee-high layer of fresh hell
and hoping I don’t fall through into any older strata.

The only one who isn’t struggling is Kiralair, Cat’s silver-winged
gryphon, who walks at Andarna’s side. Only those two are light enough not
to cause an avalanche on the nonexistent path.

“Anything?” Tairn asks as he flies to the next peak, his voice tense.
“We haven’t even made it to the cave you selected,” I respond, spotting

the mouth of the cave about twenty yards ahead only because Tairn pointed
it out under the camouflage of the snowy outcropping above. The riot left
us at the only fully stable section of terrain, an outcropping of rock left bare
by the vicious wind.



“I still find this plan lacking,” he lectures. “Leaving you on one peak to
explore another for a possible energy signature leaves you in unacceptable
danger.”

“From whom?” I tug my fur-lined hood closer to ward off the wind
when it shifts, stinging the tips of my exposed ears. “Do you really think
any wyvern could—”

“I’m coming back.”
“It’s entirely too easy to rile you.” I laugh, and the sound echoes off the

snow-covered bowl, making us all take pause.
“For fuck’s sake, Sorrengail,” Cat hisses once it’s clear the snow around

us is staying put. “Are you trying to get us buried in an avalanche?”
“Sorry,” I whisper over my shoulder.
Her eyes widen. “Did you just apologize to me?”
“I can admit when I’m wrong.” I shrug and continue forward.
“I’m fully present and capable of protecting her,” Andarna snipes at

Tairn.
“You do not yet breathe fire.”
“Fire would only serve to melt the mountain,” she reminds him, and I

glance back to see her carefully picking her path, her scales reflecting the
snow in an almost silvery sheen in places. “I still wield teeth and claw
should the aristocrat bare her vitriol.”

“Are you insinuating that I don’t?” Cat asks.
“Do you even think you’re wrong? Ever?” I ask, pushing forward. “I

honestly think you might be worse than a dragon when it comes to
confidence.”

“Arrogance,” Andarna corrects me. “The flier doesn’t have the skills to
back up a word like ‘confidence.’”

I snort, but bite back the laugh before it can endanger us. Ten more feet
and we’ll be at the cave. If Tairn locates a second while we’re retrieving the
first, we’ll be ahead of Claw Section, who has already found three to our
section’s two, according to Tairn.

Dragons are nothing if not competitive.
“What?” Cat asks.



“Andarna thinks you’re arrogant, not confident,” I tell her.
“She is,” Sloane agrees.
“Just because your brother didn’t like me doesn’t mean you know me,”

Cat whispers at Sloane.
“No.” I turn to face Cat, making her pause in the footsteps I’ve carved in

the ridgeline. “You want to pick a fight? You come at me.”
Cat cocks her head to the side and studies me. “Because you feel guilty

for her brother’s death.” It’s not an accusation or even a dig. Just the truth.
“Because I promised him I’d take care of her. So, you can aim all that

hatred right here.” I tap my gloved hand to my chest.
“He was wrong to ask that of you.” Sloane catches up, Visia close

behind.
“Because Imogen would have been a more capable protector?” I ask,

only able to hold her too familiar blue gaze for a heartbeat before looking
away.

“No. Because you already carry the weight of protecting Xaden’s life. It
was unfair of him to burden you with mine, too.” She huffs a breath into her
cupped, gloved hands to warm them.

I blink as my eyes sting from something other than the wind, then turn to
continue trudging through the snow toward the cave, whose entrance is
nothing but a narrow, icy ledge. “It looks bigger than we thought from the
air.” But still not wide enough for any dragon bigger than Andarna to
squeeze into.

“There was a time my kind dwelled in every mountain of this range,”
Tairn tells me. “That cave is undoubtedly part of the network of chambers
that runs throughout this range for a wintering den. This entrance would
have been inhospitable to any approach but direct flight—to protect the
young…and the adolescent.”

“I heard that,” Andarna quips.
“Kiralair says our squad has another box in hand,” Cat tells us as I

finally reach the cave’s entrance, stepping out of the wind.
“We’re so winning that pass.” Visia grins, and Cat walks out of the snow

and onto the rocky floor of the cave.



“Does every gryphon have lair in their name?” I ask Cat, hoping the
subject change might change the aim of her sharp tongue from Sloane.

“Of course not. Is every rider named Sorrengail?” She folds her arms
and bounces back on her heels like she’s trying to stay warm.

“That right there is why I don’t like you.” Sloane crosses into the cave.
“You’re—”

Visia slips and I lunge forward, catching her hand and tugging her into
the cave as snow crumbles where she’d just been standing.

“You all right?” I ask, pulling her farther into the cave and scanning her
startled face.

“Of course she is. You never seem to have a problem saving her,” Cat
mutters.

“I’m fine.” Visia nods, dropping her hood and revealing the dragonfire
burn scar down her hairline. “That’s going to make it hard to leave.”

I shoot Cat a withering look, but she’s too busy watching her gryphon,
Kira, stretch across the hole in the path, then safely squirm her way in to
notice.

“Reason number two.” Sloane holds up two fingers and walks past Cat
into the dark cave. “Needless to say, there are no mage lights in here.”

And I’ve never been that good at producing them. Anything I wield with
lesser magic is going to be swallowed up in this darkness. I rest my hand
over my stomach as if that will help the instant rise of nausea from the
smell of earth around us. At least it’s missing that damp scent from the
interrogation chamber, but it’s close enough to make me pause.

“You ended the one who kept you prisoner,” Andarna reminds me,
following Kira in, tucking her wings tight to fit through the opening.

“Fear isn’t always logical.” I glance at the other riders. “Any chance
either of you is a fire wielder? Because I don’t think you want me wielding
in here.” Keeping the energy strung between my hand and the conduit for
fifteen feet puts me into a sweat every time, and I can only keep it going for
a few seconds.,

“No signet yet,” Visia responds.
“Me, either,” Sloane answers, peering into the darkness.



“You brought a dragon.” Cat gestures wide, motioning toward Andarna.
“She can’t breathe fire yet.” I offer Andarna a smile. “But she will.”
“Remind her that I can sever her head with one bite,” Andarna growls,

the sound higher than Tairn’s menacing rumble.
“I will not. What does Tairn tell us?”
“We don’t eat our allies,” she mumbles, but there’s a distinct tap of her

talons against the rock floor.
“Great. Why they stuck me with you three, I’ll never know. You’d think

one of us would have a good mage light down.” Cat removes her bow, then
swings her pack from her back and rummages past the full quiver to pull
out a small, unlit torch.

“Are you kidding me?” I gawk as she brings a piece of wood no larger
than my palm from the bag, shakes her head, and reaches for another. “You
carry one of those around with you?”

“Obviously.” Cat digs into her bag again. “The fact that you don’t says
that you haven’t been appropriately scared of the dark yet. Shit, I can’t find
the fire rune Maren made.”

“You all trade runes?” Visia stares in open shock.
“And you call yourselves a family. Of course we share. Whoever can

make it, does. Then we all trade so everyone is equally equipped.” Cat
shakes her head and stands, muttering a curse. “I can’t find it.”

“That’s…brilliant,” I admit. “Why didn’t you tell us?”
“You’re used to hoarding power,” she says with a dismissive shrug. “Not

sharing it. Now, unless someone has an idea for fire—”
“Got it.” I yank off my gloves, then stuff them into one pocket and pull

my conduit from the other, beckoning a trickle of my power to rise. It
tingles, then burns as it flows down my hand, through my fingers, and into
the conduit. The tendrils of energy light our immediate surroundings.

“That’s so awesome.” Visia smiles. “Can all of you do that?”
“No. It just hums for most of us. Glad to see you’ll have all the light you

need.” Sarcasm drips from Cat’s voice.
“Take it,” I order Sloane.
“I’d rather live.” She puts her hands up.



“If I thought it was going to kill you, I’d hand it to Cat.” I hold the
conduit out to her.

Cat snorts, but I think there was a note of laughter there.
“Good point.” Sloane takes the conduit, and I concentrate on keeping the

energy connected.
“Back up three steps. Good, another two,” I tell her, and my fingers

tremble as she does, stretching my signet.
“Wow,” Visia whispers.
“Stick the torch into the energy, Cat.”
“You think that’s safe?” she asks.
“I have no clue, but I’m game to try if you are.” I keep focused on the

conduit, on the flow of energy, on the heat I keep checked by controlling the
door to Tairn’s power.

Kira clicks her tongue in a series of sounds I’ve become accustomed to
but have no hope of ever understanding.

“Fine, I’ll do it,” Cat mutters, then lowers the torch until it catches fire.
I immediately drop my hand, cutting off the power, and I send a prayer

of thanks to Dunne that it worked. Felix is probably going to have my head
on a pike tomorrow at lessons. “I’ll take it. Thanks, Sloane.”

Sloane hands the conduit back like it might explode.
“Damn,” Cat says, glancing from the torch, to the conduit, to me. “I hate

that you’re so…”
“Badass?” Sloane suggests, smiling in a way that reminds me of her

brother.
“Powerful,” Cat admits, looking away before slipping her pack back on,

changing hands with the torch instead of passing it off.
“It’s not the power making that possible,” I tell her, channeling into the

conduit so it lights up again and marching into the darkness. “It’s the
control.”

“Yeah, well, I kind of loathe that, too,” she mutters, catching up to walk
at my side.

“A rare moment of honesty. I’ll take it.” We move into the cave, which
seems to widen with every step we take. “They paired us because I’m



supposedly the most powerful rider in the squad,” I tell her, ignoring her
muttered response. “But you’re better at runes. We might not compliment
each other, but we complement each other.” I smile despite the darkness
we’re walking into. “Get it? With an E instead of the I.”

Cat looks at me like I’ve just grown a third arm, and the torch starts to
flicker.

There’s a breeze.
“Are you telling scribe jokes?” Sloane asks, a couple of steps behind us,

Visia at her side.
“Jesinia would think it’s funny,” Visia offers like she’s trying to save me.
“Jesinia is a scribe,” Sloane notes.
The cave opens up about twenty feet in, a vast tunnel forking to the left.
“Apparently there’s a much easier way to get into this cave,” Cat

mutters.
“It’s part of a network that runs through this range,” I explain.
“Should we split up?” Visia asks.
“No!” All three of us respond at the same time.
“Which way do we go?” Sloane voices the question we’re all

wondering.
No one answers.
“Any help?” I ask Tairn, feeling our bond stretch. He’s not far but

definitely not close, either.
“There’s an energy signature in that cave. That’s all I can tell.”
“I vote right. If it doesn’t work, we’ll come back and go left.” I look to

the others.
Cat nods, and we head farther in.
“So do you think you’ll get a second signet?” Visia asks, breaking the

silence. “Two dragons, two signets, right?”
“I don’t know,” I answer, glancing back at Andarna. I actually figured

because she bonded me so young and lost the ability to stop time, the signet
of lightning wielding was all that I would be blessed with. But now I
wonder… “Will I?”



“Why are you asking me? Signets manifest according to the person
wielding.” Her eyes blink gold, her black scales blending in with the
darkness.

“Second signets only happen when a dragon bonds a rider in the direct
familial line as its previous,” Sloane says, misunderstanding Visia’s
question. “But there’s an equal chance of it causing madness. From what
Thoirt told me, that’s why Cruth wasn’t punished for bonding Quinn. She’s
only the great-niece of her previous rider. Her signet’s more powerful but
not entirely different.”

“Thoirt shouldn’t be telling you matters resolved within the Empyrean,”
Visia lectures, then does a double take when she glances my way.

Gravity shifts. That can’t be right. That would mean—
“Violet, are you okay?” Visia asks.
I shake my head but say, “Yes.” How do you explain your heart is

sinking past the rock floor of the cave? I take a deep breath, flex and unflex
my hand as I grip the brightly glowing conduit. Andarna growls to my right,
and I quickly assure her, “I’m fine.” But we both know I’m anything but
fine—I’m also equally certain now isn’t the time to let my mind wander
down that path.

“Holy shit, there it is,” Sloane says, forcing me to pay attention as she
walks past us to pick up the plain metal chest that’s locked into an open
position by the rune on the front.

“It’s…plain,” Visia notes.
“Are you going to counter the summoning rune?” I ask Cat. When she

raises one brow, I add, “You’re better at runes, remember?”
“I am.” She nods, a genuine smile curving her mouth for the first time

since I met her. “I just wanted to see if you’d say it again.”
Kiralair’s wing brushes my shoulder as she walks past us into the

darkness, as if Cat needs to be guarded from the unseen.
Cat glances between the three of us with an uncertain—and unhappy—

tense set to her mouth, then hands the torch to Visia in what looks like a
painful sacrifice.

No, not a sacrifice: a gesture of trust.



She weaves the unlocking rune with a speed I envy, her hands moving
quickly, confidently, as Andarna shifts her weight behind me.

“What’s wrong?”
“The scent of others grows stronger.”
“Wyvern?” Every muscle in my body clenches.
“No. They smell of stolen magic when you get close enough.” She lifts

her head, taking up three-quarters of the tunnel. “This smells of…dragons.”
“Got it!” Cat says, and I turn at the sound of metal clicking shut. The

chest is closed and latched.
“We’d better hurry,” I tell them. “Andarna smells other dragons, which

means the other sections might be closing in on us.”
“I’m not losing this pass.” Visia trades Cat, taking the chest and

returning the torch. “It will give me time to fly home and convince my
cousins to leave the border if my aunt and uncle won’t.”

“You’re going to fly into Navarre?” Sloane damn near shouts.
“It’s right on the border. They won’t even know.” Visia adjusts her grip

on the chest and hurries past Andarna. “So let’s get out of here.”
“Bold choice to go back to Navarre.” Cat jogs to catch up to Visia,

lighting the way. “I respect it.”
The effort, the consideration for Visia, thaws a small chunk of my heart

toward Cat. Maybe she’s not horrible to everyone…just me.
“It’s the only thing to do,” Visia starts as we approach the fork in the

tunnel.
A low growl vibrates the very ground beneath our feet, making all four

of us halt, and the hair rises on the back of my neck.
“What the—” Cat starts.
Another growl makes the pebbles around my feet bounce, and a full-

grown orange dragon comes around the corner, its back scraping the top of
the cave as it snaps its head our direction, glaring at us through its only
remaining eye.

Oh. Fuck.
Visia shrieks.



“Tairn!” I mentally scream, forcing my body past the shock, the fear,
the nauseating hopelessness of our situation. The orb falls from my hand,
shattering on the ground at the same moment I reach for the women in front
of me, but my hand only grasps the leather of Cat’s pack.

I yank her backward with all my strength just as Visia is swatted out of
the way by a sharp, jagged claw. Cat’s body collides with mine, knocking
us both to the ground, and the torch falls from her hand as Visia hits the side
of the cave with a cracking sound that sickens my stomach.

The angle, the impact…gods…she’s…she’s dead.
“Silver One?” Tairn’s voice roars in my head as the dragon blocking our

way out focuses his narrowed eye on me and opens his jaw wide.
Fetid breath fills the air a second before he curls his tongue, and his

throat glows orange with rising fire.
“Solas found us!”

OceanofPDF.com



I’ll say one thing for dragonfire. It kills quickly.

—COLONEL KAORI’S FIELD GUIDE TO DRAGONKIND



CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR

Adark shape flies at us from the left, sweeping Cat and me into a
spinning tangle of limbs and propelling us backward. I grab onto her in

the chaos, forcing her body in front of mine as we come to a skidding halt,
knowing the shelter of facing my back to Solas won’t be enough but trying
anyway.

She has to live. She’s third in line to the throne of Poromiel. If she dies
in Tyrrendor, Cordyn will hunt Xaden down and execute him…if he
survives my death.

Survive. Survive. Survive. I push the demand down every mental bond I
have just in case we aren’t out of range. Xaden’s too far, but Tairn will hear
it, and Andarna—gods, Tairn has to get here in time to save her.

Kiralair and Sloane fly into us next, swept in by an unseen force,
pushing Sloane and me backward, toward Solas, but my back hits a hard,
rough surface as the cave walls illuminate with the eerie glow of impending
fire a heartbeat before we’re overtaken by darkness.

“Take a breath!” Andarna demands. “Don’t argue!”
Not darkness. Wings. It’s her belly at my back and she’s wrapped her

wings around us.
“Breathe in and hold it!” I shout, then fill my lungs with sulfur-scented

air.



Heat blasts, roaring past us in a stream that shakes Andarna’s wings, and
the temperature soars. I force my eyes closed to keep them from cooking as
my skin burns as though we’ve been thrown into an oven. How can she
survive this?

“She’s fireproof,” Tairn reminds me, but the panic in his voice doesn’t
do much to soothe the terror clamping down on my heart.

“Do not breathe!” Andarna demands, and I know it’s because I’ll singe
my lungs if I do, if any of us do. I count my heartbeats. One. Two. Three.

The blast feels like it goes on forever, like it’s become my eternity, like
my soul has done exactly what Sloane asked in the first part of the year and
gone straight to the depths of hell without being commended to Malek.
Eight. Nine.

On ten, it ends, and Andarna’s wings fall away. Air rushes in, and I wait
until I feel its cool brush across my cheek before I drag in a breath, hearing
the others do the same.

I open my eyes and see Cat lunge in the torchlight across the small
space, using her gloved hands to put out the burning tips of the feathers
along Kira’s far wing. It must have been exposed to the flames. Sloane
races to help as Andarna gains her feet, and I narrowly avoid her tail as she
faces down Solas.

“No! He’s nearly twice as big as you are!” I lift my hands and throw the
floodgates open on Tairn’s power, letting it burn through me as Solas’s blast
failed to do, until I’m pure fire. But I can’t wield in here, not when there’s
every chance I could hit one of us.

Andarna’s roar fills the cave, and my heart stops when she goes for
Solas’s throat. He bats her away like she’s nothing but a nuisance, and I
muffle a cry as she slides into the wall, right over the charred remains of
Visia’s bones.

“I’m fine.” Andarna shakes it off as Solas sizes me up.
“Three minutes,” Tairn tells me. “You will not die today!”
Three minutes. We can make it three minutes. But time isn’t our issue.

Tairn can’t fit through the opening of the cave. He’ll have to find whatever
entrance Solas used.



“How the fuck do you kill a dragon?”
“Let me go!” Cat shouts. “You’re…you’re draining my power!”
What the fuck? I chance a look backward, but all I see is Cat

disengaging from Sloane’s panicked grip.
“Go for his other eye.”
“Get out of the way,” I order Andarna, and this time, she listens,

scrambling back to my side as I grab two knives from their sheaths and flip
them, pinching at the tips for a heartbeat before loosing them.

The first misses as he swivels, but the second finds the mark.
His bellow of pain is followed by rage, and he stumbles backward into

the forked tunnel, leaving a small, precious opening between his head and
the wall.

Cat and Sloane are closer. They can make it.
“Get her out!” I yell at Cat. “Now!”
“Violet!” Sloane shouts, but Kira’s beak closes softly around her pack,

and she hoists her into the air as Cat scrambles to mount.
They rush by on the left, making it through just before Solas’s claws

come out swinging, his talons raking furrows into the stone of the cave.
I hit the floor, pain flaring up my shoulders. There’s no pop as talons

swipe over us, but something bites into my palm. Glass from the conduit.
I spread my bleeding fingers wide in the dim light of the dying torch,

locating the remnants before it goes out. The top of the metal joint has
broken, leaving four jagged prongs and one secured piece of alloy.

“I don’t have fire,” Andarna tells me, following my thoughts.
But I have power.
“It’s about to get really dark in here.” It’s our only shot, and I’m taking

it. “You have to run as soon as there’s an opening.”
“I’m not leaving you,” she stubbornly argues.
“One minute!” Tairn announces.
How the hell am I going to get close enough to stab the remains of the

conduit into him? There’s no time to tie it to a dagger, and the force of a
throw isn’t enough to—



Solas roars in pain, his head swiveling back toward his shoulder, and
through the opening, I see Cat poised in the dim light, nocking another
arrow.

There’s no time to ruminate on her sticking around to save me. I’m
already moving, grabbing hold of the dying torch in my empty hand, then
running toward the soft spot under Solas’s foreleg, where his scales separate
a few inches at a time to allow the movement of the joint.

He roars again, fire illuminating the cave in a short blast as he aims
without sight, hitting the wall in front of him instead of Cat. I race into the
deadly space underneath him and change my target when I realize he’ll
crush me if he falls, charging toward his right shoulder.

I shove the prongs of the conduit into the soft joint between his scales as
Andarna sinks her teeth between his neck and shoulder, distracting him, and
then I wield. Energy sizzles up my arm and into my fingertips where they
meet the metal.

Control. This is all about control.
With one hand raised, wielding the delicate strain of energy, I back away

from Solas as quickly as I dare, feeding more and more power into the
stream, and then I pour everything—

Solas roars, swinging his hind end around. A shape comes swinging for
me, and I make out the thicker part of his tail in the dim light a second
before it slams into my stomach, sending me flying and breaking the stream
of lightning.

I’m airborne, nothing more than a projectile as I fly backward, hitting
my ass, then my back, and lastly my head against the ground with a crack.
But I hold my power tight instead of striking, letting it burn me from the
inside out. Better me than accidentally hitting Andarna.

The only sound is a loud ringing in my ears, and sight only comes in
quick, flashing blasts. Fire. It flares as I struggle to sit up through the fog of
my own heartbeat, revealing Andarna latched onto Solas, hanging on even
as he thrashes, slamming her smaller body against the cave wall.

“NO!” I think I yell, but the incessant peal of bells in my head blocks it
out, and suddenly I’m moving, being dragged backward by a pair of arms.



My head falls back, and I recognize those eyes.
Liam. I must be dead.
“She’s not clear!” someone shouts as the ringing fades slightly, and then

another blast of fire shows two more arrows in the bloodied hole that used
to be Solas’s shoulder.

Cat. She’s beside me, already drawing another arrow, and her lips move
silently.

And the eyes above me aren’t Liam’s. They’re Sloane’s.
We’re plunged back into darkness momentarily, and the ringing fades

enough to hear Cat’s voice clearly.
“Ninety. One hundred. One hundred and one.” Her voice shakes.
Light flares again as I’m dragged backward, and Cat fires, hitting Solas

in the same wound. Andarna flies free, taking a chunk of Solas with her as
I’m hauled from the returning darkness into the growing light from the
mouth of the cave.

“Andarna!” I claw at Sloane’s grip, but the harder I fight, the weaker I
feel, and the insufferable heat of my power lessens as Sloane starts to
scream, letting me fall to the ground.

“Silver One!”
I feel the steady beats of air at my back and know Tairn is there,

hovering, but I can’t rip my eyes away from the darkness of the cave as I
stumble to my feet near the entrance.

A dragon screams, then falls horrifyingly silent.
She isn’t. She can’t be.
“She lives,” Tairn promises, but I don’t breathe until I reach mentally

and find my bond with Andarna gleaming and strong.
“I drained you.” Sloane holds up trembling hands, staring at them like

they don’t belong to her. “I drained you!” She grasps my shoulders, yanking
my focus from the dark as my head swims.

“For fuck’s sake, Sloane, give her a second. She just hit her head,” Cat
barks, still aiming into the darkness as we stand in the glaring light but not
firing an arrow without a target.



“Are my eyes red?” Sloane shakes me, or maybe she’s shaking and
simply holding on to me. “Are they red? I swear I didn’t reach, Violet. I
didn’t take anything from you on purpose! Oh gods, am I turning venin?”

“She is as Naolin was,” Tairn says.
“You’re not turning.” I take her hands from my shoulders and stare into

the darkness as footsteps sound, talons clicking along the rock.
“I’m not?”
“Your signet manifested,” I whisper, my eyes straining to see into the

cave opening. “You’re a siphon.”
Andarna walks into the light, but it’s not the blood covering her mouth

that catches my attention—it’s the blood dripping from the poisoned barb
on her tail.

“You killed him.” My shoulders dip in relief. “You killed Solas.”
Pride and worry assault me at the same time, but I can’t force my shields

up before Tairn’s voice fills my very existence.
“Slayer.”

 
 
 

X aden bursts into our room as the healer finishes checking my eyes,
shading my vision, then exposing me to light.

“Violet—” He halts a few feet away from where I sit on the edge of our
bed. “Cat? What the hell are you doing in here?”

“She saved my life. Making sure she was seen by a healer was the least I
could do,” Cat answers.

“She what?” Xaden moves forward as the healer stands upright.
“You heard me. She put herself between that giant orange dragon and

me.” She rises from her seat—the same chair Xaden sat in while I slept in
here for days after Resson, poisoned by the venin’s blade. “Thank you,
Sorrengail.” She chokes on the words a little before passing by Xaden on
her way out.

“Solas—” I start to explain.



“Oh, I already know,” he seethes. “Sgaeyl told me.”
“You were in a meeting. I didn’t want to bother you.” I follow the

healer’s fingers upon direction.
“Bother me?” Shadows flood the floor.
The healer notices, blinking quickly. “You’ll be all right. I don’t think

you’re concussed, but that’s quite a lump on the back of your head, and I’ll
ask that you mind the stitches in your hand.” She arches a silver brow at
me.

“Of course.” I lift my wrapped left hand. “Thank you.”
She nods, then dismisses herself, disappearing into the hallway.
I stare at Xaden, and he stares right back, tension emanating from every

line of his body. “If you want to fight about the wards, that’s fine, but I’m
not taking the blame for fighting my way out of a cave.”

He stalks forward, then bends down into my space and kisses me, soft
and slow. “You’re alive,” he whispers against my lips.

“So my heartbeat says.”
“Good.” He stands, folding his arms. “Now we can fight. What the fuck

were you thinking, saving Cat?”
I blink. “I’m sorry, you’re mad at me? I fight my way out of a cave

against a dragon, and you’re mad at me? For saving a woman in the line of
succession to the throne of Poromiel?”

He reels backward, horror flashing into his eyes a second before anger
swamps them. “You saved Cat because she’s third in line?”

“First, I would have fought to save anyone—”
“You selfless, reckless—” he accuses, backing away slowly.
“And second, her death would have triggered yours, so hell yes I saved

her!” My feet hit the ground and my head swims for a heartbeat, but my
pulse steadies as I breathe deeply. “Tecarus would have had you executed if
she’d died under your care.”

“Un-fucking-believable.” He laces his hands on the top of his head.
“You hate her, and yet you refuse to raise the wards, no doubt so her power
won’t be stripped away, and then you put your life in front of hers—”

“For you!”



“All I want is you!” He flicks his hands, and shadows shut the door a
little harder than necessary, sealing us in behind the sound shield. “If she
dies, then I’ll take the consequences. If they can’t channel, I’ll take those
consequences, too. But not you. Never you. Gods, Violet. I’m doing
everything in my power to both respect your freedom and keep you safe,
and you’re…” He shakes his head. “I don’t even know what you’re doing.”

“Keep me safe.” I laugh, sarcasm biting into my eyes and making them
sting. “Is that what you do? I get it all mixed up with just not killing me.”

“There it is.” He retreats until his back hits the wall, and then he folds
his arms and leans against it, crossing an ankle casually. “You finally ready
to ask me about the deal I made with your mother?”

OceanofPDF.com



Nothing kills powerful, unshakable love faster than opposing
ideologies.

—THE JOURNAL OF WARRICK OF LUCERAS

—TRANSLATED BY CADETS VIOLET SORRENGAIL AND DAIN AETOS



CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE

My mouth opens. Then shuts. “You knew…that I knew?” “Of course I
knew.” He arches a dark brow as if I’m the problem here. “I’ve just

been waiting for you to work up the courage, the trust, whatever you want
to call it, to fucking ask me.”

My hands fist at my sides, and I shove my power back behind the
Archives door and slam my shields up. Without a conduit, there’s every
chance I’ll set the curtains on fire for the entirely wrong reason. “You let me
stew in it for months?”

“You didn’t ask me!” He pushes off the wall but stops himself from
taking more than a step. “I’ve been begging you for months to ask me what
you want to know, to break down that last insurmountable wall you’re
keeping between us, but you didn’t. Why?”

He has the nerve to put this on me?
“You’re the one who said you’d never be entirely truthful with me. How

am I supposed to know what you will and will not answer? How am I
supposed to know what there is to ask?”

“The second you have a question, you ask it. Seems pretty simple.”
“Simple? Brennan is alive. You made a deal with my mother for my life.

She put those scars on your back. Tell me, Xaden, is it only the secrets
about my family you want me to dig out of you? You holding anything
about Mira?”



“Shit.” He shoves a hand through his hair. “I didn’t want you to know
about the scars, that’s true, but I would have told you if you’d asked.”

“I asked last year,” I challenge, walking toward the windows to look out
over the rebuilt city, my anger heating my blood…but not my skin yet,
thank the gods.

“I’m sorry. I can’t change last year, and though you’ve said you
understand why I kept you in the dark, I don’t think you’ve actually
forgiven me.”

“I…” Have I? Wrapping my arms around myself, I watch a riot of ten
fly overhead, my mind racing with the deal he made, with him knowing,
him testing me with his ridiculous questions. And he still hasn’t told me
everything about the scars on his back or what I suspect from the cave
about Sgaeyl bonding him. How much more can there be?

“As for the scars, I said you didn’t want to know how I got them. You
can’t honestly tell me that you’re happy knowing, are you?”

My stomach twists.
“Of course not!” I spin to face him. “She cut into you over and over!” I

shake my head, truly unable to fathom her actions, let alone how he endured
it.

“Yes.” He nods as if it’s just a fact, a piece of history. “And I didn’t offer
the information because I knew you’d find some way to blame yourself just
like you’ve assumed guilt for everything that’s gone wrong in the last few
months.”

I stiffen. “I have not—”
“You have.” He walks forward, stopping at the edge of the bed. “And the

scars on my back are not your fault. Yes, your life was the unnamed price
for the marked ones entering the quadrant.” He shrugs. “Your mother called
in her favor, and I gave it. Do you want me to apologize for a deal I made
before I knew you? Before I loved you? A deal that kept us alive? Started
the flow of weaponry to the fliers? Because I won’t. I’m not sorry.”

“I’m not mad about the deal.” How does he not understand? “I’m pissed
that you kept it from me, that you insist on making me ask for things you



should openly share. How the hell am I in love with you when I feel like I
barely know you sometimes?”

“Because I let you live long enough for us to fall in love,” he says.
“Without that deal, gods know what I would have done in my need for
revenge. Ask me why I don’t regret it. Ask me about the first time I saw
you. Ask me about the moment I almost killed you despite the deal and
decided not to. Ask me why. Ask me something! Fight back like you would
have done last year before I broke your trust. Stop being so scared of the
answers or waiting for me to give them to you. Demand the truth! I need
you to love all of me—not just what you decide to see.”

“How are we still having the same fight five months later?” I shake my
head. He can tell me or he can choose not to, but I’m done having to guess
which questions to ask.

“Because it wasn’t just me who shattered your trust last year. Because
you were too pissed about my refusal to answer the superficial questions
about the revolution to ask the real ones about us. Because you didn’t have
a chance to find your feet before you were tortured. Because I came for
you, told you that I love you, and you decided you could admit to loving
me, even be with me, but we skipped over the step where you admit to fully
trusting me. Take your pick. It’s like we’re still on that parapet last year, but
I’m not the one worried you’ll find something unlikable if you dig a little
deeper. You are.”

“That’s bullshit.” I shake my head. “And how am I supposed to fully
trust you when battle-axes are flying out of armoires left and right?”

He lifts his scarred brow. “I’m not sure I understand—”
“It was an analogy I used with Imogen. Never mind.” I wave him off.
“About battle-axes in armoires?” His head tilts as he studies me.
I rub the center of my forehead. “I basically said that if a battle-ax came

flying out of an armoire and almost killed you, you’d want to check out the
armoire to make sure it wouldn’t happen again.”

“Hmm.” He glances out of the corner of his eye to where our uniforms
hang side by side, and his brow furrows in thought. “I can work with this.”

“I’m sorry?”



“What’s in our armoire right now?” He crosses his arms over his chest.
My mouth opens, shuts, then opens again. “Uniforms. Boots. Flight

leathers.”
“How many uniforms? Which pairs of boots?” Shadows curl along the

floor, stretching from beneath our bed to the armoire doors. “Do you
actually know what’s in there? Or do you just trust that I haven’t moved
your belongings and everything’s where you left it?”

“It’s an analogy.” This is ridiculous. “And I open that armoire every
single day. I know where things hang because I see them.”

“What about the blanket my mother made me that’s tucked back on the
top shelf?” Two strands of shadow reach for handles and open the armoire
doors.

“I didn’t go snooping.” I shake my head, my eyes narrowing at him.
A corner of his mouth rises. “Because you trust me.”
“Analogy.” I enunciate every syllable.
“So ask the question, Violet,” he says softly, in that calm, controlled tone

that makes me lift my chin. “Humor me.”
“Fine,” I grit out through my teeth. “Do you happen to have a battle—”

Shadows surge from the armoire, and I catch the glint of metal a heartbeat
before the bands of darkness hold a dagger to within inches of my chin.

I gasp, then lock every muscle. “What the fuck, Xaden?”
“Am I going to hurt you?” The carpet makes his bootsteps nearly silent

as he crosses the room, giving me plenty of time to object or retreat, but I
don’t.

“I’m going to hurt you if you don’t get that away from me.” I keep my
eyes on him.

“Would I ever let this knife hurt you?” His boots touch the tips of mine,
and he leans into my space.

“Of course not.”
The shadows slowly take the blade closer to Xaden’s throat, and I grab

for the hilt, yanking it away and tossing it to the desk before he can
accidentally nick himself.

His smile flashes, then fades. “Hey, Violence?”



“What?” I snap.
“There’s a knife in the armoire.” His hand slides to the nape of my neck,

and he leans in, narrowing the world to just the two of us. “All you had to
do was ask, and even if you weren’t aware it was coming, you know I’d
never let it hurt you. I’m not the one you don’t trust.”

I scoff. “What is that supposed to mean?”
“Love, you’re the smartest person I know. If you actually wanted the

answers, you’d ask the right questions.” His voice softens as his thumb
sweeps along my jawline. “You knew about the deal. Maybe the question
you need to be asking is why you didn’t confront me about it.”

“Because I love you!” My voice breaks into a mortifying whisper that’s
almost half as embarrassing as the thoughts I can’t keep from spinning in
my brain. The thoughts that I’ve fought to hold at bay ever since my mother
told me about the deal she made with him. Heat flushes my cheeks as he
holds my stare, and frustration curls my hands into fists. “Because I want to
think you kept me alive those first few months before Threshing because
you were intrigued or impressed by me or attracted to me like I was to you,
and not because you made a deal with my mother. Because it’s horrifying to
think that the only reason you fell in love with me is because of her.
Because maybe you’re right and I didn’t want that particular truth, since I
know there’s a thin line between devotion and obsession, between
cowardice and self-preservation, and I’m walking it when it comes to you. I
love you so fucking much that I ignored every warning signal last year, and
now half the time I don’t know what side of that line I’m standing on
because I’m too busy looking at you to watch my own feet!”

“Because you don’t want yourself to know where your feet are,” he says
softly.

My mouth snaps shut. How dare he.
Someone pounds on the door.
“Fuck off!” Xaden yells over his shoulder, then sighs as if remembering

the sound shield.
“Let’s put your theory to the test. You want me to demand the truth? To

ask you something real?” I hold his gaze and steel my heart.



“Please, do,” he challenges.
“What’s your second signet?”
His eyes widen, and the blood drains from his face as his hand falls

away. For the first time, I think I’ve actually managed to shock Xaden
Riorson.

“I know you have one,” I whisper as the pounding continues. “You told
me that Sgaeyl was bonded to your grandfather, which makes you a direct
descendant. If a dragon bonds a family member, it can strengthen a signet,
but a direct descendant will either produce a second signet…or madness,
and you seem pretty sane to me.”

He inhales sharply and forces his features into a mask.
I shake my head and scoff. “So much for asking. I just can’t figure out

why Sgaeyl was allowed to choose you, how she got away with it. How you
both did.”

The pounding only increases. “We have an emergency out here!”
Brennan?
Both of our heads turn toward the door, and Xaden quickly moves to

open it. He listens to my brother’s hushed words, then looks over his
shoulder at me. “A horde of wyvern has been spottled flying from Pavis
toward the cliffs.”

Xaden says something else to Brennan, then turns to me again. “You
ready to raise those wards? Or would you like to wait until they’re actually
at the gates?”

Fuck.

OceanofPDF.com



It was never our continent. From the very beginning, it was theirs, and
we were simply allowed to live here.

—THE JOURNAL OF WARRICK OF LUCERAS

—TRANSLATED BY CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX

“D ragons,” Brennan says as we skip the path that leads to the
wardstone chamber and instead climb the one that leads to the top of

the hill with the other members of the Assembly, Xaden and Rhiannon
walking up behind us in the afternoon light.

The wind howls as storm clouds roll in above us. Even the weather holds
a sense of urgency, and if I’m wrong? If I missed a symbol? A meaning?
We’ll be fighting for our lives in the next few hours. But I can feel the
distinct, powerful hum of the wardstone from here, so that must mean I
have part of it right.

The time Dain, Xaden, and I have put in imbuing the wardstone has paid
off. It’s not creating wards on its own, of course, but it’s at least holding
power.

The chaos inside Riorson House bleeds onto the trail that leads to the
valley as riders and fliers alike hike for the flight field, armed to the teeth
with swords, battle-axes, daggers, and bows. My own daggers are sheathed
—all but the two I left in the cave with Solas’s body—and my pack is
strapped to my back. Most third- and second-years are headed to the
outposts along the Navarrian border, and then there’s me.

I’ll be with Xaden, since Tairn and Sgaeyl can fly faster than the rest of
the riot to confront the approaching horde. The last thing we want is to let
them get to Aretia.



If we hurry and the translation is accurate, we might get the wards
working just as the horde reaches the height of the cliffs. I try not to focus
on what will happen if I’ve translated wrong again, my heart racing in my
chest as we hurry up the path.

I glance over my shoulder at Xaden, his jaw clenched, eyes not quite
meeting mine. Maybe he and I keep having the same fight because we
never get to actually finish it. What in Malek’s name could his signet be if
he went that pale?

“Dragons,” I repeat to Brennan, pulling my attention back to my brother
and handing the journal over on the page I’d mistranslated originally. “That
line?” I point with a gloved finger. “It’s more loosely interpreted as political
power, not physical, which would be a lower placement on the symbol.
Dain caught that one. The stone needs a representative of each den.” Which
is exactly why Rhiannon is trekking up the path behind us with a stone-
silent Xaden. We need Feirge. “And it took reading the entire beginning to
know that once a dragon fires a wardstone, their fire can’t be used on any
other, and reading the entire end to know they created two wardstones. But
it doesn’t say why they never activated this one. It’s dragonfire that triggers
the imbedded runes, and they obviously had enough dragons, so why
wouldn’t they protect more of Navarre if they could?”

My entire body aches from today’s attack, especially my head and
shoulders, and I fight to lock the pain away so we can get this done. It won’t
matter if I’m hurting if we’re dead in the next few hours. Gently, I probe the
swollen knot on the back of my head and wince.

“Let me mend it,” Brennan says, worry creasing his forehead as he looks
up from the journal.

“We don’t have time right now. Later.” I shake my head and tug my
hood up over my head to ward off the cold.

He shoots me a disapproving look but doesn’t try to talk me out of my
choice. “Not only did you translate it, but you went back and did it again
when most people would have quit. I’m really impressed, Violet.” His
mouth curves into a smile.



“Thanks.” I can’t help but smile back with a little bit of pride. “Dad
taught me well, and Markham picked up where he left off.”

“Bet you disappointed the hell out of him when you stayed in the Riders
Quadrant.”

“I’m definitely his biggest failure.” Just a few more steps.
“But Dad’s biggest success.” He offers the journal back.
“I think he’d be proud of all of us. You should keep that.” I nod at the

journal as we finally reach the top. “It needs to be preserved.”
“Any time you want it, it’s yours,” he promises, tucking it into his jacket

for safekeeping before heading left toward where Marbh stands next to
Cath, his tail flicking as Dain waits in front of him, shifting his weight
impatiently.

Six dragons surround the top of the chamber, standing wing to wing, and
I make my way to Tairn, who stands beside Sgaeyl, as I would expect.

“How is Andarna?” I ask him, taking my place between his forelegs and
peeking over the stone-rimmed edge into the chamber where the wardstone
sits a hundred feet below. “She’s not responding when I reach out.”

“She’s been questioned by the elders, and her actions were found
justifiable,” he answers. “But to slay another dragon is a heavy mark upon
the soul, even when in defense of yourself or your rider.”

“That’s why you only took his eye instead of killing him.” I stiffen as
Xaden approaches, refusing to look his way as he moves into position with
Sgaeyl.

“I should have ended him then. I will not hesitate when faced with a
similar predicament in the future. She now suffers with a burden that should
have been mine.”

“I’m proud of her.”
“As am I.”
Rhiannon stands with Feirge, and Suri does the same with her Brown

Clubtail.
“Let’s get this done.” Suri shoots a glare my way, obviously still angry

that I’ve hidden my discovery for the past week. I’m definitely not winning
any points in the trust department.



All six of us exchange glances and quick nods.
“It is time,” Tairn says.
The dragons inhale as one and then exhale fire into the chamber in six

separate streams, instantly warming the air around us. This is exactly why
they built it open to the sky—not as some kind of worship of the stars but
because the dragons needed access for this.

I look away, turning my head to the side when the heat triggers my
hypersensitive skin, still stinging from Solas’s assault. A heartbeat later, a
pulse of magic vibrates through me in a wave, dredging my power to the
surface with a feeling slightly softer than the one that had rippled out at the
emergence of Aretia’s first hatchling.

The fire ceases, and the blazing heat dissipates into the winter air,
leaving us all staring at the stone, at our dragons, at one another.

That leveled, anchored sensation I’ve only felt within the wards at
Basgiath has returned, and the wild, unleashed magic that’s crawled under
my skin since leaving Navarre seems to sit back, not weaker but infinitely
more…tame. I lean over the edge to look, but the stone looks exactly the
same as it did before.

Maybe the fire is more symbolic?
I glance over at Dain, and he smiles wider than I’ve seen in years,

nodding to me. My quick grin mirrors his, and my chest swells with
excitement. We did it. All the long nights and the cold days spent imbuing,
all the squabbles over translation, and even my initial failure are worth it for
this moment.

“Is that it?” Brennan asks, looking across the chamber’s opening at me.
“We don’t exactly have time to test it.” Xaden points upward, where the

drifts have already taken to the sky, then locks his gaze with mine. “Let’s
fly.”
 
 
 
airn has never flown faster, leaving Sgaeyl and Xaden behind as he surges
for the cliff with the best vantage point for spotting wyvern—the edge of



T the high plains—usually a two-hour flight for Tairn, but this evening
we make it a few minutes under that mark.

“They’re fifteen minutes behind us,” he tells me as he sails over
miles and miles of agricultural fields, gradually descending until we land
fifty yards from the edge of the cliffs. “Use it to center yourself.”

“Don’t tell me you’re taking Xaden’s side of this argument.” I unbuckle
from the saddle and wince as I climb out of my seat. “I need to stretch my
legs.”

“I don’t take the lieutenant anywhere.” He chuffs. “As if I have nothing
better to do than listen to your romantic issues.”

“Sorry. Didn’t mean to jump to conclusions.” I navigate his spikes, and
he dips his shoulder.

“Though I do take offense at your insult,” he notes as I slide down his
leg.

“Insult?” My knee protests when my boots collide with the frozen
ground, but the wrap holds tight.

“You doubt your judgment as if I did not choose you for it.”
“But you weren’t listening. Right.” Rolling my shoulders, I walk toward

the edge of the cliff and summon just enough of my power that my skin
warms even though my breath puffs out in clouds of steam.

There’s a hum here, too, and I instinctively know that this is where the
wards end, twenty feet short of the cliff’s edge. This point is a four-hour
flight from Aretia for average dragons—if such a creature exists.

Would this be the natural border of Basgiath’s wards if they weren’t
extended by the outposts? That distance would leave Elsum, Tyrrendor, and
even most of Calldyr unwarded.

Gods, we’re not even shielding most of Tyrrendor if this is the
wardstone’s natural range.

“What’s the news?” I ask Tairn.
“The nearest riot of three is twenty miles to the north, and the same to

the south.”
“No sightings?” We don’t have the strength Xaden wants in each unit

tonight, but we can cover more of the border in groups of three, or in our



case, two. Deploying in smaller but closely spaced units gives the stronger
dragons a better chance at communicating as well.

Every bonded pair has been recalled from the lines across Poromiel to
defend the cliffs, but there’s no hope of those stationed in Cordyn, or
beyond at the border with the Braevick province, making it back in time.

“Not from the cliffs.”
“But beyond?” I look out across the darkening landscape, searching for

any sign of gray wings.
“I’d estimate we have a quarter hour.” He huffs a hot breath of steam

that billows past me. “Prepare yourself. Sgaeyl approaches.”
“Do you think he’s right?” I ask, folding my arms across my chest as

wingbeats break the relative silence of the night.
“I know he thinks he is.”
That’s helpful.
Sgaeyl lands close to Tairn, and I breathe in my last moments of peace

and prepare myself for the battle to come before the actual war reaches us.
It isn’t long before I hear his familiar footsteps coming my way.
“No sightings on this side of the cliff,” I tell him as he reaches my side,

keeping my shields firmly in place. “Tairn thinks we have fifteen minutes.”
“There’s no one else out here.” His words are clipped.
“Right. We’re the only pair.” I shift my weight, energy tingling in my

fingers, slowly filling my cells, saturating me in preparation instead of
drowning me as usual. “I know that goes against your full riot—”

“That’s not what I mean.” He shoves his gloves into his pockets, leaving
his hands bare and ready to wield, the perfect picture of composure and
control. “There’s no one within miles to hear us.”

My eyebrows shoot up, and I turn toward him in sheer incredulity. “I’m
sorry, are you suggesting that the reason you didn’t answer my question
back in Aretia was because you don’t trust your own sound shield on our
room?”

“There is always someone better at something than you, including
wards.” He winces. “And maybe that wasn’t the entire reason.”



“Spare me from whatever bullshit you’re about to impart.” My stomach
twists, and I lower my voice into my best Xaden impression. “‘Ask me.’” I
shake my head. “Yet, the first real question I pose, you duck out the door
like a coward.”

“It never occurred to me that you’d ask about a second signet,” he
argues.

“Liar.” I whip my gaze forward, studying the sky for movement and
fighting the scalding anger that tests the Archives doors of my power. “You
wouldn’t have told me that Sgaeyl bonded your grandfather if you never
wanted me to know. Whether it was a conscious or unconscious choice, you
made it. You knew I’d figure it out. Was it just another one of your ask me
tests? Because if so, you failed this one, not me.”

“Don’t you think I know that?” he shouts, the words coming out
strangled, like they had to be ripped from his throat.

The admission earns him my full attention, but his outburst is quickly
smothered by his self-control, and we fall into strained silence as he stares
off into the distance.

“Sometimes I feel like I don’t know you.” I study the harsh lines of his
face as his jaw flexes. “How am I supposed to really love you if I don’t
know you?”

I can’t, and I think we both know it.
“How long do you think it takes for someone to fall out of love?” He

studies the skyline. “A day? A month? I’m asking because I don’t have any
experience with it.”

What the fuck? I fold my arms to keep from giving in to the impulse to
jab him with the sharp point of my elbow.

“I’m asking,” he continues, his throat working as he swallows, “because
I think it will take you all of a heartbeat once you know.”

Apprehension slides up my spine and knots in my throat as I slightly
lower my shields just enough to feel ice-cold terror along my bond with
him. What the hell could his signet be that I wouldn’t love him?

Oh shit. What if he’s like Cat? What if he’s been manipulating my
emotions this whole time? I swallow back the bile inching its way up my



throat.
“I would never do something like that,” he retorts, sending a sideways,

wounded glare at me as he continues to watch the sky.
“Shit.” I rub my hands over my face. “I didn’t mean to say that out

loud.”
He doesn’t respond.
“Just tell me what it is.” I reach for him, curling my fingers around the

back of his arm. “You said that you trust me to stay because even if I don’t
know your darkest deeds, I know what you’re capable of, but I don’t if you
won’t tell me.” Somehow, we’re right back where we were months ago,
neither of us fully trusting the other.

His mouth opens, but he snaps it shut, as if he was going to talk, then
thought better of it.

“Signets have to do with who we are at our core and what we need,” I
think out loud. If he won’t tell me, then I’ll figure it out my damn self. “You
are a master of secrets, hence the shadows.” I gesture at the ones curled
around his feet. “You’re deadly with every weapon you pick up, but that’s
not a signet.” My brow furrows.

“Stop.”
“You’re ruthless, which I guess could have something to do with an

ability to shut off your emotions.” I shift my weight and study his face,
watching for even the most minute sign that I’m onto something, and keep
guessing, trusting Tairn to spot the wyvern before we do. “You’re a natural
leader. Everyone gravitates toward you, even against their better judgment.”
That last part comes out as a mutter. “You’re always in the right place—”
My eyebrows rise. “Are you a distance wielder?” I’ve only read about two
riders in all of history who could cross hundreds of miles in a single step.

“There hasn’t been a distance wielder in centuries, and don’t you think if
I was one, I would have spent every night in your bed?” He shakes his head.

“But what do you need?” I ponder, ignoring the tense set of his jaw.
“You need to question everyone to make your own impressions. You need
to be a quick judge of character in order to know who to trust and who not
to in order to have run those smuggling missions at Basgiath for years.



More than anything, you need control. It’s woven into every aspect of your
personality.”

“Stop,” he demands.
I ignore the warning completely, just like I ignored Mira’s warning last

year to stay away from him. “You need to fix— Never mind, if you could
mend, you wouldn’t have brought me to Aretia. Let’s try eliminating signets
instead. You can’t see the future, or you never would have led us to
Athebyne. You can’t wield any element, or you would have done so in
Resson—” I pause as a thought pushes past the others. “Who knows?”

“Stop before you go somewhere we can’t come back from.” Shadows
move across the inches that separate us, winding up my calves as if he
thinks he’s going to have to fight to keep me at his side.

“Who knows?” I repeat, my voice rising with my temper. Not that it
matters. There’s no one else for miles, and there are no sound-seekers in
Aretia capable of hearing across miles of distance like Captain Greely in
General Melgren’s personal unit, hence why our communication times lag.
“Do the marked ones know? Does the Assembly? Am I the only person
close to you who doesn’t know, just like last year?” My hand falls away
from his arm.

It’s impossible to have a signet that no one has detected, no one has
trained. Has he played me for a fool again? The space between my ribs and
my heart shrivels and shrinks, my chest threatening to crumple.

“For fuck’s sake, Violet. No one else knows.” He turns toward me in a
move so fast it would intimidate someone else, but I know he’s incapable of
hurting me—at least physically—so I merely tilt my chin and stare up into
those gold-flecked eyes in blatant challenge.

“I deserve better than this. Tell me the truth.”
“You’ve always deserved better than me. And no one knows,” he

repeats, his voice dropping. “Because if they did, I’d be dead.”
“Why would—” My lips part, and my pulse jumps as my head starts to

swim.
He has to have full control. He has to make snap character judgments.

He has to intrinsically know who to trust and who not to. In order for the



movement to have been as successful as it was within the walls of Basgiath,
he has to know…everything.

Xaden’s most pressing need is information.
Tairn shifts, angling his body toward Sgaeyl instead of beside her.
Oh gods. There’s only one signet riders are killed for having. Fear

churns in my stomach and threatens to bring up what little I’ve had to eat
today.

“Yes.” He nods, his gaze boring into mine.
Shit, did he just—
“No.” I shake my head and take a step backward out of his shadows, but

he moves as if he takes the step with me.
“Yes. It’s how I knew I could trust you not to tell anyone about the

meeting under the tree last year,” he says as I retreat another step. “How I
seem to know what my opponent has planned on the mat before their next
move. How I know exactly what someone needs to hear in order to get them
to do what I need done, and how I knew if someone remotely suspected us
while we were at Basgiath.”

I shake my head in denial, wishing I’d stopped pushing like he’d
demanded me to.

He crosses the space between us. “It’s why I didn’t kill Dain in the
interrogation chamber, why I let him come with us, because the second his
shields wavered, I knew he’d had a true epiphany. How would I know that,
Violet?”

He’d read Dain’s mind.
Xaden is more dangerous than I ever imagined.
“You’re an inntinnsic,” I whisper. Even the accusation is a death

sentence among riders.
“I’m a type of inntinnsic,” he repeats slowly, like it’s the first time he’s

ever said the words. “I can read intentions. Maybe I would know what to
call it if they didn’t kill everyone with even a hint of the signet.”

My eyebrows jolt upward. “Can you read thoughts or not?”
His jaw flexes. “It’s more complicated than that. Think of that breath of

a second before the actual thought, the subconscious motivation you might



not even be aware of in your mind, or when instinct drives you to move or
you’re looking to betray someone. The intention is always there. Mostly
they come across as pictures, but some people intend in really clear
pictures.”

Tairn growls low in his throat and lowers his head at Sgaeyl as a rush of
something bitter and sick floods our bond. Betrayal. I slam my shields up,
blocking him out before I’m lost to his emotions, already struggling with
mine.

He didn’t know.
Another rumble of anger vibrates his chest scales, and my heart lurches

with pangs of sympathy.
Sgaeyl draws back in retreat, shocking me to the core, but holds her

head high, exposing her throat to her mate.
The same way Xaden just metaphorically exposed his to me. All I have

to do is tell someone—anyone—and he’s dead. A soft roaring fills my ears.
“There are some secrets even mates can’t share,” Xaden says, his eyes

locked on mine, but his words are meant for Tairn. “Some secrets that can’t
be spoken of even behind the protections of wards.”

“And yet you know everyone’s secrets, don’t you? Everyone’s
intentions?” That’s why inntinnsics aren’t allowed to live. The implications
of his signet hit me with the force of a battering ram, and I stagger
backward like the blow is a physical one. How many times has he read me?
How many pre-thoughts has he eavesdropped on? Do I actually love him?
Or did he just say what I wanted to hear? Do the things I needed in order to
—

“Less than a minute,” Xaden whispers as Sgaeyl moves toward him—
toward us. “That’s how long it took for you to fall out of love with me.”

My gaze flashes to his. “Don’t read my…whatever!”
Tairn stalks toward me, his head low and his teeth bared as he places

himself at my back.
“I didn’t.” The saddest smile I’ve ever seen tugs at Xaden’s mouth.

“First, because your shields are up, and secondly because I didn’t have to.
It’s all over your face.”



My heart struggles to beat regularly, torn between slowing and
sluggishly admitting defeat, and racing—no, rising to fight—in defense of
the simple yet agonizing truth that I love him anyway.

But how many more blows can that love take? How many more daggers
are there in that metaphorical armoire? Gods, I don’t know what to think.
Nausea washes over me. Has he ever used it on me?

“Say something,” he begs, fear streaking through his eyes.
The roaring grows louder, the sound like a thousand soft drops of rain on

a roof.
“My love isn’t fickle.” I shake my head slowly, keeping my gaze locked

on his. “So you’d better live, because I’m ready to ask you all the fucking
questions.”

“Silver One, mount!” Tairn bellows, demolishing the barrier of my
shields like they’re thinner than parchment. “Wyvern!”

Xaden and I both spare a single glance to the edge of the cliffs. My
stomach drops as I realize that the approaching gray cloud isn’t a storm and
that roaring in my ears is actually wingbeats. One heartbeat, that’s all I wait,
and then I’m turning, moving, sprinting across the frozen ground and racing
up the ramp Tairn makes of his foreleg to his shoulder.

“How many?” I lower my flight goggles and blast the question down the
mental pathway that connects the four of us as I climb into my saddle.

“Hundreds,” Sgaeyl answers.
“That’s unfortunate.” I force air through my lungs in measured breaths

to keep calm, but my hand still trembles as I buckle the belt across my lap.
The second I’m secure, Tairn swings his body parallel to the cliffs and
launches, throwing my weight back into my seat as he climbs rapidly with
heavy, forceful wingbeats.

When we have enough altitude for air superiority, Tairn banks left,
flying in a tight circle until we face the flying horde. Then he pushes his
wings back against the wind, abruptly halting our momentum and sending
my body forward into the pommel as he hovers a hundred feet above the
frozen field, leaving twice his body length between us and the cliff’s edge.
“A little warning next time?” I use our private bond.



“Did you fall?” he challenges along the same, his wings rising and
falling only often enough to keep us relatively in place.

I decide to keep my retort to myself as Xaden and Sgaeyl arrive on our
right, keeping a noticeable distance from the edge of Tairn’s wing. “I’m
sorry she didn’t tell you.”

“We will settle matters of emotion after matters of life.”
Noted.
My stomach twists when I can make out individual shapes in the horde,

then outright sours as evening sky appears between their wingbeats.
“Thirty seconds,” Tairn estimates.
I release the pommel and turn my palms up, opening the Archives door

to Tairn’s power and letting it fill every cell in my body until the hum of
energy I pick up on at the edge of the wards is replaced by the hum of
energy that I’ve become.

“They’re slowing,” Xaden remarks as the horde spreads into a grouping
I’m terrified to acknowledge looks like a formation.

Bile rises in my throat as I count one, two, three, four—“I count at least
a dozen venin.”

“Seventeen,” Tairn corrects in a growl.
Seventeen dark wielders and a horde that rivals the riot at Aretia

against…us. “We’re dead if the wards aren’t up, if I messed up the
translation.”

“You didn’t,” Xaden replies, sounding infinitely more confident than I
feel. Heat flushes my skin as my power seeks an outlet, but I keep it
contained, ready to be wielded as three wyvern break away from the
grouping and fly closer. They hover a tail’s length beyond the edge of the
cliffs, their scales dull and gray, holes peppered through their wings as
though they hadn’t quite finished forming.

“They can feel the wards,” I manage to say before my stomach
abandons my body, plummeting like a rock. The rider on the center
wyvern…

“Then they can die in them, too,” Sgaeyl replies.



I can only make out vague facial features from this distance, but I know
in my very bones it’s him. The Sage from Resson, the one who’s taken up
residence in my nightmares.

His head turns noticeably from me…to Xaden.
“He was in Resson,” I tell him.
“I know.” White-hot rage shimmers along the bond.
The Sage lifts his staff, then swings it like a club, pointing toward us.
“I love you,” Xaden says as the wyvern closest to me banks away from

the wards, falling into a turning dive, only to gain speed and climb again,
leveling out behind the lead two before flying straight for us. “Even if you
believe nothing else I ever say, please believe that.”

“Do not speak to her as if death is a possibility,” Tairn snaps, slamming
his own shields around us both, an impenetrable wall of black stone,
blocking out Xaden and Sgaeyl.

I breathe deeply, using every ounce of concentration to keep my power
contained and my emotions under control as the wyvern accumulates speed
and flies past the lead two, heading for the wards.

Time slows to heartbeats, my breath freezing in my heated chest.
Then the wyvern crosses the invisible barrier, and my heart stops beating

altogether as its wings flap once. Twice.
“Prepare to dive.” Tairn swivels his head, his jaw opening as the

wyvern closes the distance to less than a body length, and I brace for the
maneuver. “Never mind.”

The wyvern’s wings and head sag, and its body follows suit—as though
someone plucked out its life force—and then it falls, propelled only by its
previous momentum, passing forty feet beneath us and crashing into the
field below, leaving a deep furrow before stopping.

“We should check—”
“Its heartbeat ceased,” Tairn tells me, his attention already redirected to

the other two wyvern along the border and the horde behind them. “The
wards work.”

The wards work. Relief restarts my heart.



The Sage swings his staff again and lets out a furious shout, sending the
wyvern on the right, who meets the same fate a few seconds later, impacting
a short distance from the first one.

Tairn doesn’t look when Sgaeyl dives for the carcasses, but he does
lower his shields.

“They’re dead,” Xaden confirms a moment later, and I glance down to
see Felix arriving on his Red Swordtail.

We’re safe. I throw out my hands and release the searing energy within
me, letting it snap free as I wield. Lightning cracks open the sky, striking a
few feet from the remaining wyvern, and I curse under my breath.

Close, but I didn’t hit him.
It’s enough for the Sage to call off the attack, and though I can’t see his

eyes from here, I feel the hatred of his stare locking onto me as he looks
back before joining the rest of the horde.

“That’s it?” I ask Tairn as he holds position, watching the wyvern
become a cloud of gray once again. How…anticlimactic. “Now what?”

“Now we stay long enough to be sure, and then we go home.”
We wait another three hours before flying back, long enough for Suri to

arrive and tell us of three similar incidents along the cliffs. We weren’t the
lucky recipients of a lone horde. It was a coordinated, simultaneous attack.

But we survived.
The joyous atmosphere is contagious when we walk into Riorson House

a few hours later, accompanied by Felix, and I’m promptly pulled into
Rhiannon’s hug.

“You got the wards up!” Her flight leathers are still cold from the night
air, meaning she’s just returned, too.

“We got the wards up,” I counter before I’m yanked out of her arms and
smooshed against Ridoc’s chest, then Sawyer’s, as riders and fliers
celebrate around us, the noise filling the cavernous space of Riorson
House’s foyer and somehow making the area feel smaller in the best way,
less like a fortress and more like a home.

“We’re needed in the Assembly chamber right now,” Xaden says,
leaning past Sloane and raising his voice to be heard over the cacophony.



Our eyes lock and I nod, keeping my shields firmly in place to block
him out, which feels not only unnatural but…wrong. How ironic to
celebrate a monumental victory and still feel like I’ve lost something
precious. There hasn’t been a second alone to discuss the fact that if my
shields were down, he’d already know how fucked up my head is about the
signet he’s hidden.

I can’t imagine walking away from this, from us, but that doesn’t mean
that we don’t have some serious issues we need to discuss—nor that I am
not pissed as hell that he’s given me another reason to doubt my own ability
to trust my own judgment. And just because I can’t imagine walking away
doesn’t mean I won’t do it if we can’t find some healthy ground. I’m
quickly learning it’s possible to love someone and not want to be with them
at the same time.

The second we walk into the Assembly chamber and a guard shuts the
door behind us, the noise outside falls away and eight pairs of eyes turn in
our direction. None of them appear as happy as they should be, given what
we’ve just accomplished.

Syrena and Mira break away from the Assembly and walk toward us as
Felix calls Xaden over from the dais with an urgent tone.

“We need to find time to talk,” Xaden says quickly and quietly, and I
know he only says it out loud because I won’t let him into my mind.

“Later,” I agree just to end the conversation before Mira and Syrena hear
us. There isn’t enough time in the world to process what he’s told me.

He walks away as they approach, and I peel my gaze from his back to
give my attention to my sister. The tension in her face has power rising
within me swiftly, my body preparing for battle. “What’s wrong?”

“As soon as the attack was over, a missive was delivered to Ulices,” she
tells me. “He was at the Terria outpost—”

“On the border with Navarre,” I finish for her, anxious to get to the heart
of the matter.

“Melgren has asked us to meet with him tomorrow. He requested
whomever represents our movement—no more than two marked ones



allowed—along with Violet and Mira Sorrengail.” She reaches for my hand
and squeezes gently. “You can say no. You should say no.”

“Why would the commanding general of all Navarrian forces ask for a
cadet and lieutenant?” My voice trails off and I glance over to the dais,
where Brennan is locked in a quiet, heated discussion with the other six.
“Our mother will be there.”

“And if a fight breaks out, we know it ends in his favor—otherwise, he
would never summon us. He’s already seen the outcome.”

I stick that predicament on the growing list of things I’ll have to deal
with.

“There’s something else you need to know,” Syrena says, drawing a
dagger and placing it on her outstretched palm. With a flick of the flier’s
wrist, the dagger rises a few inches, then spins when she twirls her index
finger.

It’s a simple, lesser magic, something I learned last year—
“You can still wield.” My heart sinks at the wider implications, and my

shoulders sag.
She nods solemnly. “As glad as I am to not be stripped of my power, I’m

sorry to say there’s something wrong with your wards.”
Fuck.

OceanofPDF.com



The day Augustine Melgren manifested his signet changed warfare 

for the kingdom of Navarre forever.

—NAVARRE, AN UNEDITED HISTORY

BY COLONEL LEWIS MARKHAM



CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN

The irony of meeting at Athebyne is not lost on me, nor is the fact that
this is the second time I’m visiting the outpost on the edge of the Esben

mountain range after finding out Xaden Riorson has hidden pertinent
information from me.

I spent last night in the library, which was probably in the best interest of
everyone as I continue to muddle through my thoughts. Intentions. What-
thefuck-ever.

Today, I’m bleary-eyed and restless, with more questions than answers.
But as I glance over at Xaden landing on Sgaeyl’s back, his face tense and
drawn, I can recognize that telling me, whether or not he wanted to, was the
ultimate gesture of trust.

And this time, I’m not the last to know. I’m the first. Maybe it makes me
completely, utterly foolish, but somehow that makes a difference, even if I
haven’t had the opportunity to tell him that…or the opportunity to
interrogate his ass about how many of my intentions he’s read.

I’m just not sure how many this-times I have in me, no matter how much
I love him.

Our riot of ten lands in the clearing over the ridgeline from the outpost at
noon—a full hour before we’re due to meet—and four of the dragons back
into the cover of the forest immediately, hiding in the shelter of the



enormous evergreen trees that surround the field. The other six stand wing
to wing, ready to launch at a moment’s notice.

“You’re sure they won’t be able to tell they’re here?” I ask Tairn, putting
my flight goggles into my pack before sliding down Tairn’s foreleg.
Landing on the frozen ground makes me wince. I’d woken up this morning
with a hundred-yearold text stuck to my cheek and a throbbing ache in my
neck.

“Not exactly, but there’s no snow at this elevation to carry tracks.
Dragons only sense each other mind-to-mind when we allow it. As long as
they stay downwind, the others will know they’re here but won’t be able to
identify how many or who has come.”

“That’s not exactly comforting.” Especially given who insisted on
traveling with us. I stretch my arms up at the sun and roll my neck carefully
to ease the stiffness in my muscles. After fighting Solas yesterday and
accidentally sleeping on a table in the library last night, my body has had it
with me, and I can’t blame it.

“You are not a child in need of comfort.”
True, which only serves to remind me of the enraged adolescent I have

waiting for me at home in Aretia. After telling her there would be no logical
way to explain her presence even if Tairn carried her, which she was
adamantly opposed to, Andarna cursed Tairn’s entire family line, then
blocked us both and went to practice with the elders.

Tairn’s only response had been a muttered expletive about the moods of
adolescents.

It doesn’t escape my notice that Sgaeyl stands between Teine and Fann,
Ulices’s cantankerous Green Swordtail, not next to Tairn, which either
explains or is a result of his surly mood this morning.

Mom and Dad are fighting, and everyone knows it.
Xaden crosses in front of Fann, completely unbothered by her snort of

insult at his proximity, and peels off his gloves as he approaches me.
“You didn’t come to bed last night.” His brow furrows as he makes a

quick study of my face, then shoves the gloves into his pocket, and I mirror
his motions just in case we’ll need to wield.



Then I reinforce my shields.
“I was in the library with Dain, poring over Warrick’s journal to see

what I got wrong. We both fell asleep on one of the tables, until Jesinia and
a few others joined us for more study.” I meet his gaze, then look away
before I start pelting him with questions or do something even more foolish
like forgive him before getting answers.

“I thought Jesinia didn’t speak Old Lucerish?” He barely glances at the
riders who walk by and gather in front of Fann. We’ve brought three from
Mira’s unit in addition to members of the Assembly.

“She doesn’t, but Sawyer’s smitten, and the others were determined to
help in any way they could.” Even Cat, Maren, and Trager had joined in a
show of support.

“Did you find anything?”
The dragons raise their heads at a sound coming from the other side of

the clearing, and the way they quickly lower them tells me everything I
need to know. Early or not, this meeting is about to start.

“No,” I answer, keeping my eyes on the trees and fighting the
apprehension trying to knot in my throat. The breath of life of the six and
the one combined and set the stone ablaze in an iron flame. What did I
miss? “If I had, you’d know it.”

“Would I?” His tone tightens.
“You would.” My gaze jumps to lock with his. “I appreciate you not

trying to talk me out of coming.”
“I learned my lesson at Cordyn.” He searches my face but doesn’t reach

for me. “Let me in. If only for a second, please let me in.”
My chest tightens with every heartbeat as I hold his gaze. Exactly how

much of this is mine to forgive? It’s his secret. But I can’t help wondering
how much he’s read into my own intentions. That’s the part that has me
hesitant, no matter how much I love him.

“Violet?” It’s the blatant plea in his tone that has me lowering my
shields just enough to feel our bond connect, and the resulting relief on his
face is palpable. “If you decide to tell them what I am as punishment for the
crimes I’ve committed against you, I’ll understand.”



“You want to discuss this now, of all times?” I lift my eyebrows at him.
“I wanted to discuss this last night, but apparently you were busy

working to save Tyrrendor.” His attention shifts to the trees, and Tairn’s
shadow races across the brittle prairie grass, winding around us.

“Are you complaining?” Our hands brush as we both turn to face
whomever is coming through those trees.

“About you choosing the safety of my home over fighting with me?” He
scowls but laces his fingers with mine. “No, but—”

Mira approaches from behind Xaden, her stride confident, though two
lines of worry are etched between her brows.

I squeeze his hand, then let go.
“I need to know something.” I run my hands down my hips, counting

the blades sheathed there, all six of them. “Did you ever use your signet to
glean information to influence my feelings in any way?”

“Never.” He shakes his head, but his hands clench at his sides and the
muscle in his jaw pops. “But I have always lacked a certain element of self-
control when it comes to you, and our bond makes it way too easy for you to
send your intentions without even realizing it.”

Death would be preferable to the embarrassment that accompanies that
revelation.

“I could torch him if you would like,” Tairn offers. “But you do seem
attached.”

Heat flushes up my neck and stings my cheeks, reminding me of the
times my scalp would prickle in his presence. “You knew I wanted to kiss
you that night by the wall…”

Gods, I can’t even finish the question.
The tops of the trees begin to sway. They’ve brought dragons.
“Yes.” He glances at me. “And you have my most sincere apology. Had I

known what we would become”—he shakes his head—“fuck, I probably
still would have done it.”

“Do you still do it?” I have to know.
“No. I stopped the moment you were more to me than the general’s

daughter, the moment I realized the harm Dain had done—and that I was no



better than he was.”
Except Xaden hadn’t brokered the information he’d stolen and been

responsible for killing Liam and Soleil. Yet I’ve made some kind of peace
with Dain, haven’t I?

Maybe I’m becoming complacent with betrayal because it’s fucking
everywhere.

“I’m not going to turn you in,” I say quickly, looking up at him as Mira
comes within hearing distance. “But we’ll be fighting about this later.” I lift
my brows.

The muscle in his jaw ticks like he wants to say more, but he only adds,
“I will make myself available to you.”

“You ready for this?” Mira asks, crossing in front of Xaden to stand
beside me.

“No,” I reply to Mira. “Are you?”
“No.” She rests her hand on the pommel of the shortsword sheathed at

her hip. “But she’ll never know that.”
“I want to be you when I grow up.” A smile tugs at my lips despite the

anxiety quickening my breaths.
“You’ll be better than me,” she counters, then looks over the top of my

head to talk to Xaden. “By the way, you couldn’t convince him to stay in
Aretia?”

“I don’t wield emotions, and members of the Assembly don’t take well
to being tied down and restrained.” He reaches back over his shoulder and
draws one of the swords strapped to his back with his left hand, leaving his
right free to wield. “If you’re looking to influence mindwork, find a flier.”

I barely keep myself from jabbing him at his clever semantics, because
the man clearly specializes in mindwork.

“Here we go,” Mira mutters as seven figures dressed in black step into
the clearing.

I palm a dagger in my right hand and crack open the door to the
Archives, letting power trickle into me.

Melgren walks at the center, his beady eyes shifting down our line of
Aretian riders. I don’t need Cat’s gift to heighten his anger. He wears rage



like it’s a part of his uniform.
I force myself to glance at the other members of their chosen party, only

recognizing three, two of whom were Mom’s aides at one point or another.
“Colonel Fremont—second on the left—is a very powerful air wielder,”

I tell Xaden. “He can suck the air straight out of your lungs.”
“Thank you.” Shadows rise in front of the three of us, curling in blade-

like fingers at the level of our knees.
Then my gaze falls on Mom.
She walks at Melgren’s side, cutting through the field with quick,

efficient steps, her attention split between Mira and me. The closer she
comes, the more apparent her exhaustion. Deep bruises mark the space
under her eyes, contrasting with her paler-than-normal complexion, even
though the lines from her flight goggles indicate she’s spending time in the
sky.

Mira tilts her chin and smooths her expression into a mask I envy and do
the best to emulate.

The dragons follow, led out of the forest by Melgren’s dragon, Codagh.
The utter nightmare of a black dragon immediately lowers his head as he
stalks forward, and his golden eyes narrow at me—no, at Tairn standing
behind me. Fuck, I’d almost forgotten just how big he is, easily five feet
taller than Tairn, numerous battle scars marking his chest scales and wings.

Mom’s dragon, Aimsir, follows, prowling toward us at the same time the
other five make their appearance, an orange, two reds…and a blue.

Tairn steps forward and lifts his head to hover over mine, a menacing
rumble working its way up his throat.

“Don’t drool on me,” I joke, but it falls flat.
The Navarrian riders walk to the center of the field, and when Ulices

moves, so do we, leaving ten feet of empty field between our lines. Swords
and daggers gleam within easy reach on both sides.

“And here I was thinking you were dead, Ulices,” Melgren starts,
forcing a smile that’s mostly bared teeth.

“And here I was hoping you were,” Ulices counters, using his height to
look down his nose at Melgren.



“No such luck,” Melgren replies. “What happened to meeting at the
outpost?” He gestures back toward the trees. “We have refreshments
waiting if you’d care to—”

“Probably poisoned,” Tairn adds, but he sounds slightly distracted, as if
holding more than one conversation at once, probably because he is.

“We don’t,” Xaden interrupts. “Speak your piece, Melgren.”
Melgren’s gaze jumps to Xaden. “We never should have let you into the

quadrant.”
“Regrets are truly a bitch, aren’t they?” Xaden cocks his head. “Let’s get

to it. You may have nothing better to do with your day, but we’re busy
fighting for our Continent.”

“Nothing better?” Melgren snaps, his face blotching. “Do you know the
destruction you caused by dropping those wyvern on the outposts? The
lengths we went to in order to keep it quiet? The civilians we had to—” He
stops himself, breathing deeply and straightening his shoulders. “You
almost tore down centuries of work, of tightly woven defensive strategy
designed to protect the people within our borders.”

“But only the people within your borders,” Mira accuses. “Fuck
everyone else, right?”

Mom’s eyes flash with barely leashed reprimand.
“Yes.” Melgren turns that unnerving stare on my sister. “When you

abandon ship in the middle of a hurricane, you save those you can in the
dinghy, then cut the hands off anyone else who tries to climb aboard so they
don’t pull you under.”

“You’re a callous asshole,” she fires back.
“Thank you.”
“Are we here for a reason?” Xaden asks. “You know, besides the evil

villain lecture?” Sunlight glints off the blade of his sword as he shifts his
grip.

“We let you go,” Melgren answers, glancing between Ulices and Xaden.
“Let you take half the Riders Quadrant cadets without so much as a fight.
Let her go”—his withering gaze slides over mine, and I lock my muscles to



keep from shuddering—“after she brutally murdered the vice commandant.
Ever stop to think about why?”

My stomach clenches.
“I personally try not to think about you,” Xaden replies, outright lying,

but damn does he pull it off.
“You can’t afford to lose the riders necessary to fight us,” Ulices

answers. “We’re too expensive to keep, especially with the number of riders
—and the riot—who chose to leave you.”

“Perhaps.” Melgren tilts his head. “Or perhaps I let you.”
My grip tightens on my dagger.
“Perhaps”—the general draws out the word—“I knew we’d need you for

a coming battle.”
Highly unlikely. Who would they possibly be fighting behind the wards?
“I’ll meet Malek before I fight for Navarre again,” Ulices snarls.
“You were always too quick to make important decisions,” Melgren says

with a sigh, patting his chest. “That’s why I didn’t mourn your loss.”
Damn. That was harsh.
“This meeting is over—” Ulices starts, red rising up his neck and

splashing onto his cheeks.
“They’re going to overrun us at Samara,” Melgren interrupts.
Everyone quiets.
I struggle to draw my next breath. Surely he didn’t mean to say that. I

look at Mom, and my knees weaken at the subtle nod she gives me. Even
Mira tenses.

“I’ve seen it,” Melgren continues. “They come for us on solstice, and
they win.”

Shit, he said exactly what he meant. A chill races up my spine as the
blood drains from my face. If Samara falls, if any of the outposts do,
wyvern would have unfettered access to parts of Navarre the ward
extensions have protected for the last six hundred years.

Without the outposts, Basgiath’s wards would rebound to their natural
limits, only a few hours’ flight, reaching nowhere near the border.



“How?” Ulices challenges, and the riders from Mira’s unit exchange
disbelieving looks.

“Do me a favor,” I say to Xaden. “Forget feeling guilty about reading
my intentions and please read theirs.”

“Everyone but the major on the right is shielded, but she’s scared
shitless and intends to do whatever she needs to get us to agree,” he
answers, shifting so his hand brushes the back of mine. “Oh, and she wants
to eat after this meeting, and argue with your mother over her supposed
affection for her daughters. Now put your shields up and block me—and
everyone else—out.”

Holy shit. No wonder inntinnsics aren’t allowed to live. Xaden is both a
jaw-dropping weapon and a frightening liability. I do as he suggests, only
leaving space for Tairn and the opaque, glimmering bond I feel with
Andarna, even at this distance.

“How isn’t how it works.” Melgren folds his arms across his chest, and
Codagh bares his dripping teeth. “All that matters is that we lose on
solstice.”

They lose. If the wards are breached, there’s no way to estimate the
death toll. Every Navarrian civilian between the border and the wardstone’s
natural limitations will be in mortal danger.

“Silver One?”
“I’m fine.” But I’m not.
“If you’ve already seen the outcome, then what the hell do you expect us

to do about it?” Ulices challenges, lifting his hands as he shrugs.
My head turns in his direction, but I bite my tongue before I can reply

that he obviously expects us to help.
“Change the outcome by fighting at our side.” Melgren frowns like he’s

being forced to swallow rotten fruit. “In the battle I see, none of you are
there.” He glances at Xaden.

“And we’re not going to be.” Ulices shakes his head. “We don’t fly for
you.”

No, we fly for… Wait, who do we fly for? Not just Aretia, or even
Tyrrendor. And if we’re willing to fight to defend the civilians of Poromiel,



why wouldn’t we fight to defend Navarrians, too?
“No, but you do fly for the Empyrean,” Mom interjects. “Dragonkind

won’t stand aside if the hatching grounds in the Vale are compromised.”
“Your mother is presumptuous to speak on behalf of dragonkind,” Tairn

mutters.
“If the hatching grounds are compromised. Losing one outpost won’t

take down the entire system, and half your riot left with us,” I remind her.
“And you’re proud of that? What you caused may very well be the

reason we lose this battle!” the box-framed captain beside Mom snarls,
lifting his shortsword in my direction.

I flip my dagger, pinching the tip in readiness to throw, but shadows jolt
forward, knocking the sword from the captain’s hand and putting him on his
ass.

Xaden clicks his tongue and wiggles his pointer finger. “No, no. I’d hate
to lose the spirit of civility, wouldn’t you? We were all getting along so
nicely.”

“Godsdamned traitor,” the captain spits out, fumbling for his sword
before finding his feet. “Malek will meet you for your crimes.”

Mom sheathes a dagger I never saw her draw, her focus flicking between
the captain and Xaden.

“Tried that. He didn’t want me—or any of us, remember?” Xaden
scratches his relic with his empty hand.

“Enough,” Melgren shouts. “I don’t expect you to ally yourself with us
for nothing. Fight for us at Samara, and I have it on King Tauri’s word that
we will respect the independence of your riot…and the city you’ve taken
refuge in.”

The breath freezes in my lungs. “Does he know about Aretia?”
“I can’t tell.”
“We will not conscript your citizens for our army, nor will we drag your

people into a border war you have no chance of winning.” Melgren shrugs.
“If you truly thought that, you would have invaded the second we left.”

Mira sounds like she’s bored. “Unless you saw the battle didn’t go your
way.”



“This is the only offer.” Melgren ignores Mira, focusing on Ulices. “If
you are not our allies, then you are our enemies.”

Allies. That’s the logical answer.
“I think we’ll sit this one out,” Ulices says dismissively, as though he’s

rejecting an offer of tea. “A kingdom who never comes to the aid of others
doesn’t deserve aid in their time of need. Personally, I think you all deserve
whatever the dark wielders do to you.”

I blink, everything in my body rebelling at the sentiment that civilians
deserve to die because their leadership failed them, no matter who that
leadership is.

“And you speak for your rebellion?” Melgren’s attention slides to
Xaden. “Or does the heir apparent?”

Xaden doesn’t rise to the bait, nor does he argue against Ulices’s
statement. But he’s going to, right?

The color drains from Mom’s face as she looks between Mira and me,
past us, and for the first time in my life, I see her wobble, like someone has
knocked her off her center.

Bootsteps sound behind me, but I can’t tear my gaze away from the
emotions crossing Mom’s face in rapid succession long enough to look to
see who it is, and honestly, I don’t need to.

“We rule by committee,” Brennan announces, his arm brushing mine as
he stops between Mira and me. “And I think I’m safe in speaking for the
quorum when I say that we do not defend kingdoms who sacrifice
neighboring civilians”— his head turns toward Mom, and her eyes bulge
—“let alone their own children so they can hide safely behind their wards.
You will not escape the suffering you’ve forced the rest of the Continent to
endure.”

“Brennan?” Mom whispers, and the urge to cross the line and hold her
upright is almost too strong to fight.

“For fuck’s sake, Brennan,” Mira whispers.
“When all three of your children stand against you, perhaps the time has

come for self-reflection. This meeting is officially over,” Brennan states, his
gaze locked on our mother. “Your hatching grounds are not in danger, and



our riot has their own to protect now.” He places his hand over his heart. “I
mean this with every fiber of my body. We deny your offer of peace and
happily accept war, since it sounds like you won’t survive another two
weeks to fight it.” He pivots and walks away, leaving our mother to stare
slack-jawed at his retreating back.

Is that all there is to it? With Suri and Kylynn in the woods behind us,
the Assembly truly has a quorum, but Xaden hasn’t spoken.

“Right.” Xaden nods, tension straining the muscles of his neck. “If I
were you, I’d try calling on the allies who helped win the Great War in the
first place— oh, wait. You cut off contact with them centuries ago. I
suppose this really is farewell.”

I glance up at him and quickly school my features to mask my surprise.
They’re really going to leave them to die. We are going to leave them to die.

Wrath shines in Melgren’s narrowed eyes. “We’re done here. Do what
you need to say goodbye,” he says to my mother before leaving the field,
walking toward the trees as Codagh moves with him, slinking backward
and baring his teeth in warning for anyone foolish enough to attack his
rider’s back.

All the Navarrian riders beside Mom follow.
“Brennan,” Mom whispers again, her shoulders folding inward as she

covers her mouth with her hand. Her eyes water, and the pain I see there
makes me look away.

Our riders make quick work of mounting, leaving only Xaden, Mira, and
me on the field.

“Why did you want to see Violet and Mira?” Xaden asks, his tone
devoid of sympathy.

“He’s alive?” Mom asks Mira, her voice faint in what I think has to be
shock.

“Obviously,” she replies, folding her arms.
Mom’s gaze shifts to me, like I’m going to give her a different answer.

“He’s the one who mended me after I took a venin blade in my side.”
Her eyes sharpen. “You’ve known for months?”



“It’s appalling to be left in the dark, isn’t it, Mom?” Mira snaps. “To feel
lied to, perhaps even betrayed, by your own family no less.”

“Mira,” I chastise.
“She sacrificed you, too, Violet,” Mira reminds me. “Maybe she put you

into the Riders Quadrant to save you from being killed as a scribe once you
learned the truth, or maybe she did it to kill you before you could learn the
truth and tear her precious war college to the ground”—she glances
sideways at me—“which you did, if you remember.”

Mom straightens her shoulders and lifts her chin, pulling herself together
with astonishing, enviable speed. “I need a word with my daughters,” she
says to Xaden.

He arches his scarred brow, then looks to me for my decision.
I nod. If what Melgren says is true and she’s called to the front lines, this

might be the last time I see her. The thought sickens my stomach. It’s one
thing to leave her, to cut any and all contact, and quite another to leave her
to her death.

Xaden backs away without another word, only offering his back once he
passes by Tairn’s claw.

“What do you want?” Mira asks.
“I’m not sure that matters at the moment.” Mom unbuttons her flight

jacket with trembling fingers. “But I want most—what I’ve always wanted
—is for my children to live. Whatever wards you’ve raised from the
instructions in Warrick’s journal will fail.”

Mira stiffens. “Our wards are fine.”
She lies just as effortlessly as Xaden.
“They’re not.” Mom delivers a full lecture with a simple look. “Cut open

the bodies of the wyvern who died crossing your border yesterday.”
My lips part.
“Whyever would you think I’d be ignorant of activities on your border,

Violet? Ignorant of where my daught—children are?” She shakes her head
and dresses me down with a quick, cutting glance that makes me instantly
feel like I’m five again before turning to Mira. “You remember what the



carcasses of the wyvern looked like at Samara? The ones Riorson so kindly
delivered?”

Mira nods.
“The stones used to create them were nothing but cold, marked rocks.”

Stones? Do dark wielders have runes?
“Yes. I was there.” Mira’s tone sharpens.
“If you don’t believe me, then check the wyvern you killed yesterday.”
“And then what?” I ask.
“Fix your wards.” She pulls a leather notebook from her jacket, and my

eyes widen with recognition. “If you don’t, they’ll decline over time to
nothing. Your father told me once that his research showed that Warrick
never wanted anyone else to hold the power of the wards. He wanted
Navarre to eternally hold the upper hand. But Lyra thought the knowledge
should be shared.”

“Warrick lied,” I whisper. But about what?
She hands me the journal I’d been tortured for stealing, then nails my

soul to the ground with the intensity of her gaze. “You have the heart of a
rider but the mind of a scribe, Violet. I’m trusting you not only to protect
yourself, but to protect Mira and”—she swallows hard—“Brennan.”

I open the journal long enough to recognize the language as Morainian.
My heart sinks for a second, but I close the journal, undo the buttons of my
jacket, and slide it into my inner pocket. Translating this one will be all on
Jesinia. Morainian is one of the dead languages I can’t read.

She looks longingly over my shoulder, then glances at both Mira and me
in turn. “You don’t have to understand my choices. You simply have to
survive. I love you enough to bear the weight of your disappointment.”
Before either of us responds, she turns on her heel and walks past Aimsir
and disappears into the woods.

“Think she’s full of shit?” Mira asks.
“I think the fliers can wield.”
“Good point.”
On the flight back to Aretia, Mira and I break away from formation and

head for the nearest wyvern carcass within our borders. Xaden stays true to



his lesson-learned proclamation and doesn’t argue when we separate from
the riot.

A half hour—and some creative knife work on Mira’s part—after
locating the pair of wyvern bodies, Mira draws back a polished chunk of
what appears to be onyx marked with a complex rune I couldn’t even begin
to replicate.

And the damned thing is humming.
Oh shit. Is this why wyvern have suddenly reappeared? Did someone

give the venin runes?
As if the stone has called to its partner, the carcass twenty feet away

shudders, and our heads whip toward the giant, golden eye that blinks open.
“Fuck, no,” Mira whispers, drawing her sword.
But I’m already an open gate to Tairn’s power, and when I throw out my

palms, it rips free, unleashed by my panic. Lightning cracks, flashing my
vision to white and hitting its mark.

The blast knocks Mira and me backward, slamming us against the cold,
stiff body of the wyvern behind us. Pain ripples down my spine, but
everything seems to be where it’s supposed to as my ass hits the ground
beside my sister.

We both sit in stunned silence, watching the now-smoking, charred
wyvern for signs of movement.

“You’re sure lightning kills them?” Mira asks after a few tense minutes.
“Certain,” I answer. “Thank Dunne the dark wielders didn’t stick around

longer to see that.” The cliffside would be littered with reanimating wyvern.
She slowly turns her head to look at me, keeping an eye on the body.

“No pressure, but if you don’t figure out what Warrick lied about, we’re all
fucked.”

“Right.” Because I did such a great job the first time. And I don’t even
know Morrainian. I’ll have to rely fully on Jesinia to translate and compare
the two. I draw a shaky breath. “No pressure.”

OceanofPDF.com



The combined hatching grounds at Basgiath is our generation’s

greatest asset…and our greatest liability.

—THE JOURNAL OF WARRICK OF LUCERAS 

—TRANSLATED BY CADETS VIOLET SORRENGAIL AND DAIN AETOS



CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT

“S tubborn asshole,” I mutter, turning just before the auditorium and
heading to the sparring gym. Talking to Brennan has gotten me

exactly nowhere over the last week, and his quick, effective dismissal of my
genuine plea for him to reconsider the Assembly’s position on the Samara
problem has my blood boiling.

I push the doors open a little harder than necessary and find the sparring
gym to be as empty as I’d expect at ten at night in the middle of a weekend,
and dimly lit by the cool glow of mage lights hovering above each
individual mat.

Xaden stands on the mat in the very center of the gym, feet apart and
arms folded across his chest, wearing sparring gear and that carefully
constructed mask of indifference he’s known for.

“I thought you were kidding when I got your note.” I close the door
behind me, then focus on the lock and turn my hand in midair, channeling
just enough power to hear the bolt slide home with a satisfying click. “I
haven’t seen you in a week, and this is where you want to meet?”

He’d been sent to monitor Draithus right after our return from Athebyne.
“Figured we’d be fighting. What better place for that than the sparring

gym?” He stands completely still, waiting for me to come to him. His usual
swords are missing, but he has two daggers strapped to his hip.



“You now have a warded bedroom,” I remind him, stepping onto the
mat. Though I’m not sure how strong those wards are given that our method
for raising Aretia’s wards was obviously flawed.

“We now have a warded bedroom,” he corrects me, his gaze sweeping
over me hungrily as I walk forward, stopping only a couple of feet away
from him.

I can’t blame him when I’m doing exactly the same, drinking in every
detail of his appearance. Whether or not I’m still pissed about his latest
reveal, I’ve missed him every minute he was gone, just like always. “What
exactly are we fighting about? The Assembly voting to leave Navarre to
fend for itself? Or the secret you kept from me again?”

His jaw flexes. “The majority voted once we returned, and though the
details of that vote are classified, I’ll break regulation and tell you that I
lost.”

“Oh.” The sharpest edge of my anger dulls. “And you’d rather discuss
the second issue in here? Where anyone can walk in and hear us?”

“Unless there’s a full inntinnsic around, no one can hear us like this.”
He gestures to the empty gym. Extending a hand, he crooks his fingers at
me. “Come on. I know you’re pissed, and no, I don’t need the bond between
us to catch on to that. It’s in every line of your face, the purse of your lips,
the tension in your shoulders.”

I purposefully relax my posture. “You’re right, you don’t need the bond.”
“See? Still pissed.” He moves so quickly I barely have a chance to get

my hands up before he sweeps my feet out from underneath me.
Shit.
He topples with me, bracing my fall with one hand and catching his

weight with the other. The wind may not have been knocked out of me, but
I’m breathless all the same. My hands brace on his chest, and his face is
inches from mine, filling my vision and blocking out the world around us.

“I’m not sparring with you.”
“Why?” His brow knits in confusion. “You have a better teacher? I have

heard that Emetterio is teaching you a variety of new techniques, since
venin adapt to our fighting styles so quickly.”



“He is. But I’m not sparring with you because I really want to kick your
ass.” I shake my head, my braid catching slightly on the mat beneath me.

“Oh, you think you can hurt me.” His slow grin makes me narrow my
eyes.

I shift a hand and whip a dagger from a sheath at my ribs, putting it
against the warm skin of his throat, right along the swirling lines of his
relic. “I don’t need to dignify that comment with a response.” Fuck him. I
make sure my shields are down so he hears it.

His eyes flare with something that looks like pride, and he leans into the
blade.

I retreat just enough that it doesn’t draw blood.
Guess we both just proved our point.
“You’re capable of hurting me in ways I’m not sure you’ve even begun

to fathom, Violet. I might be skilled enough to land a death blow, but you
alone have the power to fucking destroy me.” His hand slides out from
behind my back to help bolster his weight. “Now, we can talk here, or we
can see if Sgaeyl and Tairn are done fighting and fly through this
snowstorm to the nearest vacant peak, but make no mistake, we’re going to
work this out.”

I slide the blade back into its sheath, then lift my hand to his chest again.
“On a sparring mat?” His heart beats beneath my fingertips, strong and
steady, unlike mine, which pounds like a drum. I’ve had a week to process,
a week to wish he was around so I could yell at him, but also a week to
ruminate on the logical reasons why he wouldn’t have told me.

The foremost of them being that he values his life.
“Sure as hell not in our bedroom.” His knee separates mine. “We don’t

fight in there.”
“Since when?” That’s the most ludicrous thing I’ve ever heard. It’s the

only private space we have in this entire house.
“Since right now. I just made that rule. No fighting in our bedroom.”
“That’s not how this works.”
“Sure it is.” He drops his gaze to my mouth. “We make the rules when

they come to us. Go ahead, make one.”



“A rule?” I draw my leg up, bracing my foot on the ground so I’ll have
leverage if I want it, but the movement also drags my inner thigh up the
side of his hip, and damn if that doesn’t instantly summon an ache he’s in
prime position to ease.

“Anything.”
“We don’t keep secrets. No more ask me. No more tests to see who’s in

and who’s out of this relationship. It’s full disclosure between us…” I take a
steadying breath and map out the golden flecks in his eyes just in case it’s
the last time. “Or it’s nothing.”

“Done.”
“I’m serious.” My hand slips up his chest to the juncture of his shoulder

and his neck. “Even though I know you were right. I wasn’t asking the right
questions because I was afraid of the answers—and maybe I still am, given
the fact that you’re never completely open with me. Almost everyone in my
life has kept secrets from me because I didn’t ask the right questions, didn’t
look further than face value, and I understand that there will be times you
can’t tell me everything—that’s the nature of what we do as riders—but I
need you to stop setting me up for failure by insisting I figure out what
there is to ask.”

“Done.” He nods. “I just…” A muscle in his jaw flexes.
“You just?” My fingers slide up the warm column of his neck and into

his hair.
“I need to know you’ll be here. That no matter what happens, you’ll

come back so we can talk it out or fight it out.” His gaze drops to my
mouth, then skims over my features.

My heart clenches, and I slide my hand along his chest, around his ribs,
to his back, and then I hold on. “Done.”

The lines between his brows smooth. “I need you to know that no matter
what information I hold, you trust me, love me enough to realize I’d never
let it hurt you. I’m not the easiest person to know, but I’ve learned my
lesson, believe me. Even if it’s classified, I won’t withhold any information
that affects your agency.” He swallows, then balances his weight on one



arm and runs the back of his hand down the side of my cheek. “I need to
know you won’t run, that you know you’ll never have to.”

“I love you,” I whisper. “You could throw my entire world into
upheaval, and I would still love you. You could keep secrets, run a
revolution, frustrate the shit out of me, probably ruin me, and I would still
love you. I can’t make it stop. I don’t want to. You’re my gravity. Nothing
in my world works without you.”

“Gravity,” he whispers, a slow, beautiful smile curving his mouth.
“The one force we can never escape,” I tease. Then my smile falls. “I

mean it, though.” I lift my brows at him. “You have to let me all the way in,
or all the love in the world won’t hold this together. I am a person who
needs information to center myself.”

“Done,” he whispers. “Want to know about my father? My grandfather
and Sgaeyl? The rebellion?”

Maybe something easier. “Where’s your mother?”
He startles but quickly masks the reflex.
“No one talks about her,” I continue. “There are no paintings, no

references to her being at the Calldyr executions. Nothing. It’s like you
were hatched and not born.”

The moment stretches between us.
“She left when I was young. Their marriage contract said an heir had to

survive to the age of ten, and then she was free to go, which is what she did.
I haven’t seen or heard from her since.” His voice sounds like he dragged it
across broken glass.

“Oh.” My hand splays wide on his chest. “I’m sorry.” Now I feel like
shit for asking.

“I’m not.” He shrugs. “What else do you want to know? Because I can’t
do this again. I can’t go through months of uncertainty fighting to get you
back, not knowing if I’ve fucked up the only thing that really matters in my
life.” His eyes close briefly. “Not that I won’t if that’s what you need.”

“When did it manifest?” I slide my hand up to his neck. “The signet?”
“About a month after the shadows did. I’d already seen Carr kill

another first-year for reading minds, so when it hit, I held my shit together



and went to Sgaeyl, and when Carr asked if I’d had any other strange
abilities emerge, since they knew Sgaeyl had bonded one of my relatives, I
lied my ass off. And when my ability to control shadows seemed stronger
than they’d expected, they had no reason to dig deeper.” A corner of his
mouth tilts upward. “It helps that rider of record was thought to be a great
uncle, not my grandfather.”

“She’s really the only one who knows?”
“She’s it. She made me promise not to tell anyone. She thinks anyone

who knows will have me killed—or use me as a weapon.”
“Shit, isn’t that exactly what I did?” The second we were with Melgren,

I’d asked—
“No,” he whispers, lifting a hand and brushing the backs of his fingers

along my cheek. “You asked me for the good of the mission, but you’d
never use it for personal gain.” He leans in, resting his forehead against
mine. “Tell me we’re all right. Tell me this didn’t break us.”

“Promise you won’t use it on me again.” I hold his gaze and curl my
fingers into the fabric of his shirt.

“I promise,” he whispers, then kisses me softly. “Now, do you want your
presents?”

“Presents?” I arch my body up against his.
“You lost two of your daggers fighting Solas. I had two new ones

made.” A slow smile spreads across his face. “Just have to disarm me, and
they’re yours.”

I slide my hand down his chest and do just that.
 
 
 

D ecember nineteenth. I write the date on the next blank sheet of
parchment in my notebook, then stare. We’re two days away from

solstice, and still the Assembly won’t budge. But it’s only an eight-hour
flight to Samara, so I’m holding on to the hope that we’ll do the right thing.

“Anything in Lyra’s journal?” Rhiannon asks as she slides into the seat
next to me at Battle Brief.



Nearly every head in our squad turns toward me, and the weight of their
expectations forms a pit in my stomach. It’s the same question every day,
and I don’t have an answer.

“I told you guys, once she finishes, I’ll let you know.” It only took one
frustrating day trying to translate and failing before I handed it over to
Jesinia.

I haul my new conduit out of my pack and set it in my lap. Felix gave
them to every second- and third-year last week, and theirs are out, too, the
riders imbuing shiny pieces of alloy for daggers with every spare second
and ounce of energy they have. But mine has a special addition I asked him
for after our battle with Solas: a strap of a bracelet to keep from losing it in
combat. It’s long enough to let the orb slide into my palm, but keeps it
strapped to my arm in case I need to free myself for hand-to-hand.

The fliers have been working on carving shimmering maorsite
arrowheads to fill their quivers as well.

Over the last two weeks since our meeting with Melgren, the atmosphere
has changed from war college to straight up war. There’s a nervous energy
in the house that reminds me of the charge in the air just before a storm. All
second-and third-years are being instructed in runes, and even I can admit,
Cat is still the best of our year. She’s the only one of us who’s mastered a
tracking rune, capable of tracking someone else’s rune. Mind-blowing.

Our forge is glowing nonstop to produce weapons, and every rider has
been pulled from the coastal outposts and pushed to the border regions, both
with Navarre and Poromiel.

“Settle down!” Professor Devera orders from the center of the stage as
Brennan joins her, and the theater quickly falls quiet. “That’s better.”

Ridoc puts his feet up on the chair ahead of him, and Rhiannon swats
them down, leveling a behave-or-else look at him.

“What?” he grumbles, sitting up straight. “You’ve heard the death roll
for the last week. No losses to discuss.”

“As most of you know, we have no new attacks to report,” Devera
begins, and Ridoc shoots Rhi an I-told-you-so raise of his brows. “But what



we do have is an updated map we think is over ninety percent accurate,
thanks to flying patrols.”

She turns toward the giant map of the Continent and lifts her hands. Red
flags begin moving in an undeniable pattern, pulling away from known
strongholds and gathering to the east.

Most settle directly across the border from Samara, while a few red flags
spread out along our border.

“They’ve left Pavis,” Ridoc notes, leaning forward.
“They’ve left…everywhere in the south,” Sawyer adds. “And the Tyrrish

border, too.”
The north, in the provinces of Cygnisen and Braevick, is still spattered

with red.
“But not Zolya.” Maren sighs a few seats down on the left, and Cat

presses her lips in a tight line next to her.
They obviously don’t know our wards aren’t operating at full strength.
“What can you ascertain from their reported movements?” Devera

asks,turning back around to face us.
Brennan folds his arms in front of his chest and looks down at his feet

before lifting his gaze to us. I know that look. He’s feeling guilty.
Good.
“They’re preparing for the battle Melgren foresaw,” a rider from Third

Wing calls out.
At least the Assembly isn’t keeping Melgren’s request a secret—just

how they individually voted in regard to taking action on it.
“Agreed,” Devera says, nodding in his direction. “It’s hard to get an

accurate count, but we estimate upward of five hundred wyvern.” She
glances at Brennan and, when he doesn’t speak, continues. “And there are
dark wielders among them.”

A litany of swear words is mumbled throughout the theater.
“And why is it we’re not engaging?” someone from First Wing asks.
“Because we’re spiteful,” Quinn says from behind me.
“What was that, cadet?” Devera calls her out.



Quinn shifts in her seat, but when I glance back, her head is held high. “I
said because we’re spiteful,” she repeats, louder this time.

“Nailed it,” Rhi says under her breath.
Brennan clears his throat. “We’re not engaging because the Assembly

voted and decided that the casualty rate among riders and fliers would be
far too great. A battle this size could annihilate our forces, leaving the rest
of the Continent undefended.”

I shake my head at just how familiar that reasoning sounds.
“Some of us have family in Navarre,” Avalynn says, a row in front of

me with the other first-years in our squad. “Are we supposed to just sit back
and wait to hear if they die?”

“They should have left,” a rider retorts from somewhere in the vicinity
of Second Wing.

“Not everyone has the means to pick up their entire lives and move just
because a war is coming, you elitist prick,” Avalynn counters, her voice
rising.

She has a point, and the mutters of agreement throughout the wings rise
in volume and pitch.

“This is not what Battle Brief is for!” Devera shouts.
We quiet down, but the energy has shifted, and it’s not in a positive

direction.
“Let’s spin this another way,” Brennan says. “If you were Melgren, what

would you be doing right now?”
“Shitting myself,” Ridoc answers.
Brennan rubs the bridge of his nose. “Other than that?”
“Bolstering the wards,” Rhiannon offers. “As long as they remain at full

power, this is all just bluster on the part of the enemy.”
“Excellent point, Cadet Matthias.” Brennan nods.
“So he has to choose between arming his forces or keeping the power

supply concentrated in the armory?” That question comes out of First Wing.
“Another excellent point,” Brennan agrees. “What’s the problem with

arming the forces?”



“Spreading out the daggers lessens the efficacy as a power supply for the
wards,” Rhiannon replies. “Even if the energy isn’t actively being spent
killing dark wielders, the wards are still weaker.”

“Right.” Brennan looks straight at me. “And what would you choose to
do, Cadet Sorrengail?”

“Besides actually fight to defend innocent civilians?” The words are out
of my mouth before I can think twice about calling my brother out in
public.

“If you were Melgren.” His head tilts, and from that look, I know I’m
going to get the mother of all lectures after this.

I study the map for a heartbeat. “I’d have pulled every dagger from the
coastal outposts to reinforce and boost the power supplies at the border
outposts. They’re powerless once they cross the wards. Wyvern die. Venin
can’t channel. That leaves them with hand-to-hand combat—”

“Or artillery,” Cat adds.
“Exactly.” I glance at her and nod. “As long as the Navarrian forces can

physically repel the dark wielders and keep them from scattering the power
supply in the armory, then there’s no real danger of incursion.”

“And that’s exactly my point.”
“But Melgren saw them being defeated,” a flier from Second Wing says.
“Let’s run with that thought.” Devera gestures at the map. “Should the

wards at Samara fall, what would happen?”
“They’d have a direct line to the hatching ground,” someone answers.
“No,” I reply. “That portion of the wards would fall back to its natural

distance, about a three- or four-hour flight from Basgiath, just like ours. The
power supplies in the outposts extend the wards, they don’t create them, so
while a large piece of Navarre would be unprotected—” Blinking, my gaze
finds my brother’s.

He nods.
Melgren was bluffing, banking on us not fully understanding how the

wards work. He used a scare tactic to get us to agree to fight.
“Did you want to finish that thought, cadet?” Devara asks.



My mind spins as my heart lurches into my throat. I stare at the map, at
the thin line of the border that remains uncrossed by what appears to be an
undefeatable legion of the enemy, and a thought so terrifying I can barely
reach for it begins to take hold. “How old is this information?”

“I’m sorry?” Devera’s brows rise.
“How long have they been sitting on the border?” I clarify, my nails

biting into the palms of my hands as I tighten my fists, pushing down the
fear threatening to consume me.

She glances at Brennan, who replies, “They’ve been there for three days.
This morning’s report confirms they haven’t moved.”

Oh gods.
“We act now.” Tairn’s voice rumbles through my head.
I stuff everything into my bag as Devera calls on another rider to answer

a question.
“What are you doing?” Rhi asks in a whisper, and I notice almost every

member of my squad has turned to watch.
“I need to find Xaden.” I sling my pack over my shoulders and slip my

arms through the straps, preparing to stand. “It’s not Samara.”
“All right.” Rhiannon puts her things away, and the rest of the squad

follows her lead. “We’re coming with you.”
There’s no time to argue, so I nod and we all file out, earning us a few

shouted protests from Devera, but the sound only blurs into the roaring in
my ears as my thoughts spin faster and faster.

The hallway is relatively empty, since every cadet is at Battle Brief,
making for a quick exit from the western wing of the house.

“Where are you?” I ask down the bond.
“In a strategy meeting in the Assembly chamber,” Xaden answers.

“Why?”
“I’m headed your way. I need you.” We pass the doors to the history

classroom and then the great hall.
“Is anyone going to tell us why we just walked out of Battle Brief?” Cat

asks, a few steps behind me.



“Violet has a look in her eyes,” Rhiannon explains, keeping up at my
side.

“The same one she had before the Squad Battle last year,” Sawyer says.
“She’s onto something, and from our experience, you just roll with it,”

Rhiannon finishes.
Xaden walks out of the Assembly chamber and heads straight for me,

meeting us in the middle of the hallway. “What’s wrong?”
“It’s not Samara we have to worry about.”
“Why?” He keeps his eyes on me despite the shuffling of my

squadmates.
“Because they’re sitting there waiting,” I explain. “They’ve been

waiting for three days. Why?”
“If I knew their thought process, this war would be over,” he replies.
“Melgren says they’re overrun on solstice. That’s the day after

tomorrow.” Gods, we’re going to have to move quickly.
He nods.
“Wyvern aren’t going to take down the wards at Samara. They can’t fly

past them. Plus, smaller hordes were moved along the full border. I think
Samara is just a distraction. I think they’re waiting for them all to fall.”

His eyes flare for a heartbeat.
“The battle can’t take place somewhere else,” Sawyer argues. “Melgren

would see it.”
“Not if we’re there,” Sloane counters. “Melgren can’t see the outcome if

three of us are there, remember?” She holds up her forearm, where her relic
winds above the edge of her sleeve.

“Exactly.” My fingernails bite into my palms. “He can’t see the real
fight if we’re there. He has all his forces concentrating on Samara, when
they should be—”

“At Basgiath,” Xaden finishes my thought, his eyes searching mine.
“The Vale.”

“Yes.”
“Do you want to go back?” he asks.
“Of course we do,” Ridoc answers.



“I wasn’t asking you.” Xaden holds my gaze. “Do you want to go?”
Do I? Navarre has lied to their people—lied to us—for six hundred

years.
“They would never come to our aid,” Sloane says.
“They’ve definitely never come to ours,” Cat agrees.
They’ve let Poromish civilians die time and again, safely tucked behind

their wards, pulling the blindfold over Navarrian citizens’ lives.
“The hatching grounds are there,” Rhiannon argues.
“We have our own here,” Trager counters. At least I think it’s Trager,

since I can’t seem to look away from Xaden.
He’s the stable ground beneath my feet as my mind spins faster and

faster, my squadmates voicing contradicting opinions that match my own
thoughts.

“My family is in Morraine,” Avalynn pleads.
The voices behind me blur as they truly begin to argue.
“We’d have to leave almost immediately,” Xaden says, his voice cutting

through the noise.
“They lied to us. Executed your father. Tortured me.” I force myself to

stop counting their transgressions before they overwhelm my conscience.
“Yes.”
“I keep thinking about the infantry cadets, and the healers, and even the

scribes.
People like Kaori stayed behind, those who just want to defend their

homeland.” Reaching forward, I grasp onto his arms to hold steady as the
argument rages around us, and I get the distinct impression by the increase
in volume that we’re not the only squad out here anymore.

“Yes.”
“If we don’t go, we’re no better than they are, leaving their civilians to

die when we might be the very weapons they need.” My grip tightens on
him.

“Do you want to fight?” he asks, leaning down as the argument lessens
around us, everyone waiting to hear what I say next, probably. “Say the



word, and I’ll take it to the Assembly. And if they won’t support it, we’ll go
with whomever will. I go where you go.”

The thought of risking my friends, losing them, has my stomach
churning. I don’t want to put Tairn and Andarna into danger. I would rather
die than gamble with Xaden’s life. But is there really a choice? Going might
risk death, but staying risks us becoming just like our enemy.

“We have to.”

OceanofPDF.com



We do not eat our allies.

—TAIRN’S PERSONAL ADDENDUM TO THE BOOK OF BRENNAN

AS QUOTED BY CADET VIOLET SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE

“Ican make it on my own,” Andarna argues three hours later as cadets
scurry into our hasty and unauthorized formation in the center of the

valley.
“It’s an eighteen-hour flight,” I remind her, checking all the joints of her

new harness. Thank gods she’s still only half the size of Sgaeyl now, so
Tairn can still carry her. “I respect your decision to come, but this is the
only way.” She can only fly for an hour or two before her wing muscle
completely cramps.

“And you think I should be carried like a juvenile?” She huffs a breath
of steam as I walk underneath her and fit my fingers between her scales and
the smooth metal that curves under her shoulders.

“I think Tairn is capable of bearing your weight. You can fly until you
tire or hold back the riot, but wearing a harness for quick clipping in is the
only way I’m letting you come. I’m not risking you getting left behind if
you fall out of formation.” I tug at the steel just to be sure it doesn’t give
like mine did when we flew back to Basgiath last summer. “I get it. You
don’t want to be carried. Sometimes I don’t want to fly in a saddle, but it’s
what I need in order to ride. It’s your choice. You can come in the harness,
or you can stay behind.”

“Dragons do not answer to humans.” She bristles, straightening her
posture.



“No, but they do answer to their elders,” Tairn grunts, his claws flexing
in the green grass beside us.

“Only to the eldest of our den,” she counters as I walk out from under
her, careful not to step on my flight jacket and pack that I’ve left on the
ground. It’s too damn hot up here to be dressed for the reality of December.

“Sure, I’ll just go ask Codagh really quick,” I quip sarcastically, jumping
backward when a gryphon barrels by at full speed. They might be slower
than dragons in the sky, but they’re frighteningly fast on the ground.

They’re also less than happy about being left behind, according to
Maren.

“Try not to get killed before we get there, Vi. I think we might need
you,”

Ridoc teases from my left, waiting in front of Aotrom, who snaps at the
next gryphon who races by a little too close. I half expect to see feathers fall
from between his teeth when he draws back his head.

“Perhaps I will be the eldest of my own den.” Andarna arches her neck,
tracking a flock of birds in the sky. I follow her line of sight, then quickly
look away when the brightness of the sun stings my eyes, burning into my
vision for a second and making her scales look a shiny, sky blue before I
blink the spots away.

“I’m still in my middling years,” Tairn grumbles. “You’ll be waiting
awhile.”

“Really?” She shimmies the harness into a more comfortable position.
“I figured you were decades into your elder era. You certainly act like it.”

Tairn turns his head slowly, his eyes narrowing on Andarna.
“You don’t act a day over a hundred,” I reassure Tairn, then offer a smile

to Maren as she approaches with Cat.
“I hate that we can’t come,” Maren says, swinging her leather rucksack

from her shoulders. “We’re supposed to stick together as a squad, right?”
“You wouldn’t be able to wield,” I remind her as she crouches, digging

through her pack. “The second you crossed Navarrian wards, you’d be
defenseless and targeted by riders and venin alike. That’s not a great
combination.”



“And we’d slow you down. We’ve heard it.” Cat folds her arms in front
of her chest, surveying the chaos as Feirge lands ahead of us, flaring her
wings before touching down near Rhiannon. “Doesn’t mean we don’t feel
like shit that you’re all rushing off to battle while we…study.”

“I’m not so sure about the study part, since I think that’s Devera’s Red
Clubtail up there,” Ridoc adds, pointing toward the head of the formation.

“Here.” Maren pulls out a small crossbow and leather-capped quiver
from her pack, then stands. “Hate to tell you this, but you’re awful with a
longbow.”

“Ummm. Thanks?”
“This will give you a secondary weapon if you run out of daggers. Just

pull back the string until it catches here, then nock the arrow in the flight
groove”—she points to the center of the bow—“and pull the lever with your
forefinger.”

It’s compact and won’t take too much strength to operate. The gesture is
so kind that a lump grows in my throat. “It’s perfect. Thank you.” I take the
weapon from her, but she pulls the quiver just out of reach.

“These are all maorsite arrowheads, imbued and runed to explode on
impact.” She lifts her dark brows. “They’re cushioned in the quiver but do.
Not. Drop. This.”

“Got it.” I take the quiver from her, then slip them both into my pack.
“The Assembly won’t budge,” Xaden says. He’s dressed in full flight

gear, his swords strapped across his back as he walks with my siblings.
“Stubborn assholes.” Mira’s also dressed for flight, her sword sheathed

at her side, but Brennan isn’t, and the anger simmering in my brother’s
narrowed gaze is aimed straight at me.

“They won’t fight even knowing the hatching grounds are at risk?”
Ridoc challenges, heading our way with Sawyer, Imogen, and Quinn.

“They think we’re wrong,” Xaden answers.
“They think that rushing into enemy territory with untrained cadets is a

mistake,” Brennan snaps. “And I agree. You’re going to get cadets—
including yourself—killed.”



“It’s not like we’re taking the first-years,” Rhiannon says, fastening the
straps of sheaths around her flight jacket.

“Which is bullshit,” Aaric bites out, Sloane and the other first-years
walking up with him, all wearing flight leathers and determination. “We
have just as much right to defend the hatching grounds as second- and third-
years.” The pleading yet accusatory look he gives me sinks my heart. He
has just as much right—maybe more so—to defend Navarre as anyone here.

“None of you are going—” Brennan starts.
“You’d rather stay here, knowing there’s every chance Mom will die?” I

step toward my brother, and Mira pivots to my side, facing Brennan.
He flinches, his head drawing back like I hit him. “She had no trouble

sending any of the three of us to our deaths.” Brennan’s gaze jumps
between Mira and me, looking for understanding that neither of us gives
him.

“We don’t have time for this,” Xaden lectures. “If you aren’t coming,
Brennan, then that’s on you, but if we don’t leave now, there’s a chance
we’ll be too late to defend Basgiath.” He turns, pointing a finger at the first-
years. “And absolutely not. Most of you haven’t even manifested a signet,
and I’m not serving you up with your dragons as another energy source.”

“I’ve manifested,” Sloane protests, grasping the straps of her rucksack.
“And you’re still a first-year,” Xaden counters. “Matthias, get your

squad ready to launch, then find your wingleader for further orders. We’ll
need to fly straight through. I’ll take Violet with the—”

“With all due respect”—Rhiannon straightens her posture and stares him
down—“unlike War Games, Second Squad, Flame Section, Fourth Wing
will remain intact, though you’re welcome to join us.”

Sawyer and Ridoc move to my sides, and I know if I fall back, Quinn
and Imogen will be there waiting.

Xaden lifts his scarred brow at me, and instead of contradicting
Rhiannon, I glance at my sister. “Same goes for you. You’re welcome to
join, but I stay with my squad.”
 
 



 

The wind blows bitterly cold against my face nearly eighteen hours later
as we cross into the Morraine province and follow the Iakobos River

through the winding mountain range that leads to Basgiath. I’ve never been
so thankful that my body heats when I channel. Everyone else in our party
must be frozen to the core.

It’s a testament to General Melgren’s certainty about Samara that we
aren’t stopped by any patrols…because there are none. Even the mid-guard
posts are devoid of riders as we fly over in a riot of fifty led by Tairn and
Sgaeyl.

We may have left the first-years behind, but we also gained some of the
active riders who hadn’t been stationed along the cliffside border, like Mira,
who’s flying with Teine directly behind me as if she’s scared to let me out
of her sight.

“Aimsir is indeed within the Vale. Teine will relay communications for
the squad while you locate your mother.” Tairn finishes telling me the plan
devised by leadership midflight that will allow us to recon, then adjust to
whatever we find waiting for us.

My assigned task is to get through to my mother. No pressure or
anything.

“When we reach the upcoming bend in the river, you’ll release your
harness from mine,” Tairn tells Andarna. “Fly to the Vale and stay there. An
adolescent black dragon will raise human suspicion at Basgiath. Hide
among our kind until it’s over.”

“What if you need me? Like last time? I can stay hidden right at your
side.”

My heart clenches at the memory of how she’d appeared on the
battlefield even after I’d begged her to stay hidden. She’d risked her life to
help us and nearly lost it in the process. “Stay with the feathertails—they’ll
need all your protection if the wards fall—and report anything the second it
feels off.”

If we’re too late, then gods help us all.



At the bend in the river, Andarna detaches and flies alongside us until
the beats of her smaller wings can’t keep up, then dives toward the ice-
crusted river beneath us.

“The Vale,” I remind her.
“I will be where I am needed,” she counters, banking left, leaving the

trail of the river in favor of the snowcapped ridgeline that leads back behind
the flight field and up into the Vale.

“That didn’t sound like she intends on listening,” I tell Tairn, watching
her until she fades from view.

“I warned you what adolescents are like.” He tucks his wings and dives,
leaving my stomach behind as we drop a thousand feet in altitude in a
matter of breaths, then levels out once we’re only a hundred feet above the
tall oak trees that line the river, approaching Basgiath from the south.

Everything looks as it should in the dying evening light, identical to
when we left six weeks ago, simply covered in a fresh coat of snow. I look
over my shoulder to see half the riot—First, Second, and Third Wings—
break off, heading toward the flight field.

As long as everyone sticks to the plan, the next quarter will land in the
courtyard of the quadrant while the rest of us continue onto the main
campus.

“Can you sense anything off?” I ask as the walls of the Riders Quadrant
come into view. Only half the windows in the dormitory are lit from within.
An ache settles in my chest. No matter what cruelty transpired here, there’s
an enormous part of me that considers this place home.

It’s where I studied, where I climbed trees with Dain, and where my
father taught me the wonder of the Archives. It’s where I fell in love with
Xaden and learned just how much had been omitted from those very
Archives.

“The wards are still up. We’ve made our presence known to the
Empyrean, and I can definitely sense their displeasure, if that’s what you
mean.” We cross over the courtyard, and Tail and Claw Sections peel off
the formation with Devera in the lead, causing untold damage to the
masonry as they land wherever they’ll fit along the walls. “But Greim is in



residence, and she’s reaching out to her mate, who is at Samara to contact
Codagh.”

“At what point will you and Sgaeyl be able to cover distances like
that?” We pass the parapet in nothing more than a heartbeat, and then Tairn
banks left.

“Years. Greim and Maise have been mated for many decades.” He races
over the bell tower of the main college of Basgiath, then flares his wings
and beats them backward, halting our momentum to the sound of alarmed
cries from the watchmen in the four towers, shouting down their warnings.

“There are people down there,” I tell him as he sinks gracefully into the
main campus’s courtyard.

“They’ll move.”
Sure enough, people scurry, scattering out of his way as he lands.

“Should you change your mind, I’ll simply claw through the roof to reach
you.”

I unbuckle quickly, unstrap the bag of daggers I was assigned to carry—
each of us has one—and climb out of the saddle. “I’ll be all right,” I
promise, working to his shoulder without so much as removing my flight
goggles or tightening the straps on my pack. Speed matters, since only one
dragon can land here at a time. I’ll be alone until Sgaeyl follows.

My muscles protest the sudden movement after hours of riding, but I
make it to his shoulder, then slide down the familiar ridges of his scales
until my feet touch ground at Basgiath.

The second I’m clear, slipping the strap of my bag to my shoulder, Tairn
launches skyward. He’s strong but also heavy, and his talons barely clear
the roofline of the infantry quadrant as he flies off.

Officers stand in stunned silence against the walls, staring at me with
blatant shock, and I open the Archives doors just a crack to fill my body
with enough energy to wield just in case one of them decides to make a
move. Hands up, I scan the threats around me, taking note of the one
captain in navy blue reaching for his sword. I retreat toward the wall beside
the stairs leading up to the administration building until I feel frozen stone
against my back.



Sgaeyl lands an instant later, momentarily obscuring my view of my
would-be enemies, and Xaden dismounts, shadows in one hand and a sword
in the other as he echoes my previous movements, giving only me his back
as he retreats to my side. When Sgaeyl launches from the courtyard, Teine
sweeps down, taking her place in perfectly timed coordination.

Movement up the stairs catches my attention, and I pivot, putting myself
between Xaden and my mother as she descends with slow, deliberate steps,
her hand on the hilt of her sheathed shortsword, Nolon a few steps behind
her.

Here we go.
Shadows stream around me, racing across the cobblestones and stopping

at the first step just as my mother reaches it. Her sigh is pure annoyance,
and twin bruises lie in half circles beneath the eyes she narrows at us.

“Mom.” Power crackles, lifting the loose tendrils of my hair as I glance
back at the man who helped hold me prisoner.

“Really, Violet? You couldn’t use the front door?” She glances at Mira,
and then her gaze turns upward as Cath descends. Her face falls, but she
holds her posture rigid as ever.

“He’s not with us,” Mira says, holding her sword pointed at the captain
who’s been working his way out. “In fact, he’s pretty pissed we came.”

Mom’s head tilts slightly in a movement I know means she’s talking to
Aimsir. “Seems we’ve been fully invaded.”

“We’re not here to fight you. We’re here to fight for you,” I tell her.
“You might not believe me, but your wards are in danger.”

“Our wards are perfectly fine, as I’m sure you can feel.” Mom crosses
her arms as Dain joins us. “Oh, for fuck’s sake.” She calls across the
courtyard,

“Hollyn, open the damned gates before one of these dragons takes off
the roof.” She looks pointedly at the shadows blocking her path.

They lift, retreating to the tips of my boots.
“Let the others know the gates are opening,” I tell Tairn.
“I will position myself accordingly.”



A full minute later, the guards throw open the gates, revealing the rest of
our squad dismounting.

“Trust me, Mom. The battle you’re expecting isn’t at Samara: it’s here.”
I explain my line of thinking in the few minutes it takes for my squadmates
to reach us. “Someone is going to take down your wards.”

“Not possible, cadet.” She shakes her head as night descends in true
around us. “They’re heavily guarded every moment of every day. The
biggest threat to the wards would be you.”

“Let us check,” Xaden says at my back. “You know your daughters
would never strip Navarre of its protection.”

“I know exactly who my daughters are. And the answer is no.” Her
dismissal is curt. “You’re lucky to be alive crossing enemy airspace.
Consider retaining your lives a personal gift.”

“I think not.” Mira’s gaze sweeps the courtyard. “This courtyard should
be full at this hour with soldiers returning from mess, and yet I only count
five soldiers. One captain and four cadets, and no, I’m not counting the
healers in the corner. You’ve sent every available body to Samara, haven’t
you?”

The temperature in the courtyard plummets from freezing to nearly
unbreathable.

“The guards behind you have signets in mindwork, Mother. In fact, I’d
bet money that the most powerful riders on campus are you and…who?
Professor Carr?” Mira moves forward fearlessly. “Our forces can render aid
or conquer. It’s your choice.”

Mom’s nostrils flare as tense seconds pass.
“If you won’t take them to the wards,” Dain says from somewhere

behind me, “I will. My father showed me where they are last year.” Which
is precisely why he’s with our squad.

“Who do you want to be? The general who saves Basgiath, or the one
who loses it to the very cadets who rejected your lies?” I lift my chin.

“Black really does suit you, Violet.” It might be the nicest thing she’s
ever said to me.



“Like Captain Sorrengail said, it’s your choice. We’re wasting time,” I
retort. With night fallen, it’s officially solstice.

Mom’s gaze jumps to Mira, then slides back to me. “By all means, let’s
inspect the wards.”

My shoulders dip in relief, but I keep my power at the ready as we climb
the steps into the administration building, swallowing the knot of
apprehension in my throat as we approach Nolon.

“Violet—” he starts.
Just the sound of his voice makes bile rise in my throat.
“Stay the fuck away from Violet, and I’ll consider letting you live, if

only to mend riders if there’s a battle coming,” Xaden warns the mender as
we pass him near the entryway.

Mage lights glow above our heads as we walk into the familiar halls, a
pair of healers scurrying by, coming from the direction of the mess hall
where another group of cadets in pale blue peer out of the doorway.

“Chradh is worried,” Tairn remarks, his voice tense.
“What would Garrick’s dragon be worried about?” Xaden asks on the

pathway shared by all four of us.
“Runes,” Sgaeyl answers.
That’s right. The Brown Scorpiontail found the lure in Resson because

he’s highly sensitive to them. “Basgiath was built on runes,” I remind
them.

“This is different. He senses the same energy that he detected in
Resson.” Tairn’s tone shifts. “His rider officially has control of the
dormitory with Devera.”

Garrick’s in place.
Mom leads us down the hallway and into the northwest turret, then

descends the spiral staircase that reminds me so much of its southern
counterpart that my breath catches at the scent of earth.

Drip. Drip. Drip.
I hear the sound in my mind as clearly as if it were real, as if I were back

in that interrogation chamber. Xaden’s hand takes mine, lacing his fingers
through my own.



“You all right?” he asks, shadows wrapping around our joined hands,
their touch as soft as velvet.

For a second, I debate playing it off, but I was the one who demanded
full disclosure, so it only seems fair that I give it. “It smells like the
interrogation chamber.”

“We’ll set that room on fire before we leave,” he promises.
At the base of the stairwell is…nothing. Just a circular room paved with

the foundation stones.
Mom looks to Dain, and he walks past her, examining the pattern, then

pushing on a rectangular stone at his shoulder height. It gives, and stone
scrapes stone as a door swings open in the masonry, revealing a mage-lit
tunnel so cramped it would give even the bravest person claustrophobia.

“Just like the Archives,” I tell Xaden.
Mom orders her accompanying soldiers to stand guard. In return,

Rhiannon orders Sawyer and Imogen to guard them as we walk into the
tunnel. Mom goes first.

“What happened to being guarded?” Xaden asks, walking ahead of me.
Mira’s at my back.
“The wards are guarded,” she says, turning sideways when the tunnel

narrows even farther. “Wouldn’t you find it suspicious if guards were
stationed at the bottom of an empty stairwell?” she challenges. “Sometimes
the best defense is simple camouflage.”

I walk sideways, breathing in through my nose and out through my
mouth, and try to pretend I’m somewhere—anywhere—else.

We’re going to have fun, you and I. Varrish’s words slide over me, and
my heart rate jumps.

Xaden’s shadows expand from our hands to my waist, and the pressure
there feels like his arm is around me, making it bearable to get through the
passage for the twenty feet it takes to open up wide again. The tunnel runs
for what looks like another fifty yards before ending at a glowing blue
archway, and the hum of energy from what I assume is the wardstone
vibrates my very bones, tenfold the intensity of the one at Aretia.



“See, it’s guar…” Mom’s words die, and we see them the same moment
she does.

Two bodies in black uniforms lie on the ground, pools of their blood
slowly expanding toward each other. Their eyes are open, but they’re glazed
and vacant, freshly dead.

My heart lurches and the shadows fall away with Xaden’s hand as we
both reach for weapons.

“Oh, shit,” Ridoc whispers as the others file through the bottleneck
behind us, drawing swords, daggers, and battle-axes.

Metal slides against metal as Mom pulls her sword, then breaks into a
run, sprinting down the tunnel.

“No chance you’d stay here if I—” Xaden starts.
“None,” I say over my shoulder, already racing after my mother down

the long expanse. The vague sound of barked orders echoes off the tunnel
walls as Mira catches up quickly, then passes me to run at my mother’s side
while Xaden keeps pace with me.

“Do you know where the ward chamber opens to the sky?” I ask Tairn
as my boots pound the stone floor of the corridor. It has to, if it’s
constructed anything like Aretia.

“According to you, I cannot supply fire to more than one—” He pauses
as though taking stock of my situation. “On my way.”

“No!” Mom’s shout sends chills down my spine as she and Mira make it
to the chamber ahead of us, both charging left, weapons high.

The rest of us reach the chamber, and before I can assess the situation,
Xaden’s shadows jerk me off my feet and into his chest as he spins us
backward, pressing my spine against the wall of the archway as the points
of an orange’s scorpiontail swing through the very place I’d been standing.

There’s a fucking dragon in there?
“Are you…” His eyes fly wide.
“Didn’t get me,” I assure him.
He nods, relief shifting his gaze from worried to alert, and we both turn

into the entrance, quickly joined by Ridoc, Rhiannon, and Dain.



My mouth drops, and power charges through my veins, so potent my
hands buzz.

The wardstone is twice as large as the one in Aretia, as is the chamber
that houses it, but unlike Aretia’s, the rings and runes carved into it are
interrupted by a diamond pattern. And unlike our wards in Aretia, this
wardstone is on fire, lit on top by black flames that sputter and flare as a
dragon emerges from behind the left side of the stone, driving Mom and
Mira back toward us.

Not just any dragon. Baide.
“Get out of there!” Tairn orders as Baide lowers her head, and I get a

single glimpse of her eyes—opaque instead of golden—before Mom
charges toward her nose, lifting her sword to swing.

Baide knocks her aside with a single swipe of her head, and Mom flies
into the stone wall of the chamber, cracking her head before falling into a
heap.

Xaden throws his hand out, and shadows stream past, grasping both
Mira and Mom, pulling them back to us as Baide roars, steam and spit
flying from her mouth.

She stalks forward, her talons clicking on the floor as she maneuvers
around the stone, revealing Jack Barlowe in his seat on Baide’s back. The
smile he gives me twists my stomach. “You’re right on time, Sorrengail.”

“Anytime you want to show up would be very appreciated,” I tell Tairn
as Xaden’s shadows release Mira at my side but drag my mother’s
unconscious body back through the archway.

I can’t wield in here, not without endangering everyone. Besides, the
charge of the stone would draw every strike to it.

“It’s not exactly an easy location to get to,” Tairn growls in reply.
“What the hell are you doing, Barlowe?” Dain snaps.
“What I promised,” he answers, glee shining in his eyes.
Xaden sends another stream of shadows, this one shooting toward

Barlowe, and Baide drops her jaw, her eerie eyes flashing as fire glows up
her throat.



“Xaden!” I yell as Ridoc pushes past me—past all of us—and throws his
arms forward, palms out.

“Get down!” Ridoc shouts, and I glimpse a wall of ice rising before us
as Xaden pulls me into the shelter of his body and crouches. The chamber
glows orange for a heartbeat, then two, as fire rages against the stone walls.
Ridoc screams as the blast dies.

The second the fire ceases, we’re on our feet to face Barlowe and Baide,
but the dragon has disappeared behind the wardstone again.

“I’ve got him!” Rhiannon rushes forward and hooks her arms under
Ridoc’s, then hauls him back from where only a puddle marks where the
wall of ice had stood. Nothing prepares me for the sight of Ridoc’s burned
hands, blistered and bleeding.

“We’ll take the left,” Xaden says, glancing at me.
“Taking right,” Dain agrees, shooting a look at Mira, who nods.
Xaden and I run to the left, and I flip the dagger in my hand, pinching it

by the tip in readiness to throw as we round the corner.
What the fuck?
Baide is up on her back legs, her front claws grasping the top of the

flaming wardstone, and Barlowe isn’t in his seat. It takes a precious second
we don’t have to spot him holding on to the top of Baide’s neck, clutching
one of her horns.

Not even Xaden is fast enough to stop the downward plunge of Jack’s
shortsword between the scales alongside Baide’s neck. The dragon’s cry
shakes the foundation of the chamber and stops abruptly when Jack pushes
the blade all the way through the front of her throat.

Jack’s head swings in our direction, and he wields with an outward-
facing palm, throwing a shield that deflects Xaden’s shadows as blood
sprays from Baide’s throat onto the wardstone. The black flames extinguish
an instant before Baide collapses, her weight pitching forward.

The wardstone tips and Jack fumbles to hold on, giving me the perfect
opportunity to flick my wrist and release the dagger.

I hear a satisfying cry as Xaden grabs hold of my waist, throwing up a
wall of shadow that blocks out the chamber around us but doesn’t shield us



from the noise of the stone crashing. Cracking.
The humming stops.
The wards have fallen.

OceanofPDF.com



At its core, magic demands balance.

Whatever you take will be recouped, and it is not the wielder who

determines the price.

—MAGIC: A UNIVERSAL STUDY FOR RIDERS BY COLONEL EMEZINE
RUTHORN



CHAPTER SIXTY

X aden drops the shadows, and we both turn at the same time to survey
the damage.

My heart seizes, and I reach for Xaden’s hand reflexively. The
wardstone lies in two pieces on the ground, and there isn’t a flame in sight.

Holy Dunne, Navarre is defenseless.
There’s no seeing over Baide’s body to check on Mira, so I whip my

gaze to the right, meeting Rhiannon’s wide eyes where she stands at the
front of the archway, protecting Ridoc and my mother.

Jack stumbles backward from the blow of my dagger, a dazed but elated
look twisting his face as he wrenches it from his shoulder and drops it to the
floor.

“He only has minutes,” I whisper to Xaden.
Barlow has just killed his own dragon. It’s unfathomable. Impossible.

And yet Baide is most certainly dead as Jack falls to his knees and laughs
up at the sky fifty feet above us.

Mira appears, moving silently around Baide’s corpse, and Xaden gives
her a subtle shake of his head when she lifts her sword. She keeps it poised
for attack but doesn’t continue forward.

“You know you’re about to join your dragon, don’t you?” Xaden asks,
his voice low as shadows move in riotous swirls at our feet.

“What are you doing?” I palm another dagger.



“Getting whatever information we can.” The utter calmness of his tone
is unnerving.

“That’s the thing,” Barlowe says, his blond hair covering his forehead as
he falls forward onto a hand. “I’m not. They have us thinking we’re the
inferior species, but did you see how easily I controlled her? How easily the
energy she bonded us with is replaced?” His eyes slide shut as his fingers
splay on the stone.

“Jack! Don’t do this!” Nolon storms past Rhiannon, his features
slackening when he takes in the destruction around him. “You…you’re
better than this! You can choose!”

My chest tightens. “The way he said that is almost like he expected
this.”

“Because he did,” Xaden answers, his gaze locked on Jack. “He wants
to mend him. He’s been trying to mend him since May. He’s too weak to
shield his intentions now.”

“Mend what? The injuries from the fall?”
Xaden’s brow furrows in concentration. “Jack’s turned venin. Somehow,

he managed it within the wards.”
I think I might be sick.
“There is no choice!” Jack shouts. “And if there was, I made mine the

second I saw her”—he shoots a glare my way—“bond the most powerful
dragon available at Threshing. Why should they determine our potential
when we’re capable of reaching for fate all on our own?”

Oh. Gods. His eyes have been bloodshot for so long. When did it
happen? Before the fall. It had to have been before I wielded that first time.
Back in the gym that day…

And I’ve thrown the wrong dagger.
“Baide,” Tairn growls, and I glance up to see his silhouette block out the

stars far above us.
“I’m so sorry.”
“Magic requires balance,” Nolon argues. “It does not give without a

price!”



“Does it?” Jack inhales, and the stones around him turn from a dark,
slate gray to a dusky beige. “Do you understand how much power is
beneath your feet?”

One block pales, then another, and another.
“Xaden—”
“I know.” Shadows shoot forward, knocking Jack backward and driving

him across the floor before lifting him from the ground, pinning him in
midair with an X across his torso. “When did you turn?” Xaden asks.

“Wouldn’t you like to know?” Jack fights the binding, but Xaden closes
his fist and the shadows snap even tighter.

“I know you’re going to tell me.” Xaden walks forward. “Because I have
nothing to lose by killing you. So tell me when. Earn yourself a little good
will.”

“Before his challenge against me,” I answer when Jack refuses to. “He
forced power into my body. I just didn’t recognize it for what it is. How?
The wards—”

“Do not block all power like the dragons want you to think they do! We
can still feed from the ground, still channel enough to survive. Enough to
fool them. We might not be at full strength, capable of wielding greater
magic under your protections, but make no mistake: we are already among
you, and now we’re free.” Jack gestures at Baide, his glare alternating
between Xaden and me. “I’ll never know why it’s you he wants. What the
fuck makes you so special?”

“This changes everything,” Tairn urges.
“You have no idea what’s coming for you.” Jack grasps at the shadows,

his feet kicking against only air, but Xaden wraps another band around his
throat, and he stills. “They’re faster than you think they are. He’s coming
with a horde of greens. They all are.”

“Might take them a minute to read the map.” Xaden’s tone shifts to
taunting. “And you’ll be long gone before they arrive.”

“We need to keep him alive for questioning as long as possible.” I shift
my weight carefully to avoid Jack’s attention.

“And what’s your solution for that?” Xaden asks.



We have to cut him off from his power. My gaze swings wide, and I see
Nolon creeping up on the left. He’s kept him under control all these—

“The serum,” I tell Xaden. “He must be why they developed the signet-
blocking serum.”

Motion near Mira makes me glance her way as Dain edges past her.
“They don’t need a map. Not when I showed them the way. While you

were busy smuggling weapons out, we were busy smuggling them in.”
Jack’s motions grow weaker, his breaths more labored, just as Liam’s had
been. “This whole place will be ours in a matter of hours.” He splays his
palms wide and reaches the wall, then shudders as color leaches from the
stone.

My heart jolts. We’re underground.
Xaden pulls his alloy-hilted dagger and strides forward, but Dain gets

there faster.
“Not yet!” Dain grabs hold of Jack’s head and closes his eyes as stone

after stone loses its color.
One. Two. Three. I start to count heartbeats as the desiccation expands.
On the fourth beat, Jack wrenches his hands from the wall and grasps

Dain’s forearms.
“Xaden?” It’s a request, and we both know it, but he doesn’t act.
Dain begins to tremble.
“Xaden!” I shout. “Jack’s draining him!” Power ripples up my

fingertips,
ready to strike.
Only when Dain screams in pain does Xaden take the final step and slam

the hilt of the dagger against Jack’s temple, knocking him unconscious.
I rush to Dain as he stumbles backward, ripping at his flight jacket,

tugging it off and shoving the fabric of his uniform up his arms to reveal a
matching set of gray handprints burned into his skin in the same place
where Jack grabbed him.

“Are you all right?” Gods, the skin is crinkling.
“I think so.” Dain runs his hands down his arms in turn, then flexes his

fingers in appraisal. “Hurts like a fucking ice burn.”



“I’m assuming you know what to do with him? Seeing as you’ve been
doing it since May?” Xaden shoots Nolon a withering look.

Nolon nods, reaching Jack and pouring a vial of serum into his mouth.
Xaden withdraws his shadows, allowing Jack to crumble to the floor, then
leans over and cuts away Jack’s First Wing patch.

“How many riders are here?” Dain asks Nolon, who stares at Jack with a
mix of disbelief and horror. Suddenly, I understand why he was always so
exhausted this year. He wasn’t mending a soul in the figurative sense, but
the literal. “How many riders, Nolon?” Dain snaps.

The mender lifts his tired gaze.
“A hundred and nineteen cadets,” my mother answers, holding her hand

to her bleeding head. “Ten leadership. The rest have all been sent to
midland posts and Samara.” She glances at me. “Plus the ones you
brought.”

“I saw his memories. It’s not enough.” Dain shakes his head.
“Well, it has to be,” Mira counters.
“Gather everyone. They’re faster than dragons,” Dain says to my

mother.
“We have ten hours. Maybe less. Then we’re all dead.”

 
 
 

Ahalf hour later, nearly every seat in Battle Brief is full, and the lines are
clearly drawn between those of us who chose to fight for Poromiel and

those who chose to stay to defend Navarre. The Aretian cadets hold the
right side of the terraced classroom, and for the first time, I don’t pull out
pen and paper to take notes when my mother and Devera take the stage with
Dain.

The nervous energy in the room reminds me of those moments on top of
the turret in Athebyne, where we decided to fight in Resson. Except there’s
no choice to make today; we’re here.



This battle began in the wardstone chamber, and we’ve already lost. We
just happen to still be breathing. Greim relayed to Tairn that Melgren and
his forces won’t arrive until after the approaching horde does, and word
came in about an hour ago that there are other wyvern flying in a second
wave.

As if the first won’t be enough to destroy us.
Glancing over my shoulder, toward the top seats, I see Xaden standing

next to Bodhi with his arms folded across his chest, listening to whatever
Garrick tells him. A painful ache erupts in my heart. How can we only have
hours left?

As if he senses the weight of my gaze, he looks at me, then winks like
we’re not facing certain annihilation. Like we’ve transported ourselves back
to last year and this is just another Battle Brief.

“How are the hands?” Sawyer asks Ridoc as leadership confers about
something onstage.

“Nolon mended them right after he took care of General Sorrengail.”
Ridoc flexes his fingers, showing off unblemished skin. “Dain?” he asks
me.

“Nothing he can do for him.” I shake my head. “Not sure if it’s because
it’s an unmendable wound or because Nolon’s too exhausted from trying to
mend Jack over and over.”

“Fucking Jack,” Rhi mutters.
“Fucking Jack,” I agree.
Devera starts the briefing. Intel reports a thousand wyvern headed this

way. The good news? They didn’t even bother stopping at Samara, which
means casualties are low. The bad news? They don’t seem to be stopping
anywhere, which means we won’t get a delay.

Dain steps forward and clears his throat. “How many of you have
mastered a tracking rune?”

Not a single hand rises among the Aretian cadets, including Rhi’s and
mine. The Basgiath cadets look like Dain is speaking Krovlish up there.

“Right.” Dain shoves his hand into his hair, and his face falls before he
masks it. “That complicates things. Dark wielders know exactly where we



are because, according to Barlowe’s memories, he planted lures all over the
college and up the path to the Vale.”

Guess Dain’s done keeping his signet classified.
My lips part. That’s the energy Chradh picked up on when we arrived,

the same energy that summoned the venin to Resson. Destroying the lures is
our best chance of buying time, or at least throwing off further waves.

“I saw where Barlowe put most of the lure boxes but not all of them,”
Dain continues as footsteps sound in the doorway.

Every head turns as infantry cadets pour in wearing uncertain, anxious
faces. I spot Calvin, the leader of the platoon we were paired with for
maneuvers, gawking at the space, his gaze landing and remaining on the
map of Navarre. He’s wearing the same insignia as the rest of them, leading
me to believe they’ve only sent their quadrant’s leadership.

“The Infantry Quadrant will spend the next few hours trying to hunt
them down for us while also preparing themselves…” Dain’s voice drops
off, and he swallows.

Devera takes mercy on him, stepping forward. “You’ll be working
within your squads tonight. Remember that wyvern are the distraction and
the weapon. You take down one of the venin, and you kill the wyvern
they’ve created. No one takes on a dark wielder alone. That’s how you get
killed. Work together, rely on each other, complement each other’s signets
just like it’s the Squad Battle.”

“Except it’s real battle,” Rhiannon says under her breath.
Where real cadets will really die.
“Remember that venin will mimic your fighting style, so change it up if

you have no choice but hand-to-hand,” Devera continues, the lines of her
mouth tense with worry and perhaps a little dread.

The Basgiath cadets murmur among themselves and shift in their seats.
“I’ll bet you all the daggers we’ve brought with us that they didn’t teach

them how to fight venin.” Sawyer shakes his head, drumming his fingertips
along the desk.

“First-years who haven’t manifested, I expect you packed and ready to
fly should we fall. Healers are stocking the infirmary and are preparing.



Scribes are in the process of evacuating with our most important texts.”
Devera glances at my mother.

Of course they are. I can only wonder which texts they’ll consider
valuable enough to save, and which they’ll conveniently leave behind to
burn.

Mom looks up to my right, where Mira stands with a few of her friends,
then drops her gaze to me. “The assignments given tonight have been
decided with the best interest of Basgiath and the Vale in mind. There are
incredibly powerful signets among you. Gifted riders.” She looks in the first
row, where Emetterio sits. “And even combat masters. But I will not lie to
you—”

“That’s a first,” I mumble, and Rhiannon scoffs softly under her breath.
“—we are outnumbered,” Mom continues. “We are underpowered.
However, the odds may be against us, but the gods are with us. Whether
you left after Threshing or stayed, we are all Navarrian riders, bonded for
the purpose of defending dragonkind in the darkest hour, and this is it.”

The darkest hour on the longest night of the year. My stomach churns as
I fight off the spiraling weight of hopelessness.

“I want you to leave for Aretia,” I tell Andarna. “Get out before they
arrive. Hide where you can and make your way back to Brennan.”

“I will be where I am needed, and it is with you,” she counters.
Every argument I could make to keep her alive doesn’t matter, and we

both know it. Humans do not give dragons orders. If she’s determined to die
with Tairn and me, there’s nothing I can do about it. I press my lips between
my teeth and bite down to ward off the sting that comes to my eyes.

My fingernails bite into my palms as Mom assigns the active riders to
cadet squads, splitting the experience among the group. Garrick is assigned
to First Squad, Flame Section, and Heaton to First Squad, Claw Section,
while Emery is assigned to a squad in First Wing. “Captain Sorrengail.”
Mom looks up at Mira. “You’ll be with Second Squad, Flame Section,
Fourth Wing.”

Our entire squad looks over at Mira, and my eyes widen at the fear that
flares in her eyes.



Anger simmers along my bond with Xaden. “Fuck that.”
“With all due respect, General Sorrengail,” Mira replies, rolling her

shoulders back, “if we’re to truly use our signets to their best advantage,
then I should be paired with you as a last line of defense, since I can now
shield without the wards.”

Mom’s eyebrows rise in surprise, and my gaze jumps between them like
I’m watching a sporting match.

Mira swallows, then locks eyes with me. “And Lieutenant Riorson
should be placed into Second Squad, as his signet has previously proven in
battle to complement Cadet Sorrengail’s.” She looks at me like we’re sitting
across the dining room table from each other and not in the midst of a pre-
battle briefing. “As much as I would love to be her shield, he gives us the
highest probability of keeping our most effective weapon alive.”

A tense second passes as I look to our mother.
“So be it.” Mom nods, then finishes the unit changes.
The heat along the bond recedes, and my posture sags in relief. At least

we’ll be together.
“We get both of you?” Ridoc offers a quick smile. “Maybe we have a

shot of lasting an hour.”
“My money’s on two,” Sawyer chimes in with a nod.
“Both of you shut up before I knock your heads together,” Imogen warns

from a seat behind us. “Anything less than four hours is unacceptable.”
How long did Resson last? One? And there were ten riders and seven

fliers against four venin.
“Now that that’s settled,” Mom says as Kaori steps onto the floor,

throwing up an illusion in the form of a top-down map of Basgiath and the
surrounding area. “We’re dividing Basgiath, the Vale, and surrounding areas
into a grid of sectors.”

Kaori flicks his fingers, and gridlines appear on the map.
“Each squad will be responsible for a sector of airspace while infantry

covers the ground,” Mom continues, nodding to Kaori. Squad insignia
appear on different grids, and it takes me a second to locate ours on the side
of the Vale, paired with a squad from First Wing. No patches are inside the



space, but there are plenty of unbonded dragons no doubt ready to defend
their hatching grounds. “Memorize these grids, because you’re not going to
have time to pull out a map when you’re up there. If it’s in your airspace,
you kill it. If it crosses into another squad’s airspace, you let them kill it.
Avoid leaving your airspace at all costs, or it will turn into a disorganized
melee, and that leaves us with inevitable weak grids. We’ll reassign you as
necessary as casualties are reported.”

Not if they’re reported.
The grid behind the main campus, where the ward chamber is located, is

horrifyingly bare, as though they’ve already surrendered the space.
“This is wrong,” I whisper. “We should be defending the wardstone.”
“The broken one?” Sawyer questions quietly.
“Say it,” Rhiannon urges.
“You have a better chance of living through it,” Ridoc mutters, shifting

in his seat.
I clear my throat. “It’s a mistake to abandon the wardstone.”
My mother levels a disapproving look on me, and the temperature drops

a few degrees. “Why is it that only my daughters speak out of turn?”
“We get it from our mother,” Mira snipes in a dry tone, and that lethal

look pivots to her.
“It’s a mistake,” I push on. “We don’t know what power remains in the

stone, and it was placed in that exact location because it’s over the strongest
natural flow of power, according to Warrick.”

“Hmm.” It’s not my mother looking my way this time. It’s General
Sorrengail. “Your opinion is noted.”

Hope surges in my chest. “So you’ll assign a squad?”
“Absolutely not. Your opinion, as noted as it is, is wrong.” She dismisses

me without another word, without the reasoning we would have been given
had this been a Battle Brief, leaving me half my original size, shrinking in
my chair.

A wave of warmth floods the bond, but it doesn’t dim the chill from her
rejection.



“You have your orders for the morning,” Mom says. “Riders, find the
nearest bed and sleep for as many hours as you can. Most of you who left
Basgiath will find your rooms have not been commandeered, and most still
contain your bedding. We need you rested to be effective.” She looks over
the briefing room like it might be the last time she sees us. “Every minute
we hold out gives us a shot at reinforcements making it back. Every second
counts. Make no mistake,

we will hold out as long as possible.”
I glance up at the clock. It’s not even eight yet, which means I can keep

my mantra for the next few hours. I will not die today.
I can’t say the same about tomorrow.
 
 
 

The stars still wink in the night sky as Xaden and I dress in the relative
silence of my room. Turns out the remaining cadets had left all but the

wingleaders’ quarters untouched, as if we’d see the error of our ways and
return.

What few hours of sleep we’d gotten had been sporadic at best, leaving
me at less than full strength and a little dizzy, but at least I wasn’t plagued
with nightmares.

Or maybe my imagination really is that overactive.
Xaden kisses a path down my spine, his lips brushing every inch of skin

as he laces me into my armor over the cross-body wrap on my left shoulder
that stabilizes the aching joint. My eyes slide shut when he reaches my
lower back, and the desire he’d more than sated last night flares anew,
flushing my skin. A few simple kisses are all it ever takes, and my body is
instantly attuned to his.

“Keep doing that, and you’ll be taking this right off,” I warn him,
glancing down over my shoulder.

“Was that a threat or a promise?” His eyes darken as he stands and ties
me in, tucking the laces so they don’t come loose. “Because I have no



problem spending our last quiet minutes this morning tangled up in you.”
He slides his hand over the curve of my hip as he moves to face me, trailing
his fingers along the waistband of my flight leathers, then dipping them
between the buttons and my stomach.

We can’t do this, can’t hide away and pretend war isn’t coming for us.
Can’t ignore that more than a dozen lures haven’t been destroyed—or even
found—when just one was enough to lead the venin to Resson, and we’ve
only found half of what Jack left around campus. Can’t deny that the last
reports from the few riders brave enough to stay at the midland forts along
the route from Samara relayed that attack is imminent in the next couple of
hours. But gods do I want to.

“We can’t.” Regret saturates the words, and yet I can’t stop myself from
winding my arms around his neck. “No matter how much I would rather
lock the door and let the rest of the world burn around us.”

“We can.” He lifts a hand to the back of my neck and tugs me closer,
until our bodies meet from thigh to breast. “Say the word, and we’ll fly.”

I stare up into his eyes, marking each fleck of gold just in case I won’t
get another chance to. “You could never live with yourself if we abandoned
our friends.”

“Maybe.” His brow knits for less than a second, so quick I almost miss it
as he leans into my space. “But I know I can’t live without you, so trust me
when I say there’s a very real, very loud part of me screaming to carry you
out of here and fly for Aretia.”

I know the feeling all too well, so before I dare to give it voice, I rise up
on my toes and kiss him. At the first touch of our mouths, heat ignites
between us, and he grabs ahold of my ass, lifting me. I sense that we’re
moving, turning as I part my lips for his tongue and throw all logical
thought out the door.

My ass hits the desk and I hold tighter, kiss him harder as he slants his
mouth over mine again and again, taking everything I offer and giving it
right back. This isn’t the slow exploration we’d shared last night, lingering
on every touch, knowing it might be the last time. It’s frantic and wild, hot
and desperate.



My hand spears into his hair, holding him closer, like I still have
Andarna’s ability to stop time, like I can hold us in this moment if I just
keep kissing him.

He groans into my mouth and his fingers work the buttons on my pants
at the same moment I reach for his.

“We’ll be quick,” I promise between soul-consuming kisses, flicking
open the first button.

“Quick,” he repeats, sliding a hand down my stomach and into my pants,
“isn’t usually what you beg me for.” His fingers brush—

Someone knocks.
We both freeze, panting hard against each other’s mouths.
No. No. No.
“Don’t stop.” If this minute is all we have left, then I want it. Gods, if he

would just move his hand a fraction of an inch lower…
His eyes search mine, and then he takes my mouth like the outcome of

this kiss will decide the battle we’re facing.
“I know you’re in there!” Rhiannon barks through the door, and the

knock changes to a pound. “Stop ignoring me before this becomes the most
awkward situation known to Navarre.”

“Five minutes,” I beg as Xaden’s mouth slides down my neck.
“Now,” a deep, familiar voice demands, and Xaden puts a step between

us, muttering a curse under his breath.
There’s no way. Is there? But just in case there is, my hands fall from

Xaden’s pants and quickly redo the button on mine before I hop off the desk
and rush to the door, sparing a second to check that Xaden’s clothes are in
place, too.

“Disengage your body parts or whatever you’re doing—”
I unlock my door with a flick of my hand and yank it open to find not

only every second- and third-year flier in our squad but a few of our first-
years, including Sloane.

And Brennan.
Without thought for regulation or decorum, I fling myself into his arms,

and he catches me, pulling me tight against his chest. “You came.”



“I left you and Mira here to fight this on your own once before, and I’ll
never do it again. I knew I’d fucked up as soon as you left, but gryphons
don’t fly as quickly as dragons.” He squeezes harder for a second, then lets
me down. “Tell me where I can be of use.”

“Are those fliers?” Every head turns down the hall as my mother
approaches with two of her aides, but her steps falter when her gaze shifts
toward my brother. “Brennan?”

“I’m not here for you.” He dismisses her without another word in her
direction. “Matthias is going to send the fliers to hunt the lures. They’re
faster on the ground and better with runes, anyway.”

“We are,” Cat agrees with a casual shrug, assessing the hallway like
she’s searching for structural weaknesses. Which she probably is. “And we
don’t abandon our drifts. We’ll fight.”

I might not like her, but damn do I respect her. Finding those lures will
give us precious time to—

I grab onto Brennan’s arms, and a spark of hope lights within my chest.
“Have you ever encountered something you can’t mend?”

“Magic,” he answers. “I can’t mend a relic or anything. Probably not a
rune, either.”

If he can do it, we’ll just have to hold on long enough for Codagh to
arrive. “What about a wardstone?”

Brennan’s eyebrows shoot up, and I glance past him to Rhiannon. “We
have to guard the chamber, at least let him try.”

Rhi nods, then turns to my mother, who’s still staring at Brennan like
he’s a hallucination. “General Sorrengail, Second Squad, Flame Section,
Fourth Wing officially requests permission to guard the airspace above the
wardstone chamber.”

Mom doesn’t take her eyes off Brennan. “Granted.”

OceanofPDF.com



Though there is some debate, it is greatly believed that turning venin
heightens one of the dark wielder’s senses. It is this scholar’s belief that
the one responsible for the death of King Grethwild developed keener
eyesight. For not even the best of His Majesty’s royal fliers could see
through the darkness the venin hid within to slay our beloved king.

—MAJOR EDVARD TILLER’S UNACCREDITED STUDY OF THE VENIN
PROPERTY OF THE LIBRARY OF CORDYN



CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE

D awn is still an hour away as the riders in our squad stand on the
ridgeline above the main campus of Basgiath, our dragons lined up

behind us. The horizon holds a vague outline, the promise of light, but it
winks in and out of my vision as the skyline shifts, the wavering shape on
constant approach growing larger with every minute.

Hundreds of feet below, in front of the gates of Basgiath, my mother
waits upon Aimsir, with her personal squad, including Mira and Teine,
slightly behind her. She’s in front of us all, her three children and the place
she’s sacrificed us—and her very soul—for.

“They’re coming,” Tairn tells me, his posture stiff while the others shift
their weight or dig their talons into the snow-covered decomposed granite
of the mountainside.

Squads from Third and Fourth Wings stand in formation up and down
the mountains around us, but both First and Second Wings—half our forces,
now that we’re back with the Basgiath cadets—have been sent to the edge
of the Vale. while our squad guards the airspace above the hundred yards
between the back of main campus and the steep ridgeline we stand on,
including the very well-hidden entrance to the ward chamber hundreds of
feet below, where Brennan is working. Sloane, Aaric, and the other first-



years are with him under the guise of fetching whatever he needs, but Rhi
ordered them to Brennan’s side mostly to keep them safe.

“I know.” I glance over my shoulder at where Andarna nips at her
harness between Tairn and Sgaeyl. She showed up an hour ago and refused
to leave.

“Is this how it felt in Resson?” Rhiannon asks from my right, her hands
nervously flitting over her sheaths and scabbard.

“How are you feeling?” I ask.
“So scared I’m pretty sure either my heart’s going to give out or I’m

about to shit myself,” Ridoc answers from her other side.
“I was going to say horrifyingly scared, but sure, that works, too.”

Rhiannon nods.
“Yes. That’s exactly how it felt.” I do the customary checks again, not

that I’d have time to get back to my room if I left anything. Xaden retrieved
the dagger I’d put in Jack’s shoulder, which gives me a full twelve, plus two
alloy-hilted ones and the handheld crossbow strapped at my right thigh. I’m
fully armed.

Thanks to the daggers we brought with us and the forge here at Basgiath,
every cadet is armed.

“Does it ever get easier? Going into battle?” Sawyer asks beside Ridoc,
peering down at the college. Infantry has been deployed into every
courtyard, every hallway, and every entrance, the last line of a very fragile
defense.

“No,” Xaden answers from my left. “You just get better at hiding it.
Everyone clear on the plan?”

“Riders answer to Rhi, fliers answer to Bragen,” Quinn recites to our
squad from down the line to the left. “When they arrive.”

The fliers are still hunting down the boxes. Without the lures, maybe the
wyvern would have waited until daylight. Maybe it would have taken them
longer to get a feel for where the hatching grounds are. Maybe destroying
the lures will deter the next horde that inevitably follows. But a thousand
maybes won’t change what we’re facing now.



“We stay in our sector,” Imogen says from Quinn’s side, braiding the
longer pink strands of her hair to keep it out of her eyes. “Should a wyvern
leave our airspace, we let it become another squad’s responsibility, so that
we don’t accidentally leave our sector unguarded. We maintain our airspace
at all costs.”

“Rhiannon is on dagger duty,” Ridoc says, rubbing his hands together
even though it’s uncharacteristically warm this morning. I can’t even see
my breath. “She’ll fetch and distribute should any venin fall from their
wyvern and take our dagger with them.”

“Any reason you can’t just drag them all down with all that shadow
power?” Sawyer glances Xaden’s way like there’s any possible chance he
hasn’t already considered that, the look mirrored by Rhi and Ridoc.

“Other than the reason that I almost burned out holding forty of them
back in a narrow space like a valley, and there are what looks to be ten
times that amount on an open plain?” Xaden counters, arching his scarred
brow.

“Right. That.” Sawyer nods to himself.
“Getting caught up in the wyvern is a mistake,” I warn them as the

downslope breeze becomes noticeable wind, but it, too, lacks the icy chill of
December. “Yes, they’ll try to kill us, but don’t let them distract you from
their creator. Kill the venin who created them, and those wyvern will fall. In
our experience, they stick close to their creations during a battle.”

“You know your pairs?” Rhi asks, glancing down the line.
Everyone nods. Our goal is always two against one in our favor.
“Mount up,” Rhiannon orders.
I turn quickly and gather her into a hug, and she grabs for Sawyer and

Ridoc, yanking them in, too. “Don’t freeze,” I tell them. “No matter what
happens, just keep moving. And stay in the air. They can kill you if they
drain the ground you’re standing on. No one dies today.”

“No one dies today,” Ridoc repeats, and Sawyer nods as we break apart.
“Did you see Jesinia?” Rhi asks Sawyer.
My eyebrows rise. “She’s here?”



“Flew in with Maren,” Sawyer says, his head bobbing. “Guess gryphons
are a little more easygoing in that department than dragons. She’s in the
Archives, comparing Warrick’s journal to Lyra’s to see if she can figure out
why the wards in Aretia are faulty. Once you said you were scared the
wards would fall here, she started worrying we wouldn’t be able to get them
back up without knowing what went wrong in Aretia. Turns out she’s
right.”

“She shouldn’t be at Basgiath.” I shake my head, and my heart races to a
gallop. “She’s completely defenseless down there.”

“She was worried she’d figure out the difference between the journals
and be too far away to help. And if Brennan mends that stone, she’s our
only chance at raising the wards here successfully,” Sawyer replies, backing
away to follow Ridoc to their dragons.

“She has just as much right to risk her life as we do,” Rhi reminds me
over her shoulder, heading toward Feirge. “Now, warm up those wielding
hands or do whatever it is you need to do to set this place on fire.”

I turn to Andarna while Xaden finishes talking to Quinn and Imogen.
“Promise me you’ll stay hidden.”

“I can hide.” She backs up a step, and I blink… It’s almost as if she’s
faded straight into the darkness.

“Benefit of being a black dragon,” Tairn chuffs. “We’re born for the
night.”

I follow Andarna and scratch the scales between her nostrils when she
lowers her head. “Stay put. Marbh is below you, keeping watch over
Brennan. If the tide of the battle turns, he’ll watch after you, but you have
to go. Promise me.”

“I will stand. I will keep watch. But I will not leave you this time.” She
huffs a breath that scents lightly of sulfur, and my heart sinks. She’s seen
too much for someone her age.

“It was easier when you were a juvenile.” I give her one last scratch.
Every dragon in our squad knows to take care of her if Tairn and I fall. But
only she can make the choice to let go.

“I didn’t listen then, either.”



“Good point.”
“It’s almost time,” Tairn announces, and my heartbeat accelerates as I

turn toward the rising sun, a strip of orange illuminating not only the
horizon but the massive cloud of wyvern that’s nearly here.

Another gust of warm wind blows, and the stars wink out above us as
dark clouds billow from over the mountains, charging the air with an energy
that calls to my own.

Xaden meets me between Tairn and Sgaeyl, a scenario that reminds me
entirely too much of Resson. He reaches for me, his warm hand cupping the
back of my neck. “I love you. The world does not exist for me beyond
you.” Leaning down, he rests his forehead against mine. “I couldn’t tell you
that the last time we flew into a fight, and I should have.”

“I love you, too.” I grasp his waist and force a smile. “Do me a favor
and don’t die. I don’t want to live without you.” There are so many of them
and so few of us.

“We don’t die today.”
“If only we all felt that kind of certainty,” I try to joke.
“You keep your focus on the enemy and your life.” He kisses me hard

and quick. “Even Malek himself couldn’t keep me from you.”
I pull back at the first splatter on my head.
“Rain?” Xaden looks up. “In December?”
Warmth. Rain. The charge in the air.
“It’s my mother.” A slow smile spreads across my face. “It’s her way of

imbuing her favorite weapon.” Me.
“Remind me to thank her afterward.” He pulls me into another quick

kiss, then turns away without another word, mounting Sgaeyl at a run.
I glance up at the sky and breathe deeply to carry the pressure my

mother has just put on me. The storm will help me, but if the rain increases,
it will cost us the help of the gryphons. They can’t fly in anything much
heavier than a drizzle.

“They’ll guard the ground and ferry the wounded,” Tairn says as he
lowers his shoulder. I walk up his foreleg, rain splattering against his scales.
Settling into the saddle, I buckle the strap across my thighs and check to be



sure the quiver Maren gave me is securely fastened to the left side of the
saddle, within easy reach. I don’t want to risk my shoulder slipping out by
strapping it to my back. Then I grab the conduit from my pocket and slip
the new steel bracelet attached to the top of it over my wrist.

Only then, when I’m certain I’m as prepared as I can be, when power
flows through my veins with a heat that doesn’t quite burn, do I look
forward to the approaching enemy.

My heartbeat stutters.
Gods, they’re everywhere, their horde larger than any riot I’ve ever seen.
Flying at multiple altitudes—most equal with our position—the sea of

gray wings, straining necks, and gaping jaws devours the sunrise.
We’ve grossly underestimated their numbers, and knowing there’s

another wave following this? My throat tightens as I glance down the line
of my squad. There’s no chance all of us are getting out of this alive…if any
of us do.

But we just have to hold out long enough for Brennan to mend the
wardstone. If we can raise the wards, even if Jesinia doesn’t find what we
missed in Aretia, we can stun the wyvern long enough to kill them.

Within a few breaths, the wyvern are close enough that I can make out
which of them bears a rider, and when I reach two dozen in the count, I stop
for the sake of my own sanity. Terror slides up my spine, and I breathe
deeply to force it back down. I’m no good to Tairn and Andarna—to anyone
in my squad—if I give in to panic, and I’ll be even worse, a liability, if I
don’t keep fully in control.

They’ll be within range in only minutes.
“Maybe we should have ridden out. Engaged them over the plains.” I

can’t help but second-guess our plan as fear tightens my chest and speeds
my heart rate.

“There are too many of them. They could have flanked and surrounded
us easily. Here, we know every canyon, every peak, and they cannot
circumvent us,” Tairn answers.

They’ll have to go through us.



“They’re spreading out,” Tairn says, his head swiveling. “Their
formation indicates they’ll engage all our forces instead of targeting the
Vale as we’d planned for.”

My stomach plummets. We’ve allocated ourselves poorly. “Then we’ll
just have to be sure they never reach the Vale, won’t we?”

“You’ll only have a clear firing field for a matter of seconds,” Tairn
reminds me.

“I know.” Once the dragons engage, I’m just as likely to strike one of
our own as I am a wyvern. This first strike counts for everything. I lift my
hands and open the Archives door to a steady but manageable flow of
power, savoring the quick sizzle along my skin that comes with the rush of
energy.

“Tell Aimsir I need Mom to move that cloud—”
“Yes,” Tairn says, following my stream of thoughts to its conclusion

before I even voice them.
I let the conduit rest against my forearm and concentrate on the cloud

above us, blinking the steady fall of rain from my eyes.
The dragons beside us begin to shift their weight, their shoulders rolling

in preparation to launch, but Tairn remains as still as the mountain we stand
on. I spare a single glance over my shoulder for Andarna, but— “Where are
you?” The battle hasn’t even started yet and she’s already left her position.

“Hiding like I promised.” She peeks out from a cluster of boulders.
“Get ready,” Tairn orders as the clouds roll overhead at a supernatural

speed, rushing toward the enemy.
I focus on the horde. Without an outlet, power builds within me, so hot I

start to think I might breathe fire, and I let it gather, let it burn, let it threaten
to consume me.

“Violet…” Xaden says.
“Not yet,” I answer. They’ll be on us in seconds, but it has to be the

right second. Sweat beads on my forehead.
“Violet!”
My mother’s storm overtakes the wyvern at the highest altitude, and I

release the torrent of scalding power, aiming it skyward.



Lightning cracks, jolting upward from the very ground of the ridge
beneath ours in a blast of light so powerful it stings my eyes as it strikes
into the cloud.

I drop my arms as the bodies fall. “Maybe this will be easier than—”
Never mind. The wyvern’s tactics adjust within seconds, just like the riders
who control them, and they fly under the cloud cover, swerving to dodge
plummeting carcasses of their horde.

“Holy shit!” Ridoc shouts as wyvern crash into the four roads that lead
to Basgiath, their bodies leaving deep furrows in the ground.

That won’t work again, so I slide the orb into my palm and summon
power once more, drawing a faster, more concentrated stream as I target the
nearest rider-bearing wyvern.

Fire whips through me as I wield, missing that wyvern but hitting
another. Shit.

“Focus on the next strike, not the last,” Tairn says.
“Hold!” Xaden shouts, keeping the field clear long enough for me to fire

off another strike.
I lift my hands again, giving Tairn’s power dominion over my bones and

muscles, then draw another strike to wield. Energy tears through me, and
instead of flaring my palms, I concentrate on the intent of my fingers just
like Felix taught me, drawing them downward with the strike, directing it to
the target as though I am the composer and the lightning is my orchestra.

It strikes true, the wyvern and rider falling in separate, lifeless descents.
A handful of other wyvern fall from the sky with the death of that dark
wielder, but there’s no time for relief or joy at the accomplishment when
there are countless more.

And they’re here.
My mother’s squad launches to attack the first wave that intrudes upon

their assigned sector. Aimsir rips the throat from one wyvern before I lose
sight of my mother and Mira as the horde passes through their sector and
into the next.

“Focus on your sector,” Tairn orders, and I rip my gaze from the area
I’d last seen my family.



Second by second, each of the squads around and below us launch to
defend their sectors, and when the first menacing gray snout crosses our
line—the end of Basgiath’s structures and the beginning of the mountain—I
brace.

Tairn rears back, then hurtles forward, beating his wings as he runs for
the edge of the ridgeline, then flying off it. I yank my goggles over my eyes
at the first sting of wind, then quickly shove them back up when rain makes
the glass impossible to see through.

“That one’s ours,” Tarin tells me, flying directly for the fastest of the
horde to enter our airspace.

Quinn and Imogen bank left, heading toward other targets, and I see the
rest of the squad in my peripherals, but I keep my focus on the wyvern
Tairn has claimed as we fly toward a head-on collision.

I grasp the conduit with one hand and lift my other as the space between
us narrows to heartbeats. There’s no need to reach for power; it’s already
there, both racing through my veins and charging the sky overhead.

Energy sizzles at the ends of my fingertips, and just as I aim to wield,
the riderless wyvern drops his jaw and breathes out a stream of green fire.
My heart lurches into my throat as the flames barrel toward us, and Tairn
rolls left, narrowly missing the blaze.

I throw my weight right to keep level as we pass the wyvern, keeping
my focus on the creature, and then strike, drawing lightning from the cloud
above. It hits the wyvern just above the tail—I didn’t calculate my strike
closely enough to account for speed, but the charge is more than enough to
drop it.

“Below,” Tairn growls, plunging into a dive.
I blink furiously into the wind, noting three wyvern trying to get through

at a lower altitude. “I can’t strike here. I chance hitting someone above if I
draw from the sky, they’re too far to pull from myself, and if I miss from the
ground up—”

“Hold on.”
I throw both hands on the pommel and do just that, spotting the rider on

the center wyvern as we drop hundreds of feet in seconds, power a constant



buzz in my ears.
Tairn strikes from above, flying directly into the wyvern on the left, and

the impact whips my body forward as he sinks his teeth into the neck of the
beast, dragging it down under us as we continue to fall.

The wyvern screeches, and I reach for one of my alloy-hilted blades,
pivoting in my seat to watch Tairn’s back and squinting into the rain as two
massive shapes give chase. “They’re coming.”

A sickening crack sounds beneath us, and Tairn releases the wyvern, its
neck broken as it falls the last hundred feet to the terrain below, somewhere
behind the administration building.

Banking right, Tairn begins to climb with hard beats of his wings, but
there’s no way we’ll have the high ground in time. They’re less than fifty
feet away, and at the angle of the remaining two wyvern’s descent, we have
seconds before Tairn becomes a chew toy. I check beneath us—we’re clear
—then grasp onto the conduit and take a steadying breath to calm the racing
beat of my heart and the wild rush of adrenaline in my veins. Control. I
need complete control.

There’s only time for one strike. I release power, drawing it upward with
my blade, and lightning streaks into the sky, hitting the closest wyvern in
the chest.

“Yes!” I shout as the creature tumbles from the sky, but my joy is short-
lived as its counterpart, complete with dark wielder, surges forward,
opening its jaws to reveal rotten teeth and a green glow in its throat.
“Tairn!”

The warning is barely past my lips when a band of shadow winds around
the wyvern’s throat and jerks it backward like a rabid dog at the end of a
leash, its teeth missing the tip of Tairn’s wing by mere feet as we continue
to fly upward.

“Sgaeyl has claimed that one. We’ll have to find our own,” he tells me,
climbing faster than ever into the driving rain.

I use precious seconds to scan our surroundings. Every sector is
overwhelmed, ours included. Only flashes of color appear through the
swarm of gray as we soar toward the conflict above us, but the majority of



the wyvern still hover in the distance, held back on the edge of the
thunderstorm.

“They only sent the first wave,” Tairn explains. “Probably to probe for
weaknesses.”

Falling toward us, Aotrom has his claws raked into the belly of a
wyvern, and I catch a glimpse of Ridoc as they spiral past, Imogen and her
Orange Daggertail, Glane, on their heels.

“Ridoc!” I shout at Tairn.
“Focus on your mission or the plan falls apart. Trust the others to do

theirs.” He flies straight through the mayhem of gray, bursting into the
airspace above it before he levels out.

He’s right, we have a job to do, but trusting my friends to do their part
feels a lot like ignoring them, too. Rain soaks my scalp and runs off my
leathers as I survey the battlefield beneath us, forcing my breath in through
my nose and out through my mouth to lower my heart rate.

This isn’t the melee of Resson. This is a coordinated defense, and I need
to focus so I can do my part.

Feirge is locked in close combat with a greenfire—a blast of blue fire
erupts from its mouth—make that bluefire wyvern, and my heart clenches
when Rhi narrowly misses the fire stream by leaping from Feirge’s back to
Cruth’s. Quinn grabs hold of her forearm as the Green Scorpiontail stabs
hard with her tail, and I rip my gaze away when I realize they have it under
control and there’s nothing I can do.

But Sawyer is outmatched fifty feet below as Sliseag goes head-to-head
with three wyvern, one of whom bears a rider. I grip the conduit, then flood
my body with another wave of power and lift my hand.

“Don’t miss,” Tairn warns.
I focus on the wyvern farthest from Sliseag just in case, then wield,

drawing the power to my target with full focus and intention. Energy rips
through me, and lightning strikes from the cloud above, white-hot and fatal
to the wyvern below.

The rider looks up and locks eyes with me for a heartbeat before the pair
dives, falling out of the battle. My stomach sours. There’s only one reason



to go to ground. To feed.
“Xaden—”
“On it,” he assures me, and when Aotrom and Glane arrive to help

Sawyer and Sliseag, I turn my attention to the other sectors.
“Three,” Tairn notes, using the hands of the clock like we’d discussed,

and I look right, where wyvern overrun a squad in Third Wing. The body of
a dragon lies beneath them on the mountainside, but I look away before I
take note of who they’ve lost.

If I focus on tomorrow’s death roll, I’ll be on it.
“Hold as steady as you can.” I throw open the floodgates of his power

as he banks right, flying toward their sector but not into it, and I wield, heat
prickling my skin as I take down one wyvern.

Then I aim again for another.
And another.
Again and again, I wield in targeted, precise strikes for the sectors

around us, hitting two-thirds of my targets but never striking a dragon,
which I count as the ultimate win. Rain sizzles as it hits my skin, but I don’t
dare remove my flight jacket when my daggers are strapped to it, so I put
the heat, the pain, into my mental box and slam the lid shut on it, forcing
my mind to ignore the agonizing burn and wield again.

“Twelve.”
I face forward and find the target, missing twice before I hit it. There are

no venin left in our sector, but my hand trembles on the conduit as Tairn
locates another wyvern, another threat, and I pull lightning from the sky so
quickly that I no longer feel like I direct the storm.

I am the storm.
“You tire,” Tairn warns.
Fuck exhaustion. “People are dying.” A quick glance over the sunrise-

lit battlefield reveals more and more spots of color among the gray
carcasses littered on the ground, but I only stop quickly enough to note my
squad is still fighting, handling each wyvern that crosses into our sector
with teamwork and efficiency.



“Nine,” Tairn rumbles but doesn’t argue with me as he rolls left,
keeping us above the battle, as I wield for the next squad, taking only the
targets I’m certain of hitting without endangering our own riders.

Beneath me, shadows streak into other sectors as Xaden does the same.
Gods, the heat is going to cook me alive. Even the wind and rain aren’t

enough to cool the inferno growing inside my chest. I slip the conduit’s
bracelet from my wrist, then wedge it between my thighs long enough to
strip my flight jacket off and slide it under the strap of my saddle, leaving
me six daggers short, but they’re in easy reach and the other two are the
only ones that matter any—

“Twelve!” Tairn shouts, and I whip my head toward the plains to see
another wave of wyvern soaring over my mother’s sector, dangerously close
to the clouds but not in them, leaving me unable to strike, given who’s
under them.

My heart stutters as they pass my mother without stopping, then barrel
through the next without engaging.

Flying on top of the battle has given me the needed vantage point to
wield, but it’s also made us an undeniable target, and they’re coming for us.
I shove my hand through the strap of the bracelet so I don’t lose the conduit.
“We should lead them away—”

“We will follow the plan.” Tairn dives, and my weight lifts against the
straps of the saddle as we plunge toward my squad. The Second Squad
dragons turn their heads toward the oncoming threat, all of us rising or
falling into formation. “Prepare.”

There are three venin on this assassination mission, their blue tunics
standing out in stark contrast to the gray, bleary-eyed wyvern they ride.
We’ve got ten seconds. Maybe.

One. Ridoc waves his hands at my right, holding a dagger that’s been
snapped in two. Shit, if his only remaining blade is broken—I blink when
the pieces disappear. He wasn’t waving at me.

Two. Snapping my head to the left, I find the pieces already in
Rhiannon’s hands as Feirge dives to where Sliseag hovers beneath.

Three. Feirge flies alongside Sliseag, and Rhiannon tosses the pieces.



Four. To Sawyer’s credit, he catches them.
Five. Sgaeyl rises to take Feirge’s place, and I lock eyes with Xaden

only long enough to see that he’s unharmed. Blood both drips from Sgaeyl’s
mouth and runs in rain-driven rivulets down the side of Xaden’s face, but I
instinctively know it’s not his and focus on the imminent threat.

Six. Breathe. I have to breathe through the firestorm in my chest or I’ll
burn out. It’s not that I don’t recognize the signs: the trembling, the heat, the
fatigue. It’s just that they don’t matter. Everyone I love is on this field.

Seven. They’re almost on us, and I look down at the ward chamber,
where Marbh stands watch with a Blue Clubtail I don’t recognize and a
vague shape I hope is Andarna, and when a flash of sunlight reflects on the
dagger in Sawyer’s hand, it disappears again, Feirge already on the move.

Eight. “Dajalair is frustrated by the unflyable conditions,” Tairn relays
as Feirge rises alongside Aotrom.

Nine. “Tell them they’re more efficient guarding the courtyard and
incoming wounded than struggling with waterlogged wings,” I note.
“They’d be a liability up here right now, not an asset.”

The dagger changes hands, and Ridoc is once again armed.
I grin at how seamlessly we work as a team, then face the coming tidal

wave.
Ten. “You’re beginning to think—” Tairn starts.
“Like Brennan?” I suggest as the wyvern enter our airspace.
“Like Tairn,” Sgaeyl answers, surging toward the enemy, her neck

outstretched as shadows streak from under her, grasping a wyvern at the
jugular and dragging it with them as Sgaeyl drops away from formation.

Tairn lunges toward another, throwing me back into the saddle as he
takes the wyvern head-on. I jolt forward upon impact, blood spraying as
Tairn’s jaw locks on the throat of the wyvern.

Its screech rattles my brain as their claws grapple between them, forcing
us into a vertical position that’s nearly impossible to maintain, even with
Tairn’s wings beating this hard.

A flash of blue is all the warning I need to palm an alloy-hilted dagger
and drop the conduit against my forearm to reach for my buckle, preparing



to release it. I’ve seen this play before. I know this role. And this time I’m
not coming away with a stab wound.

“Can you level out?” My heart jolts as the dark wielder jumps from the
wyvern’s neck to Tairn’s, ignoring the menacing roar that vibrates Tairn’s
scales as he holds the wyvern in a death grip.

“Stay in your saddle!” he demands but rolls us horizontal.
The venin grabs a horn and holds on, his eerie, red-rimmed eyes never

leaving mine during the maneuver or the seconds after when we fall into a
rapid descent, the wyvern’s weight pulling us downward. No spiderwebbed
veins—he’s just an asim, and I can handle him.

“You’re the one he wants,” the dark wielder announces, shoving his wet,
stringy blond hair out of his eyes and striding down Tairn’s neck as I yank
at the belt with my left hand, but the buckle doesn’t give.

He looks so…young. But so did Jack.
Tairn releases the wyvern, his shoulders bunching to push off the dying

creature, but it snaps at his neck, and Tairn retaliates with a stronger bite,
bleeding the life out of it as we fall and fall and fall.

“Your Sage?” I wrench on the leather, but the belt is stuck, and so am I.
Fuck.
I flip the dagger to its tip, catching the water-slick blade between my

thumb and forefinger, and flick my wrist, firing the dagger toward him
when he reaches the spikes between Tairn’s shoulders.

He catches the blade, and pure panic floods my bloodstream as I pull my
spare.

“You’ll meet them all soon enough,” he promises, raising my own blade
as he marches toward me.

A green blur comes at us from the right, and we both look as Rhiannon
jumps from Feirge to Tairn, landing in front of my saddle in a crouch.

OceanofPDF.com



The easiest way to defeat a dragon is to kill its rider. Though the
creature will most likely survive the blow, it will be stunned long

enough to be felled.

—CHAPTER THREE: THE TACTICAL GUIDE TO DEFEATING DRAGONS BY
COLONEL ELIJAH JOBEN



CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO

No. No. No. This is too familiar.
Losing Liam was… I can’t lose Rhi. I just can’t.

She surges forward as the wyvern screams, our rate of descent so fast
that blood appears to fall upward. I yank on my belt again, but the leather is
swollen with rain, wedged tight, and I watch, my heart launching into my
throat, as she engages the dark wielder in a series of moves that would have
had me on the mat.

He knocks her blade loose with a backhand to her wrist, and it flies from
her hand as he kicks her. She skids backward along Tairn’s rain-slick scales,
and I reach for her, wrapping my left arm around her waist to steady her and
pressing my dagger into her palm with my right hand.

She looks over her shoulder and nods at me, gaining her feet when he’s
almost on us. I force myself to look away as their blades clash and
mountains rise, alerting me to how low our altitude is as I unstrap the
crossbow at my thigh, then quickly open the quiver strapped at my left and
slip the arrow into the flight groove. At this range, the wind and rain
shouldn’t matter.

“I need you to roll this fucker off you in three—” I start. “Rhi!” I shout
out loud, taking aim. “Two.”



She glances back, then throws her body flat between Tairn’s shoulders,
and I reach forward, grasping her ankle and pulling the lever without
hesitation. “One!”

The arrow hits true, striking the venin in the sternum as Tairn banks hard
right.

The dark wielder falls, but the sound of an explosion comes from behind
us as I grip Rhi’s ankle, ignoring the screaming protest of my shoulder as
the wrap fights to keep the joint in place.

Rhi holds fast to Tairn’s spikes, and he levels to horizontal quickly,
pumping his wings to climb as she works backward toward me, then turns,
wrapping her arms around me in a tight hug.

I hold on to her, still clutching the crossbow, and breathe deeply as
Feirge mirrors Tairn’s wingbeats just beneath us, keeping pace. She’s all
right. They’re both all right.

This isn’t Resson, and I didn’t just lose my best friend.
“You reckless, irresponsible—” I yell.
“You’re welcome!” she shouts, rain streaming down her face when she

pulls away and hands back my blade. “Fix your saddle. I’ll retrieve the
dagger from the ground.” She stands, then gives me a flash of a smile
before jumping from Tairn’s shoulder.

I track her fall, breathing a sigh of relief when she lands effortlessly on
Feirge.

“My saddle is stuck!” I tell Tairn as we climb back to the battle.
“Good. Maybe you’ll stay in it.”
Sunlight glints off Quinn’s labrys as she swings the double-sided battle-

ax from Cruth’s back into the shoulder joint of a wyvern trying its best to
sink its teeth into Glane.

“Melgren is ten minutes out, but only two of his aides could keep up,
and there’s a general consensus that most of the dark wielders are holding
back for a second wave.” Tairn passes Cruth, and I look up into a sea of
gray and barely suppress the urge to vomit. There have to be at least six
riderless wyvern up there. How long can we keep this up? Pivoting in my



saddle, I note Xaden beneath us on Sgaeyl, dragging wyvern by the throat
into the side of the mountain one by one at speed as they dive toward them.

“Sgaeyl’s outnumbered!”
“If she wants help, she’ll ask for—”
A pain-filled roar joins the cacophony above, and my chest tightens.

“Andarna?” I reach out, my gaze sweeping the blurred mountainside as we
fly upward.

“I’m quite annoyingly safe and hidden,” she responds.
“Aotrom!” Tairn bellows, and my stomach sinks.
Ridoc.
Tairn sweeps right, avoiding the plummeting body of a wyvern, but

there’s another above us with its teeth locked onto Aotrom’s hindquarters,
and three more closing in for the kill.

Sawyer and Sliseag fly from the opposite side of our sector, tracking to
intercept at the same time, but everyone else is beneath us. I sheathe my
dagger at my hip, then load the crossbow and strap that at my thigh as we
surge upward.

Tairn’s roar shakes his entire body as we approach, and I hold on to the
pommel, bracing for the jarring collision, but he flies past as Sawyer and
Sliseag reach the fray, then swings his massive tail into the trio of
approaching wyvern.

I pivot as much as the saddle will let me at the crunching sound of bone
shattering. A wyvern falls from the fight, half its head bashed in. One down.
Three to go.

Tairn pulls the steepest turn I’ve ever experienced on his back, and my
vision dims at the edge as he brings us nearly vertical before tipping his
wing left and falling into a dive. I blink furiously into the wind and rain as
we fly to Aotrom and Ridoc’s aid.

Ridoc’s doing all he can from Aotrom’s back to dislodge the wyvern,
stabbing his sword into its snout, but the dammed thing won’t let go.

Sliseag gets there first, slashing out at the wyvern with his swordtail and
cutting into a foreleg. When it doesn’t let go, he pivots to close his jaw over
its neck, but unlike Tairn, he isn’t strong enough to snap a neck with a bite



and loses precious seconds, leaving himself exposed to the remaining pair
of wyvern.

We’re not going to make it in time.
The pair changes course, veering from Aotrom at the last second and

aiming for Sliseag.
We’re almost there, but everything happens so fucking fast that it’s as if

the rest of the world slows down.
In one heartbeat, the closest wyvern opens its jaws.
In the second, it blasts green fire across Sliseag and Sawyer dives

backward out of the seat, narrowly avoiding being burned to death and
rolling down Sliseag’s spine with a smoking boot.

In the third, it completes its assault, snapping at Sliseag’s exposed side.
Sawyer kicks at the gaping jaws to save his dragon from the bite, but in the
next, he takes it himself, his leg disappearing between the wyvern’s massive
teeth.

“Sawyer!” Ridoc yells.
Sawyer’s scream rips into my soul, and I nearly echo it when the

wyvern’s jaw locks with an audible click as Tairn slows his descent directly
overhead, only a dozen feet above Aotrom as the remaining wyvern ducks
under the fight.

Tairn’s weight shifts, and I know he’s chosen an angle of attack and is
about to dive, but in this position, there’s only time to save Sawyer or
Sliseag, not both. Sawyer bellows in pain as the wyvern half drags him off
Sliseag, wrenching away its ugly gray head before snapping again.

My stomach twists and my breath threatens to seize.
Fuck, there’s nothing left below Sawyer’s knee.
He’s losing blood and his grip.
No. I’m not going to stand by and watch another one of my friends die. I

refuse.
Grasping the dagger in my left hand and the crossbow in my right, I

slice through the leather strap of my belt as Tairn dips his right wing, giving
me the perfect angle for one. Single. Second. “Forgive me.”

“Don’t you dare—”



“Kill the other one quickly for both our sakes!” I’m already moving,
sheathing my dagger and lunging from the saddle, gaining one, two, three
running steps before I leap.

Andarna. Xaden. My sister. Brennan. They all flash through my mind as
my arms swing through the fall, finding only air, but it’s my mother’s face I
see in my mind when I land on Aotrom’s back, the soles of my boots
finding purchase at the edge of one of his spine scales.

“Silver One!”
“How’s that for a running landing?” Holy shit, I made it.
Ridoc must think the same, because he stares at me in pure shock for a

good second before he yanks his sword free of the wyvern’s nose, then
moves to plunge it again as I start running toward him. “I can’t get the
fucking thing off him!”

My heart pounds as hard as my feet as Tairn completes the dive to my
right, a patch of black filling my peripheral vision. Ignoring the self-
preservation instinct that tells me this is a bad idea, I race to Ridoc and
shove the crossbow into his hands. “Fire it once I’m on Sliseag and get back
in your seat!”

“Once you’re what?”
I don’t pause to answer the question, too busy running onto the nose of

the godsdamned wyvern that’s currently having part of its throat ripped out
by Sliseag.

I run up the slope between the shrieking wyvern’s eyes as it sinks its
teeth deeper into Aotrom, then onto the flat of its head between its horns as
Sliseag tears his jaw away.

“I’m going to throttle you myself once”—Tairn growls, and I hear the
distinct sound of bone crunching in the distance—“I get you on the
ground!”

I nearly roll my ankle on a spike halfway down the wyvern’s gyrating
neck and catch myself as Sliseag swings his head back to the wyvern
attacking his rider, but Sawyer’s grip along his spine scales is too tenuous
for Sliseag to maneuver quickly. The dragon can’t defend his rider without
losing him.



He lets loose a skull-shaking roar as the wyvern takes another snap at
Sawyer, swinging his tail with no effect.

“Hurry, Vi!” Ridoc yells.
“Sliseag!” I shout, breaking the cardinal rule of all riders. “Let me help

him!”
The red swivels its head toward me, pinning me with furious golden

eyes, and I nod, praying to Dunne he understands, that he holds still, and
then leap from the wyvern’s neck, my feet kicking for distance.

I land just above Sliseag’s eyes and wrap my left arm around one of his
horns, using it to both stop my momentum and hold my balance as his head
swings toward the wyvern attacking Sawyer, snapping at the wyvern and
coming up short.

“Now, Ridoc!” Using Sliseag’s horn for leverage, I hurtle down his neck
as an explosion sounds behind me, heat flaring along my back.

Sawyer scoots himself across Sliseag’s spine, and I run faster, passing
the seat. If he falls to that side, there’s nothing Tairn can do. We’re too close
to the ridgeline below.

“Where are you?” I ask Tairn as Sawyer’s eyes meet mine in a double
take.

I ignore the snaps and snarls above me and keep moving.
“Where I’m supposed to be, unlike you!” he bites out just as his

gargantuan frame turns in the sky ahead of me, dropping the lifeless body of
the fourth wyvern from his jaws.

“Good. Now do me a favor.” I charge past Sliseag’s wings and alongside
the enormous, gnashing teeth of the wyvern poised to devour Sawyer.

“Which would be?” Tairn asks, already flying toward us.
“Violet?” Sawyer’s eyes widen with shock as blood pumps out of his leg

in sickening rhythmic spurts. He needs a healer now.
I hit my knees, sliding the last few feet and slamming into Sawyer,

knocking him farther down Sliseag’s spine toward the dragon’s
hindquarters. Wrapping my arms around Sawyer, I clasp my hands behind
his back. “Hold on!” I shout as we slide over countless red scales, seconds
away from the edge.



Sliseag banks away from the ridgeline, giving us a few hundred much-
needed feet of altitude for the inevitable fall, and tips us over.

“Silver One!”
Sawyer’s arms close around me as we tumble off Sliseag’s back and fall

into the open air.
“Catch me.” Wind tears at my hair, my face, my leathers, but I hold on

to Sawyer as we drop in total free fall. I can save him. He doesn’t have to
die today.

He won’t.
One. Two. Three. Four. I count my heartbeats as we clear the ridgeline.
“What are you doing?” Xaden roars, and there’s a faint, familiar brush

of velvet at the base of my neck, as if Xaden’s power has been extended to
its limits. Our fall slows, but not by much as a dark wing blocks out the sky.

“What the hell does it look like I’m—” The breath is knocked from my
lungs as an iron vise closes around us, halting our fall with a whipping
change of momentum. Tairn.

“What part of ‘stay in your saddle’ did you not understand?” Tairn
bellows, holding us in the precarious grip of his claw and banking left,
toward Basgiath.

“You couldn’t be in two places at once,” I argue, fighting to draw breath
as Sawyer goes limp above me, his chin falling against my shoulder. “You
had to kill the fourth wyvern, and Sliseag wouldn’t defend himself if it
meant losing Sawyer, so I took Sawyer.”

“And you just hoped I’d catch you?” He flares his wings, slowing our
speed to a glide.

“As if you wouldn’t.” Air flows into my lungs in a trickle, then a stream.
He scoffs. Then changes the subject with, “Your brother has mended the

stone into one piece but does not feel…hopeful.”
My heart rises just to fall. Well, that’s…great.
“Why? Can it not be imbued?”
“Marbh is not keen on details.” Tairn lands on three claws in the small

field between the back of the school and the cliff, gently opening the one
that holds us.



What the fuck does that mean? Icy slush greets me as rain continues to
fall, and I push Sawyer to his back and roll to my knees, putting my fingers
to the pulse of his pale, freckled neck.

“Somebody help us!” I scream, my voice echoing off the stone walls of
the administration building. The sluggish beat of his pulse jolts my own.
He’s losing too much blood too quickly, and there’s no help in sight, though
it’s obvious we’re not the first wounded to have landed here.

“I will call for aid,” Tairn replies.
You can’t have him, I tell Malek, shifting to kneel in the scarlet snow.

You took Liam. You may not have Sawyer.
“Sawyer?” I wrench the buckle on the belted sheath around my left

thigh, and mercifully, it gives. Knives and all, I wrap it over the wrecked
leather beneath Sawyer’s knee, inches above raggedly torn flesh, thread the
leather through the buckle, and pull as hard as I can, crying out when pain
sings through my left shoulder. “You have to wake up! Open your eyes!”

The bitter taste of fear floods my mouth as I force the metal prong
through a smooth section of leather by sheer will. “Please?” I beg him, my
voice breaking as my fingers search for his pulse at his wrist, then his neck,
leaving crimson fingerprints on his bloodless skin. “Please, Sawyer, please.
We said we’d all live until graduation, remember?”

“Aid comes,” Tairn announces.
“I remember,” Sawyer whispers, his eyes fluttering open.
“Oh, thank the gods!” I smile down at him, my lower lip trembling

uncontrollably. “Hold on—”
“Violet!” Maren calls from across the field, and I look up to see her on

Daja’s back, the gryphon sprinting forward through the rain, covering the
distance quickly with Cat and Bragen on foot a bit behind.

Tairn’s head snaps upward toward the battlefield. “Sgaeyl—”
“Go!” If she’s in danger, so is Xaden, and given the giant tendrils of

shadow emanating from within a wall of gray on the edge of our sector…
Tairn crouches, then springs upward, launching with heavy beats of his

wings against the morning sky as Daja reaches us, dragging a litter behind
her.



“What happened?” Maren slides from Daja’s back, her tan leathers
streaked with blood.

“Wyvern took his leg.” I glance between them as Bragen and Cat arrive.
“Are you all right?”

“It’s not ours,” Bragen says, crouching on the other side of Sawyer.
“You’re going to be all right,” he assures him. “Just need to get you to the
healers.” He slides his arms under Sawyer, then lifts and carries him to
Daja.

The healers. Because mending isn’t an option, not without his leg.
“We’ve been ferrying the wounded,” Maren says over her shoulder,

rushing back to Daja as Cat helps Bragen lower Sawyer to the litter.
“Thank you.” I sit back on my heels and look to the sky, letting the

strength of my bond with Xaden assure me that he’s well instead of possibly
distracting him by asking.

“Don’t thank us,” Maren says, mounting quickly and settling between
Daja’s shoulders before taking off for the Healers Quadrant, Bragen
following after her.

“You look like shit.” Cat crouches in front of me, her braid as sodden as
mine as she looks me over. “I heard what you did up there. Well, Kira saw,
and she told me. That took guts.”

“You would have done the same.” Exhaustion sweeps in, my shoulders
drooping as adrenaline fades.

“I would have run faster.” She slips one of her alloy-hilted daggers free
and hands it to me. “Looks like you’re missing one. I have another.”

“Thank you.” I take it like the peace offering it is.
“I’ll look after Sawyer,” she promises as she stands. “And don’t you

dare thank me for that,” she calls back over her shoulder, walking toward
the southwest tower without another word.

The conduit falls along my forearm as I wipe the rain from my eyes. I’d
completely forgotten the damned thing was even there. Glancing left, then
right, I note the scattered wyvern bodies, and one Green Clubtail that makes
my heart stumble—

Teine?



“Is alive,” Tairn promises, already flying back to me. “They are holding
the last wave back, and your mother— Behind you!”

I stumble to my feet and whip around to face the cliff…and the venin
who stands about twenty feet away, watching me with a curious look on a
heart-shaped face that had at some point been undeniably beautiful.

My stomach twists, and my grip tightens around the dagger Cat left me.
Cat. I don’t want to draw attention to the retreating flier if the venin doesn’t
already see her.

“There’s no point running,” the dark wielder says, walking forward
slowly, as if I’m no more of a threat than a butterfly. “We both know I’ll
drain the very ground underneath you, and then this all will have been for
nothing.” She throws her arms out, gesturing to the mayhem around us.

“Sorrengail!” Cat yells, and I hear the sloshing sound of her running
toward me.

“Run, Cat!” I shout, glancing up at Tairn and spotting him mid-dive,
about a minute out, but the footsteps don’t slow.

The dark wielder’s eyes flare as she spots Cat, and she drops to a knee,
splaying her hand out over the icy ground.

“Stop!” I yell, my heart lurching into my throat and lodging there. This
is so much worse than my nightmare. Even if I could run, there’s no telling
what she’d do to Cat. Flicking my wrist, I grasp the conduit in my left hand
and lift my right—dagger and all—throwing open the doors to Tairn’s
power I’d never fully closed.

Slush melts at my feet and steam lifts from my skin as Cat reaches my
side. “You have to get out of here.”

“Shut up.” She pulls a dagger from her thigh sheath.
“Oh, you are a powerful one, aren’t you?” The dark wielder cocks her

head to the side, a slow, insidious smile curving her mouth as she rises,
studying me. “The lightning wielder.”

Thunder booms in the cloud above us as energy gathers in my veins, hot
and crackling. I don’t have to run. I can wield.

“Her, I don’t care about.” She glances at Cat. “But you, I’m under orders
not to kill, so let’s not make this difficult.”



“Me?” What the hell?
She takes a step forward, and I release a strike, hitting the ground right

in front of her, stopping her in her tracks. “You’ll be so much fun for him to
wield.”

The nightmare comes back full force, the Sage’s words tumbling over
me just enough to make my hand tremble.

A wild look comes over her narrow-set eyes. “And I will be his favorite
for delivering you. I will be more than just an asim soon.” Her words flow
faster and faster. “I will be given the Vale when this is over!”

Delivering me?
“You can kill her at any time now,” Cat reminds me, her gaze locked on

the dark wielder.
“I want to know what the hell she means about delivering me,” I

murmur under my breath.
“You will turn for something much more dangerous…” Wasn’t that what

he said in the nightmare?
“It will be me! Me!” The venin shoves her shaking hand into her

scraggly red hair.
Cat’s doing this, heightening the woman’s greed, spinning her out on her

own emotions. Have to admit, it’s a pretty badass ability when she’s not
using it on me.

“Enough, Wynn.” A dark wielder in leathers the same color as the
pulsing veins beside his eyes appears from the left, walking around the
body of the fallen green and throwing out his hand.

Cat flies backward with a shout, slamming into the ground behind me.
Shit. No more time for curiosity. I wield, heat erupting from every inch of
my skin as I draw the strike from the cloud above, hitting Wynn instantly.
She falls where she stood, her eyes open and vague, smoke rising from her
corpse.

“Fascinating.” The new one strides for me, closing his fist.
The conduit flares with intolerable heat.
I drop it, watching in horror as it disintegrates, leaving nothing at the

end of the bracelet. He flips his hand, palm upward, and I’m lifted off my



feet, suspended in midair, completely immobilized.
Just like the dream, but that isn’t the Sage.
My throat closes. I can’t lift a hand to wield or even yell for Cat to run

while she can. This isn’t a dream. There’s no waking up from this.
“Stay calm!” Tairn orders, nearly on us but not close enough.
“I’m on my way!” Xaden shouts as the venin steps over the body of his

counterpart like she’s a feature of the landscape and continues toward me.
They won’t make it in time.
I won’t, either.
Which means I’ve killed us all.
But Andarna can live. She just has to hold on, has to choose to survive.
“He’s almost here, so let’s move this along, shall we?” the dark wielder

says, less than a dozen feet away now. “The horde tires of hovering, waiting
for permission to attack.”

A shape moves in the cliff behind the dark wielder. No, not a shape; part
of the cliff itself; a giant…boulder?

A boulder with slivers of golden eyes.
It springs forward from the cliff like a projectile, expanding, changing

colors, sprouting wings and claws and black scales.

OceanofPDF.com



I am alone in thinking the knowledge of wards, the protections they
provide, should not solely benefit Navarre, and it has cost me

everything.

—JOURNAL OF LYRA OF MORRAINE —TRANSLATED BY CADET JESINIA
NEILWART



CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE

The dark wielder turns, but he isn’t fast enough. Andarna lands directly
in front of him, then opens her mouth and breathes fire down upon him,

roasting the dark wielder before she snaps her jaws down and rips his head
straight off his body.

I fall into the melting slush at the same time his corpse does, and she
spits out the decapitated, smoking head, then huffs a hot breath of sulfur-
laced steam.

What. The. Actual. Fuck.
“You…” I scramble to my feet and stumble toward her. “You just…”
“I breathe fire.” She preens, flaring her wings.
“Did you just eat him?” Cat stands but keeps her distance.
“You do not speak to dragons you do not ride, human.” Andarna snaps

her teeth in Cat’s direction.
“You looked like a part of the cliff.” I stare at Andarna like I’ve never

seen her before. Maybe I never have.
“I told you I could hide.” She blinks at me.
I open my mouth, then shut it, searching for words where there are none.

That wasn’t hiding. Her scales are as black as Tairn’s now. Maybe I’m
seeing things?

Tairn lands to the right, sending slush flying, then looks over our small
battlefield with quick appraisal. “You made quick work of it.”



“She did.” I point to Andarna as Sgaeyl and Sliseag land behind Tairn.
“You breathe fire,” Tairn acknowledges, a note of pride in his voice.
“I breathe fire.” Andarna extends her neck to the fullest.
“Melgren orders us to the Vale.” Tairn’s eyes narrow, and his head

swivels toward Sgaeyl.
“They’re pulling the whole squad to the Vale?” I glance upward, noting

there are only two wyvern left in our sector.
The horde tires of hovering, waiting for permission to attack. That’s

what the dark wielder said. The final wave hasn’t struck yet.
“Not the whole squad. Just us,” Xaden clarifies, walking around Tairn.

Tiny tendrils of steam rise where rain meets the exposed skin of his arms.
He looks as tired as I feel, and there’s a laceration on his forearm, but the
lack of any other visible damage makes my shoulders dip in relief.

“They haven’t sent their last wave yet, and Sawyer and Aotrom are
already wounded. Moving the two of us leaves the squad and Brennan and
the wardstone too exposed.” I shake my head. We can’t let that happen.
Brennan’s our best chance at surviving this.

“Exactly,” Xaden says as he reaches my side. “You’re all right?” His
arm winds around my shoulders as he presses a hard kiss on my temple.
“They’re holding their own up there while this wave recedes. We need to go
argue our point quickly.”

“I’m all right,” I promise. “Let’s go.”
“They’re out front. We’ll meet you there,” Tairn says.
“Go to Marbh,” I tell Andarna, pushing on my left shoulder and rotating

the joint to try and ease the sharp, pulsing pain deep within the joint.
“I will be where you need me,” she huffs.
“Fine, as long as that’s with Marbh.” I lift my eyebrows. At a dragon.
She flicks her tail twice, then walks off, but at least she’s headed in the

direction of the wardstone chamber safely below.
The halls of Basgiath teem with chaos as we pass by a line of gryphons

and enter the guarded side door beneath the bell tower. My stomach drops.
Wounded infantry and riders sit against the wall near this level’s entrance to
the infirmary in various states of injury, but mostly burns, their cries of pain



filling the stone corridor as second- and third-year healers race from patient
to patient.

“They ran out of beds twenty minutes ago,” Cat tells us quietly.
“Infantry is the heaviest hit so far.”

“They usually are,” Xaden notes, keeping his gaze focused across the
hall on the door that leads to the courtyard and off the dozens of wounded
to our right.

We stop abruptly as a platoon of infantry races by. The insignia on their
collars show them as first-years.

“Violet.” Cat grabs hold of my elbow, and I turn toward her, pausing as
Xaden pushes open the door. “Tell your mother we’ll fight in the air if she
can stop the rain, and if not, deploy us like the infantry. We have more
experience fighting venin than almost anyone here, and gryphons are
exceptionally quick on the ground.”

There’s only sheer determination in her brown eyes, so I nod. “I’ll tell
her.” She drops her hand, and Xaden and I walk into the courtyard.

It’s pure fucking mayhem as we make our way through the lines of
squads in dark blue being briefed by trembling second-years. It’s as though
their ranks have broken and they’re cobbling together units with whoever
hasn’t been injured.

Once we reach the center, we have a clear view of the leadership
meeting going on just in front of the open gate.

“At least they could shut the damned gate!” one of the infantry cadets
shouts at Xaden and me as we pass.

“Shutting the gate isn’t going to help you,” Xaden replies, pointing left
to the dead body of a wyvern poking through the partially demolished
roofline. “Even if they were on foot, the five seconds it will take for them to
get through isn’t worth losing the necessary egress.”

I shoot the second-year a sympathetic look and follow Xaden out. “You
could be a little…”

“Nicer? Softer?” he counters. “Kinder? How the hell is that going to
help them?”

He’s not wrong.



“Hey,” a second-year in dark blue says from a squad on the right, her
gaze flicking over my shoulder.

“I’m sorry, but he’s right. Shutting the gate isn’t going to help.” I say it
as gently as I can.

“That’s not why I stopped you.” She points behind me. “There’s a scribe
chasing you down.”

I turn to see Jesinia jogging toward me in the rain, her hand hidden
beneath her robes.

She’s keeping the journal dry.
“See if you can talk her into getting somewhere safe,” Xaden suggests.

“In the meantime, I’ll start picking the fight without you.” He walks into the
thirty-footthick archway that serves as Basgiath’s gate, crossing under the
first portcullis and continuing on, immediately gaining the attention of my
mother, General Melgren, and three of his aides standing at the edge of the
second portcullis. The tails of their dragons swing just past them, forming a
wall half the height of the fortress itself, even more in the case of Codagh.

“You should be—” I start signing to Jesinia, then drop my hands when I
realize there’s nowhere safe for her to be.

She grasps my elbow with her free hand and pulls me into the archway,
under the portcullis. Leaving the journal within the robes, she pulls her
other hand free to sign. “I think I found the difference between the two, but
I think Lyra’s journal is the lie.”

“What did you find?” I sign, keeping my back turned toward Melgren
and raising my shields, blocking everyone out, even Tairn and Andarna.

“I think it’s a seven.” She lifts her brows at me. “But it can’t be.”
“I don’t understand.” I shake my head. “Seven what?”
“That’s the only difference between the two journals. I thought at first

maybe it meant runes, that we’d mistranslated that part, since there are
seven runes on the wardstone in Aretia,” she signs, two lines furrowing in
her forehead. “But I’ve checked and double-checked.”

“Show me.”
She nods, then pulls Lyra’s journal free and flips to the middle, tapping a

symbol in the middle of the page and handing it to me, freeing her hands.



“That symbol there, it’s a seven. But Warrick’s says six, remember.”
My heart sinks, and I nod slowly.
She has to be wrong.
“This reads, ‘The breath of life of the seven combined and set the stone

ablaze in an iron flame.’”
Shoulders drooping, I sigh. Seven dragons is impossible. There are only

six dens: black, blue, green, orange, brown, and red.
I hand her the journal. “Then maybe it’s not a seven. Maybe you

mistranslated?”
She shakes her head, flipping to the very first page of the journal, then

gives it back. “Here.” She taps the symbols, then lifts her hands. “‘Here is
recorded the story of Lyra of the First Six.’” She taps the six, then turns the
pages to the previous spot in the middle. “Seven.”

My lips part. Shit. Shit. Shit.
“They’re close,” she signs. “But that’s a seven. And there are seven

circles on the wardstone in Aretia. Seven runes. Seven,” she repeats that last
word, as if I could have possibly misunderstood.

Seven. Thoughts spin in my head too quickly to grab ahold of just one.
“This journal has to be…wrong,” she signs when I remain silent.

I close the book and hand it to her. “Thank you. You should go to the
infirmary. Sawyer is there, and if we—”

She shoves the journal into her robes and begins signing before I finish.
“Why is Sawyer in the infirmary?” Her eyes fly wide.

“A wyvern took his leg.”
She inhales swiftly.
“Go. If we evacuate the wounded, Maren said she’d watch over him, so

if we evacuate, that’s the safest place for you to be. She’ll get you both
out.”

Jesinia nods. “Be safe.”
“You, too.”
She picks up her robes and sprints across the courtyard, cutting toward

the southernmost door.



My head swims as I turn toward leadership gathered at the end of the
archway and begin walking.

Could it mean a gryphon? Is that what it meant by six and the one? No.
If a gryphon contributed to the wards, flier magic would work within the
boundaries. But there aren’t seven breeds of dragon—

I stumble, catching myself with a hand along the stone wall, while my
brain trips down the path that makes the only sense. Even if that path is
ludicrous.

But…
Holy shit.
I immediately shut the thoughts down before anyone connected to me

can break through my shields and catch me thinking them.
“Absolutely not,” Xaden snaps at Melgren, who stands between two of

his aides.
I put myself in the middle of my mother and Xaden.
“You think cadets will be able to defend all this?” Colonel Panchek

gesticulates wildly at the air as a Green Clubtail—
My heart seizes as Teine takes down the last remaining wyvern in their

sector. The gray carcass tumbles from the sky and lands somewhere to the
northeast, behind the line of dragons.

“What are you doing here?” Mom asks me as my gaze drifts upward to
the line of wyvern hovering in the distance. Up until now, we’ve been
wounded, but they’re undeniably the kill shot, and in the center of their line
rests a gaping hole, as if they’re waiting for someone.

“She’s never far from him,” Melgren quips.
Those wyvern are waiting just like the dark wielder implied, and my

stomach churns at the thought of who they’re waiting for.
“We’re not taking Tairn and Sgaeyl to defend the Vale,” Xaden

announces, folding his arms over his chest. “They already have First and
Second Wings, plus every unbonded dragon.”

Sgaeyl and Tairn land to the right, near the tower that leads to Parapet,
and all I can do is hope Andarna isn’t hiding over there with them, since I



don’t dare lower my shields to check. For the first time, I’m the one holding
what might be the ultimate secret.

“You’re the reason I can’t plan effectively,” General Melgren snaps at
Xaden. “You’re the reason I didn’t even see this battle occurring.” He tries
to look down his hawkish nose at Xaden, but he’s at least an inch shorter.

“You’re welcome for flying to your aid,” Xaden replies, earning a sneer.
“The Vale is the only thing that matters,” Mom interrupts, shifting

slightly so her shoulder is between Melgren and me. “The Archives are
already sealed. The rest of the fortress can be rebuilt.”

“You’re going to abandon it,” Xaden says softly, using that cold,
menacing tone that used to scare the shit out of me. From the way Panchek
steps back, it hasn’t lost its edge.

Their silence is damning. My gaze jumps from face to face, looking for
someone—anyone—to argue.

“They can launch that line at any moment.” Melgren points to the
waiting horde. “We have over sixty injured pairs, be it dragon or rider that’s
wounded. That horde right there will take us as spread out as we are now.”

“Then why not move every cadet to the Vale?” Xaden challenges.
Melgren narrows his beady eyes. “You might lead a revolution, Riorson,

but you know nothing about winning a war.”
At least he called it a revolution and not a rebellion.
“You’re using them as a distraction.” Xaden drops his arms. “A delaying

tactic. They’ll die while those in the Vale have time to prepare. Prepare for
what, exactly?”

My jaw drops. “You can’t do that.” I pivot, putting myself in front of
Mom. “You won’t need to. Brennan has mended the wardstone.”

“Even Brennan can’t mend magic, Cadet Sorrengail.” There’s no give,
no room to stray from the course in her eyes.

“No,” I admit. “But he doesn’t have to. If the stone is mended, it could
hold power. We could still raise the wards. I know how.”

A curious caress of shimmering shadow slides down my shields, but I
don’t let him in.



“You weren’t entirely successful in Aretia, were you?” she asks,
lowering her voice so only I hear. “‘Could’ isn’t good enough.” That part is
for a wider audience, and the rebuke heats my cheeks.

“I can do it,” I whisper back just as quietly, then raise my voice to be
heard. “If you put Xaden and me in the Vale, you leave the wardstone
unprotected, and that is the only solution to keep everyone on this field
alive today.”

“You don’t know if it works after being mended,” she says slowly, like
there’s any chance I might misunderstand her. “And even if it did—”

“Their leader has arrived,” Tairn tells me, and by the way every rider’s
face pivots skyward—including mine—he’s not the only dragon who’s
noticed.

There, in the center of the horde, now flies a wyvern slightly larger than
the others, bearing a rider in royal blue. The pitch of my stomach says that
if he comes closer, I’ll recognize his dark, thinning hair and the annoyed
purse of his lips, even if logic argues that I won’t, that it’s just a fucking
dream.

My heart rate soars as fear soaks into my skin, colder than the rain and
melting snow around us.

“As you can see,” Mom says, tearing her gaze from the horde. “It’s too
late for wards now.”

“It’s not!” I argue.
“Cadet—” Mom starts.
“I can get them up,” I promise, putting myself in her way when she tries

to sidestep me. “If they can hold power, then I can get the wards up!”
“Cadet,” Mom snaps, her cheeks turning ruddy.
“At least see if the stone can hold power before you sentence all of us to

death!” I push.
“Violet!” Mom shouts.
“Listen to me!” I yell right back. “For once in your life, listen to what

I’m telling you!”
She draws her head back.



I forge on. “For once in my life, trust me. Have faith in me. I can get the
wards up.”

There it is, the slight narrowing of her eyes that says I have her attention.
“If we raise the wards, every wyvern on this field is dead. Every dark

wielder is powerless—” I swallow, thinking of Jack. “Nearly powerless.
Name one other weapon capable of managing that feat. Just go down there
with me and see if it will hold power. Help me imbue it,” I plead with my
mother. “If it won’t hold power, then I’ll do whatever you want, but I can
do this, General. I know how.”

“Enough of this. We’re wasting time.” Melgren waves me off, then
walks toward Codagh, his aides following after.

“Wait!” my mother calls out, and my heart stops.
“I’m sorry, General?” Melgren snaps, pausing to face us just outside the

archway.
“This is my school.” Mom lifts her chin. “I said wait.”
“It’s my army!” he barks. “And there is no waiting!”
“Technically, half of it is your army,” Xaden says, his gaze pinned on the

wyvern horde. “The other half is mine. And seeing that you had no problem
having my father executed, I have no problem leaving you to die if you
refuse her help.”

Melgren stares at Xaden, the color slowly draining from his face.
“That’s what I thought.” Xaden sticks out his hand. “You want to walk

with me, Violet?”
Something in his tone—maybe it’s resignation—makes me twine my

fingers with his, following him as he walks out of the archway, past
Melgren, and toward the dragons.

“Where are you going? They’re about to attack—” Melgren starts.
“I’m buying her the time she needs,” Xaden answers, and my stomach

sinks.
“And they won’t attack. Not yet. They’re still waiting.”
“What the fuck for?” Melgren snaps.
Xaden’s hand tightens around mine. “Me.”



OceanofPDF.com



You’re going to love Violet. She’s smart and stubborn.

Reminds me a lot of you, actually.


You just have to remember when you meet her:
she’s not her mother.

—RECOVERED CORRESPONDENCE OF CADET LIAM MAIRI TO SLOANE
MAIRI



CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR

“What do you mean, they’re waiting for you?” I ask once we’re in
front of Codagh, facing an open battlefield littered with the

corpses of wyvern and dragons alike. A pulsing ache of dread erupts in my
chest.

There’s already been so much death, and we haven’t yet faced the worst
of their forces. From the look of that line, they’ve held almost all of their
dark wielders back.

“That’s one of their teachers,” Xaden says, his eyes locked on the venin
riding front and center. “The one who escaped Resson.”

“He was at the cliffs, too.” I fight to keep my voice as calm as possible
despite the palpitations of my heart. I need to get those wards up now.
They’re the best chance we have of getting out of here alive. But each
dragon can only contribute their fire to one wardstone, which means—

“He thought we’d be at Samara. Figured we’d do the honorable thing
and answer Melgren’s call.”

“How do you know that?” My brow furrows.
“Do us both a favor and don’t ask.”
Tairn and Sgaeyl prowl out past Aimsir, monitoring the threats both on

the ground and in the sky as they head this way. Heart pounding, I glance
between them and the slowly lowering figure of the Sage a hundred yards
away. He’s coming to the ground.



Shit. I have to be quick.
“If you had to choose to correctly raise the wards here at Basgiath or

ours at…” I can’t say it. Not here. “What would you choose?”
Xaden’s brow knits as he tears his gaze from the Sage to look at me.
“You have to choose. I only have the resources to fully raise the wards

here or…there.” There’s a blatant plea in my tone. “I could never take that
choice from you.” He’s already given so much.

He flinches, then glances toward the hovering horde and the theatrically
slow descent of the Sage on his wyvern before bringing his eyes back to
mine quickly. “You ward wherever you are, which is here.”

“But your home…” It’s softer than a whisper.
“You are my home. And if we all die here today, then the knowledge dies

with us anyway. Ward Basgiath.”
“You’re sure?” My heart beats like the second hand of a clock, ticking

down what time we have left.
“I’m sure.”
I nod, then slip my hand from his and pivot, facing down the biggest

dragon on the Continent. “I need to talk to you.”
“Holy fuck, Violet.” Xaden turns, putting himself at my side as Codagh

slowly lowers his head, tilting toward the end to glare at me with narrowed
golden eyes, because even level, I won’t come past his nostrils. “You know
what you’re doing?”

“If I don’t, we’re all dead.” And I’d better be quick, because Tairn is
almost here. I can feel him dismantling my shields. No rider can keep their
dragon out for long if they want in.

Codagh’s nostrils flare, and his lip curls above very sharp, very long,
very close teeth.

“You know.” It comes out like the accusation it is. “And you didn’t tell
your rider because dragonkind protects dragonkind.”

A blast of steam hits me in the face, and Xaden swears under his breath,
shadows curling at his feet.

“Yes. I figured it out. I’ve already used Tairn’s fire on the second
wardstone, so if I power the stone at Basgiath, will you come?” I ask, my



fingernails cutting into my palms to keep from shaking. This is the one
dragon on the Continent besides Sgaeyl who doesn’t fear Tairn on one level
or another.

“You don’t need him as the black dragon for Basgiath,” Xaden argues.
“You have Andarna.”

“Will. You. Come?” I hold Codagh’s menacing glare. “We’re all dead if
you don’t. The Empyrean will end.”

He huffs another breath of steam, softer this time, then dips his chin in a
curt nod, lifting his head as Tairn approaches from the left and Melgren
appears on the far side of Codagh’s foreleg.

“You court death?” Tairn asks, pushing past my shields.
“I needed to confirm a secret that isn’t mine to share,” I answer. “Please

don’t push.”
Tairn’s talons flex in the icy slush beside me.
I turn to Xaden. “I don’t want to leave you, and I have about a million

questions as to why you think they’re coming for you, but if I don’t…”
Every fiber of my being rebels at the notion of leaving him.

Leaning in, he lifts his hand to the nape of my neck. “You and I both
know you can’t raise the wards and stay to fight. When we were in Resson,
I held them back while you fought. I trusted you to handle yourself. Now
trust me to handle myself while you get the wards up before more people
die. End this.” He kisses me hard and quick, then looks at me like this will
be the last time he ever sees me. “I love you.”

Oh…gods. No. I refuse to accept the goodbye in his tone.
“You will stay alive,” I order Xaden, then glance to the waiting horde,

the figure of the Sage who is nearly to the ground, taking his time as if this
is all a game he’s already won, and finally to Tairn. “Stay with him.”

Tairn growls, raising his lip over his fangs.
“Stay with him for me. Don’t you dare let him die!” Turning on my heel,

I break into a run without saying goodbye to Xaden. Farewells aren’t
needed when I’ll see him shortly. Because there’s no chance I’m going to
fail.

“The fliers want to fight,” I say to Melgren. “Let them!”



I pretend I haven’t been in a battle for the last two hours, haven’t
wielded to exhaustion, haven’t pushed my body to the breaking point and
run.

“Cut the storm so the gryphons can fly!” I shout at my mother as I pass
by, sprinting under the archway. Fuck her permission or her understanding.
If the wardstone can hold power, I’ll imbue it on my own.

My arms pump and I force my legs to move, despite the jarring pain in
my knees. I run through the courtyard, dodging infantry squads, and I run
up the central steps. I run through the open door and down the hall with a
pounding heart and burning lungs. I run like I’ve been training for it since
Resson.

I run because I couldn’t save Liam, couldn’t save Soleil, but I can save
the rest of them. I can save him. And if I give myself even a moment to
linger on the possibilities of what he might be facing, I’ll turn around and
run straight back to Xaden.

Taking the spiral steps at breakneck speed has me dizzy when I reach the
bottom of the southwest tower, and I don’t waste my gasped breaths on our
first-years standing guard at the doorway as I sprint through, into the tunnel
that smells like Varrish and pain.

“Move!” I shout at Lynx and Baylor. Because I remember their names.
Avalynn. Sloane. Aaric. Kai, the flier. I know all the first-years’ names.

They dive to opposite sides, and I force my body sideways, shuffling
through the narrowest part of the tunnel.

My chest tightens, and I think of Xaden.
Xaden, and the scent of thunderstorms, and books. That’s all I let in as I

force my way through the passage. And as soon as it opens up, so do I,
pushing myself harder than I ever have, racing down the rest of the tunnel
and into the ward chamber lit by morning sunlight.

Only then do I skid to a halt and brace my hands on my knees, breathing
deeply to keep from puking. “Does. It. Work?” I ask, looking up at the stone
that is miraculously in one piece and standing where it should be.

“Damn, Sorrengail, I don’t think I’ve ever seen you run that fast!” Aaric
lifts his brows.



“Here.” Brennan stumbles out from next to Aaric, his reddish-brown
waves damp with sweat, and the first-year catches him, slinging his arm
over his shoulder to keep my brother standing. “It took everything I had to
mend it.”

“Will it hold power?” I ask, forcing myself to stand through the nausea.
“Try,” Brennan suggests. “If it doesn’t, this was all for nothing.”
Every second counts as I step up to the stone. It looks exactly how it did

when we arrived last night, with the exception of the powerful hum of
energy and the flames.

“Looks just like ours did before we imbued and fired it,” Brennan
observes.

“Right, except this stone was actually on fire when we got here,” I tell
him, lifting my hand to the black iron.

“Iron doesn’t catch fire,” Brennan argues.
“Tell that to the wardstone,” I counter. Without a conduit, this is harder

than I imagined, but I have to know. Opening up the Archives door again, I
welcome Tairn’s power in a focused trickle, just like Felix taught me, but
instead of powering the conduit, I rest my fingertips on the wardstone and
let it flow.

“How long did it take for three to imbue the wardstone at home?”
Brennan asks.

“Weeks,” I answer, my fingers tingling painfully, like they’ve just had
circulation restored after a lengthy period of numbness, and I watch with
more than a little satisfaction when energy streams past the tips. I pull my
hand back an inch, just enough to see the white-blue strands connect my
fingertips to the stone, and then I increase the power.

Heat prickles my skin, and I push myself to the edge to imbue, which
isn’t as far as I’d like it to be after hours of wielding. Sweat pops on my
forehead,and my skin flushes red.

“We don’t have weeks,” Brennan says softly, as though talking to
himself.

“I know.”



Roars sound in the distance, and I look up through the chamber’s
opening to the sky so far above us. My throat closes at the sight of gray
clashing with green. With orange. My squad is up there fighting without
me. Xaden is battling at the gates. We’re out of time.

I cut my power, then rest my palm on the stone. There’s a tiny vibration,
like the ripple of water after a pebble has been skipped into a vast lake. We
don’t have enough pebbles. “It can hold power, but we don’t have enough
riders who can imbue down here.”

“I’ll have Marbh put the word out,” Brennan says, and we both look
skyward when a flash of red is quickly followed by one of gray.

“We need every rider who can make it.” But who the hell is going to
stop fighting and risk the battle on a hunch? My heart careens. It looks
exactly like what my mother warned us not to let happen—a full-on melee.
A dark shape moves at the top edge of the chamber, and I lower my shields
for the first time since speaking to Jesinia.

“Get down here,” I say to Andarna, walking around to the back of the
stone so no one coming to help imbue will see her.

“I’m not fond of pits—”
“Now.” There’s no room for argument in my tone.
I put my hand on the stone and call my power to rise while she descends,

blacking out the sun momentarily on her way down, where no one else can
see. Power flows out of me in a steady drip, buzzing the ends of my
fingertips as I feed it into the stone.

She lands, sticking to the shadows the morning light doesn’t yet touch.
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
Her golden eyes blink in the darkness. “Tell you what?”
“I know.” I shake my head at her. “I should have known earlier. The

second I saw you after Resson, I knew something was different about the
sheen of your scales, but I figured I’d never been around an adolescent, so
what would I know?”

“Different.” She cocks her head to the side and steps out of the
darkness, her scales shifting from midnight black to a shimmering deep
purple. “That’s exactly how I’ve always felt.”



“It’s why you feel like you don’t fit in with the other adolescents,” I note,
my hand shaking as I hold the power steady, giving the stone what I can
until others arrive to help. “It’s why you were allowed to bond. Gods, you
told me yourself, but I thought you were just being…”

“An adolescent?” she challenges, flaring her nostrils.
Nodding, I try to ignore the sounds of battle high above so I can

concentrate on saving us, even as anger barrels down the bond from Tairn,
and fury… I can’t think about what Xaden’s doing. “I should have listened
when you said you were the head of your own den. That’s why no one could
fight your Right of Benefaction last year. Why the Empyrean allowed a
juvenile to bond.”

“Say it. Don’t just guess,” she demands.
Even a slow breath won’t calm my racing heart. “Your scales aren’t

really black.”
“No.” Even now, her scales are changing, taking on the grayish hue of

the stone around us. “But he is, and I so badly want to be just like him.”
“Tairn.” It’s not hard to guess.
“He doesn’t know. Only the elders do.” She lowers her head, resting it

on the ground in front of me. “They revere him. He is strong, and loyal, and
fierce.”

“You are all those things, too.” I wobble under the strain of wielding but
keep my balance, keep the power flowing into the stone. “You didn’t have
to hide. You could have told me.”

“If you didn’t figure it out, you weren’t worthy of knowing.” She huffs.
“I waited six hundred and fifty years to hatch. Waited until your eighteenth
summer, when I heard our elders talk of the weakling daughter of their
general, the girl forecasted to become the head of the scribes, and I knew.
You would have the mind of a scribe and the heart of a rider. You would be
mine.” She leans into my hand. “You are as unique as I am. We want the
same things.”

“You couldn’t have known I would be a rider.”
“And yet, here we are.”



A thousand questions go through my head, none of which we have the
time for, so I give her exactly what I wanted—to be seen for who and what
she is. “You are not a black dragon, or any of the six that we know of.
You’re a seventh breed.”

“Yes.” Her eyes widen in excitement.
I suck in a quick, steadying breath. “I want you to tell me everything, but

our friends are dying, so I need to ask if you are willing to breathe fire for
the stone.” Sweat pops on my forehead as my temperature rises, and yet I
pull more and more power, my arm trembling with the effort to keep it
leashed, keep it trickling instead of striking.

“It is why I was left behind.” She cocks her head to the other side. “At
least from what I remember. It has been centuries.”

“Nice to see you, Cam. Your father’s been looking for you.” I hear
Mom’s voice from the other side of the stone.

“I’m a bonded rider. There’s nothing he can—”
“Don’t really care. It holds power?”
Mom? What the hell could she be doing here? She should be on the

battlefield. “Fly,” I order Andarna, my voice weakening. “I don’t trust her
to see you.”

“It holds power,” Brennan replies.
Andarna hesitates, then launches, flying for the top of the chamber. My

fingers scrape across the stone as I slowly make my way around the side.
“You are pushing the limits,” Tairn warns, distress tightening his tone.
“I have no choice.” Taking a few staggered steps, I reach for Xaden

lightly, not to distract but just to feel— His shields are up, blocking me
completely out.

“He fights,” Tairn says, and my vision darkens momentarily before
clearing again…with a view of the battlefield. I’m seeing through his eyes
just like I had Andarna’s last year.

A swath of gray blocks out the world a second before the sky appears
again, red flowing against the clouds in a stream, and then Tairn glances
beneath him, watching the wyvern fall with a burst of satisfaction before he
scans the ground, spotting Xaden near the edge of the ravine.



My heart beats erratically as I watch the Sage easily block each of
Xaden’s shadows with blasts of blue daggers of fire, then stops completely
when the dappled sunlight catches on two blades imbedded in the ground
behind the staff-wielding venin.

Xaden must have thrown his daggers and missed. I know he carries a
third, but will he get to use it? Because the Sage isn’t losing territory. He’s
gaining on Xaden, coming closer step by step, backing Xaden against the
edge of the ravine.

Green fire streams from overhead, and Tairn jerks his attention upward
to Sgaeyl and the three wyvern moving in to attack, one blasting cherry-red
fire. Oh gods, there are even more breeds than we know about. Terror
floods the pathway, and my vision darkens again, my ears ringing as if I’ve
just been hit.

I blink and breathe deeply, forcing air through my throat as it constricts,
and the chamber comes back into view. Stumbling one step, then another
and another, I drag my hand along the slowly warming stone as I turn the
corner to the front of the wardstone chamber, catching sight of Mom,
Brennan, and Aaric in the middle of a conversation I can’t hear over the
ringing in my ears.

The power not only burns but scorches my veins, my muscles, my very
bones.

“You’re burning out,” Andarna warns, her voice pitching high with
worry.

The next breath I take singes my lungs.
“Silver One!” Tairn roars.
The wards have to go up. “You both have to live. Promise me you’ll

choose to live.”
Because I’m starting to realize the price of imbuing this wardstone in

time to save everyone I love, and it’s my life. My power feels so
insignificant to a stone this size. It would take all of Tairn’s power—his
very life—and I won’t give that. But I can give enough that the riders who
make it can finish the job.



I fall to my knees, but I don’t lose contact. I pour and pour, opening my
Archives door and taking on the full force of Tairn’s power, shaking with
the effort to keep it controlled, focused, constructive instead of violent.

“Violet?” Brennan’s voice sounds from far away.
Heat surges through me in waves as I push power into the stone, and my

world narrows to pain, heat, and my racing heartbeat.
“Violet!” Mom rushes to me, her eyes wide with fear as she reaches for

my free hand, then gasps, drawing back a red, blistered palm.
The ground rises toward my face, and I throw that hand out to catch

myself against the stone floor and keep channeling. So what if my skin
sizzles, my fingers redden, my muscles give out, and I surrender to the fire?
Nothing matters beyond imbuing this stone, raising the wards that will save
my friends, my siblings, Xaden.

“What’s your signet?” Mom shouts, but I lack the strength to lift my
head.

“You can’t do this,” Andarna argues in a shriek.
“You have your purpose.” Even my mental voice is a whisper. “Maybe

this is mine.”
“Hasn’t manifested,” Aaric answers in a panic.
“What about the others out there?” Mom’s voice rises.
He starts to answer the ones he knows of, and I tune him out to stay

focused on control, on lasting long enough to be the most use.
Brennan hits the ground to my left, crouching a few feet away, his lips

moving, but I close my eyes and reach for more of the power that’s slowly
killing me.

“You will cease!” Tairn orders.
“I’m so sorry.” The muscles in my arm lock from exhaustion. Finally.

Now I won’t have to hold it in place. I’m entering the final stages of
burnout, just like I had on top of the mountain with Varrish. “You shouldn’t
have to lose two riders this way.”

Forcing my eyes open, I stare at the pattern of rock beneath my fingers,
and I get it. I finally understand why someone would turn to stealing magic.



All of the power in the world is beneath my fingertips, and if I channel, if I
take from the earth instead of from Tairn, I’ll have enough power to save—

“You must save yourself,” Tairn demands. “I chose you not as my next,
but as my last, and should you fall, then I will follow.”

“No.” Steam rises from my skin.
“Let go,” Andarna pleads, and the rush of air in the chamber paired with

the slight tremble of the ground tells me she’s landed.
“I won’t do it!” Sloane’s shout echoes off the walls and breaks through

the haze.
Inch by painful inch, I force myself to raise my head, just in time to see

Brennan’s eyes widen and Mom’s boot rising toward my shoulder. She
makes impact softly, and before I can open my mouth, she kicks with her
full strength, sending me sprawling across the chamber floor and breaking
my hold on the wardstone.

Power flies into the air with the crack of lightning as I hit my back, and
a scream tears from my throat, the sound echoed by Brennan as his face fills
my vision and he grasps my hand. Cool relief streaks up my arm, the burn
fading, my muscles mending from the strain and releasing.

If I don’t cut the power, he’ll die. He can’t mend me that fast over and
over, and the next wave of heat pushes forward—

I shove the Archives door closed with the last of my mental strength,
and the power cuts off. The relief from Tairn and Andarna is instant, but all
I taste is the sour bite of defeat as I lie there, my brother kneeling next to
me as he mends the body I’ve been so reckless with.

And above me, I see a flash of green before the swarm comes into view,
the sky darkening with beating gray wings.

“It’s the only way,” Mom yells, and I turn my head as my muscles knit
and my skin cools. “You can’t imbue something this big in an instant. Not
without hundreds of riders, which we don’t have. If you want to save your
friends, you’ll do this!” she shouts at Sloane, her fingers wrapped around
the first-year’s wrist as she drags her to the wardstone.

“Mom?” I croak, but she doesn’t answer.
“You’re a Mairi,” Mom says to Sloane.



“Yes.” Her bright blue eyes meet mine, wide with uncertainty.
“I killed your mother.” Mom taps on her chest.
“Mom!” I shout.
Brennan collapses next to me, pale and sweating, and I haul myself to

my knees.
“I tracked her down and hauled her to her own execution, remember?”

Mom says to Sloane, pushing her against the stone. “You were there. I made
you watch. You and your brother.”

“Liam,” Sloane whispers.
Mom nods, picking up Sloane’s left hand and putting it on the lowest

circle of the massive rune carved into the stone. “I could have stopped his
death, too, if I’d just paid a little more attention last year to what my own
aide was doing.”

“No!” I shout, lunging forward. Aaric runs in from the side of the ward
chamber, not only catching me but stopping me. “Let me go!”

“I can’t,” he says apologetically. “She’s right. And if I have to choose
between her life and yours, I choose yours.”

My life or…hers?
“Andarna!” I scream.
“I’m so sorry. I choose your life, too. You are mine. I can’t let you die.”
Andarna shifts around my side, moving forward so she’s poised to step

between my mother and me.
Oh gods. No. Sloane is a siphon.
“Can you hear them up there dying? That’s what’s happening,” Mom

says, her tone softer than she’s ever used with me. “Your friends are dying,
Cadet Mairi. Tyrrendor’s heir is fighting for his life, and you can stop it.
You can save them all.” She picks up her free hand, and to my dread,
Sloane doesn’t drop the other from the stone.

“Don’t do it!” I cry. “Sloane, that’s my mother.” This isn’t happening.
Maybe Sloane won’t listen to me, but she’ll listen to Xaden. I throw down
my shields—

Pain. Agonizing, blistering pain roars down the pathway. Hopelessness
and… helplessness? It hits me from every angle, stealing my breath,



overwhelming my senses and my strength. My body sags—my full weight
in Aaric’s arms—as my mind fights to separate Xaden’s emotions from
mine.

He’s… I can’t think around the pain, can’t breathe for the tightness in
my chest, can’t feel the ground beneath my feet.

“Xaden’s dying,” I whisper.
Sloane’s gaze snaps to mine, and that’s all it takes.
“You don’t have to do anything but stand there,” my mother promises

somewhere in the distance. “Your signet will take over for you. Think of
yourself as nothing more than a conduit for power. You’re simply
facilitating mine flowing into the stone.”

“Violet?” Sloane whispers.
I drag my gaze to hers, but I’m not here. Not really. I’m dying on the

battlefield, the last of my strength fading, burning, consuming my body. But
it will be worth it to save the one I love. Violet.

“Fight!” I scream down the bond at all three of them, shouting past
blood and vengeance. Wrath and fire. The sour taste of wyvern flesh
between her teeth.

“You can do this,” Mom says, her voice soothing.
“Mom!” My voice cracks as she laces her fingers with Sloane’s.
“It’s all right,” Mom says to me, her eyes softening as Sloane’s body

goes rigid. “As soon as my power—Aimsir’s power—lives within the stone,
fire it. Raise the wards. There’s nothing I wouldn’t do to keep you safe. Do
you understand? Everything was to get you to this moment, when you’d be
strong enough—” She falls to her knees but doesn’t let go of Sloane.

“No, no, no.” I fight Aaric’s arms as my chest threatens to collapse, to
crumple in on my heart. Mom blinks in and out of my vision, blurry one
second, then clear.

“I’m so sorry,” Aaric whispers.
“You’re everything we dreamed you would be,” Mom says quietly, her

skin paling even as Sloane’s flushes scarlet. “All three of you.” She looks
down at Brennan. “And I’ll get to see him soon.”

Our father. My eyes flare as I struggle to break free from Aaric.



“Don’t,” Brennan begs, shaking his head. “Don’t do this.” He staggers to
his feet, stumbling her direction, but doesn’t get far before falling.

“Live well.” Her head bobs and her eyes roll as her skin takes on a waxy
pallor that’s an obscene contrast to her flight leathers as her chest rises and
falls slower, in a stuttered, incomplete breath.

Brennan crawls toward her.
Footsteps sound from behind me, coming at us at a run.
“No!” I scream, tearing my throat, ripping into my soul.
A distinct, hair-raising hum emanates from the wardstone as Mom falls

forward into Brennan’s arms.
Sloane staggers backward, staring at her palms like they belong to

someone else, and Aaric finally lets me go.
I fly forward, hitting my knees in front of where Brennan sits with

Mom’s body draped across his lap, his hand trembling as he reaches for her
face. My fingers find her neck, but there’s no pulse. No heat. No life.

The only beat I hear are bootsteps racing into the chamber.
She’s gone.
“Mom,” Brennan whispers, his face crumpling as he looks down at her.
“What did you do!” Mira drops to her knees and pulls Mom’s body from

Brennan, her hands furiously seeking what mine just had, any sign of a
heartbeat. “Mom?” She shakes her violently, but Mom’s head rolls onto her
shoulder.

“Mom!”
I can’t breathe. She’s the tide, the storms, the very air, a force too big to

be extinguished without ripping the world itself apart to the core. How can
she just be gone?

“I’m so sorry.” Sloane cries softly.
“What did you do?” Mira yells again, the full force of her wrath turned

on Brennan.
“Xaden needs you,” Andarna says, but I can’t move. “Tairn and Sgaeyl

wait with him.”
“We need to get them out,” Aaric says, and there are hands—his, I think

—on my shoulders, pulling me up off the floor and guiding me backward.



Mira follows, hooking her arms under Mom’s and dragging her from the
chamber. Sloane helps Brennan, and then we’re all in the tunnel. Someone
else carries Mom. One of the first-years?

Mira’s hands are on my face, searching my eyes, as a shape blocks the
entrance to the tunnel. “Are you all right?”

“I couldn’t stop her.” Was that my voice? Or Brennan’s?
Heat flares, intense enough to suck the oxygen from my lungs, but it

doesn’t touch us.
Andarna is in the doorway, her wings flared to stop the flame that circles

the chamber, flowing in from six above and the one who makes all the
difference. A pulse of energy runs through me in a wave. The wards.

When Andarna moves, my gaze wanders up the mended wardstone to
the iron flame that burns black on top.

It’s all that’s left of my mother.

OceanofPDF.com



Most generals dream of dying in service to their kingdom.

But you know me better than that, my love.


When I fall, it will be for one reason only: to protect our children.

—RECOVERED, UNSENT CORRESPONDENCE OF GENERAL LILITH
SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE

Thud. Thud. The sound echoes down the ward chamber. “Wyvern
bodies,” Andarna tells me, pivoting to peek her head through the

doorway. “Please forgive me.” Her golden eyes blink.
Forgive her?
“She made a choice,” I whisper, but the tears falling down my cheeks

aren’t quite as resigned, nor are the sobs racking Mira’s body, and the blank
stare on Brennan’s face is anything but peaceful as he removes his flight
jacket in slow, jerky motions and drapes it over Mom’s body.

I’m not sure how much time passes as we’re ushered down the tunnel
and through the narrow passage. The stairs are a blur.

“You are alive. You will live today. You will wake tomorrow,” Tairn
promises me as I force one foot in front of the other.

“Xaden?” I reach through the bond, but his shields are up.
“He lives.”
Thank you, Dunne.
That’s gravity, right? He’s enough to keep my feet grounded. To keep

the sun rising.
“He’ll put her body in the quadrant,” someone tells Brennan. A dragon

must have brought Mom’s body out of the ward chamber.
We emerge from the southwest tower to the sounds of victory. Cheers

and cries of thanks to the gods. Infantry, healers, riders, and fliers alike clog



the hallway with their hugs, but we make it through.
Mira, Brennan, and I stand in the doorway of the courtyard, watching

the celebration break into full force. None of us seem able to move.
A face appears in front of mine. Brown eyes. Brown hair. Dain.
“Violet?” He lifts a blood-soaked arm to reach for me, then thinks twice.

“Are you—”
“Move!” Rhiannon pushes him out of the way, her grin tired and so very

beautiful. “You got the wards up!” She cups my face with both hands.
“Yes.” I manage a nod, my gaze skimming over her face. There are a

few tears in the thighs of her leathers that might be stab wounds, but I can’t
tell. “Are you hurt?”

“It’s nothing,” she assures me. “You should have seen it! The wyvern
started falling from the sky like dead weights, and the venin panicked and
ran. Leadership is hunting them down.”

“Good. That’s good.” I keep nodding. “The others?”
“Ridoc is all right. Imogen took a swipe on her side, but she’s barely

complaining. Quinn has a busted cheek, but I think it’s mostly swelling, and
I was just headed to check on Sawyer and the fliers. Want to…” She studies
my expression. “Xaden?”

“Alive,” I croak. “According to Tairn.”
She glances at Brennan, then Mira before turning back toward me,

understanding dawning as her face falls.
“My mom,” I try to explain, but my throat closes. “She. The wardstone

didn’t have any power, and my mom…”
“Oh, Vi.” Rhi takes the step that separates us and pulls me in a hug.
It doesn’t matter that I shouldn’t, that it’s a shameful display of emotion,

or that she wouldn’t want it. I break down and sob against Rhiannon’s
shoulder, my breaths coming in heaving gasps. With every tear, I feel my
feet gain traction on a spinning world, feel the first waves of shock start to
pass.

When I look up, Brennan is sitting on the steps that lead into the
administration building, looking ready to pass out as he gives orders, and
Mira is nowhere to be seen.



“What do you need?” Rhi asks.
I reach out to Xaden, but his shields are still locked up tight, so I drag

the backs of my hands across my face and try like hell to pull myself
together. “I need to lay eyes on Tairn and Xaden.”

“In the front,” Tairn tells me, and I head in that direction, passing the
negotiations between Melgren and Devera and pausing when I hear him
laying out terms for our return. An attack, a horde that big? Bodies
dropping all over the kingdom? There’s no chance leadership can hide this.
It’s only a matter of hours before every Navarrian citizen knows they’ve
been lied to. No wonder they want us to return.

I’m not even sure I want to come back. I make my way through the
courtyard and then the archway, into the open air.

Open…graveyard.
Bodies of wyvern litter the ground with a few colors mixed in, but I

don’t recognize any of the dragons I pass as I make my way to the looming
shapes of Tairn and Sgaeyl near the edge of the ravine.

“Are you harmed?” I ask him.
“You would know if I were,” he says, his head swiveling as Andarna

approaches, her right wing trembling as she flares them just before landing.
“You two need to catch up. Right now.”
Tairn turns a golden eye on me.
“Right. Now,” I repeat.
His attention fully shifts to Andarna, and I walk toward Sgaeyl, feeling

Xaden beyond where she sits guard.
“Are you going to let me pass?” I ask her, keeping my eyes on hers and

not the blood beard she’s sporting.
“You fought well today.”
“Thank you.” A reluctant smile tugs at my lips. “You did, too.”
“Yes, well, I’m expected to.” She shifts her forelegs, revealing Xaden

standing at the edge of the ravine, his back turned toward me. “Be careful
of your words.”

“That’s ironic coming from you,” I mutter but move forward, surveying
him. There’s a laceration across his upper back, but that’s all I see as I walk



to his side, keeping my toes a few inches from the edge, where his damn
near hang over. “What happened?”

“I killed him.” His voice is flat, and so is his expression, the noon sun
cutting away almost every shadow from his face. “Snapped whatever tether
he had on me and killed him. His body fell into the ravine, and now I keep
watching the river like it’s going to pop back up, even though I know he’s
miles downstream by now.”

“I’m sorry I wasn’t here.” I reach for his hand, but he tugs it away.
“I’m not. You saved us.”
“My mother saved us.” My voice cracks. “She had Sloane siphon

Aimsir’s power and both their life energies into the wardstone. She’s gone.”
His eyes slide closed. “I’m so fucking sorry.”
“She killed your father. Why would you be sorry?” I swipe at another

tear that leaks out.
“I didn’t want her dead,” he says softly. “I could never want anyone you

love dead.”
Silence falls over us, and it’s not the comfortable kind.
“Melgren wants us to come back,” I throw out there, looking for some

reaction, any reaction.
“Then we come back.” He nods. “Aretia’s wards are already weakening,

and these are intact. Which you’ll explain to me later, right?” His gaze
flicks sideways at me but quickly leaves, like I’m painful to look at.

“I’ll explain,” I promise.
“Good.” He nods. “It’s safer for you here. This is where we should be.”

He drags in a shaky breath, then laughs. “You won’t be as scared under the
full wards.”

My brow furrows. “I just fought an entire wyvern army, dark wielders,
and raised wards, losing my mother in the process. Please, do tell me what
could possibly be scarier than that?”

“You love me,” he whispers.
“You know I do.” I grab hold of his hand, and my stomach twists when

he turns toward me but lowers his eyes. “What’s out there that I should be



scared of, Xaden? What did he tell you? What did you see?” What could he
know that has him this shaken?

Slowly, he drags his gaze up my body, and it feels like it takes years for
him to just look at me.

When he finally does, I gasp, my hand tightening on his in reflex.
No. That single word is all I can think, feel, scream internally as I stare

up at the man I’m hopelessly in love with.
“Me,” he whispers, a faint, almost indistinguishable red ring emanating

from his gold-flecked onyx irises. “You should be scared of me.”

OceanofPDF.com



We have tried every method we know of, as you requested.

There is no cure. There is only control.

—MISSIVE FROM LIEUTENANT COLONEL NOLON COLBERSY TO GENERAL
LILITH SORRENGAIL



CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX

XADEN
 

Every note of Sgaeyl’s terror plays down my spine as I hang suspended
mere feet above the battlefield, my muscles frozen, my power locked

uselessly inside of me. Even if he let me go, I’m not sure I’d have enough
strength left to wield. He wore me down for fucking fun.

I was never a match for him. None of us are.
Every nerve in my body screams from the pain of incineration, the heat

from wielding too much for too long burning me alive. But worse than the
pain is the defeat.

“It hurts, doesn’t it? Nearing burnout?” The Sage walks a slow circle
around me, his blue robes darker at the hem from the melting snow, mere
feet from the ravine I had to cross to prove I could cut it in this place.
“Magic does like everything in balance. Take too much and she’ll consume
you for overstepping.”

I tear at the bonds he has wrapped around me, invisible strings of power
that bind me like a trussed chicken.

“You strike. I block. You throw. I dodge.” He sighs, dragging his staff in
the dirt behind him.

Just like my fucking nightmares.



Except the sweat dripping down the back of my neck reminds me that
this is very much my reality. That Violet is beneath Basgiath, fighting to
raise the wards; that Tairn is picking off the wyverns tearing at Sgaeyl
above me to keep her from my side. What is it about me that fails the
females in my life?

“So, I’m going to give you one last chance to make the right choice so
we can get this over with,” the Sage says, stopping in front of me and
smiling up at me with those eerie red-rimmed eyes and spider-webbed
veins. He retreats a handful of steps, then taps the staff on the ground.

Gravity claims me, and I fall, passing my feet and slamming into the
ground on my hands and knees.

“I told you once that you’d turn for love,” he says, holding his arms out.
“And so you shall.”

“You don’t know shit about me.” I stumble for my feet and fall again,
landing on my knees as Sgaeyl roars in pure fury overhead.

“I know more than you think.” He lowers his staff and leans on it like a
walking stick.

“Because you’re a Sage?” I spit, grounding my feet on that hillside in
Tyrrendor and reaching for my power.

“A Sage?” He laughs. “I am a general.”
Fire races down my arms and shadows stream from beneath me,

wrapping around the arrogant asshole’s torso. Satisfaction courses through
me in a high better than churram. “Generals die the same as soldiers.” I
fight with my own arms to get them to move, but they don’t obey, having
gone into muscle failure long before he hefted me into the sky.

“Do they?” He laughs again, wrapped in darkness. “Come on, shadow
wielder. Turn. It’s the only way to save her.”

“Fuck you.” I throw myself down the bond and feel Violet slipping,
burning, intending to… My shadows slip, but the general doesn’t move.

She’s going to sacrifice herself to save me.
She intends to die.
My heart vaults into my throat, and I taste it again, the same as it was

when I sat by her bedside after Resson—fear.



“You know what will happen when you fail?” the general taunts, flicking
at the weak bands of shadow that curl around his throat. “I’ll step over your
dead body and find her. Then I’ll wrap my hands around her delicate little
neck—”

Fury surges in my veins, the blast of adrenaline enough to solidify the
bands of shadow and yank them tight, but no matter how hard I tug, he
won’t move.

“—and drain her.”
I slam one hand onto the ground and clench my other fist, my arm

shaking with the effort it takes to hold him there as I delve to the depths of
Sgaeyl’s power and let the fire consume me.

“Hold him!” she demands.
But I can’t.
He’s too strong, and I have nothing left. But I’ll be damned if Violet

suffers the consequences. He won’t get his hands on her. Not today. Not
ever. The slush beneath my palm melts, and I feel… There’s something
beneath me.

A steady flow of unmistakable…power.
“You cannot!” Sgaeyl shrieks. “I chose you!”
But Violet chose me, too.
I reach.
My heart stammers and I gasp for air, jolting upright in bed. I check the

back of my neck, but it’s dry. No dripping sweat. No aching muscles. No
exhaustion.

Just Violet, sleeping beside me, her cheek resting on the pillow, her
breaths deep and even thanks to the exhaustion that’s left bruises under her
eyes, her arm bent as though reaching out for me even in her dreams.

I watch her long enough to calm my racing heart, my gaze skimming
over every part of her I can see from the silvery lines of her hard-won scars
to the silvery half of her hair on the pillow. She’s so fucking beautiful I can
barely breathe. And I almost lost her.

My fingertips trail over the smooth, soft skin of her cheek, spotting the
tracks her tears left. She lost her mother today, and while I won’t mourn the



loss of Lilith Sorrengail, I can’t stand the pain Violet’s suffering.
And yet I’m about to be the biggest cause of it.
“I love you,” I whisper, just because I can, and then I climb from the bed

as quietly as possible and dress quickly in the moonlight.
Silently, I leave the room, then make my way down the hall and to the

staircase, surrounding myself in the warmth of my shadows as I descend
floor by floor to the tunnels of Basgiath.

I don’t bother reaching for Sgaeyl. She’s been eerily silent since the
battle ended.

The doors to the bridge open at my command, as do the ones on the far
side when I reach them, keeping myself wrapped in darkness as I pass the
overflowing clinic where we’d spent hours waiting for Sawyer to come out
of surgery earlier.

I sidestep two drunken infantry cadets and keep walking down the
tunnel, only turning when I reach the guarded staircase that leads to my
target. The guard cracks a yawn, and I slip by unnoticed thanks to the
increase in my signet… or whatever this is.

The last time I walked these stairs, I’d just murdered everyone who
stood between me and Violet. It’s ironic that’s the cell I end up standing in
front of now, peering through the barred window at Jack-fucking-Barlowe.

“You look good,” the second-year says, sitting up on the reconstructed
bunk and smiling. “You here to dose me? Pretty sure I’m not due until
tomorrow morning.”

“What’s the cure?” I fold my arms across my chest.
“For the serum?” He scoffs. “The antidote.”
“You know what I fucking mean.” Shadows scurry in from the edges of

the walls in his cell. “Tell me what the cure is, and I won’t send for the
Rybestad Chest that will hold you in the air until you mummify.”

He stands slowly, cracking his neck before he moves to the center of the
room, where the chair they’d tortured Violet in had been bolted. “Cures are
for diseases. What we have is power, and that, dear Riorson, isn’t curable.
It’s enviable.”

“Bullshit. There’s a way to get rid of this,” I seethe.



His smile grows even wider. “Oh no. There’s no cure. You can never
give back what’s taken—you’ll only hunger for more.”

“I’d rather die than become one of you.” Fear flavors the words because
I feel it, the power beneath the college, the craving to sate the need for it.

“And yet, you just did.” Jack laughs, and the sound curdles my blood.
“All this time, you’ve been convincing everyone you’re the hero, and now
you’ll be the villain…especially in her story. Welcome to our fucked-up
family. Guess we’re brothers now.”

OceanofPDF.com



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thank you to my husband, Jason, for being the best inspiration an author
could ever have for the perfect book boyfriend and for your endless support
in what can only be described as years of utter chaos. Thank you for
holding my hand when the world went wonky, getting me to every doctor’s
appointment, and managing the overwhelming calendar that comes with
having four sons and a wife with Ehlers-Danlos. Thank you to my six
children, who are quite simply my everything. To my sister, Kate, who
never complained when we were holed up in a London hotel room with
edits instead of sightseeing: love you, mean it. To my parents, who are
always there when I need them. To my best friend, Emily Byer, for always
hunting me down when I disappear into the writing cave for months.

Thank you to my team at Red Tower. Thank you to my editor Liz
Pelletier, for giving me the chance to write my favorite genre. To Stacy
Abrams for what shall be called the July all-nighter. You are an absolute
goddess. Hannah, Lydia, Rae, Heather, Curtis, Molly, Jessica, Toni, Nicole,
Veronica, and everyone at Entangled and Macmillan for answering endless
streams of emails and for bringing this book to the marketplace. To Julia
Kniep and Becky West for all the incredible notes and support. To Bree
Archer for this phenomenal cover and Elizabeth and Amy for the exquisite
art. To Meredith Johnson for being the GOAT. Thank you to my
phenomenal agent, Louise Fury, for always standing at my back.

Thank you to my business manager, KP, for holding my sanity in your
hands and never dropping it. Thank you to my wifeys, our unholy trinity,
Gina Maxwell and Cindi Madsen—I’d be lost without you. To Kyla, who
made this book possible. To Shelby and Cassie for keeping my ducks in a
row and always being my number one hype girls. To every blogger and



reader who has taken a chance on me over the years, I can’t thank you
enough. To my reader group, The Flygirls, for bringing me joy every day.

Lastly, because you’re my beginning and end, thank you again to my
Jason. There’s a little bit of you in every hero I write.



OceanofPDF.com