The Works of Octavia E. Butler

Parable of the Talents*
Parable of the Sower*
Dawn*
Adulthood Rites*
Imago*
Wild Seed*
Mind of My Mind*
Clay’s Ark*
Patternmaster*
Kindred
Survivor
Bloodchild and Other Stories
* Available from Warner Aspect

This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are the product of the author’s
imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or persons, living or
dead, is coincidental.
Copyright © 1993 by Octavia E. Butler
Reading Group Guide copyright © 2000 by Octavia E. Butler and Warner Books.
All rights reserved.
This Warner Books Edition is published by arrangement with Seven Stories Press, New York, NY
Aspect® name and logo are registered trademarks of Warner Books.
Time Warner Book Group
1271 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020
Visit our Web site at www.twbookmark.com.
Printed in the United States of America
First Trade Printing: January 2000
10 9 8 7 6 5
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Butler, Octavia E.
Parable of the sower / Octavia E. Butler.—Warner Books ed.
p. cm.
Sequel: Parable of the talents.
“Aspect.”
ISBN 0-446-67550-4
1. Afro-Americans—California, Southern—Fiction. 2. Twenty-first century—Fiction. 3. California,
Southern—Fiction. I. Title.
PS3552.U827 P37 2000
813'. 54-dc21
99-046567
CIP
Cover design by Don Puckey
Cover illustration by John Blackford
Interior design by Charles Sutherland

Contents
2024
1
2
3
2025
4
5
6
7
8
9
2026
10
11
12
13
2027
14
15
16
17
18

19
20
21
22
23
24
25
A Conversation with Octavia E. Butler

2024
❏❏❏
PRODIGY IS, AT ITS essence, adaptability and persistent, positive
obsession. Without persistence, what remains is an enthusiasm of
the moment. Without adaptability, what remains may be
channeled into destructive fanaticism. Without positive obsession,
there is nothing at all.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
by Lauren Oya Olamina

1
❏❏❏
All that you touch
You Change.
All that you Change
Changes you.
The only lasting truth
Is Change.
God
Is Change.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, JULY 20, 2024
I HAD MY RECURRING dream last night. I guess I should have expected it. It
comes to me when I struggle—when I twist on my own personal hook and try
to pretend that nothing unusual is happening. It comes to me when I try to be
my father’s daughter.
Today is our birthday—my fifteenth and my father’s fifty-fifth.
Tomorrow, I’ll try to please him—him and the community and God. So last
night, I dreamed a reminder that it’s all a lie. I think I need to write about the
dream because this particular lie bothers me so much.
I’m learning to fly, to levitate myself. No one is teaching me. I’m just
learning on my own, little by little, dream lesson by dream lesson. Not a very
subtle image, but a persistent one. I’ve had many lessons, and I’m better at
flying than I used to be. I trust my ability more now, but I’m still afraid. I
can’t quite control my directions yet.
I lean forward toward the doorway. It’s a doorway like the one between

my room and the hall. It seems to be a long way from me, but I lean toward it.
Holding my body stiff and tense, I let go of whatever I’m grasping, whatever
has kept me from rising or falling so far. And I lean into the air, straining
upward, not moving upward, but not quite falling down either. Then I do
begin to move, as though to slide on the air drifting a few feet above the floor,
caught between terror and joy.
I drift toward the doorway. Cool, pale light glows from it. Then I slide a
little to the right; and a little more. I can see that I’m going to miss the door
and hit the wall beside it, but I can’t stop or turn. I drift away from the door,
away from the cool glow into another light.
The wall before me is burning. Fire has sprung from nowhere, has eaten in
through the wall, has begun to reach toward me, reach for me. The fire
spreads. I drift into it. It blazes up around me. I thrash and scramble and try to
swim back out of it, grabbing handfuls of air and fire, kicking, burning!
Darkness.
Perhaps I awake a little. I do sometimes when the fire swallows me.
That’s bad. When I wake up all the way, I can’t get back to sleep. I try, but
I’ve never been able to.
This time I don’t wake up all the way. I fade into the second part of the
dream—the part that’s ordinary and real, the part that did happen years ago
when I was little, though at the time it didn’t seem to matter.
Darkness.
Darkness brightening.
Stars.
Stars casting their cool, pale, glinting light.
“We couldn’t see so many stars when I was little,” my stepmother says to
me. She speaks in Spanish, her own first language. She stands still and small,
looking up at the broad sweep of the Milky Way. She and I have gone out
after dark to take the washing down from the clothesline. The day has been
hot, as usual, and we both like the cool darkness of early night. There’s no
moon, but we can see very well. The sky is full of stars.
The neighborhood wall is a massive, looming presence nearby. I see it as
a crouching animal, perhaps about to spring, more threatening than protective.
But my stepmother is there, and she isn’t afraid. I stay close to her. I’m seven
years old.
I look up at the stars and the deep, black sky. “Why couldn’t you see the
stars?” I ask her. “Everyone can see them.” I speak in Spanish, too, as she’s
taught me. It’s an intimacy somehow.
“City lights,” she says. “Lights, progress, growth, all those things we’re
too hot and too poor to bother with anymore.” She pauses. “When I was your

age, my mother told me that the stars—the few stars we could see—were
windows into heaven. Windows for God to look through to keep an eye on us.
I believed her for almost a year.” My stepmother hands me an armload of my
youngest brother’s diapers. I take them, walk back toward the house where
she has left her big wicker laundry basket, and pile the diapers atop the rest of
the clothes. The basket is full. I look to see that my stepmother is not
watching me, then let myself fall backward onto the soft mound of stiff, clean
clothes. For a moment, the fall is like floating.
I lie there, looking up at the stars. I pick out some of the constellations and
name the stars that make them up. I’ve learned them from an astronomy book
that belonged to my father’s mother.
I see the sudden light streak of a meteor flashing westward across the sky.
I stare after it, hoping to see another. Then my stepmother calls me and I go
back to her.
“There are city lights now,” I say to her. “They don’t hide the stars.”
She shakes her head. “There aren’t anywhere near as many as there were.
Kids today have no idea what a blaze of light cities used to be—and not that
long ago.”
“I’d rather have the stars,” I say.
“The stars are free.” She shrugs. “I’d rather have the city lights back
myself, the sooner the better. But we can afford the stars.”

2
❏❏❏
A gift of God
May sear unready fingers.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SUNDAY, JULY 21, 2024
AT LEAST THREE YEARS ago, my fathers God stopped being my God. His
church stopped being my church. And yet, today, because I’m a coward, I let
myself be initiated into that church. I let my father baptize me in all three
names of that God who isn’t mine any more.
My God has another name.
We got up early this morning because we had to go across town to church.
Most Sundays, Dad holds church services in our front rooms. He’s a Baptist
minister, and even though not all of the people who live within our
neighborhood walls are Baptists, those who feel the need to go to church are
glad to come to us. That way they don’t have to risk going outside where
things are so dangerous and crazy. It’s bad enough that some people—my
father for one—have to go out to work at least once a week. None of us goes
out to school any more. Adults get nervous about kids going outside.
But today was special. For today, my father made arrangements with
another minister—a friend of his who still had a real church building with a
real baptistery.
Dad once had a church just a few blocks outside our wall. He began it
before there were so many walls. But after it had been slept in by the
homeless, robbed, and vandalized several times, someone poured gasoline in
and around it and burned it down. Seven of the homeless people sleeping
inside on that last night burned with it.
But somehow, Dad’s friend Reverend Robinson has managed to keep his
church from being destroyed. We rode our bikes to it this morning—me, two
of my brothers, four other neighborhood kids who were ready to be baptized,

plus my father and some other neighborhood adults riding shotgun. All the
adults were armed. That’s the rule. Go out in a bunch, and go armed.
The alternative was to be baptized in the bathtub at home. That would
have been cheaper and safer and fine with me. I said so, but no one paid
attention to me. To the adults, going outside to a real church was like stepping
back into the good old days when there were churches all over the place and
too many lights and gasoline was for fueling cars and trucks instead of for
torching things. They never miss a chance to relive the good old days or to
tell kids how great it’s going to be when the country gets back on its feet and
good times come back.
Yeah.
To us kids—most of us—the trip was just an adventure, an excuse to go
outside the wall. We would be baptized out of duty or as a kind of insurance,
but most of us aren’t that much concerned with religion. I am, but then I have
a different religion.
“Why take chances,” Silvia Dunn said to me a few days ago. “Maybe
there’s something to all this religion stuff.” Her parents thought there was, so
she was with us.
My brother Keith who was also with us didn’t share any of my beliefs. He
just didn’t care. Dad wanted him to be baptized, so what the hell. There
wasn’t much that Keith did care about. He liked to hang out with his friends
and pretend to be grown up, dodge work and dodge school and dodge church.
He’s only twelve, the oldest of my three brothers. I don’t like him much, but
he’s my stepmother’s favorite. Three smart sons and one dumb one, and it’s
the dumb one she loves best.
Keith looked around more than anyone as we rode. His ambition, if you
could call it that, is to get out of the neighborhood and go to Los Angeles.
He’s never too clear about what he’ll do there. He just wants to go to the big
city and make big money. According to my father, the big city is a carcass
covered with too many maggots. I think he’s right, though not all the maggots
are in LA. They’re here, too.
But maggots tend not to be early-morning types. We rode past people
stretched out, sleeping on the sidewalks, and a few just waking up, but they
paid no attention to us. I saw at least three people who weren’t going to wake
up again, ever. One of them was headless. I caught myself looking around for
the head. After that, I tired not to look around at all.
A woman, young, naked, and filthy stumbled along past us. I got a look at
her slack expression and realized that she was dazed or drunk or something.
Maybe she had been raped so much that she was crazy. I’d heard stories
of that happening. Or maybe she was just high on drugs. The boys in our

group almost fell off their bikes, staring at her. What wonderful religious
thoughts they would be having for a while.
The naked woman never looked at us. I glanced back after we’d passed
her and saw that she had settled down in the weeds against someone else’s
neighborhood wall.
A lot of our ride was along one neighborhood wall after another; some a
block long, some two blocks, some five… Up toward the hills there were
walled estates—one big house and a lot of shacky little dependencies where
the servants lived. We didn’t pass anything like that today. In fact we passed a
couple of neighborhoods so poor that their walls were made up of unmortared
rocks, chunks of concrete, and trash. Then there were the pitiful, unwalled
residential areas. A lot of the houses were trashed—burned, vandalized,
infested with drunks or druggies or squatted-in by homeless families with
their filthy, gaunt, half-naked children. Their kids were wide awake and
watching us this morning. I feel sorry for the little ones, but the ones my age
and older make me nervous. We ride down the middle of the cracked street,
and the kids come out and stand along the curb to stare at us. They just stand
and stare. I think if there were only one or two of us, or if they couldn’t see
our guns, they might try to pull us down and steal our bikes, our clothes, our
shoes, whatever. Then what? Rape? Murder? We could wind up like that
naked woman, stumbling along, dazed, maybe hurt, sure to attract dangerous
attention unless she could steal some clothing. I wish we could have given her
something.
My stepmother says she and my father stopped to help an injured woman
once, and the guys who had injured her jumped out from behind a wall and
almost killed them.
And we’re in Robledo—20 miles from Los Angeles, and, according to
Dad, once a rich, green, unwalled little city that he had been eager to abandon
when he was a young man. Like Keith, he had wanted to escape the dullness
of Robledo for big city excitement. L.A. was better then—less lethal. He lived
there for 21 years. Then in 2010, his parents were murdered and he inherited
their house. Whoever killed them had robbed the house and smashed up the
furniture, but they didn’t torch anything. There was no neighborhood wall
back then.
Crazy to live without a wall to protect you. Even in Robledo, most of the
street poor—squatters, winos, junkies, homeless people in general—are
dangerous. They’re desperate or crazy or both. That’s enough to make anyone
dangerous.
Worse for me, they often have things wrong with them. They cut off each
other’s ears, arms, legs… They carry untreated diseases and festering wounds.

They have no money to spend on water to wash with so even the unwounded
have sores. They don’t get enough to eat so they’re malnourished—or they eat
bad food and poison themselves. As I rode, I tried not to look around at them,
but I couldn’t help seeing—collecting—some of their general misery.
I can take a lot of pain without falling apart. I’ve had to learn to do that.
But it was hard, today, to keep peddling and keep up with the others when just
about everyone I saw made me feel worse and worse.
My father glanced back at me every now and then. He tells me, “You can
beat this thing. You don’t have to give in to it.” He has always pretended, or
perhaps believed, that my hyperempathy syndrome was something I could
shake off and forget about. The sharing isn’t real, after all. It isn’t some magic
or ESP that allows me to share the pain or the pleasure of other people. It’s
delusional. Even I admit that. My brother Keith used to pretend to be hurt just
to trick me into sharing his supposed pain. Once he used red ink as fake blood
to make me bleed. I was eleven then, and I still bled through the skin when I
saw someone else bleeding. I couldn’t help doing it, and I always worried that
it would give me away to people outside the family.
I haven’t shared bleeding with anyone since I was twelve and got my first
period. What a relief that was. I just wish all the rest of it had gone away, too.
Keith only tricked me into bleeding that once, and I beat the hell out of him
for it. I didn’t fight much when I was little because it hurt me so. I felt every
blow that I struck, just as though I’d hit myself. So when I did decide that I
had to fight, I set out to hurt the other kid more than kids usually hurt one
another. I broke Michael Talcott’s arm and Rubin Quintanilla’s nose. I
knocked out four of Silvia Dunn’s teeth. They all earned what I did to them
two or three times over. I got punished every time, and I resented it. It was
double punishment, after all, and my father and stepmother knew it. But
knowing didn’t stop them. I think they did it to satisfy the other kids’ parents.
But when I beat up Keith, I knew that Cory or Dad or both of them would
punish me for it—my poor little brother, after all. So I had to see that my poor
little brother paid in advance. What I did to him had to be worthwhile in spite
of what they would do to me.
It was.
We both got it later from Dad—me for hurting a younger kid and Keith
for risking putting “family business” into the street. Dad is big on privacy and
“family business.” There’s a whole range of things we never even hint about
outside the family. First among these is anything about my mother, my
hyperempathy, and how the two are connected. To my father, the whole
business is shameful. He’s a preacher and a professor and a dean. A first wife
who was a drug addict and a daughter who is drug damaged is not something

he wants to boast about. Lucky for me. Being the most vulnerable person I
know is damned sure not something I want to boast about.
I can’t do a thing about my hyperempathy, no matter what Dad thinks or
wants or wishes. I feel what I see others feeling or what I believe they feel.
Hyperempathy is what the doctors call an “organic delusional syndrome.” Big
shit. It hurts, that’s all I know. Thanks to Paracetco, the small pill, the
Einstein powder, the particular drug my mother chose to abuse before my
birth killed her, I’m crazy. I get a lot of grief that doesn’t belong to me, and
that isn’t real. But it hurts.
I’m supposed to share pleasure and pain, but there isn’t much pleasure
around these days. About the only pleasure I’ve found that I enjoy sharing is
sex. I get the guy’s good feeling and my own. I almost wish I didn’t. I live in
a tiny, walled fish-bowl cul-de-sac community, and I’m the preacher’s
daughter. There’s a real limit to what I can do as far as sex goes.
Anyway, my neurotransmitters are scrambled and they’re going to stay
scrambled. But I can do okay as long as other people don’t know about me.
Inside our neighborhood walls I do fine. Our rides today, though, were hell.
Going and coming, they were all the worst things I’ve ever felt—shadows and
ghosts, twists and jabs of unexpected pain.
If I don’t look too long at old injuries, they don’t hurt me too much. There
was a naked little boy whose skin was a mass of big red sores; a man with a
huge scab over the stump where his right hand used to be; a little girl, naked,
maybe seven years old with blood running down her bare thighs. A woman
with a swollen, bloody, beaten face…
I must have seemed jumpy. I glanced around like a bird, not letting my
gaze rest on anyone longer than it took me to see that they weren’t coming in
my direction or aiming anything at me.
Dad may have read something of what I was feeling in my expression. I
try not to let my face show anything, but he’s good at reading me. Sometimes
people say I look grim or angry. Better to have them think that than know the
truth. Better to have them think anything than let them know just how easy it
is to hurt me.
Dad had insisted on fresh, clean, potable water for the baptism. He
couldn’t afford it, of course. Who could? That was the other reason for the
four extra kids:
Silvia Dunn, Hector Quintanilla, Curtis Talcott, and Drew Baiter, along
with my brothers Keith and Marcus. The other kids’ parents had helped with
costs. They thought a proper baptism was important enough to spend some
money and take some risks. I was the oldest by about two months. Curtis was

next. As much as I hated being there, I hated even more that Curtis was there.
I care about him more than I want to. I care what he thinks of me. I worry that
I’ll fall apart in public some day and he’ll see. But not today.
By the time we reached the fortress-church, my jaw-muscles hurt from
clinching and unclinching my teeth, and overall, I was exhausted.
There were only five or six dozen people at the service—enough to fill up
our front rooms at home and look like a big crowd. At the church, though,
with its surrounding wall and its security bars and Lazor wire and its huge
hollowness inside, and it’s armed guards, the crowd seemed a tiny scattering
of people. That was all right. The last thing I wanted was a big audience to
maybe trip me up with pain.
The baptism went just as planned. They sent us kids off to the bathrooms
(“men’s,” “women’s,” “please do not put paper of any kind into toilets,”
“water for washing in bucket at left…”) to undress and put on white gowns.
When we were ready, Curtis’s father took us to an anteroom where we could
hear the preaching—from the first chapter of Saint John and the second
chapter of The Acts—and wait our turns.
My turn came last. I assume that was my father’s idea. First the neighbor
kids, then my brothers, then me. For reasons that don’t make a lot of sense to
me, Dad thinks I need more humility. I think my particular biological
humility—or humiliation—is more than enough.
What the hell? Someone had to be last. I just wish I could have been
courageous enough to skip the thing altogether.
So, “In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost…”
Catholics get this stuff over with when they’re babies. I wish Baptists did.
I almost wish I could believe it was important the way a lot of people seem to,
the way my father seems to. Failing that, I wish I didn’t care.
But I do. The idea of God is much on my mind these days. I’ve been
paying attention to what other people believe—whether they believe, and if so
what kind of God they believe in. Keith says God is just the adults’ way of
trying to scare you into doing what they want. He doesn’t say that around
Dad, but he says it. He believes in what he sees, and no matter what’s in front
of him, he doesn’t see much. I suppose Dad would say that about me if he
knew what I believe. Maybe he’d be right. But it wouldn’t stop me from
seeing what I see.
A lot of people seem to believe in a big-daddy-God or a big-cop-God or a
big-king-God. They believe in a kind of super-person. A few believe God is
another word for nature. And nature turns out to mean just about anything
they happen not to understand or feel in control of.
Some say God is a spirit, a force, an ultimate reality. Ask seven people

what all of that means and you’ll get seven different answers. So what is
God? Just another name for whatever makes you feel special and protected?
There’s a big, early-season storm blowing itself out in the Gulf of Mexico.
It’s bounced around the Gulf, killing people from Florida to Texas and down
into Mexico. There are over 700 known dead so far. One hurricane. And how
many people has it hurt? How many are going to starve later because of
destroyed crops? That’s nature. Is it God? Most of the dead are the street poor
who have nowhere to go and who don’t hear the warnings until it’s too late
for their feet to take them to safety. Where’s safety for them anyway? Is it a
sin against God to be poor? We’re almost poor ourselves. There are fewer and
fewer jobs among us, more of us being born, more kids growing up with
nothing to look forward to. One way or another, we’ll all be poor some day.
The adults say things will get better, but they never have. How will God—my
father’s God—behave toward us when we’re poor?
Is there a God? If there is, does he (she? it?) care about us? Deists like
Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson believed God was something that
made us, then left us on our own.
“Misguided,” Dad said when I asked him about Deists. “They should have
had more faith in what their Bibles told them.”
I wonder if the people on the Gulf Coast still have faith. People have had
faith through horrible disasters before. I read a lot about that kind of thing. I
read a lot period. My favorite book of the Bible is Job. I think it says more
about my father’s God in particular and gods in general than anything else
I’ve ever read.
In the book of Job, God says he made everything and he knows
everything so no one has any right to question what he does with any of it.
Okay. That works. That Old Testament God doesn’t violate the way things
are now. But that God sounds a lot like Zeus—a super-powerful man, playing
with his toys the way my youngest brothers play with toy soldiers. Bang,
bang! Seven toys fall dead. If they’re yours, you make the rules. Who cares
what the toys think. Wipe out a toy’s family, then give it a brand new family.
Toy children, like Job’s children, are interchangeable.
Maybe God is a kind of big kid, playing with his toys. If he is, what
difference does it make if 700 people get killed in a hurricane—or if seven
kids go to church and get dipped in a big tank of expensive water?
But what if all that is wrong? What if God is something else altogether?

3
❏❏❏
We do not worship God.
We perceive and attend God.
We learn from God.
With forethought and work,
We shape God.
In the end, we yield to God.
We adapt and endure,
For we are Earthseed
And God is Change.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
TUESDAY, JULY 30, 2024
ONE OF THE ASTRONAUTS on the latest Mars mission has been killed.
Something went wrong with her protective suit and the rest of her team
couldn’t get her back to the shelter in time to save her. People here in the
neighborhood are saying she had no business going to Mars, anyway. All that
money wasted on another crazy space trip when so many people here on earth
can’t afford water, food, or shelter.
The cost of water has gone up again. And I heard on the news today that
more water peddlers are being killed. Peddlers sell water to squatters and the
street poor—and to people who’ve managed to hold on to their homes, but not
to pay their utility bills. Peddlers are being found with their throats cut and
their money and their handtrucks stolen. Dad says water now costs several
times as much as gasoline. But, except for arsonists and the rich, most people
have given up buying gasoline. No one I know uses a gas-powered car, truck,
or cycle. Vehicles like that are rusting in driveways and being cannibalized
for metal and plastic.
It’s a lot harder to give up water.

Fashion helps. You’re supposed to be dirty now. If you’re clean, you
make a target of yourself. People think you’re showing off, trying to be better
than they are. Among the younger kids, being clean is a great way to start a
fight. Cory won’t let us stay dirty here in the neighborhood, but we all have
filthy clothes to wear outside the walls. Even inside, my brothers throw dirt
on themselves as soon as they get away from the house. It’s better than
getting beaten up all the time.
Tonight the last big Window Wall television in the neighborhood went
dark for good. We saw the dead astronaut with all of red, rocky Mars around
her. We saw a dust-dry reservoir and three dead water peddlers with their
dirty-blue armbands and their heads cut halfway off. And we saw whole
blocks of boarded up buildings burning in Los Angeles. Of course, no one
would waste water trying to put such fires out.
Then the Window went dark. The sound had flickered up and down for
months, but the picture was always as promised—like looking through a vast,
open window.
The Yannis family has made a business of having people in to look
through their Window. Dad says that kind of unlicensed business isn’t legal,
but he let us go to watch sometimes because he didn’t see any harm in it, and
it helped the Yannises. A lot of small businesses are illegal, even though they
don’t hurt anyone, and they keep a household or two alive. The Yannis
Window is about as old as I am. It covers the long west wall of their living
room. They must have had plenty of money back when they bought it. For the
past couple of years, though, they’ve been charging admission—only letting
in people from the neighborhood—and selling fruit, fruit juice, acorn bread,
or walnuts. Whatever they had too much of in their garden, they found a way
to sell. They showed movies from their library and let us watch news and
whatever else was broadcast. They couldn’t afford to subscribe to any of the
new multisensory stuff, and their old Window couldn’t have received most of
it, anyway.
They have no reality vests, no touch-rings, and no headsets. Their setup
was just a plain, thin-screened Window.
All we have left now are three small, ancient, murky little TV sets
scattered around the neighborhood, a couple of computers used for work, and
radios. Every household still has at least one working radio. A lot of our
everyday news is from radio.
I wonder what Mrs. Yannis will do now. Her two sisters have moved in
with her, and they’re working so maybe it will be all right. One is a
pharmacist and the other is a nurse. They don’t earn much, but Mrs. Yannis

owns the house free and clear. It was her parents’ house.
All three sisters are widows and between them they have twelve kids, all
younger than I am. Two years ago, Mr. Yannis, a dentist, was killed while
riding his electric cycle home from the walled, guarded clinic where he
worked. Mrs. Yannis says he was caught in a crossfire, hit from two
directions, then shot once more at close range. His bike was stolen. The police
investigated, collected their fee, and couldn’t find a thing. People get killed
like that all the time. Unless it happens in front of a police station, there are
never any witnesses.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 3, 2024
The dead astronaut is going to be brought back to Earth. She wanted to be
buried on Mars. She said that when she realized she was dying. She said Mars
was the one thing she had wanted all her life, and now she would be part of it
forever.
But the Secretary of Astronautics says no. He says her body might be a
contaminant. Idiot.
Can he believe that any microorganism living in or on her body would
have a prayer of surviving and going native in that cold, thin, lethal ghost of
an atmosphere? Maybe he can. Secretaries of Astronautics don’t have to
know much about science. They have to know about politics. Theirs is the
youngest Cabinet department, and already it’s fighting for its life. Christopher
Morpeth Donner, one of the men running for President this year, has
promised to abolish it if he’s elected. My father agrees with Donner.
“Bread and circuses,” my father says when there’s space news on the
radio. “Politicians and big corporations get the bread, and we get the
circuses.”
“Space could be our future,” I say. I believe that. As far as I’m concerned,
space exploration and colonization are among the few things left over from
the last century that can help us more than they hurt us. It’s hard to get anyone
to see that, though, when there’s so much suffering going on just outside our
walls.
Dad just looks at me and shakes his head. “You don’t understand,” he
says. “You don’t have any idea what a criminal waste of time and money that
so-called space program is.” He’s going to vote for Donner. He’s the only
person I know who’s going to vote at all. Most people have given up on
politicians. After all, politicians have been promising to return us to the glory,
wealth, and order of the twentieth century ever since I can remember. That’s
what the space program is about these days, at least for politicians. Hey, we

can run a space station, a station on the moon, and soon, a colony on Mars.
That proves we’re still a great, forward-looking, powerful nation, right?
Yeah.
Well, we’re barely a nation at all anymore, but I’m glad we’re still in
space. We have to be going some place other than down the toilet.
And I’m sorry that astronaut will be brought back from her own chosen
heaven. Her name was Alicia Catalina Godinez Leal. She was a chemist. I
intend to remember her. I think she can be a kind of model for me. She spent
her life heading for Mars—preparing herself, becoming an astronaut, getting
on a Mars crew, going to Mars, beginning to figure out how to terraform
Mars, beginning to create sheltered places where people can live and work
now…
Mars is a rock—cold, empty, almost airless, dead. Yet it’s heaven in a
way. We can see it in the night sky, a whole other world, but too nearby, too
close within the reach of the people who’ve made such a hell of life here on
Earth.
MONDAY, AUGUST 12, 2024
Mrs. Sims shot herself today—or rather, she shot herself a few days ago, and
Cory and Dad found her today. Cory went a little crazy for a while afterward.
Poor, sanctimonious, old Mrs. Sims. She used to sit in our front-room
church every Sunday, large-print Bible in hand, and shout out her responses:
“Yes, Lord!” “Hallelujah!” “Thank you, Jesus!” “Amen!” During the rest of
the week she sewed, made baskets, took care of her garden, sold what she
could from it, took care of pre-school children, and talked about everyone
who wasn’t as holy as she thought she was.
She was the only person I’ve ever known who lived alone. She had a
whole big house to herself because she and the wife of her only son hated
each other. Her son and his family were poor, but they wouldn’t live with her.
Too bad.
Different people frightened her in some deep, hard, ugly way. She didn’t
like the Hsu family because they were Chinese and Hispanic, and the older
Chinese generation is still Buddhist. She’s lived a couple of doors up from
them for longer than I’ve been alive, but they were still from Saturn as far as
she was concerned.
“Idolaters,” she would call them if none of them were around. At least she
cared enough about neighborly relations to do her talking about them behind
their backs. They brought her peaches and figs and a length of good cotton
cloth last month when she was robbed.

That robbery was Mrs. Sims’s first major tragedy. Three men climbed
over the neighborhood wall, cutting through the strands of barbed wire and
Lazor wire on top. Lazor wire is terrible stuff. It’s so fine and sharp that it
slices into the wings or feet of birds who either don’t see it or see it and try to
settle on it. People, though, can always find a way over, under, or through.
Everyone brought Mrs. Sims things after the robbery, in spite of the way
she is. Was. Food, clothing, money… We took up collections for her at
church. The thieves had tied her up and left her—after one of them raped her.
An old lady like that! They grabbed all her food, her jewelry that had once
belonged to her mother, her clothes, and worse of all, her supply of cash. It
turns out she kept that—all of it—in a blue plastic mixing bowl high up in her
kitchen cabinet. Poor, crazy old lady. She came to my father, crying and
carrying on after the robbery because now she couldn’t buy the extra food she
needed to supplement what she grew. She couldn’t pay her utility bills or her
upcoming property taxes. She would be thrown out of her house into the
street! She would starve!
Dad told her over and over that the church would never let that happen,
but she didn’t believe him. She talked on and on about having to be a beggar
now, while Dad and Cory tried to reassure her. The funny thing is, she didn’t
like us either because Dad had gone and married “that Mexican woman Coryah-zan.” It just isn’t that hard to say “Corazon” if that’s what you choose to
call her. Most people just call her Cory or Mrs. Olamina.
Cory never let on that she was offended. She and Mrs. Sims were sugary
sweet to one another. A little more hypocrisy to keep the peace.
Last week Mrs. Sims’s son, his five kids, his wife, her brother, and her
brother’s three kids all died in a house fire—an arson fire. The son’s house
had been in an unwalled area north and east of us, closer to the foothills. It
wasn’t a bad area, but it was poor. Naked. One night someone torched the
house. Maybe it was a vengeance fire set by some enemy of a family member
or maybe some crazy just set it for fun. I’ve heard there’s a new illegal drug
that makes people want to set fires.
Anyway, no one knows who did it to the Sims/Boyer families. No one
saw anything, of course.
And no one got out of the house. Odd, that. Eleven people, and no one got
out.
So about three days ago, Mrs. Sims shot herself. Dad said he’d heard from
the cops that it was about three days ago. That would have been just two days
after she heard about her son’s death. Dad went to see her this morning
because she missed church yesterday. Cory forced herself to go along because
she thought she should. I wish she hadn’t. To me, dead bodies are disgusting.

They stink, and if they’re old enough, there are maggots. But what the hell?
They’re dead. They aren’t suffering, and if you didn’t like them when they
were alive, why get so upset about their being dead? Cory gets upset. She
jumps on me for sharing pain with the living, but she tries to share it with the
dead.
I began writing this about Mrs. Sims because she killed herself. That’s
what’s upset me. She believed, like Dad, that if you kill yourself, you go to
hell and burn forever. She believed in a literal acceptance of everything in the
Bible. Yet, when things got to be too much for her, she decided to trade pain
for eternal pain in the hereafter.
How could she do that?
Did she really believe in anything at all? Was it all hypocrisy?
Or maybe she just went crazy because her God was demanding too much
of her. She was no Job. In real life, how many people are?
SATURDAY, AUGUST 17, 2024
I can’t get Mrs. Sims out of my mind. Somehow, she and her suicide have
gotten tangled up with the astronaut and her death and her expulsion from
heaven. I need to write about what I believe. I need to begin to put together
the scattered verses that I’ve been writing about God since I was twelve. Most
of them aren’t much good. They say what I need to say, but they don’t say it
very well. A few are the way they should be. They press on me, too, like the
two deaths. I try to hide in all the work there is to do here for the household,
for my father’s church, and for the school Cory keeps to teach the
neighborhood kids. The truth is, I don’t care about any of those things, but
they keep me busy and make me tired, and most of the time, I sleep without
dreaming. And Dad beams when people tell him how smart and industrious I
am.
I love him. He’s the best person I know, and I care what he thinks. I wish
I didn’t, but I do.
For whatever it’s worth, here’s what I believe. It took me a lot of time to
understand it, then a lot more time with a dictionary and a thesaurus to say it
just right—just the way it has to be. In the past year, it’s gone through twentyfive or thirty lumpy, incoherent rewrites. This is the right one, the true one.
This is the one I keep coming back to:

God is Power—
Infinite,
Irresistible,
Inexorable,
Indifferent.
And yet, God is Pliable—
Trickster,
Teacher,
Chaos,
Clay.
God exists to be shaped.
God is Change.
This is the literal truth.
God can’t be resisted or stopped, but can be shaped and focused. This
means God is not to be prayed to. Prayers only help the person doing the
praying, and then, only if they strengthen and focus that persons resolve. If
they’re used that way, they can help us in our only real relationship with God.
They help us to shape God and to accept and work with the shapes that God
imposes on us. God is power, and in the end, God prevails.
But we can rig the game in our own favor if we understand that God exists
to be shaped, and will be shaped, with or without our forethought, with or
without our intent.
That’s what I know. That’s some of it anyway. I’m not like Mrs. Sims.
I’m not some kind of potential Job, long suffering, stiff necked, then, at last,
either humble before an all-knowing almighty, or destroyed. My God doesn’t
love me or hate me or watch over me or know me at all, and I feel no love for
or loyalty to my God. My God just is.
Maybe I’ll be more like Alicia Leal, the astronaut. Like her, I believe in
something that I think my dying, denying, backward-looking people need. I
don’t have all of it yet. I don’t even know how to pass on what I do have. I’ve
got to learn to do that. It scares me how many things I’ve got to learn. How
will I learn them?
Is any of this real?
Dangerous question. Sometimes I don’t know the answer. I doubt myself.
I doubt what I think I know. I try to forget about it. After all, if it’s real, why
doesn’t anyone else know about it. Every one knows that change is inevitable.
From the second law of thermodynamics to Darwinian evolution, from
Buddhism’s insistence that nothing is permanent and all suffering results from
our delusions of permanence to the third chapter of Ecclesiastes (“To

everything there is a season”), change is part of life, of existence, of the
common wisdom. But I don’t believe we’re dealing with all that that means.
We haven’t even begun to deal with it.
We give lip service to acceptance, as though acceptance were enough.
Then we go on to create super-people—super-parents, super-kings and
queens, super-cops—to be our gods and to look after us—to stand between us
and God. Yet God has been here all along, shaping us and being shaped by us
in no particular way or in too many ways at once like an amoeba—or like a
cancer. Chaos.
Even so, why can’t I do what others have done—ignore the obvious. Live
a normal life. It’s hard enough just to do that in this world.
But this thing (This idea? Philosophy? New religion?) won’t let me alone,
won’t let me forget it, won’t let me go. Maybe… Maybe it’s like my sharing:
One more weirdness; one more crazy, deep-rooted delusion that I’m stuck
with. I am stuck with it. And in time, I’ll have to do something about it. In
spite of what my father will say or do to me, in spite of the poisonous
rottenness outside the wall where I might be exiled, I’ll have to do something
about it.
That reality scares me to death.
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2024
President William Turner Smith lost yesterdays election. Christopher Charles
Morpeth Donner is our new President—President-elect. So what are we in
for? Donner has already said that as soon as possible after his inauguration
next year, he’ll begin to dismantle the “wasteful, pointless, unnecessary”
moon and Mars programs. Near space programs dealing with communications
and experimentation will be privatized—sold off.
Also, Donner has a plan for putting people back to work. He hopes to get
laws changed, suspend “overly restrictive” minimum wage, environmental,
and worker protection laws for those employers willing to take on homeless
employees and provide them with training and adequate room and board.
What’s adequate, I wonder: A house or apartment? A room? A bed in a
shared room? A barracks bed? Space on a floor? Space on the ground? And
what about people with big families? Won’t they be seen as bad investments?
Won’t it make much more sense for companies to hire single people, childless
couples, or, at most, people with only one or two kids? I wonder.
And what about those suspended laws? Will it be legal to poison,
mutilate, or infect people—as long as you provide them with food, water, and
space to die?

Dad decided not to vote for Donner after all. He didn’t vote for anyone.
He said politicians turned his stomach.

2025
❏❏❏
INTELLIGENCE
IS
ONGOING,
INDIVIDUAL
adaptability.
Adaptations that an intelligent species may make in a single
generation, other species make over many generations of selective
breeding and selective dying. Yet intelligence is demanding. If it is
misdirected by accident or by intent, it can foster its own orgies of
breeding and dying.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING

4
❏❏❏
A victim of God may,
Through learning adaption,
Become a partner of God,
A victim of God may,
Through forethought and planning,
Become a shaper of God.
Or a victim of God may,
Through shortsightedness and fear,
Remain God’s victim,
God’s plaything,
God’s prey.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2025
WE HAD A FIRE today. People worry so much about fire, but the little kids will
play with it if they can. We were lucky with this fire. Amy Dunn, three years
old, managed to start it in her family’s garage.
Once the fire began to crawl up the wall, Amy got scared and ran into the
house. She knew she had done something bad, so she didn’t tell anyone. She
hid under her grandmother’s bed.
Out back, the dry wood of the garage burned fast and hot. Robin Baiter
saw the smoke and rang the emergency bell on the island in our street.
Robin’s only ten, but she’s a bright little kid—one of my stepmother’s star
students. She keeps her head. If she hadn’t alerted people as soon as she saw
the smoke, the fire could have spread.
I heard the bell and ran out like everyone else to see what was wrong. The
Dunns live across the street from us, so I couldn’t miss the smoke.
The fire plan worked the way it was supposed to. The adult men and
women put the fire out with garden hoses, shovels, wet towels and blankets.

Those without hoses beat at the edges of the fire and smothered them with
dirt. Kids my age helped out where we were needed and put out any new fires
started by flying embers. We brought buckets to fill with water, and shovels,
blankets, and towels of our own. There were a lot of us, and we kept our eyes
open. The very old people watched the little kids and kept them out of the
way and out of trouble.
No one missed Amy. No one had seen her in the Dunn back yard, so no
one thought about her. Her grandmother found her much later and got the
truth out of her.
The garage was a total loss. Edwin Dunn salvaged some of his garden and
carpentry equipment, but not much. The grapefruit tree next to the garage and
the two peach trees behind it were half-burned, too, but they might survive.
The carrot, squash, collard, and potato plants were a trampled mess.
Of course, no one called the fire department. No one would take on fire
service fees just to save an unoccupied garage. Most of our households
couldn’t afford another big bill, anyway. The water wasted on putting out the
fire was going to be hard enough to pay for.
What will happen, I wonder, to poor little Amy Dunn. No one cares about
her. Her family feeds her and, now and then, cleans her up, but they don’t
love her or even like her. Her mother Tracy is only a year older than I am. She
was 13 when Amy was born. She was 12 when her 27-year-old uncle who had
been raping her for years managed to make her pregnant.
Problem: Uncle Derek was a big, blond, handsome guy, funny and bright
and well-liked. Tracy was, is, dull and homely, sulky and dirty-looking. Even
when she’s clean, she looks splotchy, dirty. Some of her problems might have
come from being raped by Uncle Derek for years. Uncle Derek was Tracy’s
mother’s youngest brother, her favorite brother, but when people realized
what he had been doing, the neighborhood men got together and suggested he
go live somewhere else. People didn’t want him around their daughters.
Irrational as usual, Tracy’s mother blamed Tracy for his exile, and for her
own embarrassment. Not many girls in the neighborhood have babies before
they drag some boy to my father and have him unite them in holy matrimony.
But there was no one to marry Tracy, and no money for prenatal care or an
abortion. And poor Amy, as she grew, looked more and more like Tracy:
scrawny and splotchy with sparse, stringy hair. I don’t think she’ll ever be
pretty.
Tracy’s maternal instincts didn’t kick in, and I doubt that her mother
Christmas Dunn has any. The Dunn family has a reputation for craziness.
There are sixteen of them living in the Dunn house, and at least a third are
nuts. Amy isn’t crazy, though. Not yet. She’s neglected and lonely, and like

any little kid left on her own too much, she finds ways to amuse herself.
I’ve never seen anyone hit Amy or curse her or anything like that. The
Dunns do care what people think of them. But no one pays any attention to
her, either. She spends most of her time playing alone in the dirt. She also eats
the dirt and whatever she finds in it, including bugs. But not long ago, just out
of curiosity, I took her to our house, sponged her off, taught her the alphabet,
and showed her how to write her name. She loved it. She’s got a hungry, able
little mind, and she loves attention.
Tonight I asked Cory if Amy could start school early. Cory doesn’t take
kids until they’re five or close to five, but she said she’d let Amy in if I would
take charge of her. I expected that, though I don’t like it. I help with the five
and six year olds, anyway. I’ve been taking care of little kids since I was one,
and I’m tired of it. I think, though, that if someone doesn’t help Amy now,
someday she’ll do something a lot worse than burning down her family’s
garage.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 2025
Some cousins of old Mrs. Sims have inherited her house. They’re lucky
there’s still a house to inherit. If it weren’t for our wall, the house would have
been gutted, taken over by squatters, or torched as soon as it was empty. As it
was, all people did was take back things they had given to Mrs. Sims after she
was robbed, and take whatever food she had in the house. No sense letting it
rot. We didn’t take her furniture or her rugs or her appliances. We could have,
but we didn’t. We aren’t thieves.
Wardell Parrish and Rosalee Payne think otherwise. They’re both small,
rust-brown, sour-looking people like Mrs. Sims. They’re the children of a first
cousin that Mrs. Sims had managed to keep contact and good relations with.
He’s a widower twice over, no kids, and she’s been widowed once, seven
kids. They’re not only brother and sister, but twins. Maybe that helps them
get along with each other. They damn sure won’t get along with anyone else.
They’re moving in today. They’ve been here a couple of times before to
look the place over, and I guess they must have liked it better than their
parents’ house. They shared that with 18 other people. I was busy in the den
with my class of younger school kids, so I didn’t meet them until today,
though I’ve heard Dad talking to them—heard them sit in our living room and
insinuate that we had cleaned out Mrs. Sims house before they arrived.
Dad kept his temper. “You know she was robbed during the month before
she died,” he said. “You can check with the police about that—if you haven’t
already. Since then the community has protected the house. We haven’t used

it or stripped it. If you choose to live among us, you should understand that.
We help each other, and we don’t steal.”
“I wouldn’t expect you to say you did,” Wardell Parrish muttered.
His sister jumped in before he could say more. “We’re not accusing
anyone of anything,” she lied. “We just wondered… We knew Cousin
Marjorie had some nice things—jewelry that she inherited from her mother…
Very valuable…”
“Check with the police,” my father said.
“Well, yes, I know, but…”
“This is a small community,” my father said. “We all know each other
here. We depend on each other.”
There was a silence. Perhaps the twins were getting the message.
“We’re not very social,” Wardell Parrish said. “We mind our own
business.”
Again his sister jumped in before he could go on. “I’m sure everything
will be all right,” she said. “I’m sure we’ll get along fine.”
I didn’t like them when I heard them. I liked them even less when I met
them. They look at us as though we smell and they don’t. Of course, it doesn’t
matter whether I like them or not. There are other people in the neighborhood
whom I don’t like. But I don’t trust the Payne-Parrishes. The kids seem all
right, but the adults… I wouldn’t want to have to depend on them. Not even
for little things.
Payne and Parrish. What perfect names they have.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 2025
We ran into a pack of feral dogs today. We went to the hills today for target
practice—me, my father, Joanne Garfield, her cousin and boyfriend Harold—
Harry—Baiter, my boyfriend Curtis Talcott, his brother Michael, Aura Moss
and her brother Peter. Our other adult Guardian was Joanne’s father Jay. He’s
a good guy and a good shot. Dad likes to work with him, although sometimes
there are problems. The Garfields and the Baiters are white, and the rest of us
are black. That can be dangerous these days. On the street, people are
expected to fear and hate everyone but their own kind, but with all of us
armed and watchful, people stared, but they let us alone. Our neighborhood is
too small for us to play those kinds of games.
Everything went as usual at first. The Talcotts got into an argument first
with each other, then with the Mosses. The Mosses are always blaming other
people for whatever they do wrong, so they tend to have disputes outstanding
with most of us. Peter Moss is the worst because he’s always trying to be like

his father, and his father is a total shit. His father has three wives. All at once,
Karen, Natalie, and Zahra. They’ve all got kids by him, though so far, Zahra,
the youngest and prettiest, only has one. Karen is the one with the marriage
license, but she let him get away with bringing in first one, then another new
woman into the house and calling them his wives. I guess the way things are,
she didn’t think she could make it on her own with three kids when he
brought in Natalie and five by the time he found Zahra.
The Mosses don’t come to church. Richard Moss has put together his own
religion—a combination of the Old Testament and historical West African
practices. He claims that God wants men to be patriarchs, rulers and
protectors of women, and fathers of as many children as possible. He’s an
engineer for one of the big commercial water companies, so he can afford to
pick up beautiful, young homeless women and live with them in polygamous
relationships. He could pick up twenty women like that if he could afford to
feed them. I hear there’s a lot of that kind of thing going on in other
neighborhoods. Some middle class men prove they’re men by having a lot of
wives in temporary or permanent relationships. Some upper class men prove
they’re men by having one wife and a lot of beautiful, disposable young
servant girls. Nasty. When the girls get pregnant, if their rich employers won’t
protect them, the employers’ wives throw them out to starve.
Is that the way it’s going to be, I wonder? Is that the future: Large
numbers of people stuck in either President-elect Donner’s version of slavery
or Richard Moss’s.
We rode our bikes to the top of River Street past the last neighborhood
walls, past the last ragged, unwalled houses, past the last stretch of broken
asphalt and rag and stick shacks of squatters and street poor who stare at us in
their horrible, empty way, and then higher into the hills along a dirt road. At
last we dismounted and walked our bikes down the narrow trail into one of
the canyons that we and others use for target practice. It looked all right this
time, but we always have to be careful. People use canyons for a lot of things.
If we find corpses in one, we stay away from it for a while. Dad tries to shield
us from what goes on in the world, but he can’t. Knowing that, he also tries to
teach us to shield ourselves.
Most of us have practiced at home with BB guns on homemade targets or
on squirrel and bird targets. I’ve done all that. My aim is good, but I don’t like
it with the birds and squirrels. Dad was the one who insisted on my learning
to shoot them. He said moving targets would be good for my aim. I think
there was more to it than that. I think he wanted to see whether or not I could
do it—whether shooting a bird or a squirrel would trigger my hyperempathy
It didn’t, quite. I didn’t like it, but it wasn’t painful. It felt like a big, soft,

strange ghost blow, like getting hit with a huge ball of air, but with no
coolness, no feeling of wind. The blow, though still soft, was a little harder
with squirrels and sometimes rats than with birds. All three had to be killed,
though. They ate our food or ruined it. Tree-crops were their special victims:
Peaches, plums, figs, persimmons, nuts… And crops like strawberries,
blackberries, grapes… Whatever we planted, if they could get at it, they
would. Birds are particular pests because they can fly in, yet I like them. I
envy their ability to fly. Sometimes I get up and go out at dawn just so I can
watch them without anyone scaring them or shooting them. Now that I’m old
enough to go target shooting on Saturdays, I don’t intend to shoot any more
birds, no matter what Dad says. Besides, just because I can shoot a bird or a
squirrel doesn’t mean I could shoot a person—a thief like the ones who
robbed Mrs. Sims. I don’t know whether I could do that. And if I did it, I
don’t know what would happen to me. Would I die?
It’s my father’s fault that we pay so much attention to guns and shooting.
He carries a nine millimeter automatic pistol whenever he leaves the
neighborhood. He carries it on his hip where people can see it. He says that
discourages mistakes. Armed people do get killed—most often in crossfires or
by snipers—but unarmed people get killed a lot more often.
Dad also has a silenced nine millimeter submachine gun. It stays at home
with Cory in case something happens there while he’s away. Both guns are
German—Heckler & Koch. Dad has never said where he got the submachine
gun. It’s illegal, of course, so I don’t blame him. It must have cost a hell of a
lot. He’s only had it away from home a few times so he, Cory, and I could get
the feel of it. He’ll do the same for the boys when they’re older.
Cory has an old Smith & Wesson .38 revolver that she’s good with. She’s
had it since before she married Dad. She loaned that one to me today. Ours
aren’t the best or the newest guns in the neighborhood, but they all work. Dad
and Cory keep them in good condition. I have to help with that now. And they
spend the necessary time on practice and money on ammunition.
At neighborhood association meetings, Dad used to push the adults of
every household to own weapons, maintain them, and know how to use them.
“Know how to use them so well,” he’s said more than once, “that you’re as
able to defend yourself at two A.M. as you are at two P.M.”
At first there were a few neighbors who didn’t like that—older ones who
said it was the job of the police to protect them, younger ones who worried
that their little children would find their guns, and religious ones who didn’t
think a minister of the gospel should need guns. This was several years ago.
“The police,” my father told them, “may be able to avenge you, but they

can’t protect you. Things are getting worse. And as for your children… Well,
yes, there is risk. But you can put your guns out of their reach while they’re
very young, and train them as they grow older. That’s what I mean to do. I
believe they’ll have a better chance of growing up if you can protect them.”
He paused, stared at the people, then went on. “I have a wife and five
children,” he said. “I will pray for them all. I’ll also see to it that they know
how to defend themselves. And for as long as I can, I will stand between my
family and any intruder.” He paused again. “Now that’s what I have to do.
You all do what you have to do.”
By now there are at least two guns in every household. Dad says he
suspects that some of them are so well hidden—like Mrs. Sims’ gun—that
they wouldn’t be available in an emergency. He’s working on that.
All the kids who attend school at our house get gun handling instruction.
Once they’ve passed that and turned fifteen, two or three of the neighborhood
adults begin taking them to the hills for target practice. It’s a kind of rite of
passage for us. My brother Keith has been whining to go along whenever
someone gets a shooting group together, but the age rule is firm.
I worry about the way Keith wants to get his hands on the guns. Dad
doesn’t seem to worry, but I do.
There are always a few groups of homeless people and packs of feral dogs
living out beyond the last hillside shacks. People and dogs hunt rabbits,
possums, squirrels, and each other. Both scavenge whatever dies. The dogs
used to belong to people—or their ancestors did. But dogs eat meat. These
days, no poor or middle class person who had an edible piece of meat would
give it to a dog. Rich people still keep dogs, either because they like them or
because they use them to guard estates, enclaves, and businesses. The rich
have plenty of other security devices, but the dogs are extra insurance. Dogs
scare people.
I did some shooting today, and I was leaning against a boulder, watching
others shoot, when I realized there was a dog nearby, watching me. Just one
dog—male, yellow-brown, sharp-eared, short-haired. He wasn’t big enough
to make a meal of me, and I still had the Smith & Wesson, so while he was
looking me over, I took a good look at him. He was lean, but he didn’t look
starved. He looked alert and curious. He sniffed the air, and I remembered
that dogs were supposed to be oriented more toward scent than sight.
“Look at that,” I said to Joanne Garfield who was standing nearby.
She turned, gasped, and jerked her gun up to aim at the dog. The dog
vanished into the dry brush and boulders. Turning, Joanne tried to look
everywhere as though she expected to see more dogs stalking us, but there

was nothing. She was shaking.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I didn’t know you were afraid of them.”
She drew a deep breath and looked at the place where the dog had been. “I
didn’t know I was either,” she whispered. “I’ve never been so close to one
before. I… I wish I had gotten a better look at it.”
At that moment, Aura Moss screamed and fired her fathers Llama
automatic.
I pushed away from the boulder and turned to see Aura pointing her gun
toward some rocks and babbling.
“It was over there!” she said, her words tumbling over one another. “It
was some kind of animal—dirty yellow with big teeth. It had its mouth open.
It was huge!”
“You stupid bitch, you almost shot me!” Michael Talcott shouted. I could
see now that he had ducked down behind a boulder. He would have been in
Aura’s line of fire, but he didn’t seem to be hurt.
“Put your gun away, Aura,” my father said. He kept his voice low, but he
was angry. I could see that, whether Aura could or not.
“It was an animal,” she insisted. “A big one. It might still be around.”
“Aura!” My father raised his voice and hardened it.
Aura looked at him, then seemed to realize that she had more than a dog
to worry about. She looked at the gun in her hand, frowned, fumbled it safe,
and put it back into her holster.
“Mike?” my father said.
“I’m okay,” Michael Talcott said. “No thanks to her!”
“It wasn’t my fault,” Aura said, right on cue. “There was an animal. It
could have killed you! It was sneaking up on us!”
“I think it was just a dog,” I said. “There was one watching us over here.
Joanne moved and it ran away.”
“You should have killed it,” Peter Moss said. “What do you want to do?
Wait until it jumps someone.”
“What was it doing?” Jay Garfield asked. “Just watching?”
“That’s all,” I said. “It didn’t look sick or starved. It wasn’t very big. I
don’t think it was a danger to anyone here. There are too many of us, and
we’re all too big.”
“The thing I saw was huge,” Aura insisted. “It had its mouth open!”
I went over to her because I’d had a sudden thought. “It was panting,” I
said. “They pant when they’re hot. It doesn’t mean they’re angry or hungry.”
I hesitated, watching her. “You’ve never seen one before, have you?”
She shook her head.
“They’re bold, but they’re not dangerous to a group like this. You don’t

have to worry.”
She didn’t look as though she quite believed me, but she seemed to relax a
little. The Moss girls were both bullied and sheltered. They were almost never
allowed to leave the walls of the neighborhood. They were educated at home
by their mothers according to the religion their father had assembled, and they
were warned away from the sin and contamination of the rest of the world.
I’m surprised that Aura was allowed to come to us for gun handling
instruction and target practice. I hope it will be good for her—and I hope the
rest of us will survive.
“All of you stay where you are,” Dad said. He glanced at Jay Garfield,
then went a short way up among the rocks and scrub oaks to see whether Aura
had shot anything. He kept his gun in his hand and the safety off. He was out
of our sight for no more than a minute.
He came back with a look on his face that I couldn’t read. “Put your guns
away,” he said. “We’re going home.”
“Did I kill it?” Aura demanded.
“No. Get your bikes.” He and Jay Garfield whispered together for a
moment, and Jay Garfield sighed. Joanne and I watched them, wondering,
knowing we wouldn’t hear anything from them until they were ready to tell
us.
“This is not about a dead dog,” Harold Baiter said behind us. Joanne
moved back to stand beside him.
“It’s about either a dog pack or a human pack,” I said, “or maybe it’s a
corpse.”
It was, as I found out later, a family of corpses: A woman, a little boy of
about four years, and a just-born infant, all partly eaten. But Dad didn’t tell
me that until we got home. At the canyon, all we knew was that he was upset.
“If there were a corpse around here, we would have smelled it,” Harry
said.
“Not if it were fresh,” I countered.
Joanne looked at me and sighed the way her father sighs. “If its that, I
wonder where we’ll go shooting next time. I wonder when there’ll be a next
time.”
Peter Moss and the Talcott brothers had gotten into an argument over
whose fault it was that Aura had almost shot Michael, and Dad had to break it
up. Then Dad checked with Aura to see that she was all right. He said a few
things to her that I couldn’t hear, and I saw a tear slide down her face. She
cries easily. She always has.
Dad walked away from her looking harassed. He led us up the path out of
the canyon. We walked our bikes, and we all kept looking around. We could

see now that there were other dogs nearby. We were being watched by a big
pack. Jay Garfield brought up the rear, guarding our backs.
“He said we should stick together,” Joanne told me. She had seen me
looking back at her father.
“You and I?”
“Yeah, and Harry. He said we should look out for one another.”
“I don’t think these dogs are stupid enough or hungry enough to attack us
in daylight. They’ll go after some lone street person tonight.”
“Shut up, for godsake.”
The road was narrow going up and out of the canyon. It would have been
a bad place to have to fight off dogs. Someone could trip and step off the
crumbling edge. Someone could be knocked off the edge by a dog or by one
of us. That would mean falling several hundred feet.
Down below, I could hear dogs fighting now. We may have been close to
their dens or whatever they lived in. I thought maybe we were just close to
what they were feeding on.
“If they come,” my father said in a quiet, even voice, “Freeze, aim, and
fire. That will save you. Nothing else will. Freeze, aim, and fire. Keep your
eyes open and stay calm.”
I replayed the words in my mind as we went up the switchbacks. No doubt
Dad wanted us to replay them. I could see that Aura was still leaking tears
and smearing and streaking her face with dirt like a little kid. She was too
wrapped up in her own misery and fear to be of much use.
We got almost to the top before anything happened. We were beginning to
relax, I think. I hadn’t seen a dog for a while. Then, from the front of our line,
we heard three shots.
We all froze, most of, us unable to see what had happened.
“Keep moving,” my father called. “It’s all right. It was just one dog
getting too close.”
“Are you okay?” I called.
“Yes,” he said. “Just come on and keep your eyes open.”
One by one, we came abreast of the dog that had been shot and walked
past it. It was a bigger, grayer animal than the one I had seen. There was a
beauty to it. It looked like pictures I had seen of wolves. It was wedged
against a hanging boulder just a few steps up the steep canyon wall from us.
It moved.
I saw its bloody wounds as it twisted. I bit my tongue as the pain I knew it
must feel became my pain. What to do? Keep walking? I couldn’t. One more
step and I would fall and lie in the dirt, helpless against the pain. Or I might
fall into the canyon.

“It’s still alive,” Joanne said behind me. “It’s moving.”
Its forefeet were making little running motions, its claws scraping against
the rock.
I thought I would throw up. My belly hurt more and more until I felt
skewered through the middle. I leaned on my bike with my left arm. With my
right hand, I drew the Smith & Wesson, aimed, and shot the beautiful dog
through its head.
I felt the impact of the bullet as a hard, solid blow—something beyond
pain. Then I felt the dog die. I saw it jerk, shudder, stretch its body long, then
freeze. I saw it die. I felt it die. It went out like a match in a sudden vanishing
of pain. Its life flared up, then went out. I went a little numb. Without the
bike, I would have collapsed.
People had crowded close before and behind me. I heard them before I
could see them clearly.
“It’s dead,” I heard Joanne say “Poor thing.”
“What?” my father demanded. “Another one?”
I managed to focus on him. He must have skirted close to the cliff-edge of
the road to have gotten all the way back to us. And he must have run.
“The same one,” I said, managing to straighten up. “It wasn’t dead. We
saw it moving.”
“I put three bullets into it,” he said.
“It was moving, Reverend Olamina,” Joanne insisted. “It was suffering. If
Lauren hadn’t shot it, someone else would have had to.”
Dad sighed. “Well, it isn’t suffering now. Let’s get out of here.” Then he
seemed to realize what Joanne had said. He looked at me. “Are you all right?”
I nodded. I don’t know how I looked. No one was reacting to me as
though I looked odd, so I must not have shown much of what I had gone
through. I think only Harry Baiter, Curtis Talcott, and Joanne had seen me
shoot the dog. I looked at them and Curtis grinned at me. He leaned against
his bike and in a slow, lazy motion, he drew an imaginary gun, took careful
aim at the dead dog, and fired an imaginary shot.
“Pow,” he said. “Just like she does stuff like that every day Pow!”
“Let’s go.” My father said.
We began walking up the path again. We left the canyon and made our
way down to the street. There were no more dogs.
I walked, then rode in a daze, still not quite free of the dog I had killed. I
had felt it die, and yet I had not died. I had felt its pain as though it were a
human being. I had felt its life flare and go out, and I was still alive.
Pow.

5
❏❏❏
Belief
Initiates and guides action—
Or it does nothing.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SUNDAY, MARCH 2, 2025
IT’S RAINING.
We heard last night on the radio that there was a storm sweeping in from
the Pacific, but most people didn’t believe it. “We’ll have wind,” Cory said.
“Wind and maybe a few drops of rain, or maybe just a little cool weather.
That would be welcome. It’s all we’ll get.”
That’s all there has been for six years. I can remember the rain six years
ago, water swirling around the back porch, not high enough to come into the
house, but high enough to attract my brothers who wanted to play in it. Cory,
forever worried about infection, wouldn’t let them. She said they’d be
splashing around in a soup of all the waste-water germs we’d been watering
our gardens with for years. Maybe she was right, but kids all over the
neighborhood covered themselves with mud and earthworms that day, and
nothing terrible happened to them.
But that storm was almost tropical—a quick, hard, warm, September rain,
the edge of a hurricane that hit Mexico’s Pacific coast. This is a colder, winter
storm. It began this morning as people were coming to church.
In the choir we sang rousing old hymns accompanied by Cory’s piano
playing and lightning and thunder from outside. It was wonderful. Some
people missed part of the sermon, though, because they went home to put out
all the barrels, buckets, tubs, and pots they could find to catch the free water.
Other went home to put pots and buckets inside where there were leaks in the
roof.
I can’t remember when any of us have had a roof repaired by a

professional. We all have Spanish tile roofs, and that’s good. A tile roof is, I
suspect, more secure and lasting than wood or asphalt shingles. But time,
wind, and earthquakes have taken a toll. Tree limbs have done some damage,
too. Yet no one has extra money for anything as nonessential as roof repair.
At best, some of the neighborhood men go up with whatever materials they
can scavenge and create makeshift patches. No one’s even done that for a
while. If it only rains once every six or seven years, why bother?
Our roof is all right so far, and the barrels and things we put out after
services this morning are full or filling. Good, clean, free water from the sky.
If only it came more often.
MONDAY, MARCH 3, 2025
Still raining.
No thunder today, though there was some last night. Steady drizzle, and
occasional, heavy showers all day. All day. So different and beautiful. I’ve
never felt so overwhelmed by water. I went out and walked in the rain until I
was soaked. Cory didn’t want me to, but I did it anyway. It was so wonderful.
How can she not understand that? It was so incredible and wonderful.
TUESDAY, MARCH 4, 2025
Amy Dunn is dead.
Three years old, unloved, and dead. That doesn’t seem reasonable or even
possible. She could read simple words and count to thirty. I taught her. She so
much loved getting attention that she stuck to me during school hours and
drove me crazy. Didn’t want me to go to the bathroom without her.
Dead.
I had gotten to like her, even though she was a pest.
Today I walked her home after class. I had gotten into the habit of
walking her home because the Dunns wouldn’t send anyone for her.
“She knows the way,” Christmas said. “Just send her over. She’ll get here
all right.”
I didn’t doubt that she could have. She could look across the street, and
across the center island, and see her house from ours, but Amy had a tendency
to wander. Sent home alone, she might get there or she might wind up in the
Montoya garden, grazing, or in the Moss rabbit house, trying to let the rabbits
out. So I walked her across, glad for an excuse to get out in the rain again.
Amy loved it, too, and we lingered for a moment under the big avocado tree
on the island. There was a navel orange tree at the back end of the island, and
I picked a pair of ripe oranges—one for Amy and one for me. I peeled both of

them, and we ate them while the rain plastered Amy’s scant colorless hair
against her head and made her look bald.
I took her to her door and left her in the care of her mother.
“You didn’t have to get her so wet,” Tracy complained.
“Might as well enjoy the rain while it lasts,” I said, and I left them.
I saw Tracy take Amy into the house and shut the door. Yet somehow
Amy wound up outside again, wound up near the front gate, just opposite the
Garfield/Balter/Dory house. Jay Garfield found her there when he came out to
investigate what he thought was another bundle that someone had thrown
over the gate. People toss us things sometimes—gifts of envy and hate: A
maggoty, dead animal, a bag of shit, even an occasional severed human limb
or a dead child. Dead adults have been left lying just beyond our wall. But
these were all outsiders. Amy was one of us.
Someone shot Amy right through the metal gate. It had to be an accidental
hit because you can’t see through our gate from the outside. The shooter
either fired at someone who was in front of the gate or fired at the gate itself,
at the neighborhood, at us and our supposed wealth and privilege. Most
bullets wouldn’t have gotten through the gate. It’s supposed to be bulletproof.
But it’s been penetrated a couple of times before, high up, near the top. Now
we have six new bullet holes in the lower portion—six holes and a seventh
dent, a long, smooth gauge where a bullet had glanced off without breaking
through.
We hear so much gunfire, day and night, single shots and odd bursts of
automatic weapons fire, even occasional blasts from heavy artillery or
explosions from grenades or bigger bombs. We worry most about those last
things, but they’re rare. It’s harder to steal big weapons, and not many people
around here can afford to buy the illegal ones—or that’s what Dad says. The
thing is, we hear gunfire so much that we don’t hear it. A couple of the Baiter
kids said they heard shooting, but as usual, they paid no attention to it. It was
outside, beyond the wall, after all. Most of us heard nothing except the rain.
Amy was going to turn four in a couple of weeks. I had planned to give
her a little party with my kindergartners.
God, I hate this place.
I mean, I love it. It’s home. These are my people. But I hate it. It’s like an
island surrounded by sharks—except that sharks don’t bother you unless you
go in the water. But our land sharks are on their way in. It’s just a matter of
how long it takes for them to get hungry enough.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 5, 2025

I walked in the rain again this morning. It was cold, but good. Amy has
already been cremated. I wonder if her mother is relieved. She doesn’t look
relieved. She never liked Amy, but now she cries. I don’t think she’s faking.
The family has spent money it could not afford to get the police involved to
try to find the killer. I suspect that the only good this will do will be to chase
away the people who live on the sidewalks and streets nearest to our wall. Is
that good? The street poor will be back, and they won’t love us for sicking the
cops on them. It’s illegal to camp out on the street the way they do—the way
they must—so the cops knock them around, rob them if they have anything
worth stealing, then order them away or jail them. The miserable will be made
even more miserable. None of that can help Amy. I suppose, though, that it
will make the Dunns feel better about the way they treated her.
On Saturday, Dad will preach Amy’s funeral. I wish I didn’t have to be
there. Funerals have never bothered me before, but this one does.
“You cared about Amy,” Joanne Garfield said to me when I complained
to her. We had lunch together today. We ate in my bedroom because it’s still
raining off and on, and the rest of the house was full of all the kids who
hadn’t gone home to eat lunch. But my room is still mine. It’s the one place in
the world where I can go and not be followed by anyone I don’t invite in. I’m
the only person I know who has a bedroom to herself. These days, even Dad
and Cory knock before they open my door. That’s one of the best things about
being the only daughter in the family. I have to kick my brothers out of here
all the time, but at least I can kick them out. Joanne is an only child, but she
shares a room with three younger girl cousins—whiny Lisa, always
demanding and complaining; smart, giggly Robin with her near-genius I.Q.;
and invisible Jessica who whispers and stares at her feet and cries if you give
her a dirty look. All three are Baiters—Harry’s sisters and the children of
Joanne’s mother’s sister. The two adult sisters, their husbands, their eight
children, and their parents Mr. and Mrs. Dory are all squeezed into one fivebedroom house. It isn’t the most crowded house in the neighborhood, but I’m
glad I don’t have to live like that.
“Almost no one cared about Amy,” Joanne said. “But you did.”
“After the fire, I did,” I said. “I got scared for her then. Before that, I
ignored her like everyone else.”
“So now you’re feeling guilty?”
“No.”
“Yes, you are.”
I looked at her, surprised. “I mean it. No. I hate that she’s dead, and I miss
her, but I didn’t cause her death. I just can’t deny what all this says about us.”
“What?”

I felt on the verge of talking to her about things I hadn’t talked about
before. I’d written about them. Sometimes I write to keep from going crazy.
There’s a world of things I don’t feel free to talk to anyone about.
But Joanne is a friend. She knows me better than most people, and she has
a brain. Why not talk to her? Sooner or later, I have to talk to someone.
“What’s wrong?” she asked. She had opened a plastic container of bean
salad. Now she put it down on my night table.
“Don’t you ever wonder if maybe Amy and Mrs. Sims are the lucky
ones?” I asked. “I mean, don’t you ever wonder what’s going to happen to the
rest of us?”
There was a clap of dull, muffled thunder, and a sudden heavy shower.
Radio weather reports say today’s rain will be the last of the four-day series
of storms. I hope not.
“Sure I think about it,” Joanne said. “With people shooting little kids, how
can I not think about it?”
“People have been killing little kids since there’ve been people,” I said.
“Not in here, they haven’t. Not until now.”
“Yes, that’s it, isn’t it. We got a wake-up call. Another one.”
“What are you talking about?”
“Amy was the first of us to be killed like that. She won’t be the last.”
Joanne sighed, and there was a little shudder in the sigh. “So you think so,
too.”
“I do. But I didn’t know you thought about it at all.”
“Rape, robbery, and now murder. Of course I think about it. Everyone
thinks about it. Everyone worries. I wish I could get out of here.”
“Where would you go?”
“That’s it, isn’t it? There’s nowhere to go.”
“There might be.”
“Not if you don’t have money. Not if all you know how to do is take care
of babies and cook.”
I shook my head. “You know much more than that.”
“Maybe, but none of it matters. I won’t be able to afford college. I won’t
be able to get a job or move out of my parents’ house because no job I could
get would support me and there are no safe places to move. Hell, my parents
are still living with their parents.”
“I know,” I said. “And as bad as that is, there’s more.”
“Who needs more? That’s enough!” She began to eat the bean salad. It
looked good, but I thought I might be about to ruin it for her.
“There’s cholera spreading in southern Mississippi and Louisiana,” I said.
“I heard about it on the radio yesterday. There are too many poor people—

illiterate, jobless, homeless, without decent sanitation or clean water. They
have plenty of water down there, but a lot of it is polluted. And you know that
drug that makes people want to set fires?”
She nodded, chewing.
“It’s spreading again. It was on the east coast. Now it’s in Chicago. The
reports say that it makes watching a fire better than sex. I don’t know whether
the reporters are condemning it or advertising it.” I drew a deep breath.
“Tornadoes are smashing hell out of Alabama, Kentucky, Tennessee, and two
or three other states. Three hundred people dead so far. And there’s a blizzard
freezing the northern midwest, killing even more people. In New York and
New Jersey, a measles epidemic is killing people. Measles!”
“I heard about the measles,” Joanne said. “Strange. Even if people can’t
afford immunizations, measles shouldn’t kill.”
“Those people are half dead already,” I told her. “They’ve come through
the winter cold, hungry, already sick with other diseases. And, no, of course
they can’t afford immunizations. We’re lucky our parents found the money to
pay for all our immunizations. If we have kids, I don’t see how we’ll be able
to do even that for them.”
“I know, I know.” She sounded almost bored. “Things are bad. My
mother is hoping this new guy, President Donner, will start to get us back to
normal.”
“Normal,” I muttered. “I wonder what that is. Do you agree with your
mother?”
“No. Donner hasn’t got a chance. I think he would fix things if he could,
but Harry says his ideas are scary. Harry says he’ll set the country back a
hundred years.”
“My father says something like that. I’m surprised that Harry agrees.”
“He would. His own father thinks Donner is God. Harry wouldn’t agree
with him on anything.”
I laughed, distracted, thinking about Harry’s battles with his father.
Neighborhood fireworks—plenty of flash, but no real fire.
“Why do you want to talk about this stuff,” Joanne asked, bringing me
back to the real fire. “We can’t do anything about it.”
“We have to.”
“Have to what? We’re fifteen! What can we do?”
“We can get ready. That’s what we’ve got to do now. Get ready for
what’s going to happen, get ready to survive it, get ready to make a life
afterward. Get focused on arranging to survive so that we can do more than
just get batted around by crazy people, desperate people, thugs, and leaders
who don’t know what they’re doing!”

She just stared at me. “I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
I was rolling—too fast, maybe. “I’m talking about this place, Jo, this culde-sac with a wall around it. I’m talking about the day a big gang of those
hungry, desperate, crazy people outside decide to come in. I’m talking about
what we’ve got to do before that happens so that we can survive and rebuild
—or at least survive and escape to be something other than beggars.”
“Someone’s going to just smash in our wall and come in?”
“More likely blast it down, or blast the gate open. It’s going to happen
some day. You know that as well as I do.”
“Oh, no I don’t,” she protested. She sat up straight, almost stiff, her lunch
forgotten for the moment. I bit into a piece of acorn bread that was full of
dried fruit and nuts. It’s a favorite of mine, but I managed to chew and
swallow without tasting it.
“Jo, we’re in for trouble. You’ve already admitted that.”
“Sure,” she said. “More shootings, more break-ins. That’s what I meant.”
“And that’s what will happen for a while. I wish I could guess how long.
We’ll be hit and hit and hit, then the big hit will come. And if we’re not ready
for it, it will be like Jericho.”
She held herself rigid, rejecting. “You don’t know that! You can’t read the
future. No one can.”
“You can,” I said, “if you want to. It’s scary, but once you get past the
fear, it’s easy. In LA. some walled communities bigger and stronger than this
one just aren’t there any more. Nothing left but ruins, rats, and squatters.
What happened to them can happen to us. We’ll die in here unless we get
busy now and work out ways to survive.”
“If you think that, why don’t you tell your parents. Warn them and see
what they say.”
“I intend to as soon as I think of a way to do it that will reach them.
Besides… I think they already know. I think my father does, anyway. I think
most of the adults know. They don’t want to know, but they do.”
“My mother could be right about Donner. He really could do some good.”
“No. No, Donner’s just a kind of human banister.”
“A what?”
“I mean he’s like…like a symbol of the past for us to hold on to as we’re
pushed into the future. He’s nothing. No substance. But having him there, the
latest in a two-and-a-half-century-long line of American Presidents make
people feel that the country, the culture that they grew up with is still here—
that we’ll get through these bad times and back to normal.”
“We could,” she said. “We might. I think someday we will.” No, she
didn’t. She was too bright to take anything but the most superficial comfort

from her denial. But even superficial comfort is better than none, I guess. I
tried another tactic.
“Did you ever read about bubonic plague in medieval Europe?” I asked.
She nodded. She reads a lot the way I do, reads all kinds of things. “A lot
of the continent was depopulated,” she said. “Some survivors thought the
world was coming to an end.”
“Yes, but once they realized it wasn’t, they also realized there was a lot of
vacant land available for the taking, and if they had a trade, they realized they
could demand better pay for their work. A lot of things changed for the
survivors.”
“What’s your point?”
“The changes.” I thought for a moment. They were slow changes
compared to anything that might happen here, but it took a plague to make
some of the people realize that things could change.”
“So?”
“Things are changing now, too. Our adults haven’t been wiped out by a
plague so they’re still anchored in the past, waiting for the good old days to
come back. But things have changed a lot, and they’ll change more. Things
are always changing. This is just one of the big jumps instead of the little
step-by-step changes that are easier to take. People have changed the climate
of the world. Now they’re waiting for the old days to come back.”
“Your father says he doesn’t believe people changed the climate in spite
of what scientists say. He says only God could change the world in such an
important way.”
“Do you believe him?”
She opened her mouth, looked at me, then closed it again. After a while,
she said, “I don’t know.”
“My father has his blind spots,” I said. “He’s the best person I know, but
even he has blind spots.”
“It doesn’t make any difference,” she said. “We can’t make the climate
change back, no matter why it changed in the first place. You and I can’t. The
neighborhood can’t. We can’t do anything.”
I lost patience. “Then let’s kill ourselves now and be done with it!”
She frowned, her round, too serious face almost angry. She tore bits of
peel from a small navel orange. “What then?” she demanded. “What can we
do?”
I put the last bite of my acorn bread down and went around her to my
night table. I took several books from the deep bottom drawer and showed
them to her. “This is what I’ve been doing—reading and studying these over
the past few months. These books are old like all the books in this house. I’ve

also been using Dad’s computer when he lets me—to get new stuff.”
Frowning, she looked them over. Three books on survival in the
wilderness, three on guns and shooting, two each on handling medical
emergencies, California native and naturalized plants and their uses, and basic
living: logcabin-building, livestock raising, plant cultivation, soap making—
that kind of thing. Joanne caught on at once.
“What are you doing?” she asked. “Trying to learn to live off the land?”
“I’m trying to learn whatever I can that might help me survive out there. I
think we should all study books like these. I think we should bury money and
other necessities in the ground where thieves won’t find them. I think we
should make emergency packs—grab and run packs—in case we have to get
out of here in a hurry. Money, food, clothing, matches, a blanket… I think we
should fix places outside where we can meet in case we get separated. Hell, I
think a lot of things. And I know—I know!—that no matter how many things
I think of, they won’t be enough. Every time I go outside, I try to imagine
what it might be like to live out there without walls, and I realize I don’t know
anything.”
“Then why—”
“I intend to survive.”
She just stared.
“I mean to learn everything I can while I can,” I said. “If I find myself
outside, maybe what I’ve learned will help me live long enough to learn
more.”
She gave me a nervous smile. “You’ve been reading too many adventure
stories,” she said.
I frowned. How could I reach her. “This isn’t a joke, Jo.”
“What is it then?” She ate the last section of her orange. “What do you
want me to say?”
“I want you to be serious. I realize I don’t know very much. None of us
knows very much. But we can all learn more. Then we can teach one another.
We can stop denying reality or hoping it will go away by magic.”
“That’s not what I’m doing.”
I looked out for a moment at the rain, calming myself.
“Okay. Okay, what are you doing?”
She looked uncomfortable. “I’m still not sure we can really do anything.”
“Jo!”
“Tell me what I can do that won’t get me in trouble or make everyone
think I’m crazy. Just tell me something.”
At last. “Have you read all your family’s books?”
“Some of them. Not all. They aren’t all worth reading. Books aren’t going

to save us.”
“Nothing is going to save us. If we don’t save ourselves, we’re dead. Now
use your imagination. Is there anything on your family bookshelves that
might help you if you were stuck outside?”
“No.”
“You answer too fast. Go home and look again. And like I said, use your
imagination. Any kind of survival information from encyclopedias,
biographies, anything that helps you learn to live off the land and defend
ourselves. Even some fiction might be useful.”
She gave me a sidelong glance. “I’ll bet,” she said.
“Jo, if you never need this information, it won’t do you any harm. You’ll
just know a little more than you did before. So what? By the way, do you take
notes when you read?”
Guarded look. “Sometimes.”
“Read this.” I handed her one of the plant books. This one was about
California Indians, the plants they used, and how they used them—an
interesting, entertaining little book. She would be surprised. There was
nothing in it to scare her or threaten her or push her. I thought I had already
done enough of that.
“Take notes,” I told her. “You’ll remember better if you do.”
“I still don’t believe you,” she said. “Things don’t have to be as bad as
you say they are.”
I put the book into her hands. “Hang on to your notes,” I said. “Pay
special attention to the plants that grow between here and the coast and
between here and Oregon along the coast. I’ve marked them.”
“I said I don’t believe you.”
“I don’t care.”
She looked down at the book, ran her hands over the black cloth-andcardboard binding. “So we learn to eat grass and live in the bushes,” she
muttered.
“We learn to survive,” I said. “It’s a good book. Take care of it. You
know how my father is about his books.”
THURSDAY, MARCH 6, 2025
The rain stopped. My windows are on the north side of the house, and I can
see the clouds breaking up. They’re being blown over the mountains toward
the desert. Surprising how fast they can move. The wind is strong and cold
now. It might cost us a few trees.
I wonder how many years it will be before we see rain again.

6
❏❏❏
Drowning people
Sometimes die
Fighting their rescuers.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, MARCH 8, 2025
JOANNE TOLD.
She told her mother who told her father who told my father who had one
of those serious talks with me.
Damn her. Damn her!
I saw her today at the service we had for Amy and yesterday at school.
She didn’t say a word about what she had done. It turns out she told her
mother on Thursday. Maybe it was supposed to be a secret between them or
something. But, oh, Phillida Garfield was so concerned for me, so worried.
And she didn’t like my scaring Joanne. Was Joanne scared? Not scared
enough to use her brain, it seems. Joanne always seemed so sensible. Did she
think getting me into trouble would make the danger go away? No, that’s not
it. This is just more denial: A dumb little game of “If we don’t talk about bad
things, maybe they won’t happen.” Idiot! I’ll never be able to tell her anything
important again.
What if I’d been more open. What if I’d talked religion with her? I’d
wanted to. How will I ever be able to talk to anyone about that?
What I did say worked its way back to me tonight. Mr. Garfield talked to
Dad after the funeral. It was like the whispering game that little kids play. The
message went all the way from, “We’re in danger here and we’re going to
have to work hard to save ourselves,” to “Lauren is talking about running
away because she’s afraid that outsiders are going to riot and tear down the
walls and kill us all.”
Well, I had said some of that, and Joanne had made it clear that she didn’t

agree with me. But I hadn’t just let the bad predictions stand alone: “We’re
going to die, boo-hoo.” What would be the point of that? Still, only the
negative stuff came home to me.
“Lauren, what did you say to Joanne?” my father demanded. He came to
my room after dinner when he should have been doing his final work on
tomorrow’s sermon. He sat down on my one chair and stared at me in a way
that meant, “Where is your mind, girl? What’s the matter with you?” That
look plus Joanne’s name told me what had happened, what this was about.
My friend Joanne. Damn her!
I sat on my bed and looked back at him. “I told her we were in for some
bad, dangerous times,” I said. “I warned her we ought to learn what we could
now so we could survive.”
That was when he told me how upset Joanne’s mother was, how upset
Joanne was, and how they both thought I needed to “talk to someone,”
because I thought our world was coming to an end.
“Do you think our world is coming to an end?” Dad asked, and with no
warning at all, I almost started crying. I had all I could do to hold it back.
What I thought was, “No, I think your world is coming to an end, and maybe
you with it.” That was terrible. I hadn’t thought about it in such a personal
way before. I turned and looked out a window until I felt calmer. When I
faced him again, I said. “Yes. Don’t you?”
He frowned. I don’t think he expected me to say that. “You’re fifteen,” he
said. “You don’t really understand what’s going on here. The problems we
have now have been building since long before you were born.”
“I know.”
He was still frowning. I wondered what he wanted me to say. “What were
you doing, then?” he asked. “Why did you say those things to Joanne?”
I decided to go on telling the truth for as long as I could. I hate to lie to
him. “What I said was true,” I insisted.
“You don’t have to say everything you think you know,” he said.
“Haven’t you figured that out yet?”
“Joanne and I were friends,” I said. “I thought I could talk to her.”
He shook his head. “These things frighten people. It’s best not to talk
about them.”
“But, Dad, that’s like…like ignoring a fire in the living room because
we’re all in the kitchen, and, besides, house fires are too scary to talk about.”
“Don’t warn Joanne or any of your other friends,” he said. “Not now. I
know you think you’re right, but you’re not doing anyone any good. You’re
just panicking people.”
I managed to suppress a surge of anger by shifting the subject a little.

Sometimes the way to move Dad is to go at him from several directions.
“Did Mr. Garfield give you back your book?” I asked.
“What book?”
“I loaned Joanne a book about California plants and the ways Indians used
them. It was one of your books. I’m sorry I loaned it to her. It’s so neutral, I
didn’t think it could cause trouble. But I guess it has.”
He looked startled, then he almost smiled. “Yes, I will have to have that
one back, all right. You wouldn’t have the acorn bread you like so much
without that one—not to mention a few other things we take for granted.”
“Acorn bread…?”
He nodded. “Most of the people in this country don’t eat acorns, you
know. They have no tradition of eating them, they don’t know how to prepare
them, and for some reason, they find the idea of eating them disgusting. Some
of our neighbors wanted to cut down all our big live oak trees and plant
something useful. You wouldn’t believe the time I had changing their minds.”
“What did people eat before?”
“Bread made of wheat and other grains—corn, rye, oats…things like
that.”
“Too expensive!”
“Didn’t use to be. You get that book back from Joanne.” He drew a deep
breath. “Now, let’s get off the side track and back onto the main track. What
were you planning? Did you try to talk Joanne into running away?”
Then I sighed. “Of course not.”
“Her father says you did.”
“He’s wrong. This was about staying alive, learning to live outside so that
we’d be able to if we ever had to.”
He watched me as though he could read the truth in my mind. When I was
little, I used to think he could. “All right,” he said. “You may have meant
well, but no more scare talk.”
“It wasn’t scare talk. We do need to learn what we can while there’s
time.”
“That’s not up to you, Lauren. You don’t make decisions for this
community.”
Oh hell. If I could just find a balance between holding back too much and
pushing, poaching. “Yes, sir.”
He leaned back and looked at me. “Tell me exactly what you told Joanne.
All of it.”
I told him. I was careful to keep my voice flat and passionless, but I didn’t
leave anything out. I wanted him to know, to understand what I believed. The
nonreligious part of it, anyway. When I finished, I stopped and waited. He

seemed to expect me to say more. He just sat there for a while and stared at
me. I couldn’t tell what he felt. Other people never could if he didn’t want
them to, but I’ve been able to most of the time. Now I felt shut out, and there
was nothing I could do about it. I waited.
At last he let his breath out as though he had been holding it. “Don’t talk
about this any more,” he said in a voice that didn’t invite argument.
I looked back at him, not wanting to give a promise that would be a lie.
“Lauren.”
“Dad.”
“I want your promise that you won’t talk about this any more.”
What to say? I wouldn’t promise. I couldn’t. “We could make earthquake
packs,” I suggested. “Emergency kits that we can grab in case we have to get
out of the house fast. If we call them earthquake packs, the idea might not
bother people so much. People are used to worrying about earthquakes.” All
this came out in a rush.
“I want your promise, Daughter.”
I slumped. “Why? You know I’m right. Even Mrs. Garfield must know it.
So why?”
I thought he would yell at me or punish me. His voice had had that
warning edge to it that my brothers and I had come to call the rattle—as in a
rattlesnake’s warning sound. If you pushed him past the rattle, you were in
trouble. If he called you “son” or “daughter” you were close to trouble.
“Why?” I insisted.
“Because you don’t have any idea what you’re doing,” he said. He
frowned and rubbed his forehead. When he spoke again, the edge went out of
his voice. “It’s better to teach people than to scare them, Lauren. If you scare
them and nothing happens, they lose their fear, and you lose some of your
authority with them. It’s harder to scare them a second time, harder to teach
them, harder to win back their trust. Best to begin by teaching.” His mouth
crooked into a little smile. “It’s interesting that you chose to begin your
efforts with the book you lent to Joanne. Did you ever think of teaching from
that book?”
“Teaching…my kindergartners?”
“Why not. Get them started on the right foot. You could even put together
a class for older kids and adults. Something like Mr. Ibarra’s wood carving
class, Mrs. Baiter’s needlework classes, and young Robert Hsu’s astronomy
lectures. People are bored. They wouldn’t mind another informal class now
that they’ve lost the Yannis television. If you can think of ways to entertain
them and teach them at the same time, you’ll get your information out. And
all without making anyone look down.”

“Look down…?”
“Into the abyss, Daughter.” But I wasn’t in trouble any more. Not at the
moment. “You’ve just noticed the abyss,” he continued. “The adults in this
community have been balancing at the edge of it for more years than you’ve
been alive.”
I got up, went over to him and took his hand. “It’s getting worse, Dad.”
“I know.”
“Maybe it’s time to look down. Time to look for some hand and foot
holds before we just get pushed in.”
“That’s why we have target practice every week and Lazor wire and our
emergency bell. Your idea for emergency packs is a good one. Some people
already have them. For earthquakes. Some will assemble them if I suggest it.
And, of course, some won’t do anything at all. There are always people who
won’t do anything.”
“Will you suggest it?”
“Yes. At the next neighborhood association meeting.”
“What else can we do? None of this is fast enough.”
“It will have to be.” He stood up, a tall, broad wall of a man. “Why don’t
you ask around, see if anyone in the neighborhood knows anything about
martial arts. You need more than a book or two to learn good dependable
unarmed combat.”
I blinked. “Okay.”
“Check with old Mr. Hsu and Mr. and Mrs. Montoya.”
“Mr. and Mrs.?”
“I think so. Talk to them about classes, not about Armageddon.”
I looked up at him, and he looked more like a wall than ever, standing and
waiting. And he had offered me a lot—all I would get, I suspected. I sighed.
“Okay, Dad, I promise. I’ll try not to scare anyone else. I just hope things
hold together long enough for us to do it your way.”
And he echoed my sigh. “At last. Good. Now come out back with me.
There are some important things buried in the yard in sealed containers. It’s
time for you to know where they are—just in case.”
SUNDAY, MARCH 9, 2025
Today, Dad preached from Genesis six, Noah and the ark: “And God saw that
the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of
the thoughts and of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the
Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And
the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the

earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing and the fowls of the air; for
it repenteth me that I have made them. But Noah found grace in the eyes of
the Lord.”
And then, of course, later God says to Noah, “Make thee an ark of gopher
wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without
with pitch.”
Dad focused on the two-part nature of this situation. God decides to
destroy everything except Noah, his family, and some animals. But if Noah is
going to be saved, he has plenty of hard work to do.
Joanne came to me after church and said she was sorry for all the
craziness.
“Okay,” I said.
“Still friends?” she asked.
And I hedged: “Not enemies, anyway. Get my fathers book back to me.
He wants it.”
“My mother took it. I didn’t know she’d get so upset.”
“It isn’t hers. Get it back to me. Or have your dad give it to mine. I don’t
care. But he wants his book.”
“All right.”
I watched her leave the house. She looks so trustworthy—tall and straight
and serious and intelligent—I still feel inclined to trust her. But I can’t. I
don’t. She has no idea how much she could have hurt me if I had given her
just a few more words to use against me. I don’t think I’ll ever trust her again,
and I hate that. She was my best friend. Now she isn’t.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 12, 2025
Garden thieves got in last night. They stripped citrus trees of fruit in the Hsu
yard and the Talcott yard. In the process, they trampled what was left of
winter gardens and much of the spring planting.
Dad says we have to set up a regular watch. He tried to call a
neighborhood association meeting for tonight, but it’s a work night for some
people, including Gary Hsu who sleeps over at his job whenever he has to
report in person. We’re supposed to get together for a meeting on Saturday.
Meanwhile, Dad got Jay Garfield, Wyatt and Kayla Talcott, Alex Montoya,
and Edwin Dunn together to patrol the neighborhood in shifts in armed pairs.
That meant that except for the Talcotts who are already a pair (and who are so
angry about their garden that I pity any thief who gets in their way), the others
have to find partners among the other adults of the neighborhood.

“Find someone you trust to protect your back,” I heard Dad tell the little
group. Each pair was to patrol for two hours from just before dark to just after
dawn. The first patrol, walking through or looking into all the back yards
would get people used to the idea of watchers while they were still awake
enough to understand.
“Make sure they see you if you get first watch,” Dad said. “The sight of
you will remind them that there will be watchers all through the night. We
don’t want any of them mistaking you for thieves.”
Sensible. People go to bed soon after dark to save electricity, but between
dinner and darkness they spend time on their porches or in their yards where
it isn’t so hot. Some listen to their radio on front or back porches. Now and
then people get together to play music, sing, play board games, talk, or get out
on the paved part of the street for volleyball, touch football, basketball, or
tennis. People used to play baseball, but we just can’t afford what that costs in
windows. A few people just find a corner and read a book while there’s still
daylight. It’s a good, comfortable, recreational time. What a pity to spoil it
with reminders of reality. But it can’t be helped.
“What will you do if you catch a thief?” Cory asked my father before he
went out. He was on the second shift, and he and Cory were having a rare cup
of coffee together in the kitchen while he waited. Coffee was for special
occasions. I couldn’t miss the good smell of it in my room where I lay awake.
I eavesdrop. I don’t put drinking glasses to walls or crouch with my ear
against doors, but I do often lie awake long after dark when we kids are all
supposed to be asleep. The kitchen is across the hall from my room, the
dining room is nearby at the end of the hall, and my parents’ room is next
door. The house is old and well insulated. If there’s a shut door between me
and the conversation, I can’t hear much. But at night with all or most of the
lights out, I can leave my door open a crack, and if other doors are also open,
I can hear a lot. I learn a lot.
“We’ll chase him off, I hope,” Dad said. “We’ve agreed to that. We’ll
give him a good scare and let him know there are easier ways to get a dollar.”
“A dollar…?”
“Yes, indeed. Our thieves didn’t steal all that food because they were
hungry. They stripped those trees—took everything they could.”
“I know,” Cory said. “I took some lemons and grapefruits to both the
Hsus and the Wyatts today and told them they could pick from our trees when
they needed more. I took them some seed, too. They both had a lot of young
plants trampled, but this early in the season, they should be able to repair the
damage.”
“Yes.” My father paused. “But you see my point. People steal that way for

money. They’re not desperate. Just greedy and dangerous. We might be able
to scare them into looking for easier pickings.”
“But what if you can’t?” Cory asked, almost whispering. Her voice fell so
low that I was afraid I would miss something.
“If you can’t, will you shoot them?”
“Yes,” he said.
“…yes?” she repeated in that same small voice. “Just…‘yes?’” She was
like Joanne all over again—denial personified. What planet do people like
that live on?
“Yes,” my father said.
“Why!”
There was a long silence. When my father spoke again, his own voice had
gone very soft. “Baby, if these people steal enough, they’ll force us to spend
more than we can afford on food—or go hungry. We live on the edge as it is.
You know how hard things are.
“But…couldn’t we just call the police?”
“For what? We can’t afford their fees, and anyway, they’re not interested
until after a crime has been committed. Even then, if you call them, they
won’t show up for hours—maybe not for two or three days.”
“I know.”
“What are you saying then? You want the kids to go hungry? You want
thieves coming into the house once they’ve stripped the gardens?”
“But they haven’t done that.”
“Of course they have. Mrs. Sims was only their latest victim.”
“She lived alone. We always said she shouldn’t do that.”
“You want to trust them not to hurt you or the kids just because there are
seven of us? Baby, we can’t live by pretending this is still twenty or thirty
years ago.”
“But you could go to jail!” She was crying—not sobbing, but speaking
with that voice-full-of-tears that she can manage sometimes.
“No,” Dad said. “If we have to shoot someone, we’re together in it. After
we’ve shot him we carry him into the nearest house. It’s still legal to shoot
housebreakers. After that we do a little damage and get our stories straight.”
Long, long silence. “You could still get in trouble.”
“I’ll risk it.”
Another long silence. “‘Thou shalt not kill,’” Cory whispered.
“Nehemiah four,” Dad said. “Verse 14.”
There was nothing more. A few minutes later, I heard Dad leave. I waited
until I heard Cory go to her room and shut the door. Then I got up, shut my
door, moved my lamp so the light wouldn’t show under the door, then turned

it on and opened my grandmother’s Bible. She had had a lot of Bibles and
Dad had let me keep this one.
Nehemiah, chapter four, Verse 14: “And I looked and rose up and said
unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, be not afraid of
them: remember the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives and your houses.”
Interesting. Interesting that Dad had that verse ready, and that Cory
recognized it. Maybe they’ve had this conversation before.
SATURDAY, MARCH 15, 2025
It’s official.
Now we have a regular neighborhood watch—a roster of people from
every household who are over eighteen, good with guns—their own and
others—and considered responsible by my father and by the people who have
already been patrolling the neighborhood. Since none of the watchers have
ever been cops or security guards, they’ll go on working in pairs, watching
out for each other as well as for the neighborhood. They’ll use whistles to call
for help if they need it. Also, they’ll meet once a week to read, discuss, and
practice martial arts and shoot-out techniques. The Montoyas will give their
martial arts classes, all right, but not at my suggestion. Old Mr. Hsu is having
back problems, and he won’t be teaching anything for a while, but the
Montoyas seem to be enough. I plan to sit in on the classes as often as I can
stand to share everyone’s practice pains.
Dad has collected all his books from me this morning. All I have left are
my notes. I don’t mind. Thanks to the garden thieves, people are preparing
themselves for the worst. I feel almost grateful to the thieves.
They haven’t come back, by the way—our thieves. When they do, we
should be able to give them something they don’t expect.
SATURDAY, MARCH 29, 2025
Our thieves paid us another visit last night.
Maybe they weren’t the same ones, but their intentions were the same: To
take away what someone else has sweated to grow and very much needs.
This time they were after Richard Moss’s rabbits. Those rabbits are the
neighborhood’s only livestock except for some chickens the Cruz and
Montoya families tried to raise a few years ago. Those were stolen as soon as
they were old enough to make noise and let outsiders know they were there.
The Moss rabbits have been our secret until this year when Richard Moss
insisted on selling meat and whatever his wives could make from raw or

tanned rabbit hides out beyond the wall. The Mosses had been selling to us all
along, of course, meat, hides, fertilizer, everything except live rabbits. Those
he hoarded as breeding stock. But now, stubborn, arrogant, and greedy, he
had decided he could earn more if he peddled his merchandise outside. So,
now the word is out on the street about the damned rabbits, and last night
someone came to get them.
The Moss rabbit house is a converted three-car garage added to the
property in the 1980s according to Dad. It’s hard to believe any household
once had three cars, and gas fueled cars at that. But I remember the old garage
before Richard Moss converted it. It was huge with three black oil spots on
the floor where three cars had once been housed. Richard Moss repaired the
walls and roof, put in windows for cross ventilation, and in general, made the
place almost fit for people to live in. In fact, it’s much better than what a lot
of people live in now on the outside. He built rows and tiers of cages—
hutches—and put in more electric lights and ceiling fans. The fans can be
made to work on kid power. He’s hooked them up to an old bicycle frame,
and every Moss kid who’s old enough to manage the pedals sooner or later
gets drafted into powering the fans. The Moss kids hate it, but they know
what they’ll get if they don’t do it.
I don’t know how many rabbits the Mosses have now, but it seems they’re
always killing and skinning and doing disgusting things to pelts. Even a little
monopoly is worth a lot of trouble.
The two thieves had managed to stuff 13 rabbits into canvas sacks by the
time our watchers spotted them. The watchers were Alejandro Montoya and
Julia Lincoln, one of Shani Yannis’s sisters. Mrs. Montoya has two kids sick
with the flu so she’s off the watch roster for a while.
Mrs. Lincoln and Mr. Montoya followed the plan that the group of
watchers had put together at their meetings. Without a word of command or
warning, they fired their guns into the air two or three times each, at the same
time, blowing their whistles full blast. They kept to cover, but inside the Moss
house, someone woke up and turned on the rabbit house lights. That could
have been a lethal mistake for the watchers, but they were hidden behind
pomegranate bushes.
The two thieves ran like rabbits.
Abandoning sacks, rabbits, pry bars, a long coil of rope, wire cutters, and
even an excellent long aluminum ladder, they scrambled up that ladder and
over the wall in seconds. Our wall is three meters high and topped off with
pieces of broken glass as well as the usual barbed wire and the all but
invisible Lazor wire. All the wire had been cut in spite of our efforts. What a
pity we couldn’t afford to electrify it or set other traps. But at least the glass—

the oldest, simplest of our tricks—had gotten one of them. We found a broad
stream of dried blood down the inside of the wall this morning.
We also found a Glock 19 pistol where one of the thieves had dropped it.
Mrs. Lincoln and Mr. Montoya could have been shot. If the thieves hadn’t
been scared out of their minds, there could have been a gun battle. Someone
in the Moss house or a neighboring house could have been hurt or killed.
Cory went after Dad about that once they were alone in the kitchen
tonight.
“I know,” Dad said. He sounded tired and miserable. “Don’t think we
haven’t thought about those things. That’s why we want to scare the thieves
away. Even shooting into the air isn’t safe. Nothing’s safe.”
“They ran away this time, but they won’t always run.”
“I know.”
“So what, then? You protect rabbits or oranges, and maybe get a child
killed?”
Silence.
“We can’t live this way!” Cory shouted. I jumped. I’ve never heard her
sound like that before.
“We do live this way,” Dad said. There was no anger in his voice, no
emotional response at all to her shouting. There was nothing. Weariness.
Sadness. I’ve never heard him sound so tired, so…almost beaten. And yet he
had won. His idea had beaten off a pair of armed thieves without our having
to hurt anyone. If the thieves had hurt themselves, that was their problem.
Of course they would come back, or others would come. That would
happen no matter what. And Cory was right. The next thieves might not lose
their guns and run away. So what? Should we lie in our beds and let them take
all we had and hope they were content with stripping our gardens? How long
does a thief stay content? And what’s it like to starve?
“We couldn’t make it without you,” Cory was saying. She wasn’t
shouting now. “That could have been you out there, facing criminals. Next
time it might be you. You could be shot, protecting the neighbors’ rabbits.”
“Did you notice,” Dad said, “that every off-duty watcher answered the
whistles last night? They came out to defend their community.”
“I don’t care about them! It’s you I’m worried about!”
“No,” he said. “We can’t think that way any more. Cory, there’s nobody
to help us but God and ourselves. I protect Moss’s place in spite of what I
think of him, and he protects mine, no matter what he thinks of me. We all
look out for one another.” He paused. “I’ve got plenty of insurance. You and
the kids should be able to make it all right if—”
“No!” Cory said. “Do you think that’s all it is? Money? Do you think—?”

“No, Babe. No.” Pause. “I know what it is to be left alone. This is no
world to be alone in.”
There was a long silence, and I didn’t think they would say any more. I
lay on my bed, wondering if I should get up and shut my door so I could turn
on my lamp and write. But there was a little more.
“What are we supposed to do if you die?” she demanded, and I think she
was crying. “What do we do if they shoot you over some damn rabbits?”
“Live!” Dad said. “That’s all anybody can do right now. Live. Hold out.
Survive. I don’t know whether good times are coming back again. But I know
that won’t matter if we don’t survive these times.”
That was the end of their talk. I lay in the dark for a long time, thinking
about what they had said. Cory was right again. Dad might get hurt. He might
get killed. I don’t know how to think about that. I can write about it, but I
don’t feel it. On some deep level, I don’t believe it. I guess I’m as good at
denial as anyone.
So Cory is right, but it doesn’t matter. And Dad is right, but he doesn’t go
far enough. God is Change, and in the end, God prevails. But God exists to be
shaped. It isn’t enough for us to just survive, limping along, playing business
as usual while things get worse and worse. If that’s the shape we give to God,
then someday we must become too weak—too poor, too hungry, too sick—to
defend ourselves. Then we’ll be wiped out.
There has to be more that we can do, a better destiny that we can shape.
Another place. Another way. Something!

7
❏❏❏
We are all Godseed, but no more or less so than any other aspect
of the universe, Godseed is all there is—all that Changes.
Earthseed is all that spreads Earthlife to new earths. The universe
is Godseed. Only we are Earthseed. And the Destiny of Earthseed
is to take root among the stars.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, APRIL 26, 2025
SOMETIMES NAMING A THING—giving it a name or discovering its name—helps
one to begin to understand it. Knowing the name of a thing and knowing what
that thing is for gives me even more of a handle on it.
The particular God-is-Change belief system that seems right to me will be
called Earthseed. I’ve tried to name it before. Failing that, I’ve tried to leave it
unnamed. Neither effort has made me comfortable. Name plus purpose equals
focus for me.
Well, today, I found the name, found it while I was weeding the back
garden and thinking about the way plants seed themselves, windborne,
animalborne, waterborne, far from their parent plants. They have no ability at
all to travel great distances under their own power, and yet, they do travel.
Even they don’t have to just sit in one place and wait to be wiped out. There
are islands thousands of miles from anywhere—the Hawaiian Islands, for
example, and Easter Island—where plants seeded themselves and grew long
before any humans arrived.
Earthseed.
I am Earthseed. Anyone can be. Someday, I think there will be a lot of us.
And I think we’ll have to seed ourselves farther and farther from this dying
place.
I’ve never felt that I was making any of this up—not the name, Earthseed,

not any of it. I mean, I’ve never felt that it was anything other than real:
discovery rather than invention, exploration rather than creation. I wish I
could believe it was all supernatural, and that I’m getting messages from God.
But then, I don’t believe in that kind of God. All I do is observe and take
notes, trying to put things down in ways that are as powerful, as simple, and
as direct as I feel them. I can never do that. I keep trying, but I can’t. I’m not
good enough as a writer or poet or whatever it is I need to be. I don’t know
what to do about that. It drives me frantic sometimes. I’m getting better, but
so slowly.
The thing is, even with my writing problems, every time I understand a
little more, I wonder why it’s taken me so long—why there was ever a time
when I didn’t understand a thing so obvious and real and true.
Here’s the only puzzle in it all, the only paradox, or bit of illogic or
circular reasoning or whatever it should be called:
Why is the universe?
To shape God.
Why is God?
To shape the universe.
I can’t get rid of it. I’ve tried to change it or dump it, but I can’t. I cannot.
It feels like the truest thing I’ve ever written. It’s as mysterious and as
obvious as any other explanation of God or the universe that I’ve ever read,
except that to me the others feel inadequate, at best.
All the rest of Earthseed is explanation—what God is, what God does,
what we are, what we should do, what we can’t help doing… Consider:
Whether you’re a human being, an insect, a microbe, or a stone, this verse is
true.
All that you touch,
You Change.
All that you Change,
Changes you.
The only lasting truth
Is Change.
God
Is Change.

I’m going to go through my old journals and gather the verses I’ve written
into one volume. I’ll put them into one of the exercise notebooks that Cory
hands out to the older kids now that there are so few computers in the
neighborhood. I’ve written plenty of useless stuff in those books, getting my
high school work out of the way. Now I’ll put one to better use. Then,
someday when people are able to pay more attention to what I say than to
how old I am, I’ll use these verses to pry them loose from the rotting past, and
maybe push them into saving themselves and building a future that makes
sense.
That’s if everything will just hold together for a few more years.
SATURDAY, JUNE 7, 2025
I’ve finally assembled a small survival pack for myself—a grab-and-run pack.
I’ve had to dig some things I need out of the garage and the attic so that no
one complains about my taking things they need. I’ve collected a hatchet, for
instance, and two small, light, all-metal pots. There’s plenty of stuff like that
around because no one throws anything away that has any possibility of
someday being useful or salable.
I packed my few hundred dollars in savings—almost a thousand. It might
feed me for two weeks if I’m allowed to keep it, and if I’m very careful what
I buy and where I buy it. I’ve kept up with, prices, questioning Dad when he
and the other neighborhood men do the essential shopping. Food prices are
insane, always going up, never down. Everyone complains about them.
I found an old canteen and a plastic bottle both for water, and I resolved to
keep them clean and full. I packed matches, a full change of clothing,
including shoes in case I have to get up at night and run, comb, soap,
toothbrush and toothpaste, tampons, toilet paper, bandages, pins, needles and
thread, alcohol, aspirin, a couple of spoons and forks, a can opener, my
pocket knife, packets of acorn flour, dried fruit, roasted nuts and edible seeds,
dried milk, a little sugar and salt, my survival notes, several plastic storage
bags, large and small, a lot of plantable raw seed, my journal, my Earthseed
notebook, and lengths of clothesline. I stowed all this in a pair of old pillow
cases, one inside the other for strength. I rolled the pillowcases into a blanket
pack and tied it with some of the clothesline so that I could grab it and run
without losing things, but I made it easy to open at the top so that I could get
my journal in and out, change the water to keep it fresh, and less often,
change the food and check on the seed. The last thing I wanted to find out was
that instead of carrying plantable seed or edible food, I had a load of bugs and
worms.

I wish I could take a gun. I don’t own one and Dad won’t let me keep one
of his in my room. I mean to try to grab one if trouble comes, but I may not be
able to. It would be crazy to wind up outside with nothing but a knife and a
scared look, but it could happen. Dad and Wyatt Talcott took us out for target
practice today, and afterward I tried to talk Dad into letting me keep one of
the guns in my room.
“No,” he said, sitting down, tired and dusty, behind his desk in his
cluttered office. “You don’t have anywhere to keep it safe during the day, and
the boys are always in and out of your room.”
I hesitated, then told him about the emergency pack that I had put
together.
He nodded. “I thought it was a good idea back when you first suggested
it,” he said. “But, think, Lauren. It would be like a gift to a burglar. Money,
food, water, a gun… Most burglars don’t find what they want all bundled up
and waiting for them. I think we’d better make it a little harder for any burglar
who comes here to get hold of a gun.”
“It will just be a rolled up blanket mixed in with some other rolled or
folded bed clothes in my closet,” I said. “No one will even notice it.”
“No.” He shook his head. “No, the guns stay where they are.”
And that’s that. I think he’s more worried about the boys snooping around
than about burglars. My brothers have been taught how to behave around
guns all their lives, but Greg is only eight and Ben is nine. Dad just isn’t
ready to put temptation in their paths yet. Marcus at 11 is more trustworthy
than a lot of adults, but Keith at almost 13 is a question mark. He wouldn’t
steal from Dad. He wouldn’t dare. But he has stolen from me—only little
things so far. He wants a gun, though, the way thirsty people want water. He
wants to be all grown up—yesterday. So maybe Dad’s right. I hate his
decision, but maybe he’s right.
“Where would you go?” I asked him, changing the subject. “If we were
forced out of here, where would you take us?”
He blew out a breath, puffing up his cheeks for a second. “To the
neighbors or to the college,” he said. “The college has temporary emergency
accommodations for employees who are burned or driven out of their homes.”
“And then?”
“Rebuilding, fortifying, doing whatever we can do to live and be safe.”
“Would you ever think about leaving here, heading north to where water
isn’t such a problem and food is cheaper?”
“No.” He stared into space. “My job down here is as secure as a job can
be. There are no jobs up there. Newcomers work for food if they work at all.
Experience doesn’t matter. Education doesn’t matter. There are just too many

desperate people. They work their lives away for a sack of beans and they live
on the streets.”
“I heard it was easier up there,” I said. “Oregon, Washington, Canada.”
“Closed,” he said. “You’ve got to sneak into Oregon if you get in at all.
Even harder to sneak into Washington. People get shot every day trying to
sneak into Canada. Nobody wants California trash.”
“But people do leave. People are always moving north.”
“They try. They’re desperate and they have nothing to lose. But I do. This
is my home. Beyond taxes, I don’t owe a penny on it. You and your brothers
have never known a hungry day here, and God willing, you never will.”
In my Earthseed notebook, I’ve written,
A tree
Cannot grow
In its parents’ shadows.
Is it necessary to write things like that? Everyone knows them. What do
they mean now, anyway? What does this one mean if you live in a cul-de-sac
with a wall around it? What does it mean if you’re damned lucky to live in a
cul-de-sac with a wall around it?
MONDAY, JUNE 16, 2025
There was a long report on the radio today about the findings of the big
Anglo-Japanese cosmological station on the moon. The station, with its vast
array of telescopes and some of the most sensitive spectroscopic equipment
ever made has detected more planets orbiting nearby stars. That station has
been detecting new worlds for a dozen years now, and there’s even evidence
that a few of the discovered worlds may be life-bearing. I’ve listened to and
read every scrap of information I could find on this subject, and I’ve noticed
that there’s less and less argument against the likelihood that some of these
worlds are alive. The idea is gaining scientific acceptance. Of course, no one
has any idea whether the extrasolar life is anything more than a few trillion
microbes. People speculate about intelligent life, and it’s fun to think about,
but no one is claiming to have found anyone to talk to out there. I don’t care.
Life alone is enough. I find it…more exciting and encouraging than I can
explain, more important than I can explain. There is life out there. There are
living worlds just a few light years away, and the United States is busy
drawing back from even our nearby dead worlds, the moon and Mars. I
understand why they are, but I wish they weren’t.

I suspect that a living world might be easier for us to adapt to and live on
without a long, expensive umbilical to Earth. Easier but not easy. Still, that’s
something, because I don’t think there could be a multi-light-year umbilical. I
think people who traveled to extrasolar worlds would be on their own—far
from politicians and business people, failing economies and tortured
ecologies—and far from help. Well out of the shadow of their parent world.
SATURDAY, JULY 19, 2025
Tomorrow, I’ll be sixteen. Only sixteen. I feel older. I want to be older. I need
to be older. I hate being a kid. Time drags!
Tracy Dunn has disappeared. She’s been depressed since Amy was killed.
When she talked at all, it was about dying and wanting to die and deserving to
die. Everyone kept hoping she would get over her grief—or her guilt—and
get on with her life. Maybe she couldn’t. Dad talked with her several times,
and I know he was worried about her. Her crazy family hasn’t been any help.
They treat her the way she treated Amy: They ignore her.
The rumor is that she went outside sometime yesterday. A group of Moss
and Payne kids say they saw her go out of the gate just after they left school.
No one has seen her since.
SUNDAY, JULY 20, 2025
Here’s the birthday gift that came into my mind this morning as I woke up—
just two lines:
The Destiny of Earthseed
Is to take root among the stars.
This is what I was reaching for a few days ago when the story of the new
planets being discovered caught my attention. It’s true, of course. It’s
obvious.
Right now, it’s also impossible. The world is in horrible shape. Even rich
countries aren’t doing as well as history says rich countries used to do.
President Donner isn’t the only one breaking up and selling off science and
space projects. No one is expanding the kind of exploration that doesn’t earn
an immediate profit, or at least promise big future profits. There’s no mood
now for doing anything that could be considered unnecessary or wasteful.
And yet,

The Destiny of Earthseed
Is to take root among the stars.
I don’t know how it will happen or when it will happen. There’s so much
to do before it can even begin. I guess that’s to be expected. There’s always a
lot to do before you get to go to heaven.

8
❏❏❏
To get along with God,
Consider the consequences of your behavior.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, JULY 26, 2025
TRACY DUNN HAS NOT come home and has not been found by the police. I
don’t think she will be. She’s only been gone for a week, but a week outside
must be like a week in hell. People vanish outside. They go through our gate
like Mr. Yannis did, and everyone waits for them, but they never come back
—or they come back in an urn. I think Tracy Dunn is dead.
Bianca Montoya is pregnant. It isn’t just gossip, it’s true, and it matters to
me, somehow. Bianca is 17, unmarried, and out of her mind about Jorge
Iturbe who lives at the Ibarra house and is Yolanda Ibarra’s brother.
Jorge admits to being the father. I don’t know why they didn’t just get
married before everything got so public. Jorge is 23, and he, at least, ought to
have some sense. Anyway, they’re going to get married now. The Ibarra and
Iturbe families have been feuding with the Montoyas for a week over this. So
stupid. You’d think they had nothing else to do. At least they’re both Latino.
No interracial feud this time. Last year when Craig Dunn who’s white and
one of the saner members of the Dunn family was caught making love to Siti
Moss who’s black and Richard Moss’s oldest daughter to boot, I thought
someone was going to get killed. Crazy.
But my point isn’t who’s sleeping with whom or who’s feuding. My point
is—my question is—how in the world can anyone get married and make
babies with things the way they are now?
I mean, I know people have always gotten married and had kids, but
now… Now there’s nowhere to go, nothing to do. A couple gets married, and
if they’re lucky, they get a room or a garage to live in—with no hope of

anything better and every reason to expect things to get worse.
Bianca’s chosen life is one of my options. It’s not one that I intend to
exercise, but it is pretty much what the neighborhood expects of me—of
anyone my age. Grow up a little more, get married, have babies. Curtis
Talcott says the new Iturbe family will get half-a-garage to live in after they
marry. Jorge’s sister Celia Iturbe Cruz and her husband and baby have the
other half. Two couples, and not one paying job among them. The best they
could hope for would be to move into some rich people’s compound as
domestic servants and work for room and board. There’s no way to save any
money or ever do any better.
And what if they wanted to go north, try for a better life in Oregon or
Washington or Canada? It would be much harder to travel with a baby or two,
and much more dangerous to try to sneak past hostile guards and over state
lines or international borders with babies.
I don’t know whether Bianca is brave or stupid. She and her sister are
busy altering their mother’s old wedding dress, and everyone’s cooking and
getting ready for a party as though these were the good old days. How can
they?
I like Curtis Talcott a lot. Maybe I love him. Sometimes I think I do. He
says he loves me. But if all I had to look forward to was marriage to him and
babies and poverty that just keeps getting worse, I think I’d kill myself.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 2025
We had a target practice today, and for the first time since I killed the dog, we
found another corpse. We all saw it this time—an old woman, naked,
maggoty, half-eaten, and beyond disgusting.
That did it for Aura Moss. She says she won’t do any more target
shooting. Not ever. I tried talking to her, but she says it’s the men’s job to
protect us anyway. She says women shouldn’t have to practice with guns.
“What if you have to protect your younger sisters and brothers?” I asked
her. She has to babysit them often enough.
“I already know enough to do that,” she said.
“You get rusty without practice,” I said.
“I’m not going out again,” she insisted. “It’s none of your business. I
don’t have to go!”
I couldn’t move her. She was afraid, and that made her defensive. Dad
said I should have waited until the memory of the corpse faded, then tried to
convince her. He’s right, I guess. It’s the Moss attitude that gets me. Richard
Moss lets his wives and daughters pull things like this. He works them like

slaves in his gardens and rabbit raising operation and around the house, but he
lets them pretend they’re “ladies” when it comes to any community effort. If
they don’t want to do their part, he always backs them up. This is dangerous
and stupid. It’s a breeding ground for resentment. No Moss woman has ever
stood a watch. I’m not the only one who’s noticed.
The two oldest Payne kids went with us for the first time. Bad luck for
them. They weren’t scared off, though. Doyle and Margaret. There’s a
toughness to them. They’re all right. Their uncle Wardell Parrish hadn’t
wanted them to go. He had made nasty comments about Dad’s ego, about
private armies and vigilantes, and about his taxes—how he had paid enough
in his life to have a right to depend on the police to protect him. Blah, blah,
blah. He’s a strange, solitary, whiny man. I’ve heard that he used to be
wealthy. Dad agrees with me that he can’t be trusted. But he’s not Doyle and
Margaret’s father, and their mother Rosalee Payne doesn’t like anyone telling
her how to raise her five kids. The only power she has in the world is her
authority over her children and her money. She does have a little money,
inherited from her parents. Her brother has somehow lost his. So his trying to
tell her what to do or what she shouldn’t let her kids do was a dumb move. He
should have known better—though for the kids’ sake, I’m glad he didn’t.
My brother Keith begged to go with us as usual. He’ll turn thirteen in a
few days—August 14—and the thought of waiting two more years until he’s
15 must seem impossible to him. I understand that. Waiting is terrible.
Waiting to be older is worse than other kinds of waiting because there’s
nothing you can do to make it happen faster. Poor Keith. Poor me.
At least Dad lets Keith shoot at birds and squirrels with the family BB
gun, but Keith still complains. “It’s not fair,” he said today for the twentieth
or thirtieth time. “Lauren’s a girl and you let her go. You always let her do
things. I could learn to help you guard and scare off robbers…” He had once
made the mistake of offering to help “shoot robbers” instead of scaring them
off, and Dad all but preached him a sermon. Dad almost never hits us, but he
can be scary without lifting a finger.
Keith didn’t go today, of course. And our practice went all right until we
found the corpse. We didn’t see any dogs this time. Most upsetting to me,
though, there were a few more rag, stick, cardboard, and palm frond shacks
along the way into the hills along River Street. There always seem to be more.
They’ve never bothered us beyond begging and cursing, but they always stare
so. It gets harder to ride past them. They’re living skeletons, some of them.
Skin and bones and a few teeth. They eat whatever they can find up there.
Sometimes I dream about the way they stare at us.
Back at home, my brother Keith slipped out of the neighborhood—out

through the front gates and away. He stole Cory’s key and took off on his
own. Dad and I didn’t know until we got home. Keith was still gone, and by
then Cory knew he must be outside. She had checked with others in the
neighborhood and two of the Dunn kids, twins Allison and Marie, age six,
said they saw him go out the gate. That was when Cory went home and
discovered that her key was gone.
Dad, tired and angry and scared, was going to go right back out to look for
him, but Keith got home just as Dad was leaving. Cory, Marcus, and I had
gone to the front porch with Dad, all three of us speculating about where
Keith had gone, and Marcus and I volunteering to go with Dad to help search.
It was almost dark.
“You get back in that house and stay there,” Dad said. “It’s bad enough to
have one of you out there.” He checked the submachine gun, made sure it was
fully loaded.
“Dad, look,” I said. I had spotted something moving three houses down—
quick, shadowy movement alongside the Garfield porch. I didn’t know it was
Keith. I was attracted by its furtiveness. Someone was sneaking around,
trying to hide.
Dad was quick enough to see the movement before it was hidden by the
Garfield house. He got up at once, took the gun, and went to check. The rest
of us watched and waited.
Moments later Cory said she heard an odd noise in the house. I was too
focused on Dad and what was going on outside to hear what she heard, or to
pay any attention to her. She went in. Marcus and I were still on the porch
when she screamed.
Marcus and I glanced at each other, then at the front door. Marcus lunged
for the door. I yelled for Dad. Dad was out of sight, but I heard him answer
my call.
“Come quick,” I shouted, then I ran into the house.
Cory, Marcus, Bennett, and Gregory were in the kitchen, clustered around
Keith. Keith was sprawled, panting, on the floor, wearing only his underpants.
He was scraped and bruised, bleeding, and filthy. Cory knelt beside him,
examining him, questioning him, crying.
“What happened to you? Who did this? Why did you go outside? Where
are your clothes? What—?”
“Where’s the key you stole?” Dad cut in. “Did they take it from you?”
Everyone jumped, looked up at Dad, then down at Keith.
“I couldn’t help it,” Keith said, still panting. “I couldn’t, Daddy. There
were five guys.”
“So they got the key.”

Keith nodded, careful not to meet Dad’s eyes.
Dad turned and strode out of the house, almost at a run. It was too late
now to get George or Brian Hsu to change the gate lock. That would have to
be done tomorrow, and new keys made and passed out. I thought Dad must be
going out to warn people and to put more watchers on duty. I wanted to offer
to help alert people, but I didn’t. Dad looked too angry to accept help from
one of his kids right then. And when he got back, Keith was in for it. Was he
ever in for it. A pair of pants gone, and a shirt and a pair of shoes. Cory had
never been willing to let us run around barefoot the way a lot of kids did,
except in the house. Her definitions of being civilized did not involve dirty,
heavily callused feet any more than they involved dirty, diseased skin. Shoes
were expensive, and we were always growing out of ours, but Cory insisted.
Each of us had at least one pair of wearable shoes, in spite of what they cost,
and they cost a lot. Now money would have to be found to get an extra pair
for Keith.
Keith curled up on the floor, smudging the tile with blood from his nose
and mouth, hugging himself and crying now that Dad was gone. It took Cory
two or three minutes to get him up and half carry him to the bathroom. I tried
to help her, but she stared at me like I was the one who beat him up, so I let
them alone. It wasn’t as though I wanted to help. I just thought I should. Keith
was in real pain, and it was hard for me to endure sharing it.
I cleaned up the blood so no one would slip in it or track it around. Then I
fixed dinner, ate, fed the three younger boys, and put the rest aside for Dad,
Cory, and Keith.
SUNDAY, AUGUST 3, 2025
Keith had to confess what he had done this morning at church. He had to
stand up in front of the whole congregation and tell them everything,
including what the five thugs had done to him. Then he had to apologize—to
God, to his parents, and to the congregation that he had endangered and
inconvenienced. Dad made him do that over Cory’s objections.
Dad never hit him, though last night he must have been tempted. “Why
would you do such a thing!” he kept demanding. “How could any son of mine
be so stupid! Where are your brains, boy? What did you think you were
doing? I’m talking to you! Answer me!”
Keith answered and answered and answered, but the answers never
seemed to make much sense to Dad. “I ain’t no baby no more,” he wept. Or,
“I wanted to show you. Just wanted to show you! You always let Lauren do
stuff!” Or, “I’m a man! I shouldn’t be hiding in the house, hiding in the wall;

I’m a man!”
It went on and on because Keith refused to admit he had done anything
wrong. He wanted to show he was a man, not a scared girl. It wasn’t his fault
that a gang of guys jumped him, beat him, robbed him. He didn’t do anything.
It wasn’t his fault.
Dad stared at him in utter disgust. “You disobeyed,” he said. “You stole.
You endangered the lives and the property of everyone here, including your
mother, your sister, and your little brothers. If you were the man you think
you are, I’d beat the hell out of you!”
Keith stared straight ahead. “Bad guys come in even if they don’t have a
key,” he muttered. “They come in and steal stuff. It’s not my fault!”
It took Dad two hours to get Keith to admit that it was his fault, no
excuses. He’d done wrong. He wouldn’t do it again.
My brother isn’t very smart, but he makes up for it in pure stubbornness.
My father is smart and stubborn. Keith didn’t have a chance, but he made Dad
work for his victory. The next morning, Dad had his revenge. I don’t believe
he thought of Keith’s forced confession that way, but Keith’s expression told
me that he did.
“How do I get out of this family,” Marcus muttered to me as we watched.
I sympathized. He had to share a room with Keith, and the two of them, only
a year apart in age, fought all the time. Now things would be worse.
Keith is Cory’s favorite. If you asked her, she would say she didn’t have a
favorite, but she does. She babies him and lets him get away with skipping
chores, a little lying, a little stealing… Maybe that’s why Keith thinks when
he screws up, it’s okay.
This morning’s sermon was on the ten commandments with extra
emphasis on “Honor thy father and thy mother,” and “Thou shalt not steal.” I
think Dad got rid of a lot of anger and frustration, preaching that sermon.
Keith, tall, stone-faced, looking older than his thirteen years, kept his anger. I
could see him keeping it inside, holding it down, choking on it.

9
❏❏❏
All struggles
Are essentially
power struggles.
Who will rule,
Who will lead,
Who will define,
refine,
confine,
design,
Who will dominate.
All struggles
Are essentially power struggles,
And most are no more intellectual
than two rams
knocking their heads together.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SUNDAY, AUGUST 17, 2025
MY PARENTS’ USUAL GOOD judgment failed them this week on my brother
Keith’s birthday. They gave him his own BB gun. It wasn’t new, but it
worked, and it looked much more dangerous than it was. And it was his. He
didn’t have to share it. I suppose it was intended to make him feel better about
the two years he still, had to wait until he got his hands on the Smith &
Wesson, or better yet, the Heckler & Koch. And, of course, it was supposed to
help him get over his stupid desire to sneak out, and the humiliation of his
public confession.
Keith shot a few more pigeons and crows, threatened to shoot Marcus—
Marcus just told me about that tonight—then yesterday, he took off for parts
unknown. He took the BB gun with him, of course. No one has seen him for

about eighteen hours, and there’s not much doubt that he’s gone outside
again.
MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 2025
Dad went out looking for Keith today. He even called in the police. He says
he doesn’t know how we’ll afford the fee, but he’s scared. The longer Keith is
gone, the more likely he is to get hurt or killed. Marcus says he thinks Keith
went looking for the guys who beat him up. I don’t believe it. Not even Keith
would go looking for five guys—or even one guy—with nothing but a BB
gun.
Cory’s even more upset than Dad. She’s scared and jumpy and sick to her
stomach, and she keeps crying. I talked her into going back to bed, then
taught her classes myself. I’ve done that four or five times before when she
was sick, so it wasn’t too weird for the kids. I just used Cory’s lesson plans,
and during the first part of the day, I partnered the older kids with my
kindergartners and let everyone get a taste of teaching or learning from
someone different. Some of my students are my age and older, and a couple
of these—Aura Moss and Michael Talcott—got up and left. They knew I
understood the work. I got the last of my high school work and tests out of the
way almost two years ago. Since then I’ve done uncredited (free) college
work with Dad. Michael and Aura know all that, but they’re much too grown
up to learn anything from the likes of me. The hell with them. It’s a pity,
though, that my Curtis has to have a brother like Michael—not that any of us
gets to choose our brothers.
TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 2025
No sign of Keith. I think Cory has gone into mourning for him. I handled
classes again today, and Dad went out searching again. He came home
looking exhausted tonight, and Cory wept and shouted at him.
“You didn’t try!” she said with me and all three of my brothers looking
on. We’d all come to see whether Dad had brought Keith back. “You could
have found him if you’d tried!”
Dad tried to go to her, but she backed away, still shouting: “If it were your
precious Lauren out there alone, you would have found her by now! You
don’t care about Keith.”
She’s never said anything like that before.
I mean, we were always Cory and Lauren. She never asked me to call her
“mother,” and I never thought to do it. I always knew she was my stepmother.
But still… I always loved her. It mystified me that Keith was her favorite, but

it didn’t make me love her any less. I was her kid, but not her kid. Not quite.
Not really. But I always thought she loved me.
Dad shooed us all off to bed. He quieted Cory and took her back to their
room. A few minutes ago, he came to see me.
“She didn’t mean it,” he said. “She loves you as though you were her
daughter, Lauren.”
I just looked at him.
“She wants you to know she’s sorry.”
I nodded, and after a few more assurances, he went.
Is she sorry? I don’t think so.
Did she mean it. She did. Oh, yes, she meant it. Shit.
THURSDAY, AUGUST 30, 2025
Keith came back last night.
He just walked into the house during dinner, as though he’d been outside
playing football instead of gone since Saturday. And this time he looked fine.
Not a mark on him. He was wearing a clean new set of clothing—even new
shoes. All of it was of much better quality than he had when he left, and much
more expensive than we could have afforded.
He still had the BB gun until Dad took it away from him and smashed it.
Keith wouldn’t say where he’d been or how he’d gotten the new things, so
Dad beat him bloody.
I’ve only seen Dad like that once before—when I was 12. Cory tried to
stop him, tried to pull him off Keith, screamed at him in English, then in
Spanish, then without words.
Gregory threw up on the floor, and Bennett started to cry. Marcus backed
away from the whole scene, and slipped out of the house.
Then it was over.
Keith was crying like a two-year-old and Cory was holding him. Dad
stood over both of them, looking dazed.
I followed Marcus out the back door and stumbled and almost fell down
the back steps. I didn’t know what I was doing. Marcus wasn’t around. I sat
on the steps in the warm darkness and let my body shake and hurt and vomit
in helpless empathy with Keith. Then I guess I passed out.
I came to sometime later with Marcus shaking me and whispering my
name.
I got up with Marcus hanging on to my arm, trying to steady me, and I got
to my bedroom.
“Let me sleep in here,” he whispered once I was sitting on my bed, dazed

and still in pain. “I’ll sleep on the floor, I don’t care.”
“All right,” I said, not caring where he slept. I lay down on the bed
without taking off even my shoes, and drew my body into a fetal ball on top
of the bedclothes. I either fell asleep that way or I passed out again.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2025
Keith has gone outside again. He went yesterday afternoon. Cory didn’t admit
until tonight that he took not only her key this time, but her gun. He took the
Smith & Wesson.
Dad refused to go out and look for him. Dad slept in his office last night.
He’s sleeping there again tonight.
I never liked my brother much. I hate him now for what he’s doing to the
family—for what he’s doing to my father. I hate him. Damn, I hate him.
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2025
Keith came home tonight while Dad was visiting over at the Talcott house. I
suspect that Keith hung around and watched the house and waited until Dad
left. He had come to see Cory. He brought her a lot of money done up in a fat
roll.
She stared at it, then took it, dazed. “So much, Keith,” she whispered.
“Where did you get it?”
“It’s for you,” he said. “All for you, not him.”
He took her hand and closed it around the money—and she let him do it,
though she had to know it must be stolen money or drug money or worse.
Keith gave Bennett and Gregory big, expensive bars of milk chocolate
with peanuts. He just smiled at Marcus and me—an obvious “fuck you”
smile. Then, before Dad could come home and find him here, he left again.
Cory hadn’t realized that he was leaving again, and she all but screamed and
clung to him.
“No! You’ll be killed out there! What’s the matter with you? Stay home!”
“Mama, I won’t let him beat me again,” he said. “I don’t need him hitting
me and telling me what to do. Pretty soon, I’ll be able to make more money in
a day than he can in a week—maybe in a month.”
“You’ll be killed!”
“No I won’t. I know what I’m doing.” He kissed her, then, with surprising
ease, took her arms from around him. “I’ll come back and see you,” he said.
“I’ll bring you presents.”
And he vanished out the back door, and was gone.

2026
❏❏❏
CIVILIZATION IS TO GROUPS what intelligence is to individuals. It
is a means of combining the intelligence of many to achieve
ongoing group adaptation.
Civilization, like intelligence, may serve well, serve adequately,
or fail to serve its adaptive function. When civilization fails to
serve, it must disintegrate unless it is acted upon by unifying
internal or external forces.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING

10
❏❏❏
When apparent stability disintegrates,
As it must—
God is Change—
People tend to give in
To fear and depression,
To need and greed.
When no influence is strong enough
To unify people
They divide.
They struggle,
One against one,
Group against group,
For survival, position, power.
They remember old hates and generate new ones,
They create chaos and nurture it.
They kill and kill and kill,
Until they are exhausted and destroyed,
Until they are conquered by outside forces,
Or until one of them becomes
A leader
Most will follow,
Or a tyrant
Most fear.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
THURSDAY, JUNE 25, 2026
KEITH CAME HOME YESTERDAY, bigger than ever, as tall and lean as Dad is tall
and broad. He’s not quite 14, but he already looks like the man he wants so
much to be. We’re like that, we Olaminas—tall, sturdy, fast growing people.

Except for Gregory who is only nine, we all tower over Cory. I’m still the
tallest, but my height seems to annoy her these days. She loves Keith’s size,
though—her big son. She just hates the fact that he doesn’t live with us
anymore.
“I got a room,” he said to me yesterday. We talked, he and I. Cory was
with Dorotea Cruz who is one of her best friends and who had just had
another baby. The other boys were playing in the street and on the island. Dad
had gone to the college, and would be gone overnight. Now, more than ever,
it’s safest to go out just at dawn, and not to try coming home until just at
dawn the next morning. That’s if you have to go outside at all, which Dad
does about once a week. The worst parasites still prowl at night and sleep late
into the morning. Yet Keith lives outside.
“I got a room in a building with some other people,” he said. Translation:
He and his friends were squatting in an abandoned building. Who were his
friends? A gang? A flock of prostitutes? A bunch of astronauts, flying high
on drugs? A den of thieves? All of the above? Whenever he came to see us he
brought money to Cory and little gifts to Bennett and Gregory.
How could he get money? There’s no honest way.
“Do your friends know how old you are?” I asked.
He grinned. “Hell, no. Why should I tell them that?”
I nodded. “It does help to look older sometimes.”
“You want something to eat?”
“You going to cook for me?”
“I’ve cooked for you hundreds of times. Thousands.”
“I know. But you always had to before.”
“Don’t be stupid. You think I couldn’t act the way you did: Skip out on
my responsibilities if I felt like it? I don’t feel like it. You want to eat or not?”
“Sure.”
I made rabbit stew and acorn bread—enough for Cory and all the boys
when they came in. He hung around and watched me work for a while, then
began to talk to me. He’s never done that before. We’ve never, never liked
each other, he and I. But he had information I wanted, and he seemed to want
to talk. I must have been the safest person he could talk to. He wasn’t afraid
of shocking me. He didn’t much care what I thought. And he wasn’t afraid I’d
tell Dad or Cory anything he said. Of course, I wouldn’t. Why cause them
pain? I’ve never been much for tattling on people, anyway.
“It’s just a nasty old building on the outside,” he was saying of his new
home. “You wouldn’t believe how great it looks once you go in, though.”
“Whorehouse or spaceship?” I asked.
“It’s got stuff like you never saw,” he evaded. “TV windows you go

through instead of just sitting and looking at. Headsets, belts, and
touchrings…you see and feel everything, do anything. Anything! There’s
places and things you can get into with that equipment that are insane! You
don’t ever have to go into the street except to get food.”
“And whoever owns this stuff took you in?” I asked.
“Yeah.”
“Why?”
He looked at me for a long time, then started to laugh. “Because I can read
and write,” he said at last. “And none of them can. They’re all older than me,
but not one of them can read or write anything. They stole all this great stuff
and they couldn’t even use it. Before I got there they even broke some of it
because they couldn’t read the instructions.”
Cory and I had had a hell of a struggle, teaching him to read and write. He
had been bored, impatient, anything but eager.
“So you read for a living—help your new friends learn to use their stolen
equipment,” I said.
“Yeah.”
“And what else?”
“Nothin’ else.”
What a piss-poor liar he is. Always was. He’s got no conscience. He just
isn’t smart enough to tell convincing lies. “Drugs, Keith?” I asked.
“Prostitution? Robbery?”
“I said nothing else! You always think you know everything.”
I sighed. “You’re not done causing Dad and Cory pain are you? Not by a
long shot.”
He looked as though he wanted to shout back at me or hit me. He might
have done one or the other if I hadn’t mentioned Cory.
“I don’t give a shit about him,” he said, his voice low and ugly. He had a
man’s voice already. He had everything but a man’s brain. “I do more for her
than he does. I bring her money and nice things. And my friends…my friends
know she lives here, and they let this place alone. He’s nothing!”
I turned and looked at him and saw my father’s face, lighter-skinned,
younger, thinner, but my father’s face, unmistakable. “He’s you,” I
whispered. “Every time I look at you, I see him. Every time you look at him,
you see yourself.”
“Dogshit!”
I shrugged.
It was a long time before he spoke again. At last he said, “Did he ever hit
you?”
“Not for about five years.”

“Why’d he hit you—back then?”
I thought about that, and decided to tell him. He was old enough. “He
caught me and Rubin Quintanilla in the bushes together.”
Keith shouted with abrupt laughter. “You and Rubin? Really? You were
doing it with him? You’re kidding.”
“We were twelve. What the hell.”
“You’re lucky you didn’t get pregnant.”
“I know. Twelve can be a dumb age.”
He looked away. “Bet he didn’t beat you as bad as he beat me!”
“He sent you boys over to play with the Talcotts.” I gave him a glass of
cold orange juice and poured one for myself.
“I don’t remember,” he said.
“You were nine,” I said. “Nobody was going to tell you what was going
on. As I remember, I told you I fell down the back steps.”
He frowned, perhaps remembering. My face had been memorable. Dad
hadn’t beaten me as badly as he beat Keith, but I looked worse. He should
remember that.
“He ever beat up Mama?”
I shook my head. “No. I’ve never seen any sign of it. I don’t think he
would. He loves her, you know. He really does.”
“Bastard!”
“He’s our father, and he’s the best man I know.”
“Did you think that when he beat you?”
“No. But later when I figured out how stupid I’d been, I was just glad he
was so strict. And back when it happened, I was just glad he didn’t quite kill
me.”
He laughed again—twice in just a few minutes, and both times at things
I’d said. Maybe he was ready to open up a little now.
“Tell me about the outside,” I said. “How do you live out there?”
He drained the last of his second glass of juice. “I told you. I live real
good out there.”
“But how did you live when you first went out—when you went to stay.”
He looked at me and smiled. He smiled like that years ago when he used
red ink to trick me into bleeding in empathy with a wound he didn’t have. I
remember that particular nasty smile.
“You want to go out yourself, don’t you?” he demanded.
“Someday.”
“What, instead of marrying Curtis and having a bunch of babies?”
“Yeah. Instead of that.”
“I wondered why you were being so nice to me.”

The food smelled just about ready, so I got up and took the bread from the
oven and bowls from the cupboard. I was tempted to tell him to dish up his
own stew, but I knew he would spoon all the meat out of the stew and leave
nothing but potatoes and vegetables for the rest of us. So I served him and
myself, covered the pot, left it on the lowest possible fire, and put a towel
over the bread.
I let him eat in peace for a while, though I thought the boys would be
coming in any time now, starving.
Then I was afraid to wait any longer. “Talk to me, Keith,” I said. “I really
want to know. How did you survive when you first went out there.”
His smile this time was less evil. Maybe the food had mellowed him.
“Slept in a cardboard box for three days and stole food,” he said. “I don’t
know why I kept going back to that box. Could have slept in any old corner.
Some kids carry a piece of cardboard to sleep on—so they won’t be right
down on the ground, you know.
“Then I got a sleepsack from an old man. It was new, like he never used
it. Then I—”
“You stole it?”
He gave me a look of scorn. “What you think I was going to do? I didn’t
have no money. Just had that gun—Mama’s .38.”
Yes. He had brought it back to her three visits ago, along with two boxes
of ammunition. Of course he never said how he got the ammunition—or how
he got his replacement gun—a Heckler & Koch nine millimeter just like
Dad’s. He just showed up with things and claimed that if you had the money,
you could buy anything outside. He had never admitted how he got the
money.
“Okay,” I said. “So you stole a sleepsack. And you kept stealing food? It’s
a wonder you didn’t get caught.”
“The old guy had some money. I used it to buy food. Then I started
walking toward L.A.”
That old dream of his. For reasons that make sense to him alone, he’s
always wanted to go to L.A. Any sane person would be thankful for the
twenty miles that separate us from that oozing sore.
“There’s people all over the freeway coming away from LA.,” he said.
“There’s even people walking up from way down in San Diego. They don’t
know where they’re going. I talked to this guy, he said he was going to
Alaska. Goddamn. Alaska!”
“Good luck to him,” I said. “He’s got a lot of guns to face before he gets
there.”
“He won’t get there. Alaska must be a thousand miles from here!”

I nodded. “More than that, and with hostile state lines and borders along
the way. But good luck to him anyhow. It’s a goal that makes sense.”
“He had twenty-three thousand dollars in his pack.”
I didn’t say anything. I just froze, stared at him in disgust and renewed
dislike. But of course. Of course.
“You wanted to know,” he said. “That’s what it’s like outside. If you got a
gun, you’re somebody. If you don’t, you’re shit. And a lot of people out there
don’t have guns.”
“I thought most of them did—except the ones too poor to be worth
robbing.”
“I thought so too. But guns cost a lot. And it’s easier to get one if you
already got one, you know?”
“What if that Alaska guy had had one. You’d be dead.”
“I sneaked up on him while he was sleeping. Just sort of followed him
until he went off the road to go to sleep. Then I got him. He led me away
from L.A., though.”
“You shot him?”
The nasty smile again.
“He talked to you. He was friendly to you. And you shot him.”
“What was I supposed to do? Wait for God to come and give me some
money? What was I supposed to do?”
“Come home.”
“Shit.”
“Doesn’t it even bother you that you took someone’s life—you killed a
man?”
He seemed to think about that for a while. Then he shook his head. “It
don’t bother me,” he said. “I was scared at first, but then…after I did it, I
didn’t feel nothing. Nobody saw me do it. I just took his stuff and left him
there. Besides, maybe he wasn’t dead. People don’t always die just because
you shoot them.”
“You didn’t check?”
“I just wanted his stuff. He was crazy anyway. Alaska!”
I didn’t say any more to him, didn’t ask any more questions. He talked a
little about meeting some guys and joining up with them, then discovering
that even though they were all older than he was, none of them could read or
write. He was a help to them. He made their lives pleasanter. Maybe that’s
why they didn’t just wait until he was asleep and kill him and take his loot for
themselves.
After a while, he noticed that I wasn’t saying anything, and he laughed.
“You better marry Curtis and make babies,” he said. “Out there, outside, you

wouldn’t last a day. That hyperempathy shit of yours would bring you down
even if nobody touched you.”
“You think that,” I said.
“Hey, I saw a guy get both of his eyes gouged out. After that, they set him
on fire and watched him run around and scream and burn. You think you
could stand to see that?”
“Your new friends did that?” I asked.
“Hell no! Crazies did that. Paints. They shave off all their hair—even their
eyebrows—and they paint their skin green or blue or red or yellow. They eat
fire and kill rich people.”
“They do what?”
“They take that drug that makes them like to watch fires. Sometimes a
camp fire or a trash fire or a house fire. Or sometimes they grab a rich guy
and set him on fire.”
“Why?”
“I don’t know. They’re crazy. I heard some of them used to be rich kids,
so I don’t know why they hate rich people so much. That drug is bad, though.
Sometimes the paints like the fire so much they get too close to it. Then their
friends don’t even help him. They just watch them burn. It’s like… I don’t
know, it’s like they were fucking the fire, and like it was the best fuck they
ever had.”
“You’ve never tried it?”
“Hell no! I told you. Those guys are crazy. You know, even the girls
shave their heads. Damn, they look ugly!”
“They’re mostly kids, then?”
“Yeah. Your age up to maybe twenty. There’s a few old ones, twentyfive, even thirty. I hear most of them don’t live that long though.”
Cory and the boys came in at that moment, Gregory and Bennett excited
because their side in soccer had won. Cory was happy and wistful, talking to
Marcus about Dorotea Cruz’s new baby girl. Things changed when they all
saw Keith, of course, but the evening wasn’t too bad. Keith had presents for
the little boys, of course, and money for Cory and nothing for Marcus and me.
This time, though, he was a little shamefaced with me.
“Maybe I’ll bring you something next time,” he said.
“No, don’t,” I said, thinking of the Alaska-bound traveler. “It’s all right. I
don’t want anything.”
He shrugged and turned to talk to Cory.
MONDAY, JULY 20, 2026

Keith came to see me today just before dark. He found me walking home
from the Talcott house where Curtis had been wishing me a very happy
birthday. We’ve been very careful, Curtis and I, but from somewhere or other,
he’s gotten a supply of condoms. They’re old fashioned, but they work. And
there’s an unused darkroom in a corner of the Talcott garage.
Keith scared me out of a very sweet mood. He came from behind two
houses without making a sound. He had almost reached me before I realized
someone was there and turned to face him.
He raised his hands, smiling, “Brought you a birthday present,” he said.
He put something into my left hand. Money.
“Keith, no, give it to Cory.”
“You give it to her. You want her to have it, you give it to her. I gave it to
you.”
I walked him to the gate, concerned that one of the watchers might spot
him and shoot him. He was that much taller than he had been when he
stopped living with us. Dad was home so he wouldn’t come in. I thanked him
for the money and told him I would give it to Cory. I wanted him to know that
because I didn’t want him to bring me anything else, ever.
He seemed not to mind. He kissed the side of my face said, “Happy
birthday,” and went out. He still had Cory’s key, and although Dad knew he
had it, he hadn’t had the lock changed again.
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 26, 2026
Today, my parents had to go downtown to identify the body of my brother
Keith.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 29, 2026
I haven’t been able to write a word since Wednesday. I don’t know what to
write. The body was Keith’s. I never saw it, of course. Dad said he tried to
keep Cory from seeing it. The things someone had done to Keith before he
died… I don’t want to write about this, but I need to. Sometimes writing
about a thing makes it easier to stand.
Someone had cut and burned away most of my brothers skin. Everywhere
except his face. They burned out his eyes, but left the rest of his face intact—
like they wanted him to be recognized. They cut and they cauterized and they
cut and they cauterized… Some of the wounds were days old. Someone had
an endless hatred of my brother.
Dad got us all together and described to us what had been done. He told it
in a flat, dead monotone. He wanted to scare us, to scare Marcus, Bennett, and

Gregory in particular. He wanted us to understand just how dangerous the
outside is.
The police said drug dealers torture people the way Keith was tortured.
They torture people who steal from them and people who compete with them.
We don’t know whether Keith was doing either of these things. We just know
he’s dead. His body was dumped across town from here in front of a burnedout old building that was once a nursing home. It was dumped on the broken
concrete and abandoned several hours after Keith died. It could have been
dumped in one of the canyons and only the dogs would have found it. But
someone wanted it to be found, wanted it to be recognized. Had one of his
victims’ relatives or friends managed to get even at last?
The police seemed to think we should know who killed him. I got the
feeling from their questions that they would have been happy to arrest Dad or
Cory or both of them. But they both lead very public lives, and neither had
any unexplained absences or other breaks in routine. Dozens of people could
give them alibis. Of course, I said nothing about what Keith had told me he
had been doing. What good would that do? He was dead, and in a horrible
way. By accident or by intent, all his victims were avenged.
Wardell Parrish felt called upon to tell the police about the big fight Dad
and Keith had had last year. He’d heard it, of course. Half the neighborhood
had heard it. Family fights are neighborhood theater—and Dad, the minister,
after all!
I know Wardell Parrish was the one who told the cops. His youngest niece
Tanya let that much slip. “Uncle Ward said he hated to mention it but…”
Oh, I’ll bet he hated to mention it. Damned bastard! But nobody backed
him up. The cops went nosing around the neighborhood, but no one else
admitted knowing anything about a fight. After all, they knew Dad didn’t kill
Keith. And they knew the cops liked to solve cases by “discovering” evidence
against whomever they decided must be guilty. Best to give them nothing.
They never helped when people called for help. They came later, and more
often than not, made a bad situation worse.
We had the service today. Dad asked his friend Reverend Robinson to
take care of it. Dad just sat with Cory and the rest of us and looked bent and
old. So old.
Cory cried all day, most of the time without making a sound. She’s been
crying off and on since Wednesday. Marcus and Dad tried to comfort her.
Even I tried, though the way she looked at me…as though I had had
something to do with Keith’s death, as though she almost hated me. I keep
reaching out to her. I don’t know what else to do. Maybe in time, she’ll be
able to forgive me for not being her daughter, for being alive when her son is

dead, for being Dad’s daughter by someone else…? I don’t know.
Dad never shed a tear. I’ve never seen him cry in my life. Today, I wish
he would. I wish he could.
Curtis Talcott sort of hung around with me today, and we talked and
talked. I guess I needed to talk, and Curtis was willing to put up with me.
He said I should cry. He said no matter how bad things had gotten
between Keith and me or Keith and the family, I should let myself cry. Odd.
Until he brought it up, I hadn’t thought about my own absence of tears. I
hadn’t cried at all. Maybe Cory had noticed. Maybe my dry face was just one
more grudge she held against me.
It wasn’t that I was holding back, being stoic. It’s just that I hated Keith at
least as much as I loved him. He was my brother—half-brother—but he was
also the most sociopathic person I’ve ever been close to. He would have been
a monster if he had been allowed to grow up. Maybe he was one already. He
never cared what he did. If he wanted to do something and it wouldn’t cause
him immediate physical pain, he did it, fuck the earth.
He messed up our family, broke it into something less than a family. Still,
I would never have wished him dead. I would never wish anyone dead in that
horrible way. I think he was killed by monsters much worse than himself. It’s
beyond me how one human being could do that to another. If hyperempathy
syndrome were a more common complaint, people couldn’t do such things.
They could kill if they had to, and bear the pain of it or be destroyed by it. But
if everyone could feel everyone else’s pain, who would torture? Who would
cause anyone unnecessary pain? I’ve never thought of my problem as
something that might do some good before, but the way things are, I think it
would help. I wish I could give it to people. Failing that, I wish I could find
other people who have it, and live among them. A biological conscience is
better than no conscience at all.
But as for me crying, if I were going to cry, I think I would have done it
back when Dad beat Keith—when the beating was over and Dad saw what he
had done, and we all saw how both Keith and Cory looked at him. I knew
then that neither of them would ever forgive him. Not ever. That was the end
of something precious in the family.
I wish Dad could cry for his son, but I don’t feel any need at all to cry for
my brother. May he rest in peace—in his urn, in heaven, wherever.

11
❏❏❏
Any Change may bear seeds of benefit.
Seek them out.
Any Change may bear seeds of harm.
Beware.
God is infinitely malleable.
God is Change.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2026
WE ARE COMING APART.
The community, the families, individual family members… We’re a rope,
breaking, a single strand at a time.
There was another robbery last night—or an attempted robbery. I wish
that was all. No garden theft this time. Three guys came over the wall and
crowbarred their way into the Cruz house. The Cruz family, of course, has
loud burglar alarms, barred windows, and security gates at all the doors just
like the rest of us, but that doesn’t seem to matter. When people want to come
in, they come in. The thieves used simple hand tools—crowbars, hydraulic
jacks, things anyone can get. I don’t know how they disabled the burglar
alarm. I know they cut the electrical and phone lines to the house. That
shouldn’t have mattered since the alarm had back-up batteries. Whatever else
they did, or whatever went wrong, the alarm didn’t go off. And after the
thieves used the crowbar on the door, they walked into the kitchen and used it
on Dorotea Cruz’s seventy-five-year-old grandmother. The old lady was a
light sleeper and had gotten into the habit of getting up at night and brewing
herself a cup of lemon grass tea. Her family says that’s what she was coming
into the kitchen to do when the thieves broke in.
Then Dorotea’s brothers Hector and Rubin Quintanilla, came running,
guns in hand. They had the bedroom nearest to the kitchen and they heard all

the noise—the break-in itself and Mrs. Quintanilla being knocked against the
kitchen table and chairs. They killed two of the thieves. The third got away,
perhaps wounded. There was a lot of blood. But old Mrs. Quintanilla was
dead.
This is the seventh incident since Keith was killed. More and more people
are coming over our wall to take what we have, or what they think we have.
Seven intrusions into house or garden in less than two months in an 11household community. If this is what’s happening to us, what must it be like
for people who are really rich—although perhaps with their big guns, private
armies of security guards, and up to date security equipment, they’re better
able to fight back. Maybe that’s why we’re getting so much attention. We
have a few stealables and we’re not that well protected. Of the seven
intrusions, three were successful. Thieves got in and out with something—a
couple of radios, a sack of walnuts, wheat flour, corn meal, pieces of jewelry,
an ancient TV, a computer… If they could carry it, they made off with it. If
what Keith told me is true, we’re getting the poorer class of thieves here. No
doubt the tougher, smarter, more courageous thieves hit stores and businesses.
But our lower-class thugs are killing us slowly.
Next year, I’ll be 18—old enough, according to Dad, to stand a regular
night watch. I wish I could do it now. As soon as I can do it, I will. But it
won’t be enough.
It’s funny. Cory and Dad have been using some of the money Keith
brought us to help the people who’ve been robbed. Stolen money to help
victims of theft. Half the money is hidden in our back yard in case of disaster.
There has always been some money hidden out there. Now there’s enough to
make a difference. The other half has gone into the church fund to help our
neighbors in emergencies. It won’t be enough.
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2026
Something new is beginning—or perhaps something old and nasty is reviving.
A company called Kagimoto, Stamm, Frampton, and Company—KSF—has
taken over the running of a small coastal city called Olivar. Olivar,
incorporated in the 1980s, is just one more beach/bedroom suburb of Los
Angeles, small and well-to-do. It has little industry, much hilly, vacant land
and a short, crumbling coastline. Its people, like some here in our Robledo
neighborhood, earn salaries that would once have made them prosperous and
comfortable. In fact, Olivar is a lot richer than we are, but since it’s a coastal
city, its taxes are higher, and since some of its land is unstable, it has extra
problems. Parts of it sometimes crumble into the ocean, undercut or deeply

saturated by salt water. Sea level keeps rising with the warming climate and
there is the occasional earthquake. Olivar’s flat, sandy beach is already just a
memory. So are the houses and businesses that used to sit on that beach. Like
coastal cities all over the world, Olivar needs special help. It’s an upper
middle class, white, literate community of people who once had a lot of
weight to throw around. Now, not even the politicians it’s helped to elect will
stand by it. The whole state, the country, the world needs help, it’s been told.
What the hell is tiny Olivar whining about?
Somewhat richer and less geologically active communities are getting
help—dikes, sea walls, evacuation assistance, whatever’s appropriate. Olivar,
located between the sea and Los Angeles, is getting an influx of salt water
from one direction and desperate poor people from the other. It has a solar
powered desalination plant on some of its flatter, more stable land, and that
provides its people with a dependable supply of water.
But it can’t protect itself from the encroaching sea, the crumbling earth,
the crumbling economy, or the desperate refugees. Even getting back and
forth to work, for those few who can’t work at home, was becoming as
dangerous for them as it is for our people—a kind of terrible gauntlet that has
to be run over and over again.
Then the people of KSF showed up. After many promises, much haggling,
suspicion, fear, hope, and legal wrangling, the voters and the officials of
Olivar permitted their town to be taken over, bought out, privatized. KSF will
expand the desalination plant to vast size. That plant will be the first of many.
The company intends to dominate farming and the selling of water and solar
and wind energy over much of the southwest—where for pennies it’s already
bought vast tracts of fertile, waterless land. So far, Olivar is one of its smaller
coastal holdings, but with Olivar, it gets an eager, educated work force,
people a few years older than I am whose options are very limited. And
there’s all that formerly public land that they now control. They mean to own
great water, power, and agricultural industries in an area that most people
have given up on. They have long-term plans, and the people of Olivar have
decided to become part of them—to accept smaller salaries than their socioeconomic group is used to in exchange for security, a guaranteed food supply,
jobs, and help in their battle with the Pacific.
There are still people in Olivar who are uncomfortable with the change.
They know about early American company towns in which the companies
cheated and abused people.
But this is to be different. The people of Olivar aren’t frightened,
impoverished victims. They’re able to look after themselves, their rights and
their property. They’re educated people who don’t want to live in the

spreading chaos of the rest of Los Angeles County. Some of them said so on
the radio documentary we all listened to last night—as they made a public
spectacle of selling themselves to KSF.
“Good luck to them,” Dad said. “Not that they’ll have much luck in the
long run.”
“What do you mean?” Cory demanded. “I think the whole idea is
wonderful. It’s what we need. Now if only some big company would want to
do the same thing with Robledo.”
“No,” Dad said. “Thank God, no.”
“You don’t know! Why shouldn’t they?”
“Robledo’s too big, too poor, too black, and too Hispanic to be of interest
to anyone—and it has no coastline. What it does have is street poor, body
dumps, and a memory of once being well-off—of shade trees, big houses,
hills, and canyons. Most of those things are still here, but no company will
want us.”
At the end of the program it was announced that KSF was looking for
registered nurses, credentialed teachers, and a few other skilled professionals
who would be willing to move to Olivar and work for room and board. The
offer wasn’t put that way, of course, but that’s what it meant. Yet Cory
recorded the phone number and called it at once. She and Dad are both
teachers, both Ph.D.’s. She was desperate to get in ahead of the crowd. Dad
just shrugged and let her call.
Room and board. The offered salaries were so low that if Dad and Cory
both worked, they wouldn’t earn as much as Dad is earning now with the
college. And out of it they’d have to pay rent as well as the usual expenses. In
fact, when you add everything up, it’s clear that with the six of us, they
couldn’t earn enough to meet expenses. It might work if I could find a job of
some kind, but in Olivar they don’t need me. They’ve got hundreds of me, at
least—maybe thousands. Every surviving community is full of unemployed,
half-educated kids or unemployed, uneducated kids.
Anyone KSF hired would have a hard time living on the salary offered. In
not very much time, I think the new hires would be in debt to the company.
That’s an old company-town trick—get people into debt, hang on to them,
and work them harder. Debt slavery. That might work in Christopher
Donner’s America. Labor laws, state and federal, are not what they once
were.
“We could try,” Cory insisted to Dad. “We could be safe in Olivar. The
kids could go to a real school and later get jobs with the company. After all,
where can they go from here except outside?”
Dad shook his head. “Don’t hope for it, Cory. There’s nothing safe about

slavery.”
Marcus and I were still up, listening. The two younger boys had been sent
to bed, but we four were still clustered around the radio. Now Marcus spoke
up.
“Olivar doesn’t sound like slavery,” he said. “Those rich people would
never let themselves be slaves.”
Dad gave him a sad smile. “Not now,” he said. “Not at first.” He shook
his head. “Kagimoto, Stamm, Frampton: Japanese, German, Canadian. When
I was young, people said it would come to this. Well, why shouldn’t other
countries buy what’s left of us if we put it up for sale. I wonder how many of
the people in Olivar have any idea what they’re doing.”
“I don’t think many do,” I said. “I don’t think they’d dare let themselves
know.”
He looked at me, and I looked back. I’m still learning how dogged people
can be in denial, even when their freedom or their lives are at stake. He’s
lived with it longer. I wonder how.
Marcus said, “Lauren, you ought to want to go to some place like Olivar
more than anyone. You share pain every time you see someone get hurt.
There’d be a lot less pain in Olivar.”
“And there would be all those guards,” I said. “I’ve noticed that people
who have a little bit of power tend to use it. All those guards KSF is bringing
in—they won’t be allowed to bother the rich people, at least at first. But new,
bare-bones, work-for-room-and-board employees… I’ll bet they’ll be fair
game.”
“There’s no reason to believe the company would allow that kind of
thing,” Cory said. “Why do you always expect the worst of everyone?”
“When it comes to strangers with guns,” I told her, “I think suspicion is
more likely to keep you alive than trust.”
She made a sharp, wordless sound of disgust. “You know nothing about
the world. You think you have all the answers but you know nothing!”
I didn’t argue. There wasn’t much point in my arguing with her.
“I doubt that Olivar is looking for families of blacks and Hispanics,
anyway,” Dad said. “The Baiters or the Garfields or even some of the Dunns
might get in, but I don’t think we would. Even if I were trusting enough to put
my family into KSF’s hands, they wouldn’t have us.”
“We could try it,” Cory insisted. “We should! We wouldn’t be any worse
off than we are now if they turn us down. And if we got in and we didn’t like
it, we could come back here. We could rent the house to one of the big
families here—charge them just a little, then—”
“Then come back here jobless and penniless,” Dad said. “No, I mean it.

This business sounds half antebellum revival and half science fiction. I don’t
trust it. Freedom is dangerous, Cory, but it’s precious, too. You can’t just
throw it away or let it slip away. You can’t sell it for bread and pottage.”
Cory stared at him—just stared. He refused to look away. Cory got up and
went to their bedroom. I saw her there a few minutes later, sitting on the bed,
cradling the urn of Keith’s ashes, and crying.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2026
Marcus tells me the Garfields are trying to get into Olivar. He’s been
spending a lot of time with Robin Baiter and she told him. She hates the idea
because she likes her cousin Joanne a lot better than she does her two sisters.
She’s afraid that if Joanne goes away to Olivar, she’ll never see her again. I
suspect she’s right.
I can’t imagine this place without the Garfields. Joanne, Jay, Phillida…
We’ve lost individuals before, of course, but we’ve never lost a whole family.
I mean…they’ll be alive, but…they’ll be gone.
I hope they’re refused. I know it’s selfish, but I don’t care. Not that it
makes any difference what I hope. Oh hell. I hope they get whatever will be
best for their survival. I hope they’ll be all right.
At 13, my brother Marcus has become the only person in the family
whom I would call beautiful. Girls his age stare at him when they think he’s
not looking. They giggle a lot around him and chase him like crazy, but he
sticks to Robin. She’s not pretty at all—all skin and bones and brains—but
she’s funny and sensible. In a year or two, she’ll start to fill out and my
brother will get beauty along with all those brains. Then, if the two of them
are still together, their lives will get a lot more interesting.
I’ve changed my mind. I used to wait for the explosion, the big crash, the
sudden chaos that would destroy the neighborhood. Instead, things are
unraveling, disintegrating bit by bit. Susan Talcott Bruce and her husband
have applied to Olivar. Other people are talking about applying, thinking
about it. There’s a small college in Olivar. There are lethal security devices to
keep thugs and the street poor out. There are more jobs opening up…
Maybe Olivar is the future—one face of it. Cities controlled by big
companies are old hat in science fiction. My grandmother left a whole
bookcase of old science fiction novels. The company-city subgenre always
seemed to star a hero who outsmarted, overthrew, or escaped “the company.”
I’ve never seen one where the hero fought like hell to get taken in and
underpaid by the company. In real life, that’s the way it will be. That’s the

way it is.
And what should I be doing? What can I do? In less than a year, I’ll be 18,
an adult—an adult with no prospects except life in our disintegrating
neighborhood. Or Earthseed.
To begin Earthseed, I’ll have to go outside. I’ve known that for a long
time, but the idea scares me just as much as it always has.
Next year when I’m 18, I’ll go. That means now I have to begin to plan
how I’ll handle it.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2026
I’m going to go north. My grandparents once traveled a lot by car. They left
us old road maps of just about every county in the state plus several of other
parts of the country. The newest of them is 40 years old, but that doesn’t
matter. The roads will still be there. They’ll just be in worse shape than they
were back when my grandparents drove a gas-fueled car over them. I’ve put
maps of the California counties north of us and the few I could find of
Washington and Oregon counties into my pack.
I wonder if there are people outside who will pay me to teach them
reading and writing—basic stuff—or people who will pay me to read or write
for them. Keith started me thinking about that. I might even be able to teach
some Earthseed verses along with the reading and writing. Given any chance
at all, teaching is what I would choose to do. Even if I have to take other
kinds of work to get enough to eat, I can teach. If I do it well, it will draw
people to me—to Earthseed.
All successful life is
Adaptable,
Opportunistic,
Tenacious,
Interconnected, and
Fecund.
Understand this.
Use it.
Shape God.
I wrote that verse a few months ago. It’s true like all the verses. It seems
more true than ever now, more useful to me when I’m afraid.
I’ve finally got a title for my book of Earthseed verses—Earthseed: The
Book of the Living. There are the Tibetan and the Egyptian Books of the

Dead. Dad has copies of them. I’ve never heard of anything called a book of
the living, but I wouldn’t be surprised to discover that there is something. I
don’t care. I’m trying to speak—to write—the truth. I’m trying to be clear.
I’m not interested in being fancy, or even original. Clarity and truth will be
plenty, if I can only achieve them. If it happens that there are other people
outside somewhere preaching my truth, I’ll join them. Otherwise, I’ll adapt
where I must, take what opportunities I can find or make, hang on, gather
students, and teach.

12
❏❏❏
We are Earthseed
The life that perceives itself
Changing.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2026
THE GARFIELDS HAVE BEEN accepted at Olivar.
They’ll be moving next month. That soon. I’ve known them all my life,
and they’ll be gone. Joanne and I have had our differences, but we grew up
together. I thought somehow that when I left, she would still be here.
Everyone would still be here, frozen in time just as I left them. But no, that’s
fantasy. God is Change.
“Do you want to go?” I asked her this morning. We had gotten together to
pick a few early lemons and navel oranges and some persimmons, almost ripe
and brilliant orange. We picked at my house, and then at hers, enjoying the
work. The weather was cool. It was good to be outside.
“I have to go,” she said. “What else is there for me—for anyone. It’s all
going to hell here. You know it is.”
I stared at her. I guess discussing such things is all right now that she has a
way out. “So you move into another fortress,” I said.
“It’s a better fortress. It won’t have people coming over the walls, killing
old ladies.”
“Your mother says all you’ll have is an apartment. No yard. No garden.
You’ll have less money, but you’ll have to use more of it to buy food.”
“We’ll manage!” There was a brittle quality to her voice.
I put down the old rake I was using as a fruit picker. It worked fine on the
lemons and oranges. “Scared?” I asked.
She put down her own real fruit picker with its awkward extension handle
and small fruit-catching basket. It was best for persimmons. She hugged

herself. “I’ve lived here, lived with trees and gardens all my life. I…don’t
know how it will be to be shut up in an apartment. It does scare me, but we’ll
manage. We’ll have to.”
“You can come back here if things aren’t what you hope. Your
grandparents and your aunt’s family will still be here.”
“Harry will still be here,” she whispered, looking toward her house. I
would have to stop thinking of it as the Garfield house. Harry and Joanne
were at least as close as Curtis and I. I hadn’t thought about her leaving him
—what that must be like. I like Harry Baiter. I remember being surprised
when he and Joanne first started going together. They’d lived in the same
house all their lives. I had thought of Harry almost as her brother. But they
were only first cousins, and against the odds, they had managed to fall in love.
Or I thought they had. They hadn’t gone with anyone else for years. Everyone
assumed they would get around to marrying when they were a little older.
“Marry him and take him with you,” I said.
“He won’t go,” she said in that same whisper. “We’ve talked and talked
about it. He wants me to stay here with him, get married soon and go north.
Just…go with no prospects. Nothing. It’s crazy.”
“Why won’t he go to Olivar?”
“He thinks the way your father does. He thinks Olivar’s a trap. He’s read
about nineteenth and early twentieth century company towns, and he says no
matter how great Olivar looks, all we’ll get from it in the end is debt and loss
of freedom.”
I knew Harry had sense. “Jo,” I said, “you’ll be of age next year. You
could stay here with the Baiters until then and marry. Or you could talk your
father into letting you marry now.”
“And then what? Go join the street poor? Stay and stuff more babies into
that crowded house. Harry doesn’t have a job, and there’s no real chance of
his getting one that pays money. Are we supposed to live on what Harry’s
parents earn? What kind of future is that? None! None at all!”
Sensible. Conservative and sensible and mature and wrong. Very much in
character with Joanne.
Or maybe I was the one who was wrong. Maybe the security Joanne will
find in Olivar is the only kind of security to be had for anyone who isn’t rich.
To me, though, security in Olivar isn’t much more attractive than the security
Keith has finally found in his urn.
I picked a few more lemons and some oranges and wondered what she
would do if she knew I was also planning to leave next year. Would she run to
her mother again, frightened for me, and eager to have someone protect me
from myself? She might. She wants a future she can understand and depend

on—a future that looks a lot like her parents’ present. I don’t think that’s
possible. Things are changing too much, too fast. Who can fight God?
We put baskets of fruit inside my back door on the porch, then headed for
her house.
“What will you do?” she asked me as we walked. “Are you just going to
stay here? I mean…are you going to stay and marry Curtis?”
I shrugged and lied. “I don’t know. If I marry anyone, it will be Curtis.
But I don’t know about marrying. I don’t want to have children here any more
than you do. I know we’ll be staying here for a while longer, though. Dad
won’t let Cory even apply to Olivar. I’m glad of that because I don’t want to
go there. But there’ll be other Olivars. Who knows what I might wind up
doing?” That last didn’t feel like a lie.
“You think there’ll be more privatized cities?” she asked.
“Bound to be if Olivar succeeds. This country is going to be parceled out
as a source of cheap labor and cheap land. When people like those in Olivar
beg to sell themselves, our surviving cities are bound to wind up the
economic colonies of whoever can afford to buy them.”
“Oh, God, there you go again. You’ve always got a disaster up your
sleeve.”
“I see what’s out there. You see it too. You just deny it.”
“Remember when you thought starving hordes were going to come
crawling over our walls and we would have to run away to the mountains and
eat grass?”
Did I remember? I turned to face her, first angry—furious—then to my
own surprise, sad. “I’ll miss you,” I said.
She must have read my feelings. “I’m sorry,” she whispered.
We hugged each other. I didn’t ask her what she was sorry for, and she
didn’t say any more.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2026
Dad didn’t come home today. He was due this morning.
I don’t know what that means. I don’t know what to think. I’m scared to
death.
Cory called the college, his friends, fellow ministers, co-workers, the
cops, the hospitals…
Nothing. He isn’t under arrest or sick or injured or dead—at least not as
far as anyone knows. None of his friends or colleagues had seen him since he
left work early this morning. His bike was working all right. He was all right.
He had ridden off toward home with three co-workers who lived in other

neighborhoods in our area. Each of these said the same thing: That they had
left him as usual at River Street where it intersects Durant Road. That’s only
five blocks from here. We’re at the tip-end of Durant Road.
So where is he?
Today a group of us, all armed, rode bicycles from home to River Street
and down River Street to the college. Five miles in all. We checked side
streets, alleys, vacant buildings, every place we could think of. I went. I took
Marcus with me because if I hadn’t, he would have gone out alone. I had the
Smith & Wesson. Marcus had only his knife. He’s quick and agile with it, and
strong for his age, but he’s never used it on anything alive. If anything had
happened to him, I don’t think I would have dared to go home. Cory is
already out of her mind with worry. All this on top of losing Keith… I don’t
know. Everyone helped. Jay Garfield will be leaving soon, but that didn’t stop
him from leading the search. He’s a good man. He did everything he could
think of to find Dad.
Tomorrow we’re going into the hills and canyons. We have to. No one
wants to, but what else can we do?
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2026
I’ve never seen more squalor, more human remains, more feral dogs than I
saw today. I have to write. I have to dump this onto paper. I can’t keep it
inside of me. Seeing the dead has never bothered me before, but this…
We were looking for Dad’s body, of course, though no one said so. I
couldn’t deny that reality or avoid thinking about it. Cory checked with the
police again, with the hospitals, with everyone we could think of who knew
Dad.
Nothing.
So we had to go to the hills. When we go for target practice, we don’t
look around, except to ensure safety. We don’t look for what we’d rather not
find. Today in groups of three or four, we combed through the area nearest to
the top of River Street. I kept Marcus with me—which was not easy. What is
it in young boys that makes them want to wander off alone and get killed?
They get two chin hairs and they’re trying to prove they’re men.
“You watch my back and I’ll watch yours,” I said. “I’m not going to let
you get hurt. Don’t you let me down.”
He gave me the kind of near-smile that said he knew exactly what I was
trying to do, and that he was going to do as he pleased. I got mad and grabbed
him by the shoulders.
“Dammit, Marcus, how many sisters have you got? How many fathers

have you got!” I never used even mild profanity with him unless things were
very serious. Now, it got his attention.
“Don’t worry,” he muttered. “I’ll help.”
Then we found the arm. Marcus was the one who spotted it—something
dark lying just off the trail we were following. It was hung up in the low
branches of a scrub oak.
The arm was fresh and whole—a hand, a lower, and an upper arm. A
black man’s arm, just the color of my father’s where color could be seen. It
was slashed and cut all over, yet still powerful looking—long-boned, longfingered, yet muscular and massive… Familiar?
Smooth, white bone stuck out at the shoulder end. The arm had been cut
off with a sharp knife. The bone wasn’t broken. And, yes. It could have been
his.
Marcus threw up when he saw it. I made myself examine it, search it for
something familiar, for certainty. Jay Garfield tried to stop me, and I shoved
him away and told him to go to hell. I’m sorry for that, and I told him so later.
But I had to know. And yet, I still don’t know. The arm was too slashed and
covered in dried blood. I couldn’t tell. Jay Garfield took fingerprints in his
pocket notebook, but we left the arm itself. How could we take that back to
Cory?
And we kept searching. What else could we do? George Hsu found a
rattlesnake. It didn’t bite anyone and we didn’t kill it. I don’t think anyone
was in a mood to kill things.
We saw dogs, but they kept away from us. I even saw a cat watching us
from under a bush. Cats either run like hell or crouch and freeze. They’re
interesting to watch, somehow. Or, at any other time, they’d be interesting.
Then someone began to scream. I’ve never heard screams like that before
—on and on. A man, screaming, begging, praying: “No! No more! Oh, God,
no more, please. Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, please!” Then there were wordless,
grating cries and high, horrible mewling.
It was a man’s voice, not like my father’s but not that different from his.
We couldn’t locate the source. The echoes bounced around the canyon,
confusing us, sending us first in one direction, then in another. The canyon
was full of loose rock and spiny, vicious plants that kept us on the pathways
where there were pathways.
The screaming stopped, then began again as a kind of horrible, bubbling
noise.
I had let myself fall back to the end of the line of us by then. I wasn’t in
trouble. Sound doesn’t trigger my sharing. I have to see another person in
pain before I do any sharing. And this was one I’d do anything to avoid

seeing.
Marcus dropped back beside me and whispered, “You okay?”
“Yeah,” I said. “I just don’t want to know anything about what’s
happening to that man.”
“Keith,” he said.
“I know,” I agreed.
We walked our bikes behind the others, watching the back trail. Kayla
Talcott dropped back to see if we were all right. She hadn’t wanted us to
come, but since we had come, she had come, she had kept an eye on us. She’s
like that.
“It doesn’t sound like your daddy,” she said. “Doesn’t sound like him at
all.” Kayla is from Texas like my biological mother. Sometimes she sounded
as though she’d never left, and sometimes she sounded as though she’d never
been near any part of the south. She seemed to be able to turn the accent on
and off. She tended to turn it on for comforting people, and for threatening to
kill them. Sometimes when I’m with Curtis, I see her in his face and wonder
what kind of relative—what kind of mother-in-law—she would make. Today
I think both Marcus and I were glad she was there. We needed to be close to
someone with her kind of mothering strength.
The horrible noise ended. Maybe the poor man was dead and out of his
misery. I hope so.
We never found him. We found human bones and animal bones. We
found the rotting corpses of five people scattered among the boulders. We
found the cold remains of a fire with a human femur and two human skulls
lying among the ashes.
At last, we came home and wrapped our community wall around us and
huddled in our illusions of security.
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2026
No one has found my father. Almost every adult in the neighborhood has
spent some time looking. Richard Moss didn’t, but his oldest son and
daughter did. Wardell Parrish didn’t, but his sister and oldest nephew did. I
don’t know what else people could have done. If I did know, I would be out
doing it.
And yet nothing, nothing, nothing! The police never came up with any
sign of him. He never turned up anywhere. He’s vanished, gone. Even the
severed arm’s fingerprints weren’t his.
Every night since Wednesday, I’ve dreamed that horrible screaming. I’ve
gone out twice more with teams hunting through the canyons. We’ve found

nothing but more of the dead and the poorest of the living—people who are
all staring eyes and visible bones. My own bones ached in empathy.
Sometimes if I sleep for a while without hearing the screaming, I see these—
the living dead. I’ve always seen them. I’ve never seen them.
A team I wasn’t with found a living child being eaten by dogs. The team
killed the dogs, then watched, helpless as the boy died.
I spoke at services this morning. Maybe it was my duty. I don’t know.
People came for church, all uncertain and upset, not knowing what they
should do. I think they wanted to draw together, and they had years of habit
drawing them together at our house on Sunday morning. They were uncertain
and hesitant, but they came.
Both Wyatt Talcott and Jay Garfield offered to speak. Both did say a few
words, both informally eulogizing my father, though neither admitted that that
was what they were doing. I was afraid everyone would do that and the
service would become an impossible impromptu funeral. When I stood up, it
wasn’t just to say a couple of words. I meant to give them something they
could take home—something that might make them feel that enough had been
said for today.
I thanked them all for the ongoing—emphasize ongoing—efforts to find
my father. Then…well, then I talked about perseverance. I preached a sermon
about perseverance if an unordained kid can be said to preach a sermon. No
one was going to stop me. Cory was the only one who might have tried, but
Cory was in a kind of walking coma. She wasn’t doing anything she didn’t
have to do.
So I preached from Luke, chapter eighteen, verses one through eight: the
parable of the importunate widow. It’s one I’ve always liked. A widow is so
persistent in her demands for justice that she overcomes the resistance of a
judge who fears neither God nor man. She wears him down.
Moral: The weak can overcome the strong if the weak persist. Persisting
isn’t always safe, but it’s often necessary.
My father and the adults present had created and maintained our
community in spite of the scarcity and the violence outside. Now, with my
father or without him, that community had to go on, hold together, survive. I
talked about my nightmares and the source of those nightmares. Some people
might not have wanted their kids to hear things like that, but I didn’t care. If
Keith had known more, maybe he would still be alive. But I didn’t mention
Keith. People could say what happened to Keith was his own fault. No one
could say that about Dad. I didn’t want anyone to be able to say it about this
community some day.
“Those nightmares of mine are our future if we fail one another,” I said,

winding up. “Starvation, agony at the hands of people who aren’t human any
more. Dismemberment. Death.
“We have God and we have each other. We have our island community,
fragile, and yet a fortress. Sometimes it seems too small and too weak to
survive. And like the widow in Christ’s parable, its enemies fear neither God
nor man. But also like the widow, it persists. We persist. This is our place, no
matter what.”
That was my message. I left it there, hanging before them with an
unfinished feel to it. I could feel them expecting more, then realizing that I
wasn’t going to say more, then biting down on what I had said.
At just the right moment, Kayla Talcott began an old song. Others took it
up, singing slowly, but with feeling: “We shall not, we shall not be moved…”
I think this might have sounded weak or even pitiful somehow if it had
been begun by a lesser voice. I think I might have sang it weakly. I’m only a
fair singer. Kayla, on the other hand, has a big voice, beautiful, clear, and able
to do everything she asks of it. Also, Kayla has a reputation for not moving
unless she wants to.
Later, as she was leaving, I thanked her.
She looked at me. I’d grown past her years ago, and she had to look up.
“Good job,” she said, and nodded and walked away toward her house. I love
her.
I got other compliments today, and I think they were sincere. Most said, in
one way or another, “You’re right,” and “I didn’t know you could preach like
that,” and “Your father would be proud of you.”
Yeah, I hope so. I did it for him. He built this bunch of houses into a
community. And now, he’s probably dead. I wouldn’t let them bury him, but I
know. I’m no good at denial and self-deception. That was Dad’s funeral that I
was preaching—his and the community’s. Because as much as I want all that
I said to be true, it isn’t. We’ll be moved, all right. It’s just a matter of when,
by whom, and in how many pieces.

13
❏❏❏
There is no end
To what a living world
Will demand of you.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 19, 2026
TODAY REVEREND MATTHEW ROBINSON in whose church I was baptized came
to preach my fathers funeral. Cory made the arrangements. There was no
body, no urn. No one knows what happened to my father. Neither we nor the
police have been able to find out. We’re sure he’s dead. He would find a way
to come home if he were alive, so we’re certain he’s dead.
No, we’re not certain. We’re not certain at all. Is he sick somewhere?
Hurt? Held against his will for who knows what reason by who knows what
monsters?
This is worse than when Keith died. So much worse. As horrible as that
was, we knew he was dead. Whatever he suffered, we knew he wasn’t
suffering any more. Not in this world, anyway. We knew. Now, we don’t
know anything. He is dead. But we don’t know!
The Dunns must of felt this when Tracy vanished. Crazy as they are, crazy
as she was, they must have felt this. What do they feel now? Tracy never
came back. If she’s not dead, what must be happening to her outside? A girl
alone only faced one kind of future outside. I intend to go out posing as a man
when I go.
How will they feel when I go? I’ll be dead to them—to Cory, the boys, the
neighborhood. They’ll hope I’m dead, considering the supposed alternative.
Thank Dad for my tallness and my strength.
I won’t have to leave Dad now. He’s already left me. He was 57. What
reason would strangers have for keeping a 57-year-old man alive? Once
they’d robbed him, they would either let him go or kill him. If they let him go,

he’d come home, walking, limping, crawling.
So he’s dead.
That’s that.
It has to be.
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 22, 2026
The Garfields left for Olivar today—Phillida, Jay, and Joanne. An armored
KSF truck came from Olivar to collect them and their belongings. The adults
of the community had all they could do to keep the little kids from climbing
all over the truck and pestering the drivers to death. Most kids my brothers’
ages have never been close to a truck that runs. Some of the younger Moss
kids have never seen a truck of any kind. The Moss kids weren’t even allowed
to visit the Yannis house back when the Yannis television still worked.
The two guys from KSF were patient once they realized the kids weren’t
thieves or vandals. Those two guys with their uniforms, pistols, whips, and
clubs, looked more like cops than movers. No doubt they had even more
substantial weapons in the truck. My brother Bennett said he saw bigger guns
mounted inside the truck when he climbed onto the hood. But when you
consider how much a truck that size is worth, and how many people might
want to relieve them of it and its contents, I guess the weaponry isn’t
surprising.
The two movers were a black and a white, and I could see that Cory
considered that hopeful. Maybe Olivar wouldn’t be the white enclave that
Dad had expected.
Cory cornered the black guy and talked to him for as long as he would let
her. Will she try now to get us into Olivar? I think she will. After all, without
Dad’s salary, she’ll have to do something. I don’t think we have a prayer of
being accepted. The insurance company isn’t going to pay—or not for a long
time. Its people choose not to believe that Dad is dead. Without proof he can’t
be declared legally dead for seven years. Can they hold on to our money for
that long? I don’t know, but it wouldn’t surprise me. We could starve many
times over in seven years. And Cory must know she alone can’t earn enough
in Olivar to feed and house us. Is she hoping to get work for me, too? I don’t
know what we’re going to do.
Joanne and I cried all over each other, saying good-bye. We promised to
phone each other, to stay in touch. I don’t think we’ll be able to. It costs extra
to call Olivar. We won’t be able to afford it. I don’t think she will either.
Chances are, I’ll never see her again. The people I’ve grown up with are
falling out of my life, one by one.

After the truck pulled away, I found Curtis and took him back to the old
darkroom to make love. We hadn’t done it for a long time, and I needed it. I
wish I could imagine just marrying Curtis, staying here, and having a decent
life with him.
It isn’t possible. Even if there were no Earthseed, it wouldn’t be possible.
I would almost be doing the family a favor if I left now—one less mouth to
feed. Unless I could somehow get a job…
“We’ve got to get out of here, too,” Curtis said as we lay together
afterward, lingering, tempting fate, not wanting to lose the feel of each other
so soon. But that wasn’t what he had meant. I turned my head to look at him.
“Don’t you want to go?” he asked. “Wouldn’t you like to get out of this
dead end neighborhood, out of Robledo.”
I nodded. “I was just thinking that. But—”
“I want you to marry me, and I want us to get out of here,” he said in a
near whisper. “This place is dying.”
I raised myself to my elbows and looked down at him. The only light in
the room came from a single window up near the ceiling. Nothing covered it
any more, and the glass was broken out of it, but still, only a little light came
in. Curtis’s face was full of shadows.
“Where do you want to go?” I asked him.
“Not Olivar,” he said. “That could turn out to be a bigger dead end than
living here.”
“Where, then?”
“I don’t know. Oregon or Washington? Canada? Alaska?”
I don’t think I gave any sign of sudden excitement. People tell me my face
doesn’t show them what I’m feeling. My sharing has been a hard teacher. But
he saw something.
“You’ve already been thinking about leaving, haven’t you,” he demanded.
“That’s why you won’t talk about getting married.”
I rested my hand on his smooth chest.
“You were thinking about going alone!” He grasped my wrist, seemed
ready to push it away. Then he held on to it, kept it. “You were just going to
walk away from here and leave me.”
I turned so that he couldn’t see my face because now I had a feeling my
emotions were all too obvious: Confusion, fear, hope… Of course I had
intended to go alone, and of course I hadn’t told anyone that I was leaving.
And I had not decided yet how Dad’s disappearance would affect my going.
That raised frightening questions. What are my responsibilities? What will
happen to my brothers if I leave them to Cory? They’re her sons, and she’ll
move the earth to take care of them, keep them fed and clothed and housed.

But can she do it alone? How?
“I want to go,” I admitted, moving around, trying to be comfortable on the
pallet of old sleepsacks that we had put down on the concrete floor. “I
planned to go. Don’t tell anyone.”
“How can I if I go with you?”
I smiled, loving him. But…“Cory and my brothers are going to need
help,” I said. “When my father was here, I planned to go next year when I’m
eighteen. Now… I don’t know.”
“Where were you going?”
“North. Maybe as far as Canada. Maybe not.”
“Alone?”
“Yeah.”
“Why?” Why alone, he meant.
I shrugged. “I could get killed as soon as I leave here. I could starve. The
cops could pick me up. Dogs could get me. I could catch a disease. Anything
could happen to me; I’ve thought about it. I haven’t named half the bad
possibilities.”
“That’s why you need help!”
“That’s why I couldn’t ask anyone else to walk away from food and
shelter and as much safety as there is in our world. To just start walking north,
and hope you wind up some place good. How could I ask that of you?”
“It’s not that bad. Farther north, we can get work.”
“Maybe. But people have been flooding north for years. Jobs are scarce
up there, too. And statelines and borders are closed.”
“There’s nothing down there!”
“I know.”
“So how can you help Cory and your brothers?”
“I don’t know. We haven’t figured out what to do. So far, nothing I’ve
thought of will work.”
“They’d have more of everything if you left.”
“Maybe. But, Curtis, how can I leave them? Could you walk away and
leave your family, not knowing how they would manage to survive?”
“Sometimes I think so,” he said.
I ignored that. He didn’t get along very well with his brother Michael, but
his family was probably the strongest unit in the neighborhood. Take on one
of them and you’ve got to deal with them all. He would never walk away
from them if they were in trouble.
“Marry me now,” he said. “We’ll stay here and help your family get on its
feet. Then we’ll leave.”
“Not now,” I said. “I can’t see how anything is going to work out now.

Everything’s too crazy.”
“And what? You think it’s going to get sane? It’s never been sane. You
just have to go ahead and live, no matter what.”
I didn’t know what to say, so I kissed him. But I couldn’t distract him.
“I hate this room,” he said. “I hate hiding to be with you and I hate
playing games.” He paused. “But I do love you. Damn! Sometimes I almost
wish I didn’t.”
“Don’t wish that,” I said. He knew so little about me, and he thought he
knew everything. I’d never told him about my sharing, for instance. I’ll have
to before I marry him. If I don’t, when he finds out, he’ll know I didn’t trust
him enough to be honest, with him. And not much is known about sharing.
Suppose I pass it on to my kids?
Then there’s Earthseed. I’ll have to tell him about that. What will he
think? That I’ve gone crazy? I can’t tell him. Not yet.
“We could live at your house,” he said. “My parents would help out with
food. Maybe I could find some kind of job…”
“I want to marry you,” I said. I hesitated, and there was absolute silence. I
couldn’t believe I’d heard myself say such a thing, but it was true. Maybe I
was just feeling bereft. Keith, my father, the Garfields, Mrs. Quintanilla…
People could disappear so easily. I wanted someone with me who cared about
me, and who wouldn’t disappear. But my judgment wasn’t entirely gone.
“When my family is back on its feet, we’ll marry,” I said. “Then we can
get out of here. I just have to know that my brothers will be all right.”
“If we’re going to marry anyway, why not do it now?”
Because I have things to tell you, I thought. Because if you reject me or
make me reject you with your reactions, I don’t want to have to hang around
and watch you with someone else.
“Not now,” I said. “Wait for me.”
He shook his head in obvious disgust. “What the hell do you think I’ve
been doing?”
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 24, 2026
It’s Christmas Eve.
Last night someone set fire to the Payne-Parrish house. While the
community tried to put out the fire, and then tried to keep it from spreading,
three other houses were robbed. Ours was one of the three:
Thieves took all our store-bought food: wheat flour, sugar, canned goods,
packaged goods… They took our radio—our last one. The crazy thing is,
before we went to bed we had been listening to a half-hour news feature about

increasing arson. People are setting more fires to cover crimes—although why
they would bother these days, I don’t know. The police are no threat to
criminals. People are setting fires to do what our arsonist did last night—to
get the neighbors of the arson victim to leave their own homes unguarded.
People are setting fires to get rid of whomever they dislike from personal
enemies to anyone who looks or sounds foreign or racially different. People
are setting fires because they’re frustrated, angry, hopeless. They have no
power to improve their lives, but they have the power to make others even
more miserable. And the only way to prove to yourself that you have power is
to use it.
Then there’s that fire drug with it’s dozen or so names: Blaze, fuego,
flash, sunfire… The most popular name is pyro—short for pyromania. It’s all
the same drug, and it’s been around for a while. From what Keith said, it’s
becoming more popular. It makes watching the leaping, changing patterns of
fire a better, more intense, longer-lasting high than sex. Like Paracetco, my
biological mother’s drug of choice, pyro screws around with people’s
neurochemistry. But Paracetco began as a legitimate drug intended to help
victims of Alzheimer’s disease. Pyro was an accident. It was a homebrew—a
basement drug invented by someone who was trying to assemble one of the
other higher-priced street drugs. The inventor made a very small chemical
mistake, and wound up with pyro. That happened on the east coast and caused
an immediate increase in the number of senseless arson fires, large and small.
Pyro worked its way west without making nearly as much trouble as it
could have. Now its popularity is growing. And in dry-as-straw Southern
California, it can cause a real orgy of burning.
“My God,” Cory said when the radio report was over. And in a small,
whispery voice, she quoted from the Book of Revelation: “‘Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils…’”
And the devils set fire to the Payne-Parrish house.
At about two A.M. I woke to the jangling of the bell: Emergency!
Earthquake? Fire? Intruders?
But there was no shaking, no unfamiliar noise, no smoke. Whatever was
happening, it wasn’t at our house. I got up, threw clothing on, debated for a
second whether to snatch my survival pack, then left it. Our house didn’t
seem to be in immediate danger. My pack was safe in the closet, mixed in
among blankets and bundles of old clothes. If I had to have it, I could come
back and snatch it in seconds.
I ran outside to see what was needed, and saw at once. The Payne-Parrish
house was fully involved, surrounded by fire. One of the watchers on duty

was still sounding the alarm. People spilled from all the houses, and must
have seen as I did that the Parrish house was a total loss. Neighbors were
already wetting down the houses on either side. A live oak tree—one of our
huge, ancient ones—was afire. There was a light wind blowing, swirling bits
of burning leaves and twigs into the air and scattering them. I joined the
people who were beating and wetting the grounds.
Where were the Paynes? Where was Wardell Parrish? Had anyone called
the fire department? A house full of people, after all, it wasn’t like a burning
garage.
I asked several people. Kayla Talcott said she had called them. I was
grateful and ashamed. I wouldn’t have asked if Dad were still with us. One of
us would have just called. Now we couldn’t afford to call.
No one had seen any of the Paynes. Wardell Parrish I found in the Yannis
yard where Cory and my brother Bennett were wrapping him in a blanket. He
was coughing so much that he couldn’t talk, and wearing only pajama pants.
“Is he okay?” I asked.
“He breathed a lot of smoke,” Cory said. “Has someone called—”
“Kayla Talcott called the fire department.”
“Good. But no one’s at the gate to let them in.”
“I’ll go.” I turned away, but she caught my arm.
“The others?” she whispered. She meant the Paynes, of course.
“I don’t know.”
She nodded and let me go.
I went to the gate, borrowing Alex Montoya’s key on the way. He always
seemed to have his gate key in his pocket. It was because of him that I didn’t
go back into our house and maybe interrupt a robbery and be killed for my
trouble.
Firefighters arrived in no great hurry. I let them in, locked the gate after
them, and watched as they put out the fire.
No one had seen the Paynes. We could only assume they had never gotten
out. Cory tried to take Wardell Parrish to our house, but he refused to leave
until he found out one way or the other about his twin sister and his nieces
and nephews.
When the fire was almost out, the bell began to ring again. We all looked
around. Caroline Baiter, Harry’s mother, was jerking and pushing at the bell
and screaming.
“Intruders!” she shouted. “Thieves! They’ve broken into the houses!”
And we all rushed without thinking back to our houses. Wardell Parrish
came along with my family, still coughing, and wheezing, and as useless—as
weaponless—as the rest of us. We could have been killed, rushing in that

way. Instead, we were lucky. We scared away our thieves.
Along with our store-bought food and the radio, the thieves got some of
Dad’s tools and supplies—nails, wire, screws, bolts, that kind of thing. They
didn’t get the phone, the computer, or anything in Dad’s office. In fact, they
didn’t get into Dad’s office at all. I suppose we scared them away before they
could search the whole house.
They stole clothing and shoes from Cory’s room, but didn’t touch my
room or the boys’. They got some of our money—the kitchen money, Cory
calls it. She had hidden it in the kitchen in a box of detergent. She had thought
no one would steal such a thing. In fact, the thieves might have stolen it for
resale without realizing that it wasn’t just detergent. It could have been worse.
The kitchen money was only about a thousand dollars for minor emergencies.
The thieves did not find the rest of our money, some of it hidden out by
our lemon tree, and some hidden with our two remaining guns under the floor
in Cory’s closet. Dad had gone to a lot of trouble to make a kind of floor safe,
not locked, but completely concealed beneath a rug and a battered chest of
drawers filled with sewing things—salvaged bits of cloth, buttons, zippers,
hooks, things like that. The chest of drawers could be moved with one hand. It
slid from one side of the closet to the other if you pushed it right, and in
seconds you could have the money and the guns in your hands. The
concealment trick wouldn’t have defeated people who had time to make a
thorough search, but it had defeated our thieves. They had dumped some of
the drawers onto the floor, but they had not thought to look under the chest.
The thieves did take Cory’s sewing machine. It was a compact, sturdy old
machine with its own carrying case. Both case and machine were gone. That
was a real blow. Cory and I both use that machine to make, alter, and repair
clothing for the family. I had thought I might even be able to earn some
money with the machine, sewing for other people in the neighborhood. Now
the machine is gone. Sewing for the family will have to be done by hand. It
will take much more time, and may not look like what we’re used to. Bad.
Hard. But not a fatal blow. Cory cried over the loss of her machine, but we
can get along without it. She’s just being worn down by one blow after
another.
We’ll adapt. We’ll have to. God is Change.
Strange how much it helps me to remember that.
Curtis Talcott just came to my window to tell me that the firemen have
found charred bodies and bones in the ashes of the Payne-Parrish house. The
police are here, taking reports of the robberies and the obvious arson. I told
Cory. She can tell Wardell Parrish or let the cops tell him. He’s lying down on

one of our living room couches. I doubt that he’s sleeping. Even though I’ve
never liked him, I feel sorry for him. He’s lost his house and his family. He’s
the only survivor. What must that be like?
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 2026
I don’t know how long it can last, but in some way that I suspect is not quite
legal, Cory has taken over part of the job Dad held for so long. She’ll give the
classes Dad gave. With the computer hookups we have already in place, she’ll
issue assignments, receive homework, and be available for phone and compuconferences. The administrative part of Dad’s work will be handled by
someone else who can use the extra money, and who is willing to show up at
the college more often than once or twice a month. It will be as though Dad
were still teaching, but had decided to give up his other responsibilities.
Cory has arranged this by pleading and begging, by crying and cajoling
and calling in every favor and every friend she could think of. People at the
college know her. She taught there before Bennett’s birth, before she saw the
need here and began the front-room school that serves all the children of the
neighborhood. Dad was all for her quitting the college because he didn’t want
her going back and forth outside, exposed to all the dangers that involved.
The neighbors pay a per-kid fee, but it isn’t much. No one could support a
household on it.
Now Cory will have to go outside again. She’s already drafting men and
older boys in the neighborhood to escort her when she has to go out. There
are plenty of unemployed men here, and Cory will be paying them a small
fee.
So in a few days, the new term will start and Cory will do Dad’s work—
while I do her work. I’ll handle the school with help from her and from
Russel Dory, Joanne and Harry’s grandfather. He used to be a high school
math teacher. He’s been retired for years, but he’s still sharp. I don’t think I
need his help, but Cory does, and he’s willing, so that’s that.
Alex Montoya and Kayla Talcott will take over Dad’s preaching and other
church work. Neither is ordained, but both have substituted for Dad in the
past. Both have authority in the community and the church. And, of course,
both know their Bible.
This is how we will survive and hold together. It will work. I don’t know
how long it will last, but for now, it will work.
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 30, 2026
Wardell Parrish has finally dragged himself back to his people—to the part of

his family that he lived with before he and his sister inherited the Sims house.
He’s stayed with us since his sister and all her children were killed. Cory gave
him some of Dad’s clothes which were too big for him. Much too big.
He wandered around, not talking, not seeming to see anything, not eating
enough… Then yesterday he said, like a little boy, “I want to go home. I can’t
stay here. I hate it here; everyone’s dead! I have to go home.”
So today Wyatt Talcott, Michael, and Curtis escorted him home. Poor
man. He’s years older than he was a week ago. I think he may not live much
longer.

2027
❏❏❏
WE ARE EARTHSEED. We are flesh—self aware, questing,
problem-solving flesh. We are that aspect of Earthlife best able to
shape God knowingly. We are Earthlife maturing, Earthlife
preparing to fall away from the parent world. We are Earthlife
preparing to take root in new ground, Earthlife fulfilling its
purpose, its promise, its Destiny.

14
❏❏❏
In order to rise
From its own ashes
A phoenix
First
Must
Burn.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, JULY 31, 2027—MORNING
LAST NIGHT, WHEN I escaped from the neighborhood, it was burning. The
houses, the trees, the people: Burning.
Smoke awoke me, and I shouted down the hall to Cory and the boys. I
grabbed my clothes and emergency pack and followed Cory as she herded the
boys out.
The bell never rang. Our watchers must have been killed before they
could reach it.
Everything was chaos. People running, screaming, shooting. The gate had
been destroyed. Our attackers had driven an ancient truck through it. They
must have stolen a truck just to crash it through our gate.
I think they must have been pyro addicts—bald people with painted
heads, faces, and hands. Red faces; blue faces; green faces; screaming
mouths; avid, crazy eyes, glittering in the firelight.
They shot us and shot us and shot us. I saw Natalie Moss, running,
screaming, then pitching backward, her face half gone, her body still impelled
forward. She fell flat on her back, and did not move again.
I fell with her, caught up in her death. I lay there, dazed, struggling to
move, to get up. Cory and the boys, running ahead of me never noticed. They
ran on.
I got up, felt for my pack, found it, and ran. I tried not to see what was

happening around me. Hearing the gunfire and the screams didn’t stop me. A
dead body—Edwin Dunn—didn’t stop me. I bent, snatched up his gun, and
kept running.
Someone screamed near me, then tackled me, pulled me down. I fired the
gun in reflexive terror, and took the terrible impact in my own stomach. A
green face hung above mine, mouth open, eyes wide, not yet feeling all his
pain. I shot him again, terrified that his pain would immobilize me when he
did feel it. It seemed that he took a long time to die.
When I could move again, I pushed his body off me. I got up, still holding
the gun, and ran for the wrecked gate.
Best to be in the darkness outside. Best to hide.
I ran up Meredith Street away from Durant Road, away from the fires and
the shooting. I had lost track of Cory and the boys. I thought they would go
toward the hills and not toward the center of town. Every direction was
dangerous, but there was more danger where there were more people. In the
night, a woman and three kids might look like a gift basket of food, money,
and sex.
North toward the hills. North through the dark streets to where the nearby
hills and mountains blotted out the stars.
And then what?
I didn’t know. I couldn’t think. I had never been outside the walls when it
was so dark. My only hope of staying alive was to listen, hear any movement
before it got too close to me, see what I could by starlight, be as quiet as I
could.
I walked down the middle of the street looking and listening and trying to
avoid potholes and chunks of broken asphalt. There was little other trash.
Anything that would burn, people would use as fuel. Anything that could be
reused or sold had been gathered. Cory used to comment on that. Poverty, she
said, had made the streets cleaner.
Where was she? Where had she taken my brothers? Were they all right?
Had they even gotten out of the neighborhood?
I stopped. Were my brothers back there? Was Curtis? I hadn’t seen him at
all—though if anyone were going to survive this insanity, it would be the
Talcotts. But we had no way of finding each other.
Sound. Footsteps. Two pairs of running footsteps. I stayed where I was,
frozen in place. No sudden moves to draw attention to me. Had I already been
seen? Could I be seen—a figure of darker darkness in an otherwise empty
street?
The sound was behind me. I listened and knew that it was off to one side,
approaching, passing. Two people running down a side street, indifferent to

the noise they made, indifferent to woman-shaped shadows.
I let out a breath and drew another through my mouth because I could get
more air with less sound that way. I couldn’t go back to the fires and the pain.
If Cory and the boys were there, they were dead or worse, captive. But they
had been ahead of me. They must have gotten out. Cory wouldn’t let them
come back to look for me. There was a bright glow in the air over what had
been our neighborhood. If she had gotten the boys away, all she had to do was
look back to know that she didn’t want to go back.
Did she have her Smith & Wesson? I wished I had it and the two boxes of
ammunition that went with it. All I had was the knife in my pack and Edwin
Dunn’s old .45 automatic. And all the ammunition I had for it was in it. If it
wasn’t empty. I knew the gun. It held seven rounds. I’d fired it twice. How
many times had Edwin Dunn fired it before someone shot him? I didn’t
expect to find out until morning. I had a flashlight in my pack, but I didn’t
intend to use it unless I could be certain I wouldn’t be making a target of
myself.
During the day the sight of the bulge in my pocket would be enough to
make people think twice about robbing or raping me. But during the night the
blue gun would be all but invisible even in my hand. If it were empty, I could
only use it as a club. And the moment I hit someone with it, I might as well
hit myself. If I lost consciousness for any reason during a fight, I would lose
all my possessions if not my life. Tonight I had to hide.
Tomorrow I would have to try to bluff as much as possible. Most people
wouldn’t insist on my shooting them just to test whether or not the gun was
loaded. For the street poor, unable to afford medical care, even a minor
wound might be fatal.
I am one of the street poor, now. Not as poor as some, but homeless,
alone, full of books and ignorant of reality. Unless I meet someone from the
neighborhood, there’s no one I can afford to trust. No one to back me up.
Three miles to the hills. I kept to the starlit back streets, listening and
looking around. The gun was in my hand. I meant to keep it there. I could
hear dogs barking and snarling, fighting somewhere not far away.
I was in a cold sweat. I had never been more terrified in my life. Yet
nothing attacked me. Nothing found me.
I didn’t go all the way to the hills. Instead I found a burned out, unwalled
house a few blocks before the end of Meredith Street. Fear of dogs had made
me keep an eye open for anything that might provide shelter.
The house was a ruin, a plundered ruin. It wasn’t safe to walk into with or
without a light. It was a roofless collection of upright black bones. But it had
been built up off the ground. Five concrete steps led up to what had been the

front porch. There should be a way under the house.
What if other people were under it?
I walked around it, listening, trying to see. Then, instead of daring to
crawl under, I settled in what was left of the attached garage. A corner of it
was still standing, and there was enough rubble in front of that corner to
conceal me if I didn’t show a light. Also, if I were surprised, I could get out of
the garage faster than I could crawl out from under a house. The concrete
floor could not collapse under me as the wooden floor might in what was left
of the house proper. It was as good as I was going to get, and I was exhausted.
I didn’t know whether I could sleep, but I had to rest.
Morning now. What shall I do? I did sleep a little, but I kept startling
awake. Every sound woke me—the wind, rats, insects, then squirrels, and
birds… I don’t feel rested, but I’m a little less exhausted. So what shall I do?
How is it that we had never established an outside meeting place—
somewhere where the family could reunite after disaster. I remember
suggesting to Dad that we do that, but he had never done anything about it,
and I hadn’t pushed the idea as I should have. (Poor Godshaping. Lack of
forethought.)
What now!
Now, I have to go home. I don’t want to. The idea scares me to death. It’s
taken me a long time just to write the word: Home. But I have to know about
my brothers, and about Cory and Curtis. I don’t know how I can help if
they’re hurt or being held by someone. I don’t know what might be waiting
for me back at the neighborhood. More painted faces? The police? I’m in
trouble either way. If the police are there, I’ll have to hide my gun before I go
in—my gun, and my small amount of money. Carrying a gun can win you a
lot of unwanted attention from the police if you catch them in the wrong
mood. Yet everyone who has one carries it. The trick, of course, is not to get
caught carrying it.
On the other hand, if the painted faces are still there, I can’t go in at all.
How long do those people stay high on pyro and fire? Do they hang around
after their fun to steal whatever’s left and maybe kill a few more people?
No matter. I have to go and see.
I have to go home.
SATURDAY, JULY 31, 2027—EVENING
I have to write. I don’t know what else to do. The others are asleep now, but it
isn’t dark. I’m on watch because I couldn’t sleep if I tried. I’m jittery and

crazed. I can’t cry. I want to get up and just run and run… Run away from
everything. But there isn’t any away.
I have to write. There’s nothing familiar left to me but the writing. God is
Change. I hate God. I have to write.
There were no unburned houses back in the neighborhood, although some
were burned worse than others. I don’t know whether police or firefighters
ever came. If they had come, they were gone when I got there. The
neighborhood was wide open and crawling with scavengers.
I stood at the gate, staring in as strangers picked among the black bones of
our homes. The ruins were still smoking, but men, women, and children were
all over them, digging through them, picking fruit from the trees, stripping our
dead, quarreling or fighting over new acquisitions, stashing things away in
clothing or bundles… Who were these people?
I put my hand on the gun in my pocket—it had four rounds left in it—and
I went in. I was grimy from lying in dirt and ashes all night. I might not be
noticed.
I saw three women from an unwalled part of Durant Road, digging
through what was left of the Yannis house. They were laughing and throwing
around chunks of wood and plaster.
Where were Shani Yannis and her daughters? Where were her sisters?
I walked through the neighborhood, looking past the human maggots,
trying to find some of the people I had grown up with. I found dead ones.
Edwin Dunn lay where he had when I took his gun, but now he was shirtless
and shoeless. His pockets had been turned out.
The ground was littered with ash-covered corpses, some burned or half
blown apart by automatic weapons fire. Dried or nearly dried blood had
pooled in the street. Two men were prying loose our emergency bell. The
bright, clear, early morning sunlight made the whole scene less real somehow,
more nightmarelike. I stopped in front of our house and stared at the five
adults and the child who were picking through the ruins of it. Who were these
vultures? Did the fire draw them? Is that what the street poor do? Run to fire
and hope to find a corpse to strip?
There was a dead green face on our front porch. I went up the steps and
stood looking at him—at her. The green face was a woman—tall, lean, bald,
but female. And what had she died for? What was the point of all this?
“Leave her alone.” A woman who had a pair of Cory’s shoes in her hand
strode up to me. “She died for all of us. Leave her alone.”
I’ve never in my life wanted more to kill another human being. “Get the
hell out of my way,” I said. I didn’t raise my voice. I don’t know how I

looked, but the thief backed away.
I stepped over the green face and went into the carcass of our home. The
other thieves looked at me, but none of them said anything. One pair, I
noticed, was a man with a small boy. The man was dressing the boy in a pair
of my brother Gregory’s jeans. The jeans were much too big, but the man
belted them and rolled them up.
And where was Gregory, my clownish smartass of a baby brother? Where
was he? Where was everyone?
The roof of our house had fallen in. Most things had burned—kitchen,
living room, dining room, my room… The floor wasn’t safe to walk on. I saw
one of the scavengers fall through, give a surprised yell, then climb, unhurt,
onto a floor joist.
Nothing left in my room could be salvaged. Ashes. A heat-distorted metal
bedframe, the broken metal and ceramic remains of my lamp, bunches of
ashes that had been clothing or books. Many books were not burned through.
They were useless, but they had been packed so tightly together that the fire
had burned in deeply from the edges and the spines. Rough circles of
unhurried paper remained, surrounded by ash. I didn’t find a single whole
page.
The back two bedrooms had survived better. That was where the
scavengers were, and where I headed.
I found bundled pairs of my father’s socks, folded shorts and T-shirts, and
an extra holster that I could use for the .45. All this I found in or under the
unpromising-looking remains of Dad’s chest of drawers. Most things were
burned beyond use, but I stuffed the best of what I found into my pack. The
man with the child came over to scavenge beside me, and somehow, perhaps
because of the child, because this stranger in his filthy rags was someone’s
father, too, I didn’t mind. The little boy watched the two of us, his small
brown face expressionless. He did look a little like Gregory.
I dug a dried apricot out of my pack and held it out to him. He couldn’t
have been more than six, but he wouldn’t touch the food until the man told
him to. Good discipline. But at the man’s nod, he snatched the apricot, bit off
a tiny taste, then stuffed the rest into his mouth whole.
So, in company with five strangers, I plundered my family’s home. The
ammunition under the closet floor in my parents’ room had burned, had no
doubt exploded. The closet was badly charred. So much for the money hidden
there.
I took dental floss, soap, and a jar of petroleum jelly from my parents’
bathroom. Everything else was already gone.
I managed to gather one set of outer clothing each for Cory and my

brothers. In particular, I found shoes for them. There was a woman
scavenging among Marcus’s shoes, and she glared at me, but she kept quiet.
My brothers had run out of the house in their pajamas. Cory had thrown on a
coat. I had been the last to get out of the house because I had risked stopping
to grab jeans, a sweatshirt, and shoes as well as my emergency pack. I could
have been killed. If I had thought about what I was doing, if I had had to
think, no doubt I would have been killed. I reacted the way I had trained
myself to react—though my training was far from up to date—more memory
than anything else. I hadn’t practiced late at night for ages. Yet my selfadministered training had worked.
Now, if I could get these clothes to Cory and my brothers, I might be able
to make up for their lack of training. Especially if I could get the money under
the rocks by the lemon tree.
I put clothes and shoes into a salvaged pillow case, looked around for
blankets, and couldn’t find a one. They must have been grabbed early. All the
more reason to get the lemon-tree money.
I went out to the peach tree, and, being tall, managed to reach a couple of
nearly-ripe peaches that other scavengers had missed. Then I looked around
as though for something more to take, and surprised myself by almost crying
at the sight of Cory’s big, well-tended back garden, trampled into the ground.
Peppers, tomatoes, squashes, carrots, cucumbers, lettuce, melons, sunflowers,
beans, corn… Much of it wasn’t ripe yet, but what hadn’t been stolen had
been destroyed.
I scavenged a few carrots, a couple of handfuls of sunflower seeds from
flower heads that lay on the ground, and a few bean pods from vines Cory had
planted to run up the sunflower stalks and corn plants. I took what was left the
way I thought a late-arriving scavenger would. And I worked my way toward
the lemon tree. When I reached it, heavy with little green lemons, I hunted for
any with even a hint of paling, of yellow. I took a few from the tree, and from
the ground. Cory had planted shade-loving flowers at the base of the tree, and
they had thrived there. She and my father had scattered small, rounded
boulders among these in a way that seemed no more than decorative. A few of
these had been turned over, crushing the flowers near them. In fact, the rock
with the money under it had been turned over. But the two or three inches of
dirt over the money packet, triple wrapped and heat-sealed in plastic, was
undisturbed.
I snatched the packet in no more time than it had taken to pick up a couple
of lemons a moment before. First I spotted the hiding place, then I snatched
up the money packet along with a hand full of dirt. Then, eager to leave, but
terrified of drawing attention to myself, I picked up a few more lemons and

hunted around for more food.
The figs were hard and green instead of purple, and the persimmons were
yellow-green instead of orange. I found a single ear of corn left on a downed
stalk and used it to stuff the money packet deeper into my blanket pack. Then
I left.
With my pack on my back and the pillow case in my left arm, resting on
my hip like a baby, I walked down the driveway to the street. I kept my right
hand free for the gun still in my pocket. I had not taken time to put on the
holster.
There were more people within the walls than there had been when I
arrived. I had to walk past most of them to get out. Others were leaving with
their loads, and I tried to follow them without quite attaching myself to any
particular group. This meant that I moved more slowly than I would have
chosen to. I had time to look at the corpses and see what I didn’t want to see.
Richard Moss, stark naked, lying in a pool of his own blood. His house,
closer to the gate than ours, had been burned to the ground. Only the chimney
stuck up blackened and naked from the rubble. Where were his two surviving
wives Karen and Zahra? Or had they survived? Where were all his many
children?
Little Robin Baiter, naked, filthy, bloody between her legs, cold, bony,
barely pubescent. Yet she might have married my brother Marcus someday.
She might have been my sister. She had always been such a bright, sharp,
great little kid, all serious and knowing. Twelve going on thirty-five, Cory
used to say. She always smiled when she said it.
Russell Dory, Robin’s grandfather. Only his shoes had been taken. His
body had been almost torn apart by automatic weapons fire. An old man and a
child. What had the painted faces gotten for all their killing?
“She died for us,” the scavenger woman had said of the green face. Some
kind of insane burn-the-rich movement, Keith had said. We’ve never been
rich, but to the desperate, we looked rich. We were surviving and we had our
wall. Did our community die so that addicts could make a help the poor
political statement?
There were other corpses. I didn’t get a close look at most of them. They
littered the front yards, the street, and the island. There was no sign of our
emergency bell now. The men who had wanted it had carried it away—
perhaps to be sold for its metal.
I saw Layla Yannis, Shani’s oldest daughter. Like Robin, she had been
raped. I saw Michael Talcott, one side of his head smashed in. I didn’t look
around for Curtis. I was terrified that I might see him lying nearby. I was
almost out of control as it was, and I couldn’t draw attention to myself. I

couldn’t be anything more than another scavenger hauling away treasure.
Bodies passed under my eyes: Jeremy Baiter, one of Robin’s brothers,
Philip Moss, George Hsu, his wife and his oldest son, Juana Montoya, Rubin
Quintanilla, Lidia Cruz… Lidia was only eight years old. She had been raped,
too.
I made it back through the gate. I didn’t break down. I hadn’t seen Cory or
my brothers in the carnage. That didn’t mean they weren’t there, but I hadn’t
seen them. They might be alive. Curtis might be alive. Where could I look for
them?
The Talcotts had relatives living in Robledo, but I didn’t know where.
Somewhere on the other side of River Street. I couldn’t look for them, though
Curtis might have gone to them. Why hadn’t anyone else stayed to salvage
what they could?
I circled the neighborhood, keeping the wall in sight, then made a greater
circle. I saw no one—or at least no one I knew. I saw other street poor who
stared at me.
Then because I didn’t know what else to do, I headed back toward my
burned out garage on Meredith Street. I couldn’t call the police. All the
phones I knew of were slag. No strangers would let me use their phone if they
had phones, and I didn’t know anyone whom I could pay to call and trust to
make the call. Most people would avoid me or be tempted to keep my money
and never call. And anyway, if the police have ignored what’s been done to
my neighborhood so far, if such a fire and so many corpses can be ignored,
why should I go to them? What would they do? Arrest me? Take my cash as
their fee? I wouldn’t be surprised. Best to stay clear of them.
But where was my family!
Someone called my name.
I turned around, my hand in my pocket, and saw Zahra Moss and Harry
Baiter—Richard Moss’s youngest wife and Robin Baiter’s oldest brother.
They were an unlikely pair, but they were definitely together. They managed,
without touching each other, to give the appearance of all but clinging
together. Both were blood-spattered and ragged. I looked at Harry’s battered
swollen face and remembered that Joanne had loved him—or thought she had
—and that he wouldn’t marry her and go with her to Olivar because he
believed what Dad believed about Olivar.
“Are you all right?” he asked me.
I nodded, remembering Robin. Did he know? Russell Dory, Robin, and
Jeremy…“They beat you up?” I asked, feeling stupid and awkward. I didn’t
want to tell him his grandfather, brother, and sister were dead.
“I had to fight my way out last night. I was lucky they didn’t shoot me.”

He swayed, looked around. “Let’s sit on the curb.”
Both Zahra and I looked around, made sure no one else was near by. We
sat with Harry between us. I sat on my pillowcase of clothing. Zahra and
Harry were fully dressed, in spite of their coating of blood and dirt, but they
carried nothing. Did they have nothing, or had they left their things
somewhere—perhaps with whatever was left of their families. And where was
Zahra’s little girl Bibi? Did she know that Richard Moss was dead?
“Everyone’s dead,” Zahra whispered as though speaking into my
thoughts. “Everyone. Those painted bastards killed them all!”
“No!” Harry shook his head. “We got out. There’ll be some others.” He
sat with his face in his hands, and I wondered whether he was more hurt than
I had thought. I wasn’t sharing any serious pain with him.
“Have either of you seen my brothers or Cory?” I asked.
“Dead,” Zahra whispered. “Like my Bibi. All dead.”
I jumped. “No! Not all of them. No! Did you see them?”
“I saw most of the Montoya family,” Harry said. He wasn’t talking to me
as much as musing aloud. “We saw them last night. They said Juana was
dead. The rest of them were going to walk to Glendale where their relatives
live.”
“But—” I began.
“And I saw Laticia Hsu. She had been stabbed forty or fifty times.”
“But did you see my brothers?” I had to ask.
“They’re all dead, I told you,” Zahra said. “They got out, but the paints
caught them and dragged them back and killed them. I saw. One of them had
me down, and he… I saw.”
She was being raped when she saw my family dragged back and killed?
Was that what she meant? Was it true?
“I went back this morning,” I said. “I didn’t see their bodies. Didn’t see
any of them.” Oh, no. Oh, no. Oh, no…
“I saw. Your mother. All of them. I saw.” Zahra hugged herself. “I didn’t
want to see, but I saw.”
We all sat without talking. I don’t know how long we sat there. Now and
then someone walked past us and looked at us, some dirty, ragged person with
bundles. Cleaner people in little bunches rode past us on bikes. A group of
three rode past on motorcycles, their electric hum and whine strange in the
quiet street.
When I got up, the other two looked at me. For no reason except habit, I
picked up my pillowcase. I don’t know what I meant to do with the things in
it. It had occurred to me, though, that I should get back to my garage before
someone else settled there. I wasn’t thinking very well. It was as though that

garage was home now, and all I wanted in the world was to be there.
Harry got up and almost fell down again. He bent and threw up into the
gutter. The sight of his throwing up grabbed at me, and I only just managed to
look away in time to avoid joining him. He finished, spat, turned to face
Zahra and me, and coughed.
“I feel like hell,” he said.
“They hit him in the head last night,” Zahra explained. “He got me away
from the guy who was… Well, you know. He got me away, but they hurt
him.”
“There’s a burned out garage where I slept last night,” I said. “It’s a long
walk, but he can rest there. We can all rest there.”
Zahra took my pillowcase and carried it. Maybe something in it could do
her some good. We walked on either side of Harry and kept him from
stopping or wandering off or staggering too much. Somehow, we got him to
the garage.

15
❏❏❏
Kindness eases Change
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SUNDAY, AUGUST 1, 2027
HARRY SLEPT MOST OF the day today Zahra and I took turns staying with him.
He has a concussion, at least, and he needs time to heal. We haven’t talked
about what we’ll do if he gets sicker instead of healing. Zahra doesn’t want to
abandon him because he fought to save her. I don’t want to abandon him
because I’ve known him all my life. He’s a good guy. I wonder if there’s
some way to get in touch with the Garfields. They would give him a home, or
at least see that he has medical care.
But he doesn’t seem to be getting worse. He totters out to the fenced back
yard to urinate. He eats the food and drinks the water that I give him. With no
need for discussion, we’re eating and drinking sparingly from my supplies.
They’re all we have. Soon we’ll have to risk going out to buy more. But
today, Sunday, is a day of rest and healing for us.
The pain of Harry’s headache and his bruised, beaten body are almost
welcome to me. They’re distractions. Along with Zahra’s talking and crying
for her dead daughter, they fill my mind.
Their misery eases my own, somehow. It gives me moments when I don’t
think about my family. Everyone is dead. But how can they be? Everyone?
Zahra has a soft, little-girl voice that I used to think was phony. It’s real,
but it takes on a sandpaper roughness when she’s upset. It sounds painful, as
though it’s abrading her throat as she speaks.
She had seen her daughter killed, seen the blue face who shot Bibi as
Zahra ran, carrying her. She believed the blue face was enjoying himself,
shooting at all the moving targets. She said his expression reminded her of a
man having sex.
“I fell down,” she whispered. “I thought I was dead. I thought he had

killed me. There was blood. Then I saw Bibi’s head drop to one side. A red
face grabbed her from me. I didn’t see where he came from. He grabbed her
and threw her into the Hsu house. The house was burning everywhere. He
threw her into the fire.
“I went crazy then. I don’t know what I did. Somebody grabbed me, then I
was free, then somebody shoved me down and fell on me. I couldn’t get my
breath, and he tore my clothes. Then he was on me, and I couldn’t do
anything. That’s when I saw your mother, your brothers…
“Then Harry was there, and he pulled the bastard off me. He told me later
that I was screaming. I don’t know what I was doing. He was beating up the
guy he’d pulled off me when a new guy jumped him. I hit the new guy with a
rock and Harry knocked the other one out. Then we got away. We just ran.
We didn’t sleep. We hid between two unwalled houses down the street away
from the fire until a guy came out with an ax and chased us away. Then we
just wandered until we found you. We didn’t even really know each other
before. You know, Richard never wanted us to have much to do with the
neighbors—especially the white ones.”
I nodded, remembering Richard Moss. “He’s dead, you know,” I said. “I
saw him.” I wanted to take the words back as soon as I’d said them. I didn’t
know how to tell someone her husband was dead, but there must be a better,
gentler way than that.
She stared at me, stricken. I wanted to apologize for my bluntness, but I
didn’t think it would help. I’m sorry, I said in a kind of generic apology for
everything. She began to cry, and I repeated, “I’m sorry.”
I held her and let her cry. Harry woke up, drank a little water, and listened
while Zahra told how Richard Moss had bought her from her homeless
mother when she was only fifteen—younger than I had thought—and brought
her to live in the first house she had ever known. He gave her enough to eat
and didn’t beat her, and even when her co-wives were hateful to her, it was a
thousand times better than living outside with her mother and starving. Now
she was outside again. In six years, she had gone from nothing to nothing.
“Do you have someplace to go?” she asked us at last. “Do you know
anybody who still has a house?”
I looked at Harry. “You might be able to get into Olivar if you can walk
there from here. The Garfields would take you in.”
He thought about that for a while. “I don’t want to,” he said. “I don’t think
there’s any more future in Olivar than there was in our neighborhood. But at
least in our neighborhood, we had the guns.”
“For all the good it did us,” Zahra muttered.
“I know. But they were our guns, not hired gunmen. No one could turn

them against us. In Olivar, from what Joanne said, no one’s allowed to have a
gun except the security force. And who the hell are they?”
“Company people,” I said. “People from outside Olivar.”
He nodded. “That’s what I heard, too. Maybe it will be all right, but it
doesn’t sound all right.”
“It sounds better than starving,” Zahra said. “You guys have never missed
a meal, have you?”
“I’m going north,” I said. “I planned to go anyway once my family was
back on its feet. Now I have no family, and I’m going.”
“North where?” Zahra demanded.
“Up toward Canada. The way things are now, I may not be able to get that
far. But I’ll get to a place where water doesn’t cost more than food, and where
work brings a salary. Even a small one. I’m not going to spend my life as
some kind of twenty-first century slave.”
“North is where I’m headed, too,” Harry said. “There’s nothing here. I’ve
tried for over a year to get a job here—any job that pays money. There’s
nothing. I want to work for money and get some college. The only jobs that
pay serious money are the kind our parents had, the kind that require college
degrees.”
I looked at him, wanting to ask something, hesitating, plunging. “Harry,
what about your parents?”
“I don’t know,” he said. “I didn’t see them killed. Zahra says she didn’t. I
don’t know where anyone is. We got separated.”
I swallowed. “I didn’t see your parents,” I said, “but I did see some of
your other relatives—dead.”
“Who?” he demanded.
I guess there really isn’t any way to tell people that their close relatives
are dead except to say it—no matter how much you don’t want to. “Your
grandfather,” I said, “and Jeremy and Robin.”
“Robin and Jeremy? Kids? Little kids?”
Zahra took his hand. “They kill little kids,” she said. “Out here in the
world, they kill kids every day.”
He didn’t cry. Or maybe he cried when we were asleep. First, though, he
closed himself up, stopped talking, stopped responding, stopped doing
anything until it was nearly dark. By then, Zahra had gone out and come back
with my brother Bennett’s shirt full of ripe peaches.
“Don’t ask me where I got them,” she said.
“I assume you stole them,” I said. “Not from anyone around here, I hope.
No sense making the neighbors mad.”
She lifted an eyebrow. “I don’t need you to tell me how to live out here. I

was born out here. Eat your peaches.”
I ate four of them. They were delicious, and too ripe to travel well
anyway.
“Why don’t you try on some of those clothes,” I said. “Take what fits
you.” She fit not only into Marcus’s shirt and jeans—though she had to roll
the jeans legs up—but into his shoes. Shoes are expensive. Now she has two
pair.
“You let me do it, I’ll trade these little shoes for some food,” she said.
I nodded. “Tomorrow. Whatever you get, we’ll split it. Then I’m leaving.”
“Going north?”
“Yes.”
“Just north. Do you know anything about the roads and towns and where
to buy stuff or steal it? Have you got money?”
“I have maps,” I said. “They’re old, but I think they’re still good. No
one’s been building new roads lately.”
“Hell no. Money?”
“A little. Not enough, I suspect.”
“No such thing as enough money. What about him?” She gestured toward
Harry’s unmoving back. He was lying down. I couldn’t tell whether he was
asleep or not.
“He has to decide for himself,” I said. “Maybe he wants to hang around to
look for his family before he goes.”
He turned over slowly. He looked sick, but fully aware. Zahra put the
peaches she had saved for him next to him.
“I don’t want to wait for anything,” he said. “I wish we could start now. I
hate this place.”
“You going with her?” Zahra asked, jabbing a thumb at me.
He looked at me. “We might be able to help each other,” he said. “At least
we know each other, and… I managed to grab a few hundred dollars as I ran
out of the house.” He was offering trust. He meant we could trust each other.
That was no small thing.
“I was thinking of traveling as a man,” I said to him.
He seemed to be repressing a smile. “That will be safer for you. You’re at
least tall enough to fool people. You’ll have to cut your hair, though.”
Zahra grunted. “Mixed couples catch hell whether people think they’re
gay or straight. Harry’ll piss off all the blacks and you’ll piss off all the
whites. Good luck.”
I watched her as she said it, and realized what she wasn’t saying. “You
want to come?” I asked.
She sniffed. “Why should I? I won’t cut my hair!”

“No need,” I said. “We can be a black couple and their white friend. If
Harry can get a reasonable tan, maybe we can claim him as a cousin.”
She hesitated, then whispered, “Yeah, I want to go.” And she started to
cry. Harry stared at her in surprise.
“Did you think we were going to just dump you?” I asked. “All you had to
do was let us know.”
“I don’t have any money,” she said. “Not a dollar.”
I sighed. “Where did you get those peaches?”
“You were right. I stole them.”
“You have a useful skill then, and information about living out here.” I
faced Harry. “What do you think?”
“Her stealing doesn’t bother you?” he asked.
“I mean to survive,” I said.
“‘Thou shalt not steal,’” he quoted. “Years and years—a lifetime of ‘Thou
shalt not steal.’”
I had to smother a flash of anger before I could answer. He wasn’t my
father. He had no business quoting scripture at me. He was nobody. I didn’t
look at him. I didn’t speak until I knew my voice would sound normal. Then,
“I said I mean to survive,” I told him. “Don’t you?”
He nodded. “It wasn’t a criticism. I’m just surprised.”
“I hope it won’t ever mean getting caught or leaving someone else to
starve,” I said. And to my own surprise, I smiled. “I’ve thought about it.
That’s the way I feel, but I’ve never stolen anything.”
“You’re kidding!” Zahra said.
I shrugged. “It’s true. I grew up trying to set a good example for my
brothers and trying to live up to my father’s expectations. That seemed like
what I should be doing.”
“Oldest kid,” Harry said. “I know.” He was the oldest in his family.
“Oldest, hell,” Zahra said, laughing. “You’re both babies out here.”
And that wasn’t offensive, somehow. Perhaps because it was true. “I’m
inexperienced,” I admitted. “But I can learn. You’re going to be one of my
teachers.”
“One?” she said. “Who have you got but me?”
“Everyone.”
She looked scornful. “No one.”
“Everyone who’s surviving out here knows things that I need to know,” I
said. “I’ll watch them, I’ll listen to them, I’ll learn from them. If I don’t, I’ll
be killed. And like I said, I intend to survive.”
“They’ll sell you a bowl of shit,” she said.
I nodded. “I know. But I’ll buy as few of those as possible.”

She looked at me for a long time, then sighed. “I wish I’d known you
better before all this happened,” she said. “You’re a weird preacher’s kid. If
you still want to play man, I’ll cut your hair for you.”
MONDAY, AUGUST 2, 2027
(from notes expanded SUNDAY, AUGUST 8)
We’re on our way.
This morning Zahra took us to Hanning Joss, the biggest secure store
complex in Robledo. We could get all we needed there. Hanning vendors sell
everything from gourmet food to debusing cream, prostheses to homebirthing
kits, guns to the latest in touchrings, headsets, and recordings. I could have
spent days just wandering through the aisles, staring at the stuff I couldn’t
afford. I had never been to Hanning before, had never seen anything like it in
person.
But we had to go into the complex one at a time, leaving two outside to
guard our bundles—including my gun. Hanning, as I had heard many times
on the radio, was one of the safest places in the city. If you didn’t like their
sniffers, metal detectors, package restrictions, armed guards, and willingness
to strip-search anyone they thought was suspicious on the way in or out, you
could shop somewhere else. The store was full of people eager to put up with
the inconvenience and invasion of privacy if only they could buy the things
they needed in peace.
No one strip-searched me, though I was required to prove that I wasn’t a
deadbeat.
“Show your Hanning disc or money,” an armed guard demanded at the
massive gates. I was terrified that he would steal my money, but I showed the
bills that I intended to spend, and he nodded. He never touched them. No
doubt we were both being watched, and our behaviors recorded. Such a
security conscious store wouldn’t want its guards stealing the customers’
money.
“Shop in peace,” the guard said with no hint of a smile.
I bought salt, a small tube of honey, and the cheapest of dried foods—
oats, fruit, nuts, bean flour, lentils, plus a little dried beef—all that I thought
Zahra and I could carry. And I bought more water and a few odd items: water
purification tablets—just in case—and sun blocker, which even Zahra and I
would need, some stuff for insect bites, and an ointment Dad used for muscle
aches. We would have plenty of those. I bought more toilet paper, tampons,
and lip balm. I bought myself a new notebook, two more pens, and an
expensive supply of ammunition for the .45. I felt better once I had that.

I bought three of the cheap, multipurpose sleepsacks—big, tough storage
bags, and the preferred bedding of all the more affluent homeless. The
country was full of people who could earn or steal food and water, but could
not rent even a cot. These might sleep on the street or in makeshift shacks, but
if they could, they put a sleepsack between their bodies and the ground. The
sacks, with their own strapping, fold to serve as packs during the day. They’re
light, tough, and able to survive most abuse. They’re warm even if you have
to sleep on the concrete, but they’re thin—more useful than comfortable.
Curtis and I used to make love on a pallet of them.
And I bought three oversized jackets of the same thin, breathing synthetic
as the sleepsacks. They’ll finish the job of keeping us warm at night as we
moved north. They look cheap and ugly, and that’s good. They might not be
stolen.
That was the end of my money—the money I had packed in my
emergency pack. I haven’t touched the money I took from the foot of the
lemon tree. That I had split in half and put in two of my father’s socks. I kept
it pinned inside my jeans, invisible and unavailable to pickpockets.
It isn’t a lot of money, but it’s more than I’ve ever had before—more than
anyone could expect me to have. I pinned it where it is, rewrapped in plastic
and secure in the socks on Saturday night when I had finished writing and still
couldn’t stop thinking and remembering and knowing there was nothing I
could do about the past.
Then I had a kind of tactile memory of grabbing the money packet and a
handful of dirt and stuffing both into my pack. I had an incredible amount of
nervous energy that was spending itself in jitteriness. My hands shook so that
I could hardly find the money—by feel, in darkness. I made it an exercise in
concentration to find the money, socks, and pins, divide the money in half, or
as close to in half as I could without seeing, put it into the socks, and pin it in
place. I checked it when I went out to urinate the next morning. I’d done a
good job. The pins didn’t show at all on the outside. I’d put them through the
seams down near my ankles. Nothing dangling, no problems.
I took my many purchases out to what was once the ground floor of a
parking structure, and was now a kind of semienclosed flea market. Many of
the things dug out of ash heaps and landfills wind up for sale here. The rule is
that if you buy something in the store, you can sell something of similar value
in the structure. Your receipt, coded and dated, is your peddler’s license.
The structure was patrolled, though more to check these licenses than to
keep anyone safe. Still, the structure was safer than the street.
I found Harry and Zahra sitting on our bundles, Harry waiting to go into
the store, and Zahra waiting for her license. They had put their backs against a

wall of the store at a spot away from the street and away from the biggest
crowd of buyers and sellers. I gave Zahra the receipt and began to separate
and pack our new supplies. We would leave as soon as Zahra and Harry
finished their buying and selling.
We walked down to the freeway—the 118—and turned west. We would
take the 118 to the 23 and the 23 to U.S. 101. The 101 would take us up the
coast toward Oregon. We became part of a broad river of people walking west
on the freeway. Only a few straggled east against the current—east toward the
mountains and the desert. Where were the westward walkers going? To
something, or just away from here?
We saw a few trucks—most of them run at night—swarms of bikes or
electric cycles, and two cars. All these had plenty of room to speed along the
outer lanes past us. We’re safer if we keep to the left lanes away from the on
and off ramps. It’s against the law in California to walk on the freeways, but
the law is archaic. Everyone who walks walks on the freeways sooner or later.
Freeways provide the most direct routes between cities and parts of cities.
Dad walked or bicycled on them often. Some prostitutes and peddlers of food,
water, and other necessities live along the freeways in sheds or shacks or in
the open air. Beggars, thieves, and murderers live here, too.
But I’ve never walked a freeway before today. I found the experience both
fascinating and frightening. In some ways, the scene reminded me of an old
film I saw once of a street in mid-twentieth-century China—walkers,
bicyclers, people carrying, pulling, pushing loads of all kinds. But the freeway
crowd is a heterogenous mass—black and white, Asian and Latin, whole
families are on the move with babies on backs or perched atop loads in carts,
wagons or bicycle baskets, sometimes along with an old or handicapped
person. Other old, ill, or handicapped people hobbled along as best they could
with the help of sticks or fitter companions. Many were armed with sheathed
knives, rifles, and, of course, visible, holstered handguns. The occasional
passing cop paid no attention.
Children cried, played, squatted, did everything except eat. Almost no one
ate while walking. I saw a couple of people drink from canteens. They took
quick, furtive gulps, as though they were doing something shameful—or
something dangerous.
A woman alongside us collapsed. I got no impression of pain from her,
except at the sudden impact of her body weight on her knees. That made me
stumble, but not fall. The woman sat where she had fallen for a few seconds,
then lurched to her feet and began walking again, leaning forward under her
huge pack.

Almost everyone was filthy. Their bags and bundles and packs were
filthy. They stank. And we, who have slept on concrete in ashes and dirt, and
who have not bathed for three days—we fitted in pretty well. Only our new
sleepsack packs gave us away as either new to the road or at least in
possession of new stealables. We should have dirtied the packs a little before
we got started. We will dirty them tonight. I’ll see to it.
There were a few young guys around, lean and quick, some filthy, some
not dirty at all. Keiths. Today’s Keiths. The ones who bothered me most
weren’t carrying much. Some weren’t carrying anything except weapons.
Predators. They looked around a lot, stared at people, and the people
looked away. I looked away. I was glad to see that Harry and Zahra did the
same. We didn’t need trouble. If trouble came, I hoped we could kill it and
keep walking.
The gun was fully loaded now, and I wore it holstered, but half covered
by my shirt. Harry bought himself a knife. The money he had snatched up as
he ran from his burning house had not been enough to buy a gun. I could have
bought a second gun, but it would have taken too much of my money, and we
have a long way to go.
Zahra used the shoe money to buy herself a knife and a few personal
things. I had refused my share of that money. She needed a few dollars in her
pocket.
The day she and Harry use their knives, I hope they kill. If they don’t, I
might have to, to escape the pain. And what will they think of that?
They deserve to know that I’m a sharer. For their own safety, they should
know. But I’ve never told anyone. Sharing is a weakness, a shameful secret.
A person who knows what I am can hurt me, betray me, disable me with little
effort.
I can’t tell. Not yet. I’ll have to tell soon, I know, but not yet. We’re
together, the three of us, but we’re not a unit yet. Harry and I don’t know
Zahra very well, nor she us. And none of us know what will happen when
we’re challenged. A racist challenge might force us apart. I want to trust these
people. I like them, and…they’re all I have left. But I need more time to
decide. It’s no small thing to commit yourself to other people.
“You okay?” Zahra asked.
I nodded.
“You look like hell. And you’re so damned poker-faced most of the
time…”
“Just thinking,” I said. “There’s so much to think about now.”
She sighed her breath out in a near whistle. “Yeah. I know. But keep your
eyes open. You get too wrapped up in your thinking, and you’ll miss things.

People get killed on freeways all the time.”

16
❏❏❏
Earthseed
Cast on new ground
Must first perceive
That it knows nothing.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
MONDAY, AUGUST 2, 2027
(cont. from notes expanded AUGUST 8)
HERE ARE SOME OF THE things I’ve learned today:
Walking hurts. I’ve never done enough walking to learn that before, but I
know it now. It isn’t only the blisters and sore feet, although we’ve got those.
After a while, everything hurts. I think my back and shoulders would like to
desert to another body. Nothing eases the pain except rest. Even though we
got a late start, we stopped twice today to rest. We went off the freeway, into
the hills or bushes to sit down, drink water, eat dried fruit and nuts. Then we
went on. The days are long this time of year.
Sucking on a plum or apricot pit all day makes you feel less thirsty. Zahra
told us that.
“When I was a kid,” she said, “there were times when I would put a little
rock in my mouth. Anything to feel better. It’s a cheat, though. If you don’t
drink enough water, you’ll die no matter how you feel.”
All three of us walked along with seeds in our mouths after our first stop,
and we felt better. We drank only during our stops in the hills. It’s safer that
way.
Also, cold camps are safer than cheery campfires. Yet tonight we cleared
some ground, dug into a hillside, and made a small fire in the hollow. There
we cooked some of my acorn meal with nuts and fruit. It was wonderful.
Soon we’ll run out of it and we’ll have to survive on beans, cornmeal, oats—
expensive stuff from stores. Acorns are home-food, and home is gone.

Fires are illegal. You can see them flickering all over the hills, but they
are illegal. Everything is so dry that there’s always a danger of campfires
getting away from people and taking out a community or two. It does happen.
But people who have no homes will build fires. Even people like us who
know what fire can do will build them. They give comfort, hot food, and a
false sense of security.
While we were eating, and even after we’d finished, people drifted over
and tried to join us. Most were harmless and easily gotten rid of. Three
claimed they just wanted to get warm. The sun was still up, red on the
horizon, and it was far from cold.
Three women wanted to know whether two studs like Harry and me didn’t
need more than one woman. The women who asked this may have been cold,
considering how few clothes they had on. It’s going to be strange for me,
pretending to be a man.
“Couldn’t I just roast this potato in your coals?” an old man asked,
showing us a withered potato.
We gave him some fire and sent him away—and watched to see where he
went, since a burning brand could be either a weapon or a major distraction if
he had friends hiding. It’s crazy to live this way, suspecting helpless old
people. Insane. But we need our paranoia to keep us alive. Hell, Harry wanted
to let the old guy sit with us. It took Zahra and me together to let him know
that wasn’t going to happen. Harry and I have been well-fed and protected all
our lives. We’re strong and healthy and better educated than most people our
age. But we’re stupid out here. We want to trust people. I fight against the
impulse. Harry hasn’t learned to do that yet. We argued about it afterward,
low voiced, almost whispering.
“Nobody’s safe,” Zahra told him. “No matter how pitiful they look, they
can steal you naked. Little kids, skinny and big-eyed will make off with all
your money, water, and food! I know. I used to do it to people. Maybe they
died, I don’t know. But I didn’t die.”
Harry and I both stared at her. We knew so little about her life. But to me,
at that moment, Harry was our most dangerous question mark.
“You’re strong and confident,” I said to him. “You think you can take
care of yourself out here, and maybe you can. But think what a stab wound or
a broken bone would mean out here: Disablement, slow death from infection
or starvation, no medical care, nothing.”
He looked at me as though he wasn’t sure he wanted to know me
anymore. “What, then?” he asked. “Everyone’s guilty until proven innocent?
Guilty of what? And how do they prove themselves to you?”
“I don’t give a piss whether they’re innocent or not,” Zahra said. “Let

them tend to their own business.”
“Harry, your mind is still back in the neighborhood,” I said. “You still
think a mistake is when your father yells at you or you break a finger or chip a
tooth or something. Out here a mistake—one mistake—and you may be dead.
Remember that guy today? What if that happened to us?”
We had seen a man robbed—a chubby guy of 35 or 40 who was walking
along eating nuts out of a paper bag. Not smart. A little kid of 12 or 13
snatched the nuts and ran off with them. While the victim was distracted by
the little kid, two bigger kids tripped him, cut his pack straps, dragged the
pack off his back, and ran off with it. The whole thing happened so fast that
no one could have interfered if they’d wanted to. No one tried. The victim
was unhurt except for bruises and abrasions—the sort of thing I had to put up
with every day back in the neighborhood. But the victim’s supplies were
gone. If he had a home nearby and other supplies, he would be all right.
Otherwise, his only way of surviving might be to rob someone else—if he
could.
“Remember?” I asked Harry. “We don’t have to hurt anyone unless they
push us into it, but we don’t dare let our guard down. We can’t trust people.”
Harry shook his head. “What if I thought that way when I pulled that guy
off Zahra?”
I held on to my temper. “Harry, you know I don’t mean we shouldn’t trust
or help each other. We know each other. We’ve made a commitment to travel
together.”
“I’m not sure we do know each other.”
“I am. And we can’t afford your denial. You can’t afford it.”
He just stared at me.
“Out here, you adapt to your surroundings or you get killed,” I said.
“That’s obvious!”
Now he did look at me as though I were a stranger. I looked back, hoping
I knew him as well as I thought I did. He had a brain and he had courage. He
just didn’t want to change.
“Do you want to break off with us,” Zahra asked, “go your own way
without us?”
His gaze softened as he looked at her. “No,” he said. “Of course not. But
we don’t have to turn into animals, for godsake.”
“In a way, we do,” I said. “We’re a pack, the three of us, and all those
other people out there aren’t in it. If we’re a good pack, and we work
together, we have a chance. You can be sure we aren’t the only pack out
here.”
He leaned back against a rock, and said with amazement, “You damn sure

talk macho enough to be a guy.”
I almost hit him. Maybe Zahra and I would be better off without him. But
no, that wasn’t true. Numbers mattered. Friendship mattered. One real male
presence mattered.
“Don’t repeat that,” I whispered, leaning close to him. “Never say that
again. There are other people all over these hills; you don’t know who’s
listening. You give me away and you weaken yourself!”
That reached him. “Sorry,” he said.
“It’s bad out here,” Zahra said. “But most people make it if they’re
careful. People weaker than us make it—if they’re careful.”
Harry gave a wan smile. “I hate this world already,” he said.
“It’s not so bad if people stick together.”
He looked from her to me and back to her again. He smiled at her and
nodded. It occurred to me then that he liked her, was attracted to her. That
could be a problem for her later. She was a beautiful woman, and I would
never be beautiful—which didn’t bother me. Boys had always seemed to like
me. But Zahra’s looks grabbed male attention. If she and Harry get together,
she could wind up carrying two heavy loads northward.
I was lost in thought about the two of them when Zahra nudged me with
her foot.
Two big, dirty-looking guys were standing nearby, watching us, watching
Zahra in particular.
I stood up, feeling the others stand with me, flanking me. These guys were
too close to us. They meant to be too close. As I stood up, I put my hand on
the gun.
“Yeah?” I said. “What do you want?”
“Not a thing,” one of them said, smiling at Zahra. Both wore big holstered
knives which they fingered.
I drew the gun. “Good deal,” I said.
Their smiles vanished. “What, you going to shoot us for standing here?”
the talkative one said.
I thumbed the safety. I would shoot the talker, the leader. The other one
would run away. He already wanted to run away. He was staring, openmouthed, at the gun. By the time I collapsed, he would be gone.
“Hey, no trouble!” the talker raised his hands, backing away. “Take it
easy, man.”
I let them go. I think it would have been better to shoot them. I’m afraid
of guys like that—guys looking for trouble, looking for victims. But it seems I
can’t quite shoot someone just because I’m afraid of him. I killed a man on
the night of the fire, and I haven’t thought much about it. But this was

different. It was like what Harry said about stealing. I’ve heard, “Thou shalt
not kill,” all my life, but when you have to, you kill. I wonder what Dad
would say about that. But then, he was the one who taught me to shoot.
“We’d better keep a damn good watch tonight,” I said. I looked at Harry,
and was glad to see that he looked the way I probably had a moment before:
mad and worried. “Let’s pass your watch and my gun around,” I told him.
“Three hours per watcher.”
“You would have done it, wouldn’t you?” he asked. It sounded like a real
question.
I nodded. “Wouldn’t you?”
“Yes. I wouldn’t have wanted to, but those guys were out for fun. Their
idea of fun, anyway.” He glanced at Zahra. He had pulled one man off her,
and taken a beating for it. Maybe the obvious threat to her would keep him
alert. Anything that would keep him alert couldn’t be all bad.
I looked at Zahra, kept my voice very low. “You never went shooting with
us, so I have to ask. Do you know how to use this?”
“Yeah,” she said. “Richard let his older kids go out, but he wouldn’t let
me. Before he bought me, though, I was a good shot.”
Her alien past again. It distracted me for a moment. I had been waiting to
ask her how much a person costs these days. And she had been sold by her
mother to a man who couldn’t have been much more than a stranger. He
could have been a maniac, a monster. And my father used to worry about
future slavery or debt slavery. Had he known? He couldn’t have.
“Have you used a gun like this before?” I asked. I reengaged the safety
and handed it to her.
“Hell, yeah,” she said, examining it. “I like this. It’s heavy, but if you
shoot somebody with it, they go down.” She released the clip, checked it,
reinserted it, rammed it home, and handed it back. “I wish I could have
practiced with you all,” she said. “I always wanted to.”
Without warning, I felt a pang of loneliness for the burned neighborhood.
It was almost a physical pain. I had been desperate to leave it, but I had
expected it still to be there—changed, but surviving. Now that it was gone,
there were moments when I couldn’t imagine how I was going to survive
without it.
“You guys get some sleep,” I said. “I’m too wound up to sleep now. I’ll
take the first watch.”
“We should gather more wood for the fire first,” Harry said. “It’s burning
low.”
“Let it go out,” I said. “It’s a spotlight on us, and it messes up our night
vision. Other people can see us long before we see them.”

“And sit here in the dark,” he said. It wasn’t a protest. At worst, it was
grudging agreement. “I’ll take the watch after you,” he said, lying back and
pulling up his sleepsack and positioning the rest of his gear to serve as a
pillow. As an afterthought, he took off his wrist watch and gave it to me. “It
was a gift from my mother,” he said.
“You know I’ll take care of it,” I told him.
He nodded. “You be careful,” he said, and closed his eyes.
I put the watch on, pulled the elastic of my sleeve down over it so that the
glow of the dial wouldn’t be visible by accident, and sat back against the hill
to make a few quick notes. While there was still some natural light, I could
write and watch.
Zahra watched me for a while, then laid her hand on my arm. “Teach me
to do that,” she whispered.
I looked at her, not understanding.
“Teach me to read and write.”
I was surprised, but I shouldn’t have been. Where, in a life like hers, had
there been time or money for school. And once Richard Moss bought her, her
jealous co-wives wouldn’t have taught her.
“You should have come to us back in the neighborhood,” I said. “We
would have set up lessons for you.”
“Richard wouldn’t let me. He said I already knew enough to suit him.”
I groaned. “I’ll teach you. We can start tomorrow morning if you want.”
“Okay.” She gave me an odd smile and began ordering her bag and her
few possessions, bundled in my scavenged pillowcase. She lay down in her
bag and turned on her side to look at me. “I didn’t think I’d like you,” she
said. “Preacher’s kid, all over the place, teaching, telling everybody what to
do, sticking your damn nose in everything. But you ain’t bad.”
I went from surprise into amusement of my own. “Neither are you,” I
said.
“You didn’t like me either?” Her turn to be surprised.
“You were the best looking woman in the neighborhood. No, I wasn’t
crazy about you. And remember a couple of years ago when you tried your
hardest to make me throw up while I was learning to clean and skin rabbits?”
“Why’d you want to learn that, anyway?” she asked. “Blood, guts,
worms… I just figured, There she goes again, sticking her nose where it don’t
belong. Well, let her have it!’”
“I wanted to know that I could do that—handle a dead animal, skin it,
butcher it, treat its hide to make leather. I wanted to know how to do it, and
that I could do it without getting sick.”
“Why?”

“Because I thought someday I might have to. And we might out here.
Same reason I put together an emergency pack and kept it where I could grab
it.”
“I wondered about that—about you having all that stuff from home, I
mean. At first I thought maybe you got it all when you went back. But no, you
were ready for all the trouble. You saw it coming.”
“No.” I shook my head, remembering. “No one could have been ready for
that. But… I thought something would happen someday. I didn’t know how
bad it would be or when it would come. But everything was getting worse: the
climate, the economy, crime, drugs, you know. I didn’t believe we would be
allowed to sit behind our walls, looking clean and fat and rich to the hungry,
thirsty, homeless, jobless, filthy people outside.”
She turned again and lay on her back, staring upward at the stars. “I
should have seen some of that stuff,” she said. “But I didn’t. Those big walls.
And everybody had a gun. There were guards every night. I thought… I
thought we were so strong.”
I put my notebook and pen down, sat on my sleepsack, and put my own
pillowcased bundle behind me. Mine was lumpy and uncomfortable to lean
on. I wanted it uncomfortable. I was tired. Everything ached. Given a little
comfort, I would fall asleep.
The sun was down now, and our fire had gone out except for a few
glowing coals. I drew the gun and held it in my lap. If I needed it at all, I
would need it fast. We weren’t strong enough to survive slowness or stupid
mistakes.
I sat where I was for three weary, terrifying hours. Nothing happened to
me, but I could see and hear things happening. There were people moving
around the hills, sometimes silhouetting themselves against the sky as they
ran or walked over the tops of hills. I saw groups and individuals. Twice I saw
dogs, distant, but alarming. I heard a lot of gunfire—individual shots and
short bursts of automatic weapons fire. That last and the dogs worried me,
scared me. A pistol would be no protection against a machine gun or
automatic rifle. And dogs might not know enough to be afraid of guns. Would
a pack keep coming if I shot two or three of its members? I sat in a cold
sweat, longing for walls—or at least for another magazine or two for the gun.
It was nearly midnight when I woke Harry, gave him the gun and the
watch, and made him as uncomfortable as I could by warning him about the
dogs, the gunfire, and the many people who wandered around at night. He did
look awake and alert enough when I lay down.
I fell asleep at once. Aching and exhausted, I found the hard ground as
welcoming as my bed at home.

A shout awoke me. Then I heard gunfire—several single shots,
thunderous and nearby. Harry?
Something fell across me before I could get out of my sleep-sack—
something big and heavy. It knocked the breath out of me. I struggled to get it
off me, knowing that it was a human body, dead or unconscious. As I pushed
at it and felt its heavy beard stubble and long hair, I realized it was a man, and
not Harry. Some stranger.
I heard scrambling and thrashing near me. There were grunts and sounds
of blows. A fight. I could see them in the darkness—two figures struggling on
the ground. The one on the bottom was Harry.
He was fighting someone over the gun, and he was losing. The muzzle
was being forced toward him.
That couldn’t happen. We couldn’t lose the gun or Harry. I took a small
granite boulder from our fire pit, set my teeth, and brought it down with all
my strength on the back of the intruder’s head. And I brought myself down.
It wasn’t the worst pain I had ever shared, but it came close. I was
worthless after delivering that one blow. I think I was unconscious for a
while.
Then Zahra appeared from somewhere, feeling me, trying to see me. She
wouldn’t find a wound, of course.
I sat up, fending her off, and saw that Harry was there, too.
“Are they dead?” I asked.
“Never mind them,” he said. “Are you all right?”
I got up, swaying from the residual shock of the blow. I felt sick and
dizzy, and my head hurt. A few days before, Harry had made me feel that way
and we’d both recovered. Did that mean the man I’d hit would recover?
I checked him. He was still alive, unconscious, not feeling any pain now.
What I was feeling was my own reaction to the blow I’d struck.
“The other one’s dead,” Harry said. “This one… Well, you caved in the
back of his head. I don’t know why he’s still alive.”
“Oh, no,” I whispered. “Oh hell.” And then to Harry, “Give me the gun.”
“Why?” he asked.
My fingers had found the blood and broken skull, soft and pulpy at the
back of the stranger’s head. Harry was right. He should have been dead.
“Give me the gun,” I repeated, and held out a bloody hand for it. “Unless
you want to do this yourself.”
“You can’t shoot him. You can’t just…”
“I hope you’d find the courage to shoot me if I were like that, and out here
with no medical care to be had. We shoot him, or leave him here alive. How
long do you think it will take him to die?”

“Maybe he won’t die.”
I went to my pack, struggling to navigate without throwing up. I pulled it
away from the dead man, groped within it, and found my knife. It was a good
knife, sharp and strong. I flicked it open and cut the unconscious man’s throat
with it.
Not until the flow of blood stopped did I feel safe. The man’s heart had
pumped his life away into the ground. He could not regain consciousness and
involve me in his agony.
But, of course, I was far from safe. Perhaps the last two people from my
old life were about to leave me. I had shocked and horrified them. I wouldn’t
blame them for leaving.
“Strip the bodies,” I said. “Take what they have, then we’ll put them into
the scrub oaks down the hill where we gathered wood.”
I searched the man I had killed, found a small amount of money in his
pants pocket and a larger amount in his right sock. Matches, a packet of
almonds, a packet of dried meat, and a packet of small, round, purple pills. I
found no knife, no weapon of any kind. So this was not one of the pair that
sized us up earlier in the night. I hadn’t thought so. Neither of them had been
long-haired. Both of these were.
I put the pills back in the pocket I had taken them from. Everything else, I
kept. The money would help sustain us. The food might or might not be
edible. I would decide that when I could see it clearly.
I looked to see what the others were doing, and was relieved to find them
stripping the other body. Harry turned it over, then kept watch as Zahra went
through the clothing, shoes, socks, and hair. She was even more thorough
than I had been. With no hint of squeamishness, she hauled off the man’s
clothing and examined its greasy pockets, seams, and hems. I got the feeling
she had done this before.
“Money, food, and a knife,” she whispered at last.
“The other one didn’t have a knife,” I said, crouching beside them.
“Harry, what—?”
“He had one,” Harry whispered. “He pulled it when I yelled for them to
stop. It’s probably on the ground somewhere. Let’s put these two down in the
oaks.”
“You and I can do it,” I said. “Give Zahra the gun. She can guard us.”
I was glad to see him hand her the gun without protest. He had not made a
move to hand it to me when I asked, but that had been different.
We took the bodies down to the scrub oaks and rolled them into cover.
Then we kicked dirt over all the blood that we could see and the urine that
one of the men had released.

That wasn’t enough. By mutual consent, we moved camp. This meant
nothing more than gathering our bundles and sleepsacks and carrying them
over the next low ridge and out of sight of where we had been.
If you camped on a hill between any two of the many low, riblike ridges,
you could have, almost, the privacy of a big, open-topped, three-walled room.
You were vulnerable from hill or ridge tops, but if you camped on the ridges,
you would be noticed by far more people. We chose a spot between two
ridges, settled, and sat silent for some time. I felt set-apart. I knew I had to
speak, and I was afraid that nothing I could say would help. They might leave
me. In disgust, in distrust, in fear, they might decide that they couldn’t travel
with me any longer. Best to try to get ahead of them.
“I’m going to tell you about myself,” I said. “I don’t know whether it will
help you to understand me, but I have to tell you. You have a right to know.”
And in low whispers, I told them about my mother—my biological
mother—and about my sharing.
When I finished, there was another long silence. Then Zahra spoke, and I
was so startled by the sound of her soft voice that I jumped.
“So when you hit that guy,” she said, “it was like you hitting yourself.”
“No,” I said. “I don’t get the damage. Just the pain.”
“But, I mean it felt like you hit yourself?”
I nodded. “Close enough. When I was little, I used to bleed along with
people if I hurt them or even if I saw them hurt. I haven’t done that for a few
years.”
“But if they’re unconscious or dead, you don’t feel anything.”
“That’s right.”
“So that’s why you killed that guy?”
“I killed him because he was a threat to us. To me in a special way, but to
you, too. What could we have done about him? Abandon him to the flies, the
ants, and the dogs? You might have been willing to do that, but would Harry?
Could we stay with him? For how long? To what purpose? Or would we dare
to hunt up a cop and try to report seeing a guy hurt without involving
ourselves. Cops are not trusting people. I think they would want to check us
out, hang on to us for a while, maybe charge us with attacking the guy and
killing his friend.” I turned to look at Harry who had not said a word. “What
would you have done?” I asked.
“I don’t know,” he said, his voice hard with disapproval. “I only know I
wouldn’t have done what you did.”
“I wouldn’t have asked you to do it,” I said. “I didn’t ask you. But, Harry,
I would do it again. I might have to do it again. That’s why I’m telling you
this.” I glanced at Zahra. “I’m sorry I didn’t tell you before. I knew I should,

but talking about it is…hard. Very hard. I’ve never told anyone before.
Now…” I took a deep breath. “Now everything’s up to you.”
“What do you mean?” Harry demanded.
I looked at him, wishing I could see his expression well enough to know
whether this was a real question. I didn’t think it was. I decided to ignore him.
“So what do you think?” I asked, looking at Zahra.
Neither of them said anything for a minute. Then Zahra began to speak,
began to say such terrible things in that soft voice of hers. After a moment, I
wasn’t sure she was talking to us.
“My mama took drugs, too,” she said. “Shit, where I was born,
everybody’s mama took drugs—and whored to pay for them. And had babies
all the time, and threw them away like trash when they died. Most of the
babies did die from the drugs or accidents or not having enough to eat or
being left alone so much…or from being sick. They were always getting sick.
Some of them were born sick. They had sores all over or big things on their
eyes—tumors, you know—or no legs or fits or can’t breathe right… All kinds
of things. And some of the ones who lived were dumb as dirt. Can’t think,
can’t learn, just sit around nine, ten years old, peeing in their pants, rocking
back and forth, and dripping spit down their chins. There’s a lot of them.”
She took my hand and held it. “You ain’t got nothing wrong with you,
Lauren—nothing worth worrying about. That Paracetco shit was baby milk.”
How was it that I had not gotten to know this woman back in the
neighborhood? I hugged her. She seemed surprised, then hugged back.
We both looked at Harry.
He sat still, near us, but far from us—from me. “What would you do,” he
asked, “if that guy only had a broken arm or leg?”
I groaned, thinking about pain. I already knew more than I wanted to
about how broken bones feel. “I think I’d let him go,” I said, “and I’m sure I
would be sorry for it. It would be a long time before I stopped looking over
my shoulder.”
“You wouldn’t kill him to escape the pain?”
“I never killed anyone back in the neighborhood to escape pain.”
“But a stranger…”
“I’ve said what I would do.”
“What if I broke my arm?”
“Then I might not be much good to you. I would be having trouble with
my arm, too, after all. But we’d have two good arms between us.” I sighed.
“We grew up together, Harry. You know me. You know what kind of person I
am. I might fail you, but if I could help myself, I wouldn’t betray you.”
“I thought I knew you.”

I took his hands, looked at their big, pale, blunt fingers. They had a lot of
strength in them, I knew, but I had never seen him use it to bully anyone. He
was worth some trouble, Harry was.
“No one is who we think they are,” I said. “That’s what we get for not
being telepathic. But you’ve trusted me so far—and I’ve trusted you. I’ve just
put my life in your hands. What are you going to do?”
Was he going to abandon me now to my “infirmity”—instead of me
maybe abandoning him at some future time due to a theoretical broken arm.
And I thought: One oldest kid to another, Harry; would that be responsible
behavior?
He took his hands back. “Well, I did know you were a manipulative
bitch,” he said.
Zahra smothered a laugh. I was surprised. I’d never heard him use the
word before. I heard it now as a sound of frustration. He wasn’t going to
leave. He was a last bit of home that I didn’t have to give up yet. How did he
feel about that? Was he angry with me for almost breaking up the group? He
had reason to be, I suppose.
“I don’t understand how you could have been like this all the time,” he
said. “How could you hide your sharing from everyone?”
“My father taught me to hide it,” I told him. “He was right. In this world,
there isn’t any room for housebound, frightened, squeamish people, and that’s
what I might have become if everyone had known about me—all the other
kids, for instance. Little kids are vicious. Haven’t you noticed?”
“But your brothers must have known.”
“My father put the fear of God into them about it. He could do that. As far
as I know, they never told anyone. Keith used to play ‘funny’ tricks on me,
though.”
“So…you faked everyone out. You must be a hell of an actor.”
“I had to learn to pretend to be normal. My father kept trying to convince
me that I was normal. He was wrong about that, but I’m glad he taught me the
way he did.”
“Maybe you are normal. I mean if the pain isn’t real, then maybe—”
“Maybe this sharing thing is all in my head? Of course it is! And I can’t
get it out. Believe me, I’d love to.”
There was a long silence. Then he asked, “What do you write in your
book every night?” Interesting shift.
“My thoughts,” I said. “The day’s events. My feelings.”
“Things you can’t say?” he asked. “Things that are important to you?”
“Yes.”
“Then let me read something. Let me know something about the you that

hides. I feel as though…as though you’re a lie. I don’t know you. Show me
something of you that’s real.”
What a request! Or was it a demand? I would have given him money to
read and digest some of the Earthseed portions of my journal. But he had to
be eased into them. If he read the wrong thing, it would just increase the
distance between us.
“The risks you ask me to take, Harry… But, yes, I’ll show you some of
what I’ve written. I want to. It’ll be another first for me. All I ask is that you
read what I show you aloud so Zahra can hear it. As soon as it’s light, I’ll
show you.”
When it was light, I showed him this:
“All that you touch
You Change.
All that you Change
Changes you.
The only lasting truth
Is Change.
God
Is Change.”
Last year, I chose these lines to the first page of the first book of
Earthseed: The Books of the Living. These lines say everything. Everything!
Imagine him asking me for it.
I must be careful.

17
❏❏❏
Embrace diversity.
Unite—
Or be divided,
robbed,
ruled,
killed
By those who see you as prey.
Embrace diversity
Or be destroyed.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
TUESDAY, AUGUST 3, 2027
(from notes expanded AUGUST 8)
THERE’S A BIG FIRE in the hills to the east of us. We saw it begin as a thin, dark
column of smoke, rising into an otherwise clear sky. Now it’s massive—a
hillside or two? Several buildings? Many houses? Our neighborhood again?
We kept looking at it, then looking away. Other people dying, losing their
families, their homes… Even when we had walked past it, we looked back.
Had the people with painted faces done this, too? Zahra was crying as she
walked along, cursing in a voice so soft that I could hear only a few of the
bitter words.
Earlier today we left the 118 freeway to look for and finally connect with
the 23. Now we’re on the 23 with charred overgrown wilderness on one side
and neighborhoods on the other. We can’t see the fire itself now. We’ve
passed it, come a long way from it, put hills between it and us as we head
southward toward the coast. But we can still see the smoke. We didn’t stop
for the night until it was almost dark and we were all tired and hungry.
We’ve camped away from the freeway on the wilderness side of it, out of
sight, but not out of hearing of the shuffling hoards of people on the move. I

think that’s a sound we’ll hear for the whole of our journey whether we stop
in Northern California or go through to Canada. So many people hoping for
so much up where it still rains every year, and an uneducated person might
still get a job that pays in money instead of beans, water, potatoes, and maybe
a floor to sleep on.
But it’s the fire that holds our attention. Maybe it was started by accident.
Maybe not. But still, people are losing what they may not be able to replace.
Even if they survive, insurance isn’t worth much these days.
People on the highway, shadowy in the darkness, had begun to reverse the
flow, to drift northward to find a way to the fire. Best to be early for the
scavenging.
“Should we go?” Zahra asked, her mouth full of dried meat. We built no
fire tonight. Best for us to vanish into the darkness and avoid guests. We had
put a tangle of trees and bushes at our backs and hoped for the best.
“You mean go back and rob those people?” Harry demanded.
“Scavenge,” she said. “Take what people don’t need no more. If you’re
dead, you don’t need much.”
“We should stay here and rest,” I said. “We’re tired, and it will be a long
time before things are cool enough over there to allow scavenging. It’s a long
way off, anyway.”
Zahra sighed. “Yeah.”
“We don’t have to do things like that, anyway,” Harry said.
Zahra shrugged. “Every little bit helps.”
“You were crying about that fire a while ago.”
“Uh-uh,” Zahra drew her knees up against her body. “I wasn’t crying
about that fire. I was crying about our fire and my Bibi and thinking about
how much I hate people who set fires like that. I wish they would burn. I wish
I could burn them. I wish I could just take them and throw them in the fire…
like they did my Bibi.” And she began to cry again, and he held her,
apologizing and, I think, shedding a few tears himself.
Grief hit like that. Something would remind us of the past, of home, of a
person, and then we would remember that it was all gone. The person was
dead or probably dead. Everything we’d known and treasured was gone.
Everything except the three of us. And how well were we doing?
“I think we should move,” Harry said sometime later. He was still sitting
with Zahra, one arm around her, and she seemed to welcome the contact.
“Why?” she asked.
“I want to be higher, closer to the level of the freeway or above it. I want
to be able to see the fire if it jumps the freeway and spreads toward us. I want
to see it before it gets too close. Fire moves fast.”

I groaned. “You’re right,” I said, “but moving now that it’s dark is risky.
We could lose this place and find nothing better.”
“Wait here,” he said, and got up and walked away into the darkness. I had
the gun, so I hoped he kept his knife handy—and I hoped he wouldn’t need it.
He was still raw about what had happened the night before. He had killed a
man. That bothered him. I had killed a man in a much more cold-blooded
way, according to him, and it didn’t bother me. But my “cold-bloodedness”
bothered him. He wasn’t a sharer. He didn’t understand that to me pain was
the evil. Death was an end to pain. No Bible verses were going to change that
as far as I was concerned. He didn’t understand sharing. Why should he?
Most people knew little or nothing about it.
On the other hand, my Earthseed verses had surprised him, and, I think,
pleased him a little. I wasn’t sure whether he liked the writing or the
reasoning, but he liked having something to read and talk about.
“Poetry?” he said this morning as he looked through the pages I showed
him—pages of my Earthseed notebook, as it happened. “I never knew you
cared about poetry.”
“A lot of it isn’t very poetical,” I said. “But it’s what I believe, and I’ve
written it as well as I could.” I showed him four verses in all—gentle, brief
verses that might take hold of him without his realizing it and live in his
memory without his intending that they should. Bits of the Bible had done
that to me, staying with me even after I stopped believing.
I gave to Harry, and through him to Zahra, thoughts I wanted them to
keep. But I couldn’t prevent Harry from keeping other things as well: His new
distrust of me, for instance, almost his new dislike. I was not quite Lauren
Olamina to him any longer. I had seen that in his expression off and on all
day. Odd. Joanne hadn’t liked her glimpse of the real me either. On the other
hand, Zahra didn’t seem to mind. But then, she hadn’t known me very well at
home. What she learned now, she could accept without feeling lied to. Harry
did feel lied to, and perhaps he wondered what lies I was still telling or living.
Only time could heal that—if he let it.
We moved when he came back. He had found us a new campsite, near the
freeway and yet private. One of the huge freeway signs had fallen or been
knocked down, and now lay on the ground, propped up by a pair of dead
sycamore trees. With the trees, it formed a massive lean-to. The rock and ash
leavings of a campfire showed us that the place had been used before. Perhaps
there had been people here tonight, but they had gone away to see what they
could scavenge from the fire. Now we’re here, happy to get a little privacy, a
view of the hills back where the fire is, and the security, for what it was
worth, of at least one wall.

“Good deal!” Zahra said, unrolling her sleepsack and settling down on top
of it. “I’ll take the first watch tonight, okay?”
It was okay with me. I gave her the gun and lay down, eager for sleep.
Again I was amazed to find so much comfort in sleeping on the ground in my
clothes. There’s no narcotic like exhaustion.
Sometime in the night I woke up to soft, small sounds of voices and
breathing. Zahra and Harry were making love. I turned my head and saw them
at it, though they were too much involved with each other to notice me.
And, of course, no one was on watch.
I got caught up in their lovemaking, and had all I could do to lie still and
keep quiet. I couldn’t escape their sensation. I couldn’t keep an efficient
watch. I could either writhe with them or hold myself rigid. I held rigid until
they finished—until Harry kissed Zahra, then got up to put his pants on and
began his watch.
And I lay awake afterward, angry and worried. How in hell could I talk to
either of them about this? It would be none of my business except for the time
they chose for doing it. But look when that was! We could all have been
killed.
Still sitting up, Harry began to snore.
I listened for a couple of minutes, then sat up, reached over Zahra, and
shook him.
He jumped awake, stared around, then turned toward me. I couldn’t see
more than a moving silhouette.
“Give me the gun and go back to sleep,” I said.
He just sat there.
“Harry, you’ll get us killed. Give me the gun and the watch and lie down.
I’ll wake you later.”
He looked at the watch.
“Sorry,” he said. “Guess I was more tired than I thought.” His voice grew
less sleep-fogged. “I’m all right. I’m awake. Go back to sleep.”
His pride had kicked in. It would be almost impossible to get the gun and
the watch from him now.
I lay down. “Remember last night,” I said. “If you care about her at all, if
you want her to live, remember last night.”
He didn’t answer. I hoped I had surprised him. I supposed I had also
embarrassed him. And maybe I had made him feel angry and defensive.
Whatever I’d done, I didn’t hear him doing any more snoring.
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 4, 2027

Today we stopped at a commercial water station and filled ourselves and all
our containers with clean, safe water. Commercial stations are best for that.
Anything you buy from a water peddler on the freeway ought to be boiled,
and still might not be safe. Boiling kills disease organisms, but may do
nothing to get rid of chemical residue—fuel, pesticide, herbicide, whatever
else has been in the bottles that peddlers use. The fact that most peddlers can’t
read makes the situation worse. They sometimes poison themselves.
Commercial stations let you draw whatever you pay for—and not a drop
more—right out of one of their taps. You drink whatever the local
householders are drinking. It might taste, smell, or look bad, but you can
depend on it not to kill you.
There aren’t enough water stations. That’s why water peddlers exist. Also,
water stations are dangerous places. People going in have money. People
coming out have water, which is as good as money. Beggars and thieves hang
around such places—keeping the whores and drug dealers company. Dad
warned us all about water stations, trying to prepare us in case we ever went
out and got caught far enough from home to be tempted to stop for water. His
advice: “Don’t do it. Suffer. Get your rear end home.”
Yeah.
Three is the smallest comfortable number at a water station. Two to watch
and one to fill up. And it’s good to have three ready for trouble on the way to
and from the station. Three would not stop determined thugs, but it would
stop opportunists—and most predators are opportunists. They prey on old
people, lone women or women with young kids, handicapped people… They
don’t want to get hurt. My father used to call them coyotes. When he was
being polite, he called them coyotes.
We were coming away with our water when we saw a pair of two-legged
coyotes grab a bottle of water from a woman who was carrying a sizable pack
and a baby. The man with her grabbed the coyote who had taken the water,
the coyote passed the water to his partner, and his partner ran straight into us.
I tripped him. I think it was the baby who attracted my attention, my
sympathy. The tough plastic bubble that held the water didn’t break. The
coyote didn’t break either. I set my teeth, sharing the jolt as he fell and the
pain of his scraped forearms. Back home, the younger kids hit me with that
kind of thing every day.
I stepped back from the coyote and put my hand on the gun. Harry
stepped up beside me. I was glad to have him there. We looked more
intimidating together.
The husband of the woman had thrown off his attacker, and the two
coyotes, finding themselves outnumbered, scampered away. Skinny, scared

little bastards out to do their daily stealing.
I picked up the plastic bubble of water and handed it to the man.
He took it and said, “Thanks man. Thanks a lot.”
I nodded and we went on our way. It still felt strange to be called “man.” I
didn’t like it, but that didn’t matter.
“All of a sudden you’re a Good Samaritan,” Harry said. But he didn’t
mind. There was no disapproval in his voice.
“It was the baby, wasn’t it?” Zahra asked.
“Yes,” I admitted. “The family, really. All of them together.” All of them
together. They had been a black man, a Hispanic-looking woman, and a baby
who managed to look a little like both of them. In a few more years, a lot of
the families back in the neighborhood would have looked like that. Hell,
Harry and Zahra were working on starting a family like that. And as Zahra
had once observed, mixed couples catch hell out here.
Yet there were Harry and Zahra, walking so close together that they
couldn’t help now and then brushing against each other. But they kept alert,
looked around. We were on U.S. 101 now, and there were even more walkers.
Even clumsy thieves would have no trouble losing themselves in this crowd.
But Zahra and I had had a talk this morning during her reading lesson. We
were supposed to be working on the sounds of letters and the spelling of
simple words. But when Harry went off to the bushes of our designated toilet
area, I stopped the lesson.
“Remember what you said to me a couple of days ago?” I asked her. “My
mind was wandering and you warned me. ‘People get killed on freeways all
the time,’ you said.”
To my surprise, she saw where I was headed at once. “Damn you,” she
said, looking up from the paper I had given her. “You don’t sleep sound
enough, that’s all.” She smiled as she said it.
“You want privacy, I’ll give it to you,” I said. “Just let me know, and I’ll
guard the camp from someplace a short distance away. You two can do what
you want. But no more of this shit when you’re on watch!”
She looked surprised. “Didn’t think you said words like that.”
“And I didn’t think you did things like last night. Dumb!”
“I know. Fun, though. He’s a big strong boy.” She paused. “You jealous?”
“Zahra!”
“Don’t worry,” she said. “Things took me by surprise last night. I… I
needed something, someone. It won’t be like that no more.”
“Okay.”
“You jealous?” she repeated.
I made myself smile. “I’m as human as you are,” I said. “But I don’t think

I would have yielded to temptation out here with no prospects, no idea what’s
going to happen. The thought of getting pregnant would have stopped me
cold.”
“People have babies out here all the time.” She grinned at me. “What
about you and that boyfriend of yours.”
“We were careful. We used condoms.”
Zahra shrugged. “Well Harry and me didn’t. If it happens, it happens.”
It had apparently happened to the couple whose water we had saved. Now
they had a baby to lug north.
They stayed near us today, that couple. I saw them every now and then.
Tall, stocky, velvet-skinned, deep-black man carrying a huge pack; short,
pretty, stocky, light-brown woman with baby and pack; medium brown baby
a few months old—huge-eyed baby with curly black hair.
They rested when we rested. They’re camped now not far behind us. They
look more like potential allies than potential dangers, but I’ll keep an eye on
them.
THURSDAY, AUGUST 5, 2027
Late today we came within sight of the ocean. None of us have ever seen it
before, and we had to go closer, look at it, camp within sight and sound and
smell of it. Once we had decided to do that, we walked shoeless in the waves,
pants legs rolled up. Sometimes we just stood and stared at it: the Pacific
Ocean—the largest, deepest body of water on earth, almost half-a-world of
water. Yet, as it was, we couldn’t drink any of it.
Harry stripped down to his underwear and waded out until the cool water
reached his chest. He can’t swim, of course. None of us can swim. We’ve
never before seen water enough to swim in. Zahra and I watched Harry with a
lot of concern. Neither of us felt free to follow him. I’m supposed to be a man
and Zahra attracts enough of the wrong kind of attention with all her clothes
on. We decided to wait until after sundown and go in fully clothed, just to
wash away some of the grime and stink. Then we could change clothes. We
both had soap and we were eager to make use of it.
There were other people on the beach. In fact, the narrow strip of sand
was crowded with people, though they managed to stay out of each other’s
way. They had spread themselves out and seemed far more tolerant of one
another than they had during our night in the hills. I didn’t hear any shooting
or fighting. There were no dogs, no obvious thefts, no rape. Perhaps the sea
and the cool breeze lulled them. Harry wasn’t the only one to strip down and
go into the water. Quite a few women had gone out, wearing almost nothing.

Maybe this was a safer place than any we’d seen so far.
Some people had tents, and several had built fires. We settled in against
the remnants of a small building. We were always, it seemed, looking for
walls to shield us. Was it better to have them and perhaps get trapped against
them or to camp in the open and be vulnerable on every side? We didn’t
know. It just felt better to have at least one wall.
I salvaged a flat piece of wood from the building, went a few yards closer
to the ocean, and began to dig into the sand. I dug until I found dampness.
Then I waited.
“What’s supposed to happen?” Zahra asked. Until now she had watched
me without saying anything.
“Drinkable water,” I told her. “According to a couple of books I read,
water is supposed to seep up through the sand with most of the salt filtered
out of it.”
She looked into the damp hole. “When?” she asked.
I dug a little more. “Give it time,” I said. “If the trick works, we ought to
know about it. It might save our lives someday.”
“Or poison us or give us a disease,” she said. She looked up to see Harry
coming toward us, dripping wet. Even his hair was wet.
“He don’t look bad naked,” she said.
He was still wearing his underwear, of course, but I could see what she
meant. He had a nice, strong-looking body, and I don’t think he minded our
looking at it. And he looked clean and he didn’t stink.
I couldn’t wait to get into the water.
“Go ahead,” he said. “It’s sundown. I’ll watch our stuff. Go.”
We got our soap out, gave him the gun, took off shoes and socks, and
went. It was wonderful. The water was cold and it was hard to stand up in the
waves and the sand kept being drawn away from our feet, even drawn from
under our feet. But we threw water on each other and washed everything—
clothing, bodies, and hair—let the waves knock us around, and laughed like
crazy people. Best time I’ve had since we left home.
Quite a lot of water had seeped into the hole I dug by the time we got back
to Harry. I tasted it—took a little up in my hand while Harry criticized me.
“Look at all the people in this damned place!” he said. “Do you see any
bathrooms? What do you think they do out here. You ought to at least have
the sense to use a water purification tablet!”
That thought was enough to make me spit out the mouthful of water that I
had taken. He was right, of course. But that one mouthful had told me what I
wanted to know. The water had been a little brackish, but not bad—drinkable.
It should be boiled or a water purification tablet should be added to it, as

Harry had said, and before that, according to my book, it could be strained
through sand to get rid of more of the salt. That meant if we stayed near the
coast, we could survive even if we ran short of water. That was good to know.
We still had our shadows. The couple with the baby had camped near us,
and the woman was now sitting on the sand nursing her baby while the man
knelt beside his pack, rummaging through it.
“Do you think they want to wash?” I asked Harry and Zahra.
“What are you going to do?” Zahra responded. “Offer to babysit?”
I shook my head. “No, I think that would be too much. Do either of you
mind if I invite them over?”
“Aren’t you afraid they’ll rob us?” Harry demanded. “You’re afraid of
everyone else.”
“They have better gear than we do,” I said. “And they have no natural
allies around here except us. Mixed couples or groups are rare out here. No
doubt that’s why they’ve kept close to us.”
“And you helped them,” Zahra said. “People don’t help strangers too
much out here. And you gave them back their water. That means you have
enough so you don’t have to rob them.”
“So do you mind?” I asked again.
They looked at each other.
“I don’t mind,” Zahra said. “Long as we keep an eye on them.”
“Why do you want them?” Harry asked, watching me.
“They need us more than we need them,” I said.
“That’s not a reason.”
“They’re potential allies.”
“We don’t need allies.”
“Not now. But we’d be damned fools to wait and try to get them when we
do need them. By then, they might not be around.”
He shrugged and sighed. “All right. Like Zahra says, as long as we watch
them.”
I got up and went over to the couple. I could see them straighten and go
tense as I approached. I was careful not to go too close or move too fast.
“Hello,” I said. “If you two would like to take turns bathing, you can
come over and join us. That might be safer for the baby.”
“Join you?” the man said. “You’re asking us to join you?”
“Inviting you.”
“Why?”
“Why not. We’re natural allies—the mixed couple and the mixed group.”
“Allies?” the man said, and he laughed.
I looked at him, wondering why he laughed.

“What the hell do you really want?” he demanded.
I sighed. “Come join us if you want to. You’re welcome, and in a pinch,
five is better than two.” I turned and left them. Let them talk it over and
decide.
“They coming?” Zahra asked when I got back.
“I think so,” I said. “Although maybe not tonight.”
FRIDAY, AUGUST 6, 2027
We built a fire and had a hot meal last night, but the mixed family did not join
us. I didn’t blame them. People stay alive out here by being suspicious. But
they didn’t go away either. And it was no accident that they had chosen to
stay near us. It was a good thing for them that they were near us. The peaceful
beach scene changed late last night. Dogs came onto the sand.
They came during my watch. I saw movement far down the beach and I
focused on it. Then there was shouting, screams. I thought it was a fight or a
robbery. I didn’t see the dogs until they broke away from a group of humans
and ran inland. One of them was carrying something, but I couldn’t tell what
it was. I watched them until they vanished inland. People chased them for a
short distance, but the dogs were too fast. Someone’s property was lost—
someone’s food, no doubt.
I was on edge after that. I got up, moved to the inland end of our wall, sat
there where I could see more of the beach. I was there, sitting still with the
gun in my lap when I spotted movement perhaps a long city block up the
beach. Dark forms against pale sand. More dogs. Three of them. They nosed
around the sand for a moment, then headed our way. I sat as still as I could,
watching. So many people slept without posting watches. The three dogs
wandered among the camps, investigating what they pleased, and no one tried
to drive them away. On the other hand, peoples oranges, potatoes, and grain
meal couldn’t be very tempting to a dog. Our small supply of dried meat
might be another matter. But no dog would get it.
But the dogs stopped at the camp of the mixed couple. I remembered the
baby and jumped up. At the same moment, the baby began to cry. I shoved
Zahra with my foot and she came awake all at once. She could do that.
“Dogs,” I said. “Wake Harry.” Then I headed for the mixed couple. The
woman was screaming and beating at a dog with her hands. A second dog was
dodging the man’s kicks and going for the baby. Only the third dog was clear
of the family.
I stopped, slipped the safety, and as the third dog went in toward the baby,
I shot it.

The dog dropped without a sound. I dropped, too, gasping, feeling kicked
in the chest. It surprised me how hard the loose sand was to fall on.
At the crack of the shot, the other two dogs took off inland. From my
prone position, I sighted on them as they ran. I might have been able to pick
off one more of them, but I let them go. I hurt enough already. I couldn’t
catch my breath, it seemed. As I gasped, though, it occurred to me that prone
was a good shooting position for me. Sharing would be less able to
incapacitate me at once if I shot two-handed and prone. I filed the knowledge
away for future use. Also, it was interesting that the dogs had been frightened
by my shot. Was it the sound that scared them or the fact that one of them had
been hit? I wish I knew more about them. I’ve read books about them being
intelligent, loyal pets, but that’s all in the past. Dogs now are wild animals
who will eat a baby if they can.
I felt that the dog I had shot was dead. It wasn’t moving. But by now a lot
of people were awake and moving around. A living dog, even wounded,
would be frantic to get away.
The pain in my chest began to ebb. When I could breathe without gasping,
I stood up and walked back to our camp. There was so much confusion by
then that no one noticed me except Harry and Zahra.
Harry came out to meet me. He took the gun from my hand, then took my
arm and steered me back to my sleepsack.
“So you hit something,” he said as I sat gasping again from the small
exertion.
I nodded. “Killed a dog. I’ll be okay soon.”
“You need a keeper,” he said.
“Dogs were after the baby!”
“You’ve adopted those damned people.”
I smiled in spite of myself, liking him, thinking that I’d pretty much
adopted him and Zahra, too. “What’s wrong with that?” I asked.
He sighed. “Get in your bag and go to sleep, will you. I’ll take the next
watch.”
“Some people just came and carried off the dog you killed,” Zahra said.
“We should have got it.”
“I’m not ready to eat a dog yet,” Harry told her. “Go to sleep.”
The names of the members of the mixed family are Travis Charles
Douglas, Gloria Natividad Douglas, and six-month-old Dominic Douglas,
also called Domingo. They gave in and joined us tonight after we made camp.
We’ve detoured away from the highway to make camp on another beach, and
they’ve followed. Once we were settled, they came over to us, uncertain and

suspicious, offering us small pieces of their treasure: milk chocolate full of
almonds. Real milk chocolate, not carob candy. It was the best thing I’d tasted
since long before leaving Robledo.
“It was you last night?” Natividad asked Harry. The first thing she had
told us was to call her Natividad.
“It was Lauren,” Harry said, gesturing toward me.
She looked at me. “Thank you.”
“Is your baby all right?” I asked.
“He had scratches and sand in his eyes and mouth from being dragged.”
She stroked the sleeping baby’s black hair. “I put salve on the scratches and
washed his eyes. He’s all right now. He’s so good. He only cried a little bit.”
“Hardly ever cries,” Travis said with quiet pride. Travis has an unusual
deep-black complexion—skin so smooth that I can’t believe he has ever in his
life had a pimple. Looking at him makes me want to touch him and see how
all that perfect skin feels. He’s young, good looking, and intense—a stocky,
muscular man, tall, but a little shorter and a little heavier than Harry.
Natividad is stocky, too—a pale brown woman with a round, pretty face, long
black hair bound up in a coil atop her head. She’s short, but it isn’t surprising
somehow that she can carry a pack and a baby and keep up a steady pace all
day. I like her, feel inclined to trust her. I’ll have to be careful about that. But
I don’t believe she would steal from us. Travis has not accepted us yet, but
she has. We’ve helped her baby. We’re her friends.
“We’re going to Seattle,” she told us. “Travis has an aunt there. She says
we can stay with her until we find work. We want to find work that pays
money.”
“Don’t we all,” Zahra agreed. She sat on Harry’s sleepsack with him, his
arm around her. Tonight could be tiresome for me.
Travis and Natividad sat on their three sacks, spread out to give their baby
room to crawl when he woke up. Natividad had harnessed him to her wrist
with a length of clothesline.
I felt alone between the two couples. I let them talk about their hopes and
rumors of northern edens. I took out my notebook and began to write up the
day’s events, still savoring the last of the chocolate.
The baby awoke hungry and crying. Natividad opened her loose shirt,
gave him a breast, and moved over near me to see what I was doing.
“You can read and write,” she said with surprise. “I thought you might be
drawing. What are you writing?”
“She’s always writing,” Harry said. “Ask to read her poetry. Some of it
isn’t bad.”
I winced. My name is androgynous, in pronunciation at least—Lauren

sounds like the more masculine Loren. But pronouns are more specific, and
still a problem for Harry.
“She?” Travis asked right on cue. “Her?”
“Damn it, Harry,” I said. “We forgot to buy that tape for your mouth.”
He shook his head, then gave me an embarrassed smile. “I’ve known you
all my life. It isn’t easy to remember to switch all your pronouns. I think it’s
all right this time, though.”
“I told you so!” Natividad said to her husband. Then she looked
embarrassed. “I told him you didn’t look like a man,” she said to me. “You’re
tall and strong, but… I don’t know. You don’t have a man’s face.”
I had, almost, a man’s chest and hips, so maybe I should be glad to hear
that I didn’t have a man’s face—though it wasn’t going to help me on the
road. “We believed two men and a woman would be more likely to survive
than two women and a man,” I said. “Out here, the trick is to avoid
confrontation by looking strong.”
“The three of us aren’t going to help you look strong,” Travis said. He
sounded bitter. Did he resent the baby and Natividad?
“You are our natural allies,” I said. “You sneered at that last time I said it,
but it’s true. The baby won’t weaken us much, I hope, and he’ll have a better
chance of surviving with five adults around him.”
“I can take care of my wife and my son,” Travis said with more pride than
sense. I decided not to hear him.
“I think you and Natividad will strengthen us,” I said. “Two more pairs of
eyes, two more pairs of hands. Do you have knives?”
“Yes.” He patted his pants pocket. “I wish we had guns like you.”
I wished we had guns—plural—too. But I didn’t say so. “You and
Natividad look strong and healthy,” I said. “Predators will look at a group like
the five of us and move on to easier prey.”
Travis grunted, still noncommittal. Well, I had helped him twice, and now
I was a woman. It might take him a while to forgive me for that, no matter
how grateful he was.
“I want to hear some of your poetry,” Natividad said. “The man we
worked for, his wife used to write poetry. She would read it to me sometimes
when she was feeling lonely. I liked it. Read me something of yours before it
gets too dark.”
Odd to think of a rich woman reading to her maid—which was who
Natividad had been. Maybe I had the wrong idea of rich women. But then,
everyone gets lonely. I put my journal down and picked up my book of
Earthseed verses. I chose soft, non-preachy verses, good for road-weary
minds and bodies.

18
❏❏❏
Once or twice
each week
A Gathering of Earthseed
is a good and necessary thing.
It vents emotion, then
quiets the mind.
It focuses attention,
strengthens purpose, and
unifies people.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2027
“YOU BELIEVE IN ALL this Earthseed stuff, don’t you?” Travis asked me.
It was our day off, our day of rest. We had left the highway to find a
beach where we could camp for the day and night and be comfortable. The
Santa Barbara beach we had found included a partly burned park where there
were trees and tables. It wasn’t crowded, and we could have a little daytime
privacy. The water was only a short walk away. The two couples took turns
disappearing while I watched their packs and the baby. Interesting that the
Douglases were already comfortable trusting me with all that was precious to
them. We didn’t trust them to watch alone last night or the night before,
though we did make them watch. We had no walls to put our backs against
last night so it was useful to have two watchers at a time. Natividad watched
with me and Travis watched with Harry. Finally, Zahra watched alone.
I organized that, feeling that it was the schedule that would be most
comfortable to both couples. Neither would be required to trust the other too
much.
Now, amid the outdoor tables, firepits, pines, palms, and sycamores, trust
seems not to be a problem. If you turn your back to the burned portion which

is barren and ugly, this is a beautiful place, and it’s far enough from the
highway not to be found by the ever-flowing river of people moving north. I
found it because I had maps—in particular, a street map of much of Santa
Barbara County. My grandparents’ maps helped us explore away from the
highway even though many street signs were fallen or gone. There were
enough left for us to find beaches when we were near them.
There were locals at this beach—people who had left real homes to spend
an August day at the beach. I eavesdropped on a few fragments of
conversation and found out that much.
Then I tired talking to some of them. To my surprise, most were willing to
talk. Yes, the park was beautiful except where some painted fools had set
fires. The rumors were that they did it to fight for the poor, to expose or
destroy the goods hoarded by the rich. But a park by the sea wasn’t goods. It
was open to everyone. Why burn it? No one knew why.
No one knew where the fad of painting yourself and getting high on drugs
and fire had come from, either. Most people suspected it had begun in Los
Angeles where, according to them, most stupid or wicked things began. Local
prejudice. I didn’t tell any of them I was from the LA. area. I just smiled and
asked about the local job situation. Some people said they knew where I could
work to earn a meal or a “safe” place to sleep, but no one knew where I could
earn money. That didn’t mean there weren’t any such jobs, but if there were,
they would be hard to find and harder to qualify for. That’s going to be a
problem wherever we go. And yet we know a lot, the three of us, the five of
us. We know how to do a great many things. There must be a way to put it all
together and make us something other than domestic servants working for
room and board. We make an interesting unit.
Water is very expensive here—worse than in Los Angeles or Ventura
Counties. We all went to a water station this morning. Still no freeway
watersellers for us.
On the road yesterday, we saw three dead men—a group together, young,
unmarked, but covered with the blood they had vomited, their bodies bloated
and beginning to stink. We passed them, looked at them, took nothing from
their bodies. Their packs—if they’d had any—were already gone. Their
clothes, we did not want. And their canteens—all three still had canteens—
their canteens, no one wanted.
We all resupplied yesterday at a local Hanning Joss. We were relieved and
surprised to see it—a good dependable place where we could buy all we
needed from solid food for the baby to soap to salves for skin chafed by salt
water, sun, and walking. Natividad bought new liners for her baby carrier and
washed and dried a plastic bag of filthy old ones. Zahra went with her into the

separate laundry area of the store to wash and dry some of our filthy clothing.
We wore our sea-washed clothing, salty, but not quite stinking. Paying to
wash clothes was a luxury we could not often afford, yet none of us found it
easy to be filthy. We weren’t used to it. We were all hoping for cheaper water
in the north. I even bought a second clip for the gun—plus solvent, oil, and
brushes to clean the gun. It had bothered me, not being able to clean it before.
If the gun failed us when we needed it, we could be killed. The new clip was a
comfort, too. It gave us a chance to reload fast and keep shooting.
Now we lounged in the shade of pines and sycamores, enjoyed the sea
breeze, rested, and talked. I wrote, fleshing out my journal notes for the week.
I was just finishing that when Travis sat down next to me and asked his
question:
“You believe in all this Earthseed stuff, don’t you?”
“Every word,” I answered.
“But…you made it up.”
I reached down, picked up a small stone, and put it on the table between
us. “If I could analyze this and tell you all that it was made of, would that
mean I’d made up its contents?”
He didn’t do more than glance at the rock. He kept his eyes on me. “So
what did you analyze to get Earthseed?”
“Other people,” I said, “myself, everything I could read, hear, see, all the
history I could learn. My father is—was—a minister and a teacher. My
stepmother ran a neighborhood school. I had a chance to see a lot.”
“What did your father think of your idea of God?”
“He never knew.”
“You never had the guts to tell him.”
I shrugged. “He’s the one person in the world I worked hard not to hurt.”
“Dead?”
“Yes.”
“Yeah. My parents, too.” He shook his head. “People don’t live long these
days.”
There was a period of silence. After a while, he said, “How did you get
your ideas about God?”
“I was looking for God,” I said. “I wasn’t looking for mythology or
mysticism or magic. I didn’t know whether there was a god to find, but I
wanted to know. God would have to be a power that could not be defied by
anyone or anything.”
“Change.”
“Change, yes,”
“But it’s not a god. It’s not a person or an intelligence or even a thing. It’s

just… I don’t know. An idea.”
I smiled. Was that such a terrible criticism? “It’s a truth,” I said. “Change
is ongoing. Everything changes in some way—size, position, composition,
frequency, velocity, thinking, whatever. Every living thing, every bit of
matter, all the energy in the universe changes in some way. I don’t claim that
everything changes in every way, but everything changes in some way.”
Harry, coming in dripping from the sea, heard this last. “Sort of like
saying God is the second law of thermodynamics,” he said, grinning. He and I
had already had this conversation.
“That’s an aspect of God,” I said to Travis. “Do you know about the
second law?”
He nodded. “Entropy, the idea that the natural flow of heat is from
something hot to something cold—not the other way—so that the universe
itself is cooling down, running down, dissipating its energy.”
I let my surprise show.
“My mother wrote for newspapers and magazines at first,” he said. “She
taught me at home. Then my father died and she couldn’t earn enough for us
to keep the house. And she couldn’t find any other work that paid money. She
had to take a job as a live-in cook, but she went on teaching me.”
“She taught you about entropy?” Harry asked.
“She taught me to read and write,” Travis said. “Then she taught me to
teach myself. The man she worked for had a library—a whole big room full
of books.”
“He let you read them?” I asked.
“He didn’t let me near them.” Travis gave me a humorless smile. “I read
them anyway. My mother would sneak them to me.”
Of course. Slaves did that two hundred years ago. They sneaked around
and educated themselves as best they could, sometimes suffering whipping,
sale, or mutilation for their efforts.
“Did he ever catch you or her at it?” I asked.
“No.” Travis turned to look toward the sea. “We were careful. It was
important. She never borrowed more than one book at a time. I think his wife
knew, but she was a decent woman. She never said anything. She was the one
who talked him into letting me marry Natividad.”
The son of the cook marrying one of the maids. That was like something
out of another era, too.
“Then my mother died and all Natividad and I had was each other, and
then the baby. I was staying on as gardener-handyman, but then the old
bastard we worked for decided he wanted Natividad. He would try to watch
when she fed the baby Couldn’t let her alone. That’s why we left. That’s why

his wife helped us leave. She gave us money. She knew it wasn’t Natividad’s
fault. And I knew I didn’t want to have to kill the guy. So we left.”
In slavery when that happened, there was nothing the slaves could do
about it—or nothing that wouldn’t get them killed, sold, or beaten.
I looked at Natividad who sat a short distance away, on spread out
sleepsacks, playing with her baby and talking to Zahra. She had been lucky.
Did she know? How many other people were less lucky—unable to escape
the master’s attentions or gain the mistress’s sympathies. How far did masters
and mistresses go these days toward putting less than submissive servants in
their places?
“I still can’t see change or entropy as God,” Travis said, bringing the
conversation back to Earthseed.
“Then show me a more pervasive power than change,” I said. “It isn’t just
entropy. God is more complex than that. Human behavior alone should teach
you that much. And there’s still more complexity when you’re dealing with
several things at once—as you always are. There are all kinds of changes in
the universe.”
He shook his head. “Maybe, but nobody’s going to worship them.”
“I hope not,” I said. “Earthseed deals with ongoing reality, not with
supernatural authority figures. Worship is no good without action. With
action, it’s only useful if it steadies you, focuses your efforts, eases your
mind.”
He gave me an unhappy smile. “Praying makes people feel better even
when there’s no action they can take,” he said. “I used to think that was all
God was good for—to help people like my mother stand what they had to
stand.”
“That isn’t what God is for, but there are times when that’s what prayer is
for. And there are times when that’s what these verses are for. God is Change,
and in the end, God prevails. But there’s hope in understanding the nature of
God—not punishing or jealous, but infinitely malleable. There’s comfort in
realizing that everyone and everything yields to God. There’s power in
knowing that God can be focused, diverted, shaped by anyone at all. But
there’s no power in having strength and brains, and yet waiting for God to fix
things for you or take revenge for you. You know that. You knew it when you
took your family and got the hell out of your boss’s house. God will shape us
all every day of our lives. Best to understand that and return the effort: Shape
God.”
“Amen!” Harry said, smiling.
I looked at him, wavered between annoyance and amusement, and let
amusement win. “Put something on before you burn, Harry.”

“You sounded like you could use an ‘amen,’” he said as he put on a loose
blue shirt. “Do you want to go on preaching or do you want to eat?”
We had beans cooked with bits of dried meat, tomatoes, peppers, and
onions. It was Sunday. There were public firepits in the park, and we had
plenty of time. We even had a little wheat-flour bread and the baby had real
baby food with his milk instead of mashed or mother-chewed bits of whatever
we were eating.
It’s been a good day. Every now and then, Travis would ask me another
question or toss me another challenge to Earthseed, and I would try to answer
without preaching him a sermon—which was hard. I think I managed it most
of the time. Zahra and Natividad got into an argument about whether I was
talking about a male god or a female god. When I pointed out that Change
had no sex at all and wasn’t a person, they were confused, but not dismissive.
Only Harry refused to take the discussion seriously. He liked the idea of
keeping a journal, though. Yesterday he bought a small notebook, and now
he’s writing, too—and helping Zahra with her reading and writing lessons.
I’d like to draw him into Earthseed. I’d like to draw them all in. They
could be the beginning of an Earthseed community. I would love to teach
Dominic Earthseed as he grows up. I would teach him and he would teach
me. The questions little children ask drive you insane because they never
stop. But they also make you think. For now, though, I had to deal with
Travis’s questions.
I took a chance. I told Travis about the Destiny.
He had asked and asked me what the point of Earthseed is. Why personify
change by calling it God? Since change is just an idea, why not call it that?
Just say change is important.
“Because after a while, it won’t be important!” I told him. “People forget
ideas. They’re more likely to remember God—especially when they’re scared
or desperate.”
“Then they’re supposed to do what?” he demanded. “Read a poem?”
“Or remember a truth or a comfort or a reminder to action,” I said.
“People do that all the time. They reach back to the Bible, the Talmud, the
Koran, or some other religious book that helps them deal with the frightening
changes that happen in life.”
“Change does scare most people.”
“I know. God is frightening. Best to learn to cope.”
“Your stuff isn’t very comforting.”
“It is after a while. I’m still growing into it myself. God isn’t good or evil,
doesn’t favor you or hate you, and yet God is better partnered than fought.”
“Your God doesn’t care about you at all,” Travis said.

“All the more reason to care about myself and others. All the more reason
to create Earthseed communities and shape God together. ‘God is Trickster,
Teacher, Chaos, Clay.’ We decide which aspect we embrace—and how to
deal with the others.”
“Is that what you want to do? Set up Earthseed communities?”
“Yes.”
“And then what?”
There it was. The opening. I swallowed and turned a little so that I could
see the burned over area. It was so damn ugly. Hard to think anyone had done
that on purpose.
“And then what?” Travis insisted. “A God like yours wouldn’t have a
heaven for people to hope for, so what is there?”
“Heaven,” I said, facing him again. “Oh, yes. Heaven.”
He didn’t say anything. He gave me one of his suspicious looks and
waited.
“The Destiny of Earthseed is to take root among the stars,’” I said. “That’s
the ultimate Earthseed aim, and the ultimate human change short of death. It’s
a destiny we’d better pursue if we hope to be anything other than smoothskinned dinosaurs—here today, gone tomorrow, our bones mixed with the
bones and ashes of our cities, and so what?”
“Space?” he said. “Mars?”
“Beyond Mars,” I said. “Other star systems. Living worlds.”
“You’re crazy as hell,” he said, but I like the soft, quiet way he said it—
with amazement rather than ridicule.
I grinned. “I know it won’t be possible for a long time. Now is a time for
building foundations—Earthseed communities—focused on the Destiny.
After all, my heaven really exists, and you don’t have to die to reach it. ‘The
Destiny of Earthseed is to take root among the stars,’ or among the ashes.” I
nodded toward the burned area.
Travis listened. He didn’t point out that a person walking north from LA.
to who-knows-where with all her possessions on her back was hardly in a
position to point the way to Alpha Centauri. He listened. He laughed a little—
as though he were afraid to get caught being too serious about my ideas. But
he didn’t back away from me. He leaned forward. He argued. He shouted. He
asked more questions. Natividad told him to stop bothering me, but he kept it
up. I didn’t mind. I understand persistence. I admire it.
SUNDAY, AUGUST 15, 2027
I think Travis Charles Douglas is my first convert. Zahra Moss is my second.

Zahra has listened as the days passed, and as Travis and I went on arguing off
and on. Sometimes she asked questions or pointed out what she saw as
inconsistencies. After a while, she said. “I don’t care about no outer space.
You can keep that part of it. But if you want to put together some kind of
community where people look out for each other and don’t have to take being
pushed around, I’m with you. I’ve been talking to Natividad. I don’t want to
live the way she had to. I don’t want to live the way my mama had to either.”
I wondered how much difference there was between Natividad’s former
employer who treated her as though he owned her and Richard Moss who
purchased young girls to be part of his harem. It was all a matter of personal
feeling, no doubt. Natividad had resented her employer. Zahra had accepted
and perhaps loved Richard Moss.
Earthseed is being born right here on Highway 101—on that portion of
101 that was once El Camino Real, the royal highway of California’s Spanish
past. Now it’s a highway, a river of the poor. A river flooding north.
I’ve come to think that I should be fishing that river even as I follow its
current. I should watch people not only to spot those who might be dangerous
to us, but to find those few like Travis and Natividad who would join us and
be welcome.
And then what? Find a place to squat and take over? Act as a kind of
gang? No. Not quite a gang. We aren’t gang types. I don’t want gang types
with their need to dominate, rob and terrorize. And yet we might have to
dominate. We might have to rob to survive, and even terrorize to scare off or
kill enemies. We’ll have to be very careful how we allow our needs to shape
us. But we must have arable land, a dependable water supply, and enough
freedom from attack to let us establish ourselves and grow.
It might be possible to find such an isolated place along the coast, and
make a deal with the inhabitants. If there were a few more of us, and if we
were better armed, we might provide security in exchange for living room.
We might also provide education plus reading and writing services to adult
illiterates. There might be a market for that kind of thing. So many people,
children and adults, are illiterate these days… We might be able to do it—
grow our own food, grow ourselves and our neighbors into something brand
new. Into Earthseed.

19
❏❏❏
Changes.
The galaxies move through space.
The stars ignite,
burn,
age,
cool,
Evolving.
God is Change.
God prevails.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
FRIDAY, AUGUST 27, 2027
(from notes expanded SUNDAY, AUGUST 29)
EARTHQUAKE TODAY.
It hit early this morning just as we were beginning the day’s walk, and it
was a strong one. The ground itself gave a low, grating rumble like buried
thunder. It jerked and shuddered, then seemed to drop. I’m sure it did drop,
though I don’t know how far. Once the shaking stopped, everything looked
the same—except for sudden patches of dust thrown up here and there in the
brown hills around us.
Several people screamed or shouted during the quake. Some, burdened by
heavy packs, lost their footing and fell into the dirt or onto the broken asphalt.
Travis, with Dominic on his chest and a heavy pack on his back was almost
one of these. He stumbled, staggered, and managed somehow to catch
himself. The baby, unhurt, but jolted by the sudden shaking, began to cry,
adding to the noise of two older children walking nearby, the sudden talking
of almost everyone, and the gasps of an old man who had fallen during the
quake.
I put aside my usual suspicions and went to see whether the old man was

all right—not that I could have done much to help him if he hadn’t been. I
retrieved his cane for him—it had landed beyond his reach—and helped him
up. He was as light as a child, thin, toothless, and frightened of me.
I gave him a pat on the shoulder and sent him on his way, checking when
his back was turned to see that he hadn’t lifted anything. The world was full
of thieves. Old people and young kids were often pickpockets.
Nothing missing.
Another man nearby smiled at me—an older, but not yet old black man
who still had his teeth, and who pushed his belongings in twin saddlebags
hanging from a small, sturdy metal-framed cart. He didn’t say anything, but I
liked his smile. I smiled back. Then I remembered that I was supposed to be a
man, and wondered whether he had seen through my disguise. Not that it
mattered.
I went back to my group where Zahra and Natividad were comforting
Dominic and Harry was picking up something from the roadside. I went to
Harry, and saw that he had found a filthy rag knotted into a small, tight ball
around something. Harry tore the rotten cloth and a roll of money fell out into
his hands. Hundred-dollar bills. Two or three dozen of them.
“Put it away!” I whispered.
He pushed the money into a deep pants pocket. “New shoes,” he
whispered. “Good ones, and other things. Do you need anything?”
I had promised to buy him a new pair of shoes as soon as we reached a
dependable store. His were worn out. Now another idea occurred to me. “If
you have enough,” I whispered, “buy yourself a gun. I’ll still get your shoes.
You get a gun!” Then I spoke to the others, ignoring his surprise. “Is
everyone all right?”
Everyone was. Dominic was happy again, riding now on his mother’s
back, and playing with her hair. Zahra was readjusting her pack, and Travis
had gone on and was taking a look at the small community ahead. This was
farm country. We’d passed through nothing for days except small, dying
towns, withering roadside communities and farms, some working, some
abandoned and growing weeds.
We walked forward toward Travis.
“Fire,” he said as we approached.
One house down the hill from the road smoked from several of its
windows. Already people from the highway had begun to drift down toward
it. Trouble. The people who owned the house might manage to put out their
fire and still be overwhelmed by scavengers.
“Let’s get away from here,” I said. “The people down there are still
strong, and they’re going to feel besieged soon. They’ll fight back.”

“We might find something we can use,” Zahra argued.
“There’s nothing down there worth our getting shot over,” I said. “Let’s
go!” I led the way past the small community and we were almost clear of it
when the gunfire began.
There were people still on the road with us, but many had flooded down
into the small community to steal. The crowd would not confine its attention
to the one burning house, and all the households would have to resist.
There were more shots behind us—first single shots, then an uneven
crackling of exchanged fire, then the unmistakable chatter of automatic
weapons fire. We walked faster, hoping that we were beyond the range of
anything aimed in our direction.
“Shit!” Zahra whispered, keeping up with me. “I should have known that
was going to happen. People out here in the middle of nowhere gotta be
tough.”
“I don’t think their toughness will get them through this day, though,” I
said, looking back. There was much more smoke rising now, and it was rising
from more than one place. Distant shouts and screams mixed with the gunfire.
Stupid place to put a naked little community. They should have hidden their
homes away in the mountains where few strangers would ever see them. That
was something for me to keep in mind. All the people of this community
could do now was take a few of their tormentors with them. Tomorrow the
survivors of this place would be on the road with scraps of their belongings
on their backs.
It’s odd, but I don’t think anyone on the road would have thought of
attacking that community en masse like that if the earthquake—or something
—had not started a fire. One small fire was the weakness that gave scavengers
permission to devastate the community—which they were no doubt doing
now. The shooting could scare away some, kill or wound others, and make
the remainder very angry. If the people of the community chose to live in
such a dangerous place, they should have set up overwhelming defenses—a
line of explosive charges and incendiaries, that kind of thing. Only power that
strong, that destructive, that sudden would scare attackers off, would drive
them away in a panic more overwhelming than the greed and the need that
had drawn them in the first place. If the people of the community were
without explosives, they should have grabbed their money and their kids and
run like crazy the moment they saw the horde coming. They knew the hills
better than migrating scavengers could. They should have had hiding places
already prepared or at least been able to lose themselves among the hills while
scavengers were ransacking their homes. But they had done none of this. And
now vast thick clouds of smoke rose behind us, drawing even more

scavengers.
“Whole world’s gone crazy,” a voice near me said, and I knew before I
looked that it was the man with the saddlebagged cart. We’d slowed down a
little, looking back, and he had caught up. He too had had the sense not to try
to go scavenging in the little community. He didn’t look like a man who
scavenged. His clothes were dirty and ordinary, but they fit him well and they
looked almost new. His jeans were still dark blue, and still creased down the
legs. His red, short-sleeved shirt still had all its buttons. He wore expensive
walking shoes and had had, not too long ago, an expensive professional
haircut. What was he doing out here on the road, pushing a cart? A rich
pauper—or at least, a once-rich pauper. He had a short, full, salt and pepper
beard. I decided that I liked his looks as much as I had before. What a
handsome old man.
Had the world gone crazy?
“From what I’ve read,” I said to him, “the world goes crazy every three or
four decades. The trick is to survive until it goes sane again.” I was showing
off my education and background; I admit it. But the old man seemed
unimpressed.
“The nineteen nineties were crazy,” he said, “but they were rich. Nothing
like this bad. I don’t think it’s ever been this bad. Those people, those animals
back there…”
“I don’t see how they can act that way,” Natividad said. “I wish we could
call the police—whoever the police are around here. The householders back
there should call.”
“It wouldn’t do any good,” I said. “Even if the cops came today instead of
tomorrow, they’d just add to the death toll.”
We walked on, the stranger walking with us. He seemed content to walk
with us. He could have dropped back or walked on ahead since he didn’t have
to carry his load. As long as he stayed on the road, he could speed along. But
he stuck with us. I talked to him, introduced myself and learned that his name
was Bankole—Taylor Franklin Bankole. Our last names were an instant bond
between us. We’re both descended from men who assumed African surnames
back during the 1960s. His father and my grandfather had had their names
legally changed, and both had chosen Yoruba replacement names.
“Most people chose Swahili names in the ’60s,” Bankole told me. He
wanted to be called Bankole. “My father had to do something different. All
his life he had to be different.”
“I don’t know my grandfather’s reasons,” I said. “His last name was
Broome before he changed it, and that was no loss. But why he chose
Olamina…? Even my father didn’t know. He made the change before my

father was born, so my father was always Olamina, and so were we.”
Bankole was one year older than my father. He had been born in 1970,
and he was, according to him, too damn old to be tramping along a highway
with everything he owned in a couple of saddlebags. He was 57. I caught
myself wishing he were younger so he would live longer.
Old or not, he heard the two girls calling for help sooner than we did.
There was a road, more dirt than asphalt, running below and alongside the
highway, then veering away from the highway into the hills. Up that road was
a half-collapsed house, the dust of its collapse still hanging over it. It couldn’t
have been much of a house before it fell in. Now it was rubble. And once
Bankole alerted us, we could hear faint shouts from it.
“Sounds like women,” Harry said.
I sighed. “Let’s go see. It might just be a matter of pushing some wood off
them or something.”
Harry caught me by the shoulder. “You sure?”
“Yeah.” I took the gun out and gave it to him in case someone else’s pain
made me useless. “Watch our backs,” I said.
We went in wary and tentative, knowing that a call for help could be false,
could lure people to their attackers. A few other people followed us off the
road, and Harry hung back, staying between them and us. Bankole shoved his
cart along, keeping up with me.
There were two voices calling from the rubble. Both sounded like women.
One was pleading, the other cursing. We located them by the sound of their
voices, then Zahra, Travis and I began throwing off rubble—dry, broken
wood, plaster, plastic, and brick from an ancient chimney. Bankole stood with
Harry, watching, and looking formidable. Did he have a gun? I hoped he did.
We were drawing a small audience of hungry-eyed scavengers. Most people
looked to see what we were doing, and went on. A few stayed and stared. If
the women had been trapped since the earthquake, it was surprising that no
one had come already to steal their belongings and set fire to the rubble,
leaving them in it. I hoped we would be able to get the women out and get
back on the highway before someone decided to rush us. No doubt they
already would have if there had been anything of value in sight.
Natividad spoke to Bankole, then put Dominic in one of his saddlebags
and felt to see that her knife was still in her pocket. I didn’t like that much.
Better she should keep wearing the baby so we could leave at a run if she had
to.
We found a pale leg, bruised and bleeding but unbroken, pinned under a
beam. A whole section of wall and ceiling plus some of the chimney had
fallen on these women. We moved the loose stuff then worked together to lift

heavier pieces. At last we dragged the women out by their exposed limbs—an
arm and a leg for one, both legs for the other. I didn’t enjoy it any more than
they did.
On the other hand, it wasn’t that bad. The women had lost some skin here
and there, and one was bleeding from the nose and mouth. She spat out blood
and a couple of teeth and cursed and tried to get up. I let Zahra help her up.
All I wanted to do now was get away from here.
The other one, face wet with tears, just sat and stared at us. She was quiet
now in a blank, unnatural way. Too quiet. When Travis tried to help her up,
she cringed and cried out. Travis let her alone. She didn’t seem to be hurt
beyond a few scratches, but she might have hit her head. She might be in
shock.
“Where’s your stuff?” Zahra was asking the bloody one. “We’re going to
have to get away from here fast.”
I rubbed my mouth, trying to get past an irrational certainty that two of
my own teeth were gone. I felt horrible—scraped and bruised and throbbing,
yet whole and unbroken, undamaged in any major way I just wanted to
huddle somewhere until I felt less miserable. I took a deep breath and went to
the frightened, cringing woman.
“Can you understand me?” I asked.
She looked at me, then looked around, saw her companion wiping away
blood with a grimy hand, and tried to get up and run to her. She tripped,
started to fall, and I caught her, grateful that she wasn’t every big.
“Your legs are all right,” I said, “but take it easy. We have to get out of
here soon, and you’ve got to be able to walk.”
“Who are you?” she asked.
“A total stranger,” I said. “Try to walk.”
“There was an earthquake.”
“Yeah. Walk!”
She took a shaky step away from me, then another. She staggered over to
her friend. “Allie?” she said.
Her friend saw her, stumbled to her, hugged her, smeared her with blood.
“Jill! Thank God!”
“Here’s their stuff,” Travis said. “Let’s get them out of here while we still
can.”
We made them walk a little more, tried to make them see and understand
the danger of staying where we were. We couldn’t drag them with us, and
what would have been the point of digging them out, then leaving them at the
mercy of scavengers. They had to walk along with us until they were stronger
and able to take care of themselves.

“Okay” the bloody one said. She was the smaller and tougher of the two,
not that there was that much physical difference between them. Two mediumsize, brown-haired white women in their twenties. They might be sisters.
“Okay,” the bloody one repeated. “Let’s get out of here.” She was
walking without limping or staggering now, though her companion was less
steady.
“Give me my stuff,” she said.
Travis waved her toward two dusty sleepsack packs. She put one on her
back, then looked at the other and at her companion.
“I can carry it,” the other woman said. “I’m all right.”
She wasn’t, but she had to carry her own things. No one could carry a
double pack for long. No one could fight while carrying a double pack.
There were a dozen people standing around staring as we brought the two
women out. Harry walked ahead of us, gun in hand. Something about him
said with great clarity that he would kill. If he were pushed even a little, he
would kill. I hadn’t seen him that way before. It was impressive and
frightening and wrong. Right for the situation and the moment, but wrong for
Harry. He wasn’t the kind of man who ought ever to look that way.
When had I begun thinking of him as a man rather than a boy? What the
hell. We’re all men and women now, not kids anymore. Shit.
Bankole walked behind, looking even more formidable than Harry in spite
of his graying hair and beard. He had a gun in his hand. I had gotten a look at
it as I walked past him. Another automatic—perhaps a nine millimeter. I
hoped he was good with it.
Natividad pushed his cart along just ahead of him with Dominic still in
one of the bags. Travis walked beside her, guarding her and the baby.
I walked with the two women, fearful that one of them might fall or that
some fool might grab one. The one called Allie was still bleeding, spitting
blood and wiping her bloody nose with a bloody arm. And the one called Jill
still looked dull and shaky. Allie and I kept Jill between us.
Before the attack began, I knew it would happen. Helping the two trapped
women had made us targets. We might already have been attacked if the
community down the road had not drawn off so many of the most violent,
desperate people. The weak would be attacked today. The quake had set the
mood. And one attack could trigger others.
We could only try to be ready.
Out of the blue, a man grabbed Zahra. She’s small, and must have looked
weak as well as beautiful.
An instant later, someone grabbed me. I was spun around, and I tripped
and started to fall. It was that stupid. Before anyone could hit me, I tripped

and fell. But because my attacker had pulled me toward him, I fell against
him. I dragged him down with me. Somehow, I managed to get my knife out.
I flicked it open. I jabbed it upward into my attacker’s body.
The six inch blade went in to the hilt. Then, in empathic agony, I jerked it
out again.
I can’t describe the pain.
The others told me later that I screamed as they’d never heard anyone
scream. I’m not surprised. Nothing has ever hurt me that much before.
After a while, the agony in my chest ebbed and died. That is, the man on
top of me bled and died. Not until then could I begin to be aware of
something other than pain.
The first thing I heard was Dominic, crying.
I understood then that I had also heard shots fired—several shots. Where
was everyone? Were they wounded?
Dead? Being held prisoner?
I kept my body still beneath the dead man. He was painfully heavy as
deadweight, and his body odor was nauseating. He had bled all over my chest,
and, if my nose was any judge, in death, he had urinated on me. Yet I didn’t
dare move until I understood the situation.
I opened my eyes just a little.
Before I could understand what I was seeing, someone hauled the stinking
dead man off me. I found myself looking into two worried faces: Harry and
Bankole.
I coughed and tried to get up, but Bankole held me down.
“Are you hurt anywhere?” he demanded.
“No, I’m all right,” I said. I saw Harry staring at all the blood, and I
added, “Don’t worry. The other guy did all the bleeding.”
They helped me up, and I discovered I was right. The dead man had
urinated on me. I was almost frantic with the need to strip off my filthy
clothes and wash. But that had to wait. No matter how disgusting I was, I
wouldn’t undress in daylight where I could be seen. I’d had enough trouble
for one day.
I looked around, saw Travis and Natividad comforting Dominic who was
still screaming. Zahra was with the two new girls, standing guard beside them
as they sat on the ground.
“Are those two okay?” I asked.
Harry nodded. “They’re scared and shaken up, but they’re all right.
Everyone’s all right—except him and his friends.” He gestured toward the
dead man. There were three more dead lying nearby.
“There were some wounded,” Harry said. “We let them go.”

I nodded. “We’d better strip these bodies and go, too. We’re too obvious
here from the highway.”
We did a quick, thorough job, searching everything except body cavities.
We weren’t needy enough to do that yet. Then, at Zahra’s insistence, I did go
behind the ruined house for a quick change of clothing. She took the gun from
Harry and stood watch for me.
“You’re bloody,” she said. “If people think you’re wounded, they might
jump you. This ain’t a good day to look like you got something wrong with
you.”
I suspected that she was right. Anyway, it was a pleasure to have her talk
me into something I already wanted so much to do.
I put my filthy, wet clothes into a plastic bag, sealed it, and stuffed it into
my pack. If any of the dead had owned clothing that would fit me, and that
was still in wearable condition, I would have thrown mine away. As it was, I
would keep them and wash them the next time we came to a water station or a
store that permitted washing. We had collected money from the corpses, but it
would be best to use that for necessities.
We had taken about twenty-five hundred dollars in all from the four
corpses—along with two knives that we could sell or pass on to the two girls,
and one gun pulled by a man Harry had shot. The gun turned out to be an
empty, dirty Beretta nine millimeter. Its owner had had no ammunition, but
we can buy that—maybe from Bankole. For that we will spend money. I had
found a few pieces of jewelry in the pocket of the man who attacked me—two
gold rings, a necklace of polished blue stones that I thought were lapis lazuli,
and a single earring which turned out to be a radio. The radio we would keep.
It could give us information about the world beyond the highway. It would be
good not to be cut off any longer. I wondered who my attacker had robbed to
get it.
All four of the corpses had little plastic pill boxes hidden somewhere on
them. Two boxes contained a couple of pills each. The other two were empty.
So these people who carried neither food nor water nor adequate weapons did
carry pills when they could steal them or steal enough to buy them. Junkies.
What was their drug of choice, I wondered. Pyro? For the first time in days, I
found myself thinking of my brother Keith. Had he dealt in the round purple
pills we kept finding on people who attacked us? Was that why he died?
A few miles later along the highway, we saw some cops in cars, heading
south toward what must now be a burned out hulk of a community with a lot
of corpses. Perhaps the cops would arrest a few late-arriving scavengers.
Perhaps they would scavenge a little themselves. Or perhaps they would just
have a look and drive away. What had cops done for my community when it

was burning? Nothing.
The two women we’d dug out of the rubble want to stay with us. Allison
and Jillian Gilchrist are their names. They are sisters, 24 and 25 years old,
poor, running away from a life of prostitution. Their pimp was their father.
The house that had fallen on them was empty when they took shelter in it the
night before. It looked long abandoned.
“Abandoned buildings are traps,” Zahra told them as we walked. “Out
here in the middle of nowhere, they’re targets for all kinds of people.”
“Nobody bothered us,” Jill said. “But then the house fell on us, and
nobody helped us either, until you guys came along.”
“You’re very fortunate,” Bankole told her. He was still with us, and
walking next to me. “People don’t help each other much out here.”
“We know,” Jill admitted. “We’re grateful. Who are you guys, anyway?”
Harry gave her an odd little smile. “Earthseed,” he said, and glanced at
me. You have to watch out for Harry when he smiles that way.
“What’s Earthseed?” Jill asked, right on cue. She had let Harry direct her
gaze to me.
“We share some ideas,” I said. “We intend to settle up north, and found a
community.”
“Where up north?” Allie demanded. Her mouth was still hurting, and I felt
it more when I paid attention to her. At least her bleeding had almost stopped.
“We’re looking for jobs that pay salaries and we’re watching water
prices,” I said. “We want to settle where water isn’t such a big problem.”
“Water’s a problem everywhere,” she proclaimed. Then, “What are you?
Some kind of cult or something?”
“We believe in some of the same things,” I said.
She turned to stare at me with what looked like hostility. “I think religion
is dog shit,” she announced. “It’s either phony or crazy.”
I shrugged. “You can travel with us or you can walk away.”
“But what the hell do you stand for?” she demanded. “What do you pray
to?”
“Ourselves,” I said. “What else is there?”
She turned away in disgust, then turned back. “Do we have to join your
cult if we travel with you?”
“No.”
“All right then!” She turned her back and walked ahead of me as though
she’d won something.
I raised my voice just enough to startle and projected it at the back of her
head. I said, “We risked ourselves for you today.”
She jumped, but refused to look back.

I continued. “You don’t owe us anything for that. It isn’t something you
could buy from us. But if you travel with us, and there’s trouble, you stand by
us, stand with us. Now will you do that or not?”
Allie swung around, stiff with anger. She stopped right in front of me and
stood there.
I didn’t stop or turn. It wasn’t a time for giving way. I needed to know
what her pride and anger might drive her to. How much of that apparent
hostility of hers was real, and how much might be due to her pain? Was she
going to be more trouble than she was worth?
When she realized that I meant to walk over her if I had to, that I would
do it, she slid around me to walk beside me as though she had intended to do
that all along.
“If you hadn’t been the ones to dig us out,” she said, “we wouldn’t bother
with you at all.” She drew a deep, ragged breath. “We know how to pull our
own weight. We can help our friends and fight our enemies. We’ve been
doing that since we were kids.”
I looked at her, thinking of the little that she and her sister had told us
about their lives: prostitution, pimp father… Hell of a story if it were true. No
doubt the details would be even more interesting. How had they gotten away
from their father, anyway? They would bear watching, but they might turn out
to be worth something.
“Welcome,” I said.
She stared at me, nodded, then walked ahead of me in long quick strides.
Her sister, who had dropped to walk near us while we were talking, now
walked faster to join her. And Zahra, who had dropped back to keep an eye on
the sister, grinned at me and shook her head. She went up to join Harry who
was leading the group.
Bankole came up beside me again, and I realized he had gotten out of the
way as soon as he saw trouble between Allie and me.
“One fight a day is enough for me,” he said when he saw me looking at
him.
I smiled. “Thank you for standing by us back there.”
He shrugged. “I was surprised to see that anyone else cared what
happened to a couple of strangers.”
“You cared.”
“Yes. That kind of thing will get me killed someday. If you don’t mind,
I’d like to travel with your group, too.”
“You have been. You’re welcome.”
“Thank you,” he said, and smiled back at me. He had clear eyes with deep
brown irises—attractive eyes. I like him too much already. I’ll have to be

careful.
Late today we reached Salinas, a small city that seemed little touched by
the quake and its aftershocks. The ground has been shuddering off and on all
day. Also, Salinas seemed untouched by the hordes of overeager scavengers
that we had been seeing since that first burning community this morning. That
was a surprise. Almost all of the smaller communities we’d passed had been
burning and swarming with scavengers. It was as though the quake had given
yesterday’s quiet, plodding paupers permission to go animal and prey on
anyone who still lives in a house.
I suspected that the bulk of the predatory scavengers were still behind us,
still killing and dying and fighting over the spoils. I’ve never worked as hard
at not seeing what was going on around me as I did today. The smoke and the
noise helped veil things from me. I had enough to do dealing with Allie’s
throbbing face and mouth and the ambient misery of the highway.
We were tired when we reached Salinas, but we had decided to walk on
after resupplying and washing. We didn’t want to be in town when the worst
of the scavengers arrived. They might be calm, tired after their day of burning
and stealing, but I doubted it. I thought they would be drunk with power and
hungry for more. As Bankole said, “Once people get the idea that it’s all right
to take what you want and destroy the rest, who knows when they’ll stop.”
But Salinas looked well-armed. Cops had parked all along the shoulders
of the highway, staring at us, some holding their shotguns or automatic rifles
as though they’d love an excuse to use them. Maybe they knew what was
coming.
We needed to resupply, but we didn’t know whether we would be allowed
to. Salinas had the look of a “stay on the road” type town—the kind that
wanted you gone by sundown unless you lived there. This week and last, we
had run across a few little towns like that.
But no one stopped us when we headed off the road to a store. There were
only a few people on the road now, and the cops were able to watch all of us.
I saw them watching us in particular, but they didn’t stop us. We were quiet.
We were women and a baby as well as men, and three of us were white. I
don’t think any of that harmed us in their eyes.
The security guards in the stores were as well-armed as the cops—shotguns and automatic rifles, a couple of machine guns on tripods in cubicles
above us. Bankole said he could remember a time when security guards had
revolvers or nothing but clubs. My father used to talk like that.
Some of the guards either weren’t very well trained—or they were almost
as power-drunk as the scavengers. They pointed their guns at us. It was crazy.

Two or three of us walked into a store and two or three guns were trained on
us. We didn’t know what was going on at first. We froze, staring, waiting to
see what was going to happen.
The guys behind the guns laughed. One of them said, “Buy something or
get the fuck out!”
We got out. These were little stores. There were plenty of them to choose
from. Some of them turned out to have sane guards. I couldn’t help
wondering how many accidents the crazy guards have with those guns. I
suppose that after the fact, every accident was an armed robber with obvious
homicidal inclinations.
The guards at the water station seemed calm and professional. They kept
their guns down and confined themselves to cursing people to speed them
along. We felt safe enough not only to buy water and give our clothes a quick
wash and dry, but to rent a couple of cubicles—men’s and women’s—and
sponge ourselves off from a basin of water each. That settled the question of
my sex for any of the new people who hadn’t already figured it out.
At last, somewhat cleaner, resupplied with food, water, ammunition for all
three guns, and, by the way, condoms for my own future, we headed out of
town. On our way, we passed through a small street market at the edge of
town. It was just a few people with their merchandise—mostly junk—
scattered on tables or on filthy rags spread on the bare asphalt. Bankole
spotted the rifle on one of the tables.
It was an antique—a bolt action Winchester, empty of course, with a fiveround capacity. It would be, as Bankole admitted, slow. But he liked it. He
inspected it with eyes and fingers and bargained with the well-armed old man
and woman who were offering it for sale. They had one of the cleaner tables
with merchandise laid out in a neat pattern—a small, manual typewriter; a
stack of books; a few hand tools, worn, but clean; two knives in worn leather
sheaths; a couple of pots, and the rifle with sling and scope.
While Bankole haggled with the man over the rifle, I bought the pots from
the woman. I would get Bankole to carry them in his cart. They were large
enough to contain soup or stew or hot cereal for all of us at once. We were
nine now, and bigger pots made sense. Then I joined Harry at the stack of
books.
There was no nonfiction. I bought a fat anthology of poetry and Harry
bought a western novel. The others, either from lack of money or from lack of
interest ignored the books. I would have bought more if I could have carried
them. My pack was already about as heavy as I thought I could stand, and still
walk all day.
Our bargaining finished, we stood away from the table to wait for

Bankole. And Bankole surprised us.
He got the old man down to a price he seemed to think was fair, then he
called us over. “Any of you know how to handle a relic like this?” he asked.
Well, Harry and I did, and he had us look the rifle over. In the end,
everyone had a look at it, some with obvious awkwardness and some with
familiarity. Back in the neighborhood, Harry and I had practiced with the
guns of other households—rifles and shotguns as well as handguns. Whatever
was legal back home was shared, at least in practice sessions. My father had
wanted us to be familiar with whatever weapons might be available. Harry
and I were both good, competent shots, but we’d never bought a used gun. I
liked the rifle, I liked the look and feel of it, but that didn’t mean much. Harry
seemed to like it, too. Same problem.
“Come over here,” Bankole said. He herded us out of earshot of the old
couple. “You should buy that gun,” he told us. “You took enough money off
those four junkies to pay the price I got that guy to agree to. You need at least
one accurate, long-range weapon, and this is a good one.”
“That money would buy a lot of food,” Travis said.
Bankole nodded. “Yes, but only living people need food. You buy this,
and it will pay for itself the first time you need it. Anyone who doesn’t know
how to use it, I’ll teach. My father and I used to hunt deer with guns just like
this.”
“It’s an antique,” Harry said. “If it were automatic…”
“If it were automatic, you couldn’t afford it.” Bankole shrugged. “This
thing is cheap because it’s old and it’s legal.”
“And it’s slow,” Zahra said. “And if you think that old guy’s price is
cheap, you’re crazy.”
“I know I’m new here,” Allie said, “but I agree with Bankole. You guys
are good with your handguns, but sooner or later, you’re going to meet
someone who sits out of handgun range and picks you off. Picks us off.”
“And this rifle is going to save us?” Zahra demanded.
“I doubt that it would save us,” I said. “But with a decent shot behind it, it
might give us a chance.” I looked at Bankole. “You hit any of those deer?”
He smiled. “One or two.”
I did not return the smile. “Why don’t you buy the rifle for yourself?”
“I can’t afford it,” he said. “I’ve got enough money to keep me going and
take care of necessities for a while. Everything else that I had was stolen from
me or burned.”
I didn’t quite believe him. But then, no one knew how much money I had
either. In a way, I suppose he was asking about our solvency. Did we have
enough money to spend an unexpected windfall on an old rifle? And what did

he intend to do if we did? I hoped, not for the first time, that he wasn’t just a
handsome thief. Yet I did like the gun, and we do need it.
“Harry and I are decent shots, too,” I said to the group. “I like the feel of
this gun, and it’s the best we can afford right now. Has anyone seen any real
trouble with it?”
They looked at one another. No one answered.
“It just needs a cleaning and some 30-06 ammunition,” Bankole said. “It’s
been stored for a while, but it appears to have been well maintained. If you
buy it, I think I can manage to buy a cleaning kit and some ammunition.”
At that, I spoke up before anyone else could. “If we buy, that’s a deal.
Who else can handle the rifle?”
“I can,” Natividad said. And when that won her a few surprised looks, she
smiled. “I had no brothers. My father needed to teach someone.”
“We never had a chance to do any shooting,” Allie said. “But we can
learn.”
Jill nodded. “I always wanted to learn,” she said.
“I’ll have to learn, too,” Travis admitted. “Where I grew up, guns were
either locked away or carried by hired guards.”
“Let’s go buy it, then,” I said. “And let’s get out of here. The sun will be
down soon.”
Bankole kept his word, bought cleaning things and plenty of ammunition
—insisted on buying them before we left town, because, as he said, “Who
knows when we’ll need it, or when we’ll find other people willing to sell it to
us.”
Once that was settled, we left town.
As we left, Harry carried the new rifle and Zahra carried the Beretta, both
empty and in need of attention before we loaded them. Only Bankole and I
carried fully loaded guns. I led the group and he brought up the rear. It was
getting dark. Behind us in the distance, we could hear gunfire and the dull
thunder of small explosions.

20
❏❏❏
God is neither good
nor evil,
neither loving
nor hating.
God is Power.
God is Change.
We must find the rest of what we need
within ourselves,
in one another,
in our Destiny.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
SATURDAY, AUGUST 28, 2027
(from notes expanded TUESDAY, AUGUST 31)
TODAY OR TOMORROW SHOULD be a rest day, but we’ve agreed not to rest. Last
night was full of distant shooting, explosions and fire. We could see fire
behind us, though not in front. Moving on seems sensible, in spite of our
weariness.
Then, this morning, I cleaned the little black earring radio with alcohol
from my pack, turned the thing on, and put it in my ear. I had to relay what it
said since its sound could not reach the others.
What it said told us we should not only forget about resting, but change
our plans.
We had intended to follow U.S. 101 up through San Francisco and across
the Golden Gate Bridge. But the radio warned us to stay away from the Bay
Area. From San Jose up through San Francisco, Oakland, and Berkeley, there
is chaos. The quake hit hard up there, and the scavengers, predators, cops, and
private armies of security guards seem bent on destroying what’s left, Also, of
course, pyro is doing its part. This far north, the radio reporters shorten the

name to “pro” or “ro” and they say there are plenty of addicts.
Addicts are running wild, setting fires in areas that the earthquake didn’t
damage. Bands of the street poor precede or follow them, grabbing whatever
they can from stores and from the walled enclaves of the rich and what’s left
of the middle class. Yeah.
In some places, the rich are escaping by flying out in helicopters. The
bridges that are still intact—and most of them are—are guarded either by the
police or by gangs. Both groups are there to rob desperate, fleeing people of
their weapons, money, food, and water—at the least. The penalty for being
too poor to be worth robbing is a beating, a rape, and/or death. The National
Guard has been activated to restore order, and I suppose it might. But I
suspect that in the short term, it will only add to the chaos. What else could
another group of well-armed people do in such an insane situation. The
thoughtful ones might take their guns and other equipment and vanish to help
their families. Others might find themselves at war with their own people.
They’ll be confused and scared and dangerous. Of course, some will discover
that they enjoy their new power—the power to make others submit, the power
to take what they want—property, sex, life…
Bad situation. The Bay Area will be a good place to avoid for a long time.
We spread maps on the ground, studied them as we ate breakfast, and
decided to turn off U.S. 101 this morning. We’ll follow a smaller, no doubt
emptier road inland to the little town of San Juan Bautista, then east along
State Route 156. From 156 to 152 to Interstate 5. We’ll use I-5 to circle
around the Bay Area. For a time we’ll walk up the center of the state instead
of along the coast. We might have to bypass I-5 and go farther east to State 33
or 99. I like the emptiness around much of I-5. Cities are dangerous. Even
small towns can be deadly. Yet we have to be able to re-supply. In particular,
we have to be able to get water. If that means going into the more populated
areas around one of the other highways, we’ll do it. Meanwhile we’ll be
careful, resupply every time we get a chance, never pass up a chance to top
off our water and food, waste nothing. But, hell, the maps are old. Maybe the
area around I-5 is more settled now.
To reach I-5, we’ll pass a big freshwater lake—San Luis Reservoir. It
might be dry now. Over the past few years a lot of things had gone dry. But
there will be trees, cool shade, a place to rest and be comfortable. Perhaps
there will at least be a water station. If so, we’ll camp there and rest for a day
or even two days. After hiking up and over a lot of hills, we’ll need the extra
rest.
For now, I suspect that we’ll soon have scavengers being driven north
toward us from Salinas, and refugees being driven south toward us from the

Bay Area. The best thing we can do is get out of the way.
We got an early start, fortified by the good food we had bought at Salinas
—some extra stuff that Bankole had wheeled in his cart, though we all
chipped in to buy it. We made sandwiches—dried beef, cheese, sliced
tomatoes—all on bread made from wheat flour. And we ate grapes. It was a
shame we had to hurry. We hadn’t had anything that good tasting for a long
time.
The highway north was emptier today than I’ve ever seen it. We were the
biggest crowd around—eight adults and a baby—and other people kept away
from us. Several of the other walkers were individuals and couples with
children. They all seemed in a hurry—as though they, too, knew what might
be coming behind them. Did they also know what might be ahead—what was
ahead if they stayed on 101. Before we left 101 I tried to warn a couple of
women traveling alone with kids to avoid the Bay Area. I told them I’d heard
there was a lot of trouble up there—fires, riots, bad quake damage. They just
held on to their kids and edged away from me.
Then we left 101 and took our small, hilly road, our short cut to San Juan
Bautista. The road was paved and not too badly broken up. It was lonely. For
long stretches we saw no one at all. No one had followed us from 101. We
passed farms, small communities, and shanties, and the people living in these
came out with their guns to stare at us. But they let us alone. The shortcut
worked. We managed to reach and pass through San Juan Bautista before
dark. We’ve camped just east of the town. We’re all exhausted, footsore, full
of aches and pains and blisters. I long for a rest day, but not yet. Not yet.
I put my sleepsack next to Bankole’s and lay down, already half asleep.
We had drawn straws for the watch schedule, and my watch wasn’t until the
early morning. I ate nuts and raisins, bread and cheese, and I slept like a
corpse.
SUNDAY, AUGUST 29, 2027
(from notes expanded TUESDAY, AUGUST 31)
Early this morning I awoke to the sound of gunfire, nearby and loud. Short
bursts of automatic weapons fire. And there was light from somewhere.
“Be still,” someone said. “Stay down and keep quiet.” Zahra’s voice. She
had the watch just before mine.
“What is it?” one of the Gilchrists demanded. And then, “We’ve got to get
away!”
“Stay!” I whispered. “Be still, and it will pass.”
I could see now that two groups were running from the highway—the 156

—one group chasing the other, both firing their guns as though they and their
enemies were the only people in the world. We could only stay down and
hope they didn’t shoot us by accident. If nobody moved, accidents were less
likely.
The light came from a fire burning some distance from us. Not buildings.
We hadn’t camped near buildings. Yet something was burning. It was, I
decided, a big truck of some kind. Perhaps that was the reason for the
shooting. Someone, some group had tried to hijack a truck on the highway
and things had gone wrong. Now, whatever the truck was carrying—food, I
suspected—the fire would get it. Neither the hijackers nor the defenders
would win.
We would win if we could just keep out of the fighting.
I reached over to feel for Bankole, wanting assurance that he was all right.
He wasn’t there.
His sleepsack and his things were still there, but he was gone.
Moving as little as I could, I looked toward our designated toilet area. He
must be there. I couldn’t see him, but where else could he be? Bad timing. I
squinted, trying to pick him out, not knowing whether to be glad or afraid
because I couldn’t. After all, if I could see him, so could other people.
The shooting went on and on while we lay still and quiet and scared. One
of the trees we’d camped under was hit twice, but well above our heads.
Then the truck exploded. I don’t know what exploded in it. It hadn’t
looked like an old truck—one of those that used diesel fuel, but it might have
been. Would diesel fuel explode? I didn’t know.
The explosion seemed to end the gunfight. A few more shots were
exchanged, then nothing. I saw people, visible in the firelight, walking back
toward the truck. Sometime later, I saw others—several together in a bunch—
moving away toward the town. Both groups were moving away from us, and
that was good.
Now. Where was Bankole? In as low a voice as I could manage, I spoke
to the others. “Can anyone see Bankole?”
No answer.
“Zahra, did you see him go?”
“Yeah, a couple of minutes before the shooting started,” she answered.
All right. If he didn’t come out soon, we would have to go looking for
him. I swallowed, tried not to think about finding him hurt or dead. “Is
everyone else all right?” I asked. “Zahra?”
“I’m fine.”
“Harry?”
“Yeah,” he said. “I’m okay.”

“Travis? Natividad?”
“We’re all right,” Travis said.
“What about Dominic?”
“Didn’t even wake up.”
That was good. If he had, his crying could have gotten us killed. “Allie?
Jill?”
“We’re okay,” Allie said.
I sat up, keeping my movements slow and cautious. I couldn’t see anyone
or hear anything beyond insects and the distant fire. When no one shot me,
others sat up, too. Where noise and light had not awakened Dominic, his
mother’s movement did the trick. He awoke and began to whimper, but
Natividad held him and he quieted.
But still no Bankole. I wanted to get up and go looking for him. I had two
mental images of him: One of him lying wounded or dead, and one of him
crouching behind a tree holding his own Beretta nine millimeter. If the latter
was true, I could scare him into shooting me. There might also be other
people out there with ready guns and frayed nerves.
“What time is it?” I asked Zahra who had Harry’s watch.
“Three-forty,” she said.
“Let me have the gun,” I said. “Your watch is almost over anyway.”
“What about Bankole?” She passed both the watch and the gun over.
“If he isn’t back in five minutes I’m going to go look for him.”
“Wait a minute,” Harry said. “You aren’t going to do that by yourself. I’ll
go with you.”
I almost said no. I don’t think he would have paid any attention if I had,
but I never spoke the word. If Bankole were injured and conscious, I would
be useless the moment I saw him. I would be lucky to drag myself back to
camp. Someone else would have to drag him back.
“Thank you,” I said to Harry.
Five minutes later, he and I went first to the toilet area, then around it,
searching. There was no one, or rather, we could see no one. Still, there might
be other people around—others camping overnight, others involved in the
shooting, others prowling… Still, I called Bankole’s name once, aloud. I
touched Harry as a kind of warning and he jumped, settled, then jumped again
as I said the name. We both listened in absolute silence.
There was a rustling off to our right where there were several trees
blotting out the stars, creating a space of impenetrable darkness. Anything
could be there.
The rustling came again, and with it a whimper—a child’s whimper. Then
Bankole’s voice:

“Olamina!”
“Yes,” I answered, almost limp with relief. “Here!”
He came out of the pool of darkness, a tall, broad shadow that seemed
bulkier than it should have been. He was carrying something.
“I have an orphaned child,” he said. “The mother was hit by a stray bullet.
She just died.”
I sighed. “Is the child hurt?”
“No, just scared. I’ll carry him back to our camp. Will one of you get his
things?”
“Take us to his camp,” I said.
Harry collected the child’s things, and I collected the mother’s and
searched her body. Between us, we gathered everything. By the time we
finished, the little boy, perhaps three years old, was crying. That scared me. I
left Harry to push the dead woman’s pack along in her baby carriage and
Bankole to carry the whimpering child. All I carried was the gun, drawn and
ready. Even when we got back to our own camp, I couldn’t relax. The little
boy wouldn’t be quiet and Dominic joined him with even louder cries. Zahra
and Jill worked to comfort the new child, but he was surrounded by strangers
in the middle of the night, and he wanted his mother!
I saw movement over near the burned out carcass of the truck. The fire
was still burning, but it was smaller now, burning itself out. There were still
people near it. They had lost their truck. Would they care about a crying
child? And if they did care, would they want to help the kid or just shut its
mouth?
A lone, dark figure came away from the truck and took several steps
toward us. At that moment, Natividad took the new child, and in spite of his
age, gave him one breast and Dominic the other.
It worked. Both children were comforted almost at once. They made a few
more small sounds, then settled down to nursing.
The shadow figure from the truck stood still, perhaps confused now that it
was no longer guided by noise. After a moment, it turned and went back past
the truck and out of sight. Gone. It couldn’t have seen us. We could look out
of the darkness under the trees that sheltered our campsite and see by
firelight, by starlight. But others could only follow the baby noise to us.
“We ought to move,” Allie whispered. “Even if they can’t see us, they
know we’re here.”
“Watch with me,” I said.
“What?”
“Stay awake and watch with me. Let the others get a little more rest.
Trying to move in the dark is more dangerous than staying put.”

“…all right. But I don’t have a gun.”
“Do you have a knife?”
“Yeah.”
“That will have to be enough until we get the other guns clean and ready.”
We’ve been too tired and in too much of a hurry to do that so far. Also, I
don’t want Allie or Jill to have guns yet. Not yet. “Just keep your eyes open.”
The only real defense against automatic rifles is concealment and silence.
“A knife is better than a gun now,” Zahra said. “If you have to use it, it
will be quiet.”
I nodded. “The rest of you, try to get a little more rest. I’ll wake you at
dawn.”
Most of them lay down to sleep, or at least to rest. Natividad kept both
children with her. Tomorrow, though, one of us would have to take charge of
the little boy. We didn’t need the burden of such a big child—one who had
reached the “run around and grab everything” stage. But we had the little boy,
and there was no one to hand him off to. No woman camping alongside a
highway with her child would have other relatives handy.
“Olamina,” Bankole said into my ear. His voice was low and soft and only
I reacted to it. I turned, and he was so close that I felt his beard brush my face.
Soft, thick beard. This morning he combed it more carefully than he combed
the hair on his head. He has the only mirror among us. Vain, vain old man. I
moved almost by reflex toward him.
I kissed him, wondering what it would feel like to kiss so much beard. I
did kiss the beard at first, missing his mouth by a little in the dark. Then I
found it and he moved a little and slipped his arms around me and we settled
to it for a little while.
It was hard for me to make myself push him away. I didn’t want to. He
didn’t want to let me.
“I was going to say thank you for coming after me,” he said. “That
woman was conscious almost until she died. The only thing I could do for her
was stay with her.”
“I was afraid you might have been shot out there.”
“I was flat on the ground until I heard the woman groaning.”
I sighed. “Yeah.” And then, “Rest.”
He lay down next to me and rubbed my arm—which tingled wherever he
touched it. “We should talk soon,” he said.
“At least,” I agreed.
He grinned—I could see the flash of teeth—and turned over and tried to
sleep.

The boy’s name was Justin Rohr. His dead mother had been Sandra Rohr.
Justin had been born in Riverside, California just three years ago. His mother
had gotten him this far north from Riverside. She had saved his birth
certificate, some baby pictures, and a picture of a stocky, freckled, red-haired
man who was, according to a notation on the back of the photo, Richard
Walter Rohr, born January 9, 2002, and died May 20, 2026. The boy’s father
—only twenty-four when he died. I wondered what had killed him. Sandra
Rohr had saved her marriage certificate and other papers important to her. All
were wrapped in a plastic packet that I had taken from her body. Elsewhere
on her, I had found several thousand dollars and a gold ring.
There was nothing about relatives or a specific destination. It seemed that
Sandra had simply been heading north with her son in search of a better life.
The little boy tolerated us all well enough today, although he got
frustrated when we didn’t understand him at once. When he cried, he
demanded that we produce his mother.
Allie, of all people, was his choice for substitute mother. She resisted him
at first. She ignored him or pushed him away. But when he was not being
wheeled along, he chose to walk with her or demand to be carried by her. By
the end of the day, she had given in. The two of them had chosen each other.
“She used to have a little boy,” her sister Jill told me as we walked along
State 156 with the few other walkers who had chosen this route. It was empty.
There were times when we could see no one at all, or when, as we headed east
and north, the only people we could see were heading west and south toward
us, toward the coast.
“She called her little boy Adam,” Jill continued. “He was only a few
months old when…he died.”
I looked at her. She had a big swollen purple bruise in the middle of her
forehead, like a misshapen third eye. I don’t think it hurt her much, though. It
didn’t hurt me much.
“When he died,” I repeated. “Who killed him?”
She looked away and rubbed her bruise. “Our father. That’s why we left.
He killed the baby. It cried. He hit it with his fists until it stopped.”
I shook my head and sighed. It was no news to me that other people’s
fathers could be monsters. I’d heard about such things all my life, but I’d
never before met people who were so clearly their father’s victims.
“We burned the house,” Jill whispered. I heard her say it, and I knew
without asking what she wasn’t saying. But she looked like a person talking
to herself, forgetting that anyone was listening. “He was passed out drunk on
the floor. The baby was dead. We got our stuff and our money—we earned it!
—and we set fire to the trash on the floor and the couch. We didn’t stay to

see. I don’t know what happened. We ran away. Maybe the fire went out.
Maybe he didn’t die.” She focused on me. “He might still be alive.”
She sounded more scared than anything else. Not hopeful or sorry.
Scared. The devil might still be alive.
“Where did you run from?” I asked. “What city?”
“Glendale.”
“Way down in L.A. County?”
“Yeah.”
“Then he’s more than three hundred miles behind you.”
“…yeah.”
“He drank a lot, didn’t he.”
“All the time.”
“Then he’d be in no shape to follow you even if the fire never touched
him. What do you think would happen to a drunk on the highway? He’d never
even make it out of L.A.”
She nodded. “You sound like Allie. You’re both right. I know. But… I
dream about him sometimes—that he’s coming, that he’s found us… I know
it’s crazy. But I wake up covered in sweat.”
“Yeah,” I said, remembering my own nightmares during the search for my
father. “Yeah.”
Jill and I walked together for a while without talking. We were moving
slowly because Justin demanded to be allowed to walk now and then. He had
too much energy to spend hours sitting and riding. And, of course, when he
was allowed to walk, he wanted to run all around, investigate everything. I
had time to stop, swing my pack around, and dig out a length of clothesline. I
handed it to Jill.
“Tell your sister to try harnessing him with this,” I said. “It might save his
life. One end around his waist, the other around her arm.”
She took the rope.
“I’ve taken care of a few three-year-olds,” I said, “and I’ll tell you, she’s
going to need a lot of help with that little kid. If she doesn’t know that now,
she will.”
“Are you guys just going to leave all the work to her?” Jill demanded.
“Of course not.” I watched Allie and Justin walking along—lean, angular
woman and pudgy, bumblebee of a child. The boy ran to investigate a bush
near the roadside, then, startled by the approach of strangers, ran back to Allie
and hung on to the cloth of her jeans until she took his hand. “They do seem
to be adopting each other, though,” I said. “And taking care of other people
can be a good cure for nightmares like yours and maybe hers.”
“You sound as though you know.”

I nodded. “I live in this world, too.”
We passed through Hollister before noon. We resupplied there, not
knowing when we would see well-equipped stores again. We had already
discovered that several of the small communities shown on the maps no
longer existed—had not existed for years. The earthquake had done a lot of
damage in Hollister, but the people hadn’t gone animal. They seemed to be
helping one another with repairs and looking after their own destitute.
Imagine that.

21
❏❏❏
The Self must create
Its own reasons for being.
To shape God,
Shape Self.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
MONDAY, AUGUST 30, 2027
THERE IS STILL A little water in the San Luis Reservoir. It’s more fresh water
than I’ve ever seen in one place, but by the vast size of the reservoir, I can see
that it’s only a little compared to what should be there—what used to be there.
The highway runs through the recreational area for several miles. That
gave us a chance to travel through on the road until we spotted an area that
would make a good rest-day camp and that wasn’t occupied.
There are a lot of people in the area—people who have set up permanent
camps in everything from rag-and-plastic tents to wooden shacks that look
almost fit for human habitation. Where are so many people going to the
bathroom? How clean is the water in the reservoir? No doubt cities that use it
purify the water when it reaches them. Whether they do or not, I think it’s
time for us to break out the water purification tablets.
Around several of the tents and shacks, there are small, ragged gardens—
new plantings and remnants of summer vegetable gardens. There are a few
things left to harvest: big squashes, pumpkins, and gourds still growing along
with carrots, peppers, greens, and a little corn. Good, cheap, filling foods. Not
enough protein, but perhaps the people hunt. There must be game around
here, and I saw plenty of guns. People wear holstered handguns or carry rifles
or shotguns. The men in particular go armed.
They all stared at us.
As we went past, people stopped their gardening, outdoor cooking, or
whatever to stare at us. We had pushed ourselves, had been eager to arrive

ahead of the crowd I believe will soon come in from the Bay Area. So we
didn’t arrive with the usual human river. Yet by ourselves we are enough of a
crowd to make the local squatters nervous. They let us alone, though. Except
during disaster-induced feeding frenzies like the ones after the earthquake,
most people let one another alone. I think Dominic and Justin are making it
easier for us to fit in. Justin, now tethered to Allie’s wrist, runs around staring
at the squatters until they make him nervous. Then he runs back to Allie and
demands to be carried. He’s a cute little kid. Lean, grim-faced people tend to
smile at him.
No one shot at us or challenged us as we walked along the highway. No
one bothered us later when we left the highway and headed into the trees
toward what we thought might be a good area. We found old campsites and
toilet places and avoided them. We didn’t want to be within sight of the
highway or of anyone else’s tent or shack. We wanted privacy, not too many
rocks to sleep on, and a way of reaching the water that didn’t put us too much
on display. We looked for over an hour until we found an isolated old
campsite, long abandoned and a little higher upslope than others we’d seen. It
suited all of us. Then, with hours of daylight left, we rested in enormous
comfort and laziness, knowing we had the rest of today and all of tomorrow to
do almost nothing. Natividad fed Dominic and the two of them drifted off to
sleep. Allie followed her example with Justin, although preparing him a meal
was a little more complicated. Both women had more reason to be tired and to
need sleep than the rest of us, so we left them out when we drew lots for a
watch schedule—one for day and night. We shouldn’t get too comfortable.
Also, we agreed that no one should go off exploring or getting water alone. I
thought the couples would soon start going off together—And I thought it
was just about time for Bankole and me to have that talk.
I sat with him and cleaned our new handgun while he cleaned the rifle.
Harry was on watch and needed my gun. When I went over to give it to him,
he let me know he understood exactly what was going on between Bankole
and me.
“Be careful,” he whispered. “Don’t give the poor old guy a heart attack.”
“I’ll tell him you were worried,” I said.
Harry laughed, then sobered. “Be careful, Lauren. Bankole is probably all
right. He seems to be. But, well… Yell if anything goes wrong.”
I rested my hand on his shoulder for a moment and said, “Thank you.”
The nice thing about sitting and working alongside someone you don’t
know very well, someone you’d like to know much better, is that you can talk
with him or be quiet with him. You can get comfortable with him and with
the awareness that you’ll soon be making love to him.

Bankole and I were quiet for a while, a little shy. I sneaked glances at him
and caught him sneaking glances at me. Then, to my own surprise, I began to
talk to him about Earthseed—not preaching, just talking, testing I guess. I
needed to see his reaction. Earthseed is the most important thing in my life. If
Bankole were going to laugh at it, I needed to know now. I didn’t expect him
to agree with it or even to be much interested in it. He’s an old man. I thought
he was probably content with whatever religion he had. It occurred to me as I
spoke that I had no idea what his religion was. I asked him.
“None at all,” he said. “When my wife was alive, we went to a Methodist
church. Her religion was important to her, so I went along. I saw how it
comforted her, and I wanted to believe, but I never could.”
“We were Baptists,” I said. “I couldn’t make myself believe either, and I
couldn’t tell anyone. My father was the minister. I kept quiet and began to
understand Earthseed.”
“Began to invent Earthseed,” he said.
“Began to discover it and understand it,” I said. “Stumbling across the
truth isn’t the same as making things up.” I wondered how many times and
ways I would have to say this to new people.
“It sounds like some combination of Buddhism, existentialism, Sufism,
and I don’t know what else,” he said. “Buddhism doesn’t make a god of the
concept of change, but the impermanence of everything is a basic Buddhist
principle.”
“I know,” I said. “I’ve done a lot of reading. Some other religions and
philosophies do contain ideas that would fit into Earthseed, but none of them
are Earthseed. They go off in their own directions.”
He nodded. “All right. But tell me, what do people have to do to be good
members of an Earthseed Community?”
A nice, door-opening question. “The essentials,” I answered, “are to learn
to shape God with forethought, care, and work; to educate and benefit their
community, their families, and themselves; and to contribute to the fulfillment
of the Destiny.”
“And why should people bother about the Destiny, farfetched as it is?
What’s in it for them?”
“A unifying, purposeful life here on Earth, and the hope of heaven for
themselves and their children. A real heaven, not mythology or philosophy. A
heaven that will be theirs to shape.”
“Or a hell,” he said. His mouth twitched. “Human beings are good at
creating hells for themselves even out of richness.” He thought for a moment.
“It sounds too simple, you know.”
“You think it’s simple?” I asked in surprise.

“I said it sounds too simple.”
“It sounds overwhelming to some people.”
“I mean it’s too…straightforward. If you get people to accept it, they’ll
make it more complicated, more open to interpretation, more mystical, and
more comforting.”
“Not around me they won’t!” I said.
“With you or without you, they will. All religions change. Think about the
big ones. What do you think Christ would be these days? A Baptist? A
Methodist? A Catholic? And the Buddha—do you think he’d be a Buddhist
now? What kind of Buddhism would he practice?” He smiled. “After all, if
‘God is Change,’ surely Earthseed can change, and if it lasts, it will.”
I looked away from him because he was smiling. This was all nothing to
him. “I know,” I said. “No one can stop Change, but we all shape Change
whether we mean to or not. I mean to guide and shape Earthseed into what it
should be.”
“Perhaps.” He went on smiling. “How serious are you about this?”
The question drove me deep into myself. I spoke, almost not knowing
what I would say. “When my father…disappeared,” I began, “it was
Earthseed that kept me going. When most of my community and the rest of
my family were wiped out, and I was alone, I still had Earthseed. What I am
now, all that I am now is Earthseed.”
“What you are now,” he said after a long silence, “is a very unusual young
woman.”
We didn’t talk for a while after that. I wondered what he thought. He
hadn’t seemed to be bottling up too much hilarity. No more than I’d expected.
He had been willing to go along with his wife’s religious needs. Now, he
would at least permit me mine.
I wondered about his wife. He hadn’t mentioned her before. What had she
been like? How had she died?
“Did you leave home because your wife died?” I asked.
He put down a long slender cleaning rod and rested his back against the
tree behind him. “My wife died five years ago,” he said. “Three men broke in
—junkies, dealers, I don’t know. They beat her, tried to make her tell where
the drugs were.”
“Drugs?”
“They had decided that we must have something they could use or sell.
They didn’t like the things she was able to give them so they kept beating her.
She had a heart problem.” He drew in a long breath, then sighed. “She was
still alive when I got home. She was able to tell me what had happened. I tried
to help her, but the bastards had taken her medicine, taken everything. I

phoned for an ambulance. It arrived an hour after she died. I tried to save her,
then to revive her. I tried so damned hard…”
I stared down the hill from our camp where just a glint of water was
visible in the distance through the trees and bushes. The world is full of
painful stories. Sometimes it seems as though there aren’t any other kind and
yet I found myself thinking how beautiful that glint of water was through the
trees.
“I should have headed north when Sharon died,” Bankole said. “I thought
about it.”
“But you stayed.” I turned away from the water and looked at him.
“Why?”
He shook his head. “I didn’t know what to do, so for some time I didn’t
do anything. Friends took care of me, cooked for me, cleaned the house. It
surprised me that they would do that. Church people most of them.
Neighbors. More her friends than mine.”
I thought of Wardell Parrish, devastated after the loss of his sister and her
children—and his house. Had Bankole been some community’s Wardell
Parrish? “Did you live in a walled community?” I asked.
“Yes. Not rich, though. Nowhere near rich. People managed to hold on to
their property and feed their families. Not much else. No servants. No hired
guards.”
“Sounds like my old neighborhood.”
“I suppose it sounds like a lot of old neighborhoods that aren’t there any
more. I stayed to help the people who had helped me. I couldn’t walk away
from them.”
“But you did. You left. Why?”
“Fire—and scavengers.”
“You, too? Your whole community?”
“Yes. The houses burned, most of the people were killed… The rest
scattered, went to family or friends elsewhere. Scavengers and squatters
moved in. I didn’t decide to leave. I escaped.”
Much too familiar. “Where did you live? What city?”
“San Diego.”
“That far south?”
“Yes. As I said, I should have left years ago. If I had, I could have
managed plane fare and resettlement money.”
Plane fare and resettlement money? He might not call that rich, but we
would have.
“Where are you going now?” I asked.
“North.” He shrugged.

“Just anywhere north or somewhere in particular?”
“Anywhere where I can be paid for my services and allowed to live
among people who aren’t out to kill me for my food or water.”
Or for drugs, I thought. I looked into his bearded face and added up the
hints I’d picked up today and over the past few days. “You’re a doctor, aren’t
you?”
He looked a little surprised. “I was, yes. Family practice. It seems a long
time ago.”
“People will always need doctors,” I said. “You’ll do all right.”
“My mother used to say that.” He gave me a wry smile. “But here I am.”
I smiled back because, looking at him now, I couldn’t help myself, but as
he spoke, I decided he had told me at least one lie. He might be as displaced
and in distress as he appeared to be, but he wasn’t just wandering north. He
wasn’t looking for just anywhere he could be paid for his services and not
robbed or murdered. He wasn’t the kind of man who wandered. He knew
where he was going. He had a haven somewhere—a relative’s home, another
home of his own, a friend’s home, something—some definite destination.
Or perhaps he just had enough money to buy a place for himself in
Washington or Canada or Alaska. He had had to choose between fast, safe,
expensive air travel and having settling-in money when he got where he was
going. He had chosen settling-in money. If so, I agreed with him. He was
taking the kind of risk that would enable him to make a new beginning as
soon as possible—if he survived.
On the other hand, if I were right about any of this, he might disappear on
me some night. Or perhaps he would be more open about it—just walk away
from me some day, turn down a side road and wave good-bye. I didn’t want
that. After I’d slept with him I would want it even less.
Even now, I wanted to keep him with me. I hated that he was lying to me
already—or I believed he was. But why should he tell me everything? He
didn’t know me very well yet, and like me, he meant to survive. Perhaps I
could convince him that he and I could survive well together. Meanwhile,
best to enjoy him without quite trusting him. I may be wrong about all this,
but I don’t believe I am. Pity.
We finished the guns, loaded them, and went down to the water to wash.
You could go right down to the water, scoop some up in a pot, and take it
away. It was free. I kept looking around, thinking someone would come to
stop us or charge us or something. I suppose we could have been robbed, but
no one paid any attention to us. We saw other people getting water in bottles,
canteens, pots, and bags, but the place seemed peaceful. No one bothered
anyone. No one paid any attention to us.

“A place like this can’t last,” I told Bankole. “It’s a shame. Life could be
good here.”
“I suspect that it’s against the law to live here,” he said. “This is a State
Recreation Area. There should be some kind of limit on how long you can
stay. I’m certain that there should be—used to be—some group policing the
place. I wonder if officials of some kind come around to collect bribes now
and then.”
“Not while we’re here, I hope.” I dried my hands and arms and waited for
him to dry his. “Are you hungry?” I asked.
“Oh, yes,” he said. He looked at me for a while, then reached for me. He
took me by both arms, drew me to him, kissed me, and spoke into my ear.
“Aren’t you?”
I didn’t say anything. After a while I took his hand and we went back to
camp to pick up one of his blankets. Then we went to an isolated little spot
that we’d both noticed earlier.
It felt natural and easy to lie down with him, and explore the smooth,
hard, broad feel of his body. He’d kept himself fit. No doubt walking
hundreds of miles in the past few weeks had burned off whatever fat he’d
been carrying. He was still big—barrel-chested and tall. Best of all, he took a
lot of uncomplicated pleasure in my body, and I got to share it with him. It
isn’t often that I can enjoy the good side of my hyperempathy. I let the
sensation take over, intense and wild. I might be more in danger of having a
heart attack than he is. How had I done without this for so long?
There was an odd, unromantic moment when we both reached into
crumpled clothing and produced condoms. It was funny because of the way it
hit us both at once, and we laughed, then went on to the serious business of
loving and pleasuring one another. That combed and trimmed beard that he’s
so vain about tickles like mad.
“I knew I should have let you alone,” he said to me when we had made
love twice and were still not willing to get up and go back to the others.
“You’re going to kill me. I’m too old for this stuff.”
I laughed and made a pillow of his shoulder.
After a while, he said, “I need to be serious for a minute, girl.”
“Okay.”
He drew a long breath, sighed, swallowed, hesitated. “I don’t want to give
you up,” he said.
I smiled.
“You’re a kid,” he said. “I ought to know better. How old are you,
anyway?”

I told him.
He jumped, then pushed me off his shoulder. “Eighteen?” He flinched
away from me as though my skin burned him. “My god,” he said. “You’re a
baby! I’m a child molester!”
I didn’t laugh, though I wanted to. I just looked at him.
After a while he frowned and shook his head. In a little more time, he
moved back against me, touching my face, my shoulders, my breasts.
“You’re not just eighteen,” he said.
I shrugged.
“When were you born? What year?”
“Twenty oh nine.”
“No.” He drew the word out: “Nooo.”
I kissed him and said in the same tone, “Yesss. Now stop your nonsense.
You want to be with me and I want to be with you. We’re not going to split
up because of my age, are we?”
After a while he shook his head. “You should have a nice youngster like
Travis,” he said. “I should have the sense and the strength to send you off to
find one.”
That made me think of Curtis, and I cringed away from thinking of him.
I’ve thought as little as possible about Curtis Talcott. He isn’t like my
brothers. He may be dead, but none of us ever saw his body. I saw his brother
Michael. I was terrified of seeing Curtis himself, but I never did. He may not
be dead. He’s lost to me, but I hope he’s not dead. He should be here with me
on the road. I hope he’s alive and all right.
“Who have I reminded you of?” Bankole asked me, his voice soft and
deep.
I shook my head. “A boy I knew at home. We were going to get married
this year. I don’t even know whether he’s still alive.”
“You loved him?”
“Yes! We were going to marry and leave home, walk north. We had
decided to go this fall.”
“That’s crazy! You intended to walk this road even though you didn’t
have to?”
“Yes. And if we had left earlier, he’d be with me. I wish I knew he was all
right.”
He lay down on his back and drew me down beside him. “We’ve all lost
someone,” he said. “You and I seem to have lost everyone. That’s a bond, I
suppose.”
“A terrible one,” I said. “But not our only one.”
He shook his head. “You’re really eighteen?”

“Yes. As of last month.”
“You look and act years older.”
“This is who I am,” I said.
“You were the oldest kid in your family, weren’t you?”
I nodded. “I had four brothers. They’re all dead.”
“Yes,” he sighed. “Yes.”
TUESDAY, AUGUST 31, 2027
I’ve spent all of today talking, writing, reading, and making love to Bankole.
It seems such a luxury not to have to get up, pack, and walk all day. We all
lay sprawled around the campsite resting aching muscles, eating, and doing
nothing. More people flowed into the area from the highway and made their
camps, but none of them bothered us.
I began Zahra’s reading lesson and Jill and Allie looked interested. I
included them as though I had intended to from the first. It turned out that
they could read a little, but hadn’t learned to write. Toward the end of the
lesson, I read a few Earthseed verses to them in spite of Harry’s groans. Yet
when Allie proclaimed that she would never pray to any god of change, Harry
was the one who corrected her. Zahra and Travis both smiled at that, and
Bankole watched us all with apparent interest.
After that, Allie began to ask questions instead of making scornful
proclamations, and for the most part, the others answered her—Travis and
Natividad, Harry and Zahra. Once Bankole answered, expanding on
something I told him yesterday. Then he caught himself and looked a little
embarrassed.
“I still think it’s too simple,” he said to me. “A lot of it is logical, but it
will never work without a sprinkling of mystical confusion.”
“I’ll leave that to my descendants,” I said, and he busied himself, digging
a bag of almonds out of his pack, pouring some into his hand, and passing the
rest around.
Just before nightfall a gun battle began over toward the highway. We
couldn’t see any of it from where we were, but we stopped talking and lay
down. With bullets flying, it seemed best to keep low.
The shooting started and stopped, moved away, then came back. I was on
watch, so I had to stay alert, but in this storm of noise, nothing moved near us
except the trees in the evening breeze. It looked so peaceful, and yet people
out there were trying to kill each other, and no doubt succeeding. Strange how
normal it’s become for us to lie on the ground and listen while nearby, people
try to kill each other.

22
❏❏❏
As wind,
As water,
As fire,
As life,
God
Is both creative and destructive,
Demanding and yielding,
Sculptor and clay.
God is Infinite Potential:
God is Change.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 9, 2027
WE’VE HAD OVER A week of weary, frightening, nerve-wracking walking.
We’ve reached and passed through the city of Sacramento without real
trouble. We’ve been able to buy enough food and water, been able to find
plenty of empty places in the hills where we could make camp. Yet none of us
have had any feelings of comfort or well-being along the stretch of Interstate5 that we’ve just traveled.
I-5 is much less traveled than U.S. 101, in spite of the earthquake chaos.
There were times when the only people we could see were each other. Those
times never lasted long, but they did happen.
On the other hand, there were more trucks on I-5. We had to be careful
because trucks traveled during the day as well as at night. Also, there were
more human bones on I-5. It was nothing to run across skulls, lower jaws, or
bones of the pelvis and torso. Arm and leg bones were rarer, but now and
then, we spotted them, too.
“I think it’s the trucks,” Bankole told us. “If they hit someone along here,
they wouldn’t stop. They wouldn’t dare. And the junkies and alcoholics

wouldn’t be that careful where they walked.”
I suppose he’s right, although along that whole empty stretch of road, we
saw only four people whom I believed were either not sober or not sane.
But we saw other things. On Tuesday we camped in a little hollow back in
the hills to the west of the road, and a big black and white dog came
wandering down toward our camp with the fresh-looking, bloody hand and
forearm of a child in its mouth.
The dog spotted us, froze, turned, and ran back the way it had come. But
we all got a good look before it went, and we all saw the same thing. That
night, we posted a double watch. Two watchers, two guns, no unnecessary
conversation, no sex.
The next day we decided not to take another rest day until we had passed
through Sacramento. There was no guarantee that anything would be better on
the other side of Sacramento, but we wanted to get away from this grim land.
That night, looking for a place to camp, we stumbled across four ragged,
filthy kids huddled around a campfire. The picture of them is still clear in my
mind. Kids the age of my brothers—twelve, thirteen, maybe fourteen years
old, three boys and a girl. The girl was pregnant, and so huge it was obvious
she would be giving birth any day. We rounded a bend in a dry stream bed,
and there these kids were, roasting a severed human leg, maneuvering it
where it lay in the middle of their fire atop the burning wood by twisting its
foot. As we watched, the girl pulled a sliver of charred flesh from the thigh
and stuffed it into her mouth.
They never saw us. I was in the lead, and I stopped the others before they
all rounded the bend. Harry and Zahra, who were just behind me, saw all that
I saw. We turned the others back and away, not telling them why until we
were far from those kids and their cannibal feast.
No one attacked us. No one bothered us at all. The country we walked
through was even beautiful in some places—green trees and rolling hills;
golden dried grasses and tiny communities; farms, many overgrown and
abandoned, and abandoned houses. Nice country, and compared to Southern
California, rich country. More water, more food, more room…
So why were the people eating one another?
There were several burned out buildings. It was obvious that there had
been trouble here, too, but much less than on the coast. Yet we couldn’t wait
to get back to the coast.
Sacramento was all right to resupply in and hurry through. Water and food
were cheap there compared to what you could buy along the roadside, of
course. Cities were always a relief as far as prices went. But cities were also
dangerous. More gangs, more cops, more suspicious, nervous people with

guns. You tiptoe through cities. You keep up a steady pace, keep your eyes
open, and try to look both too intimidating to bother and invisible. Neat trick.
Bankole says cities have been like that for a long time.
Speaking of Bankole, I haven’t let him get much rest on this rest day. He
doesn’t seem to mind. He did say something that I should make note of,
though. He said he wanted me to leave the group with him. He has, as I
suspected, a safe haven—or as safe as any haven can be that isn’t surrounded
by high-tech security devices and armed guards. It’s in the hills on the coast
near Cape Mendocino maybe two weeks from here.
“My sister and her family have been living there,” he said. “But the
property belongs to me. There’s room on it for you.”
I could imagine how delighted his sister would be to see me. Would she
try to be polite, or would she stare at me, then at him, then demand to know
whether he was in his right mind?
“Did you hear what I said?” he demanded.
I looked at him, interested in the anger I heard in his voice. Why anger?
“What am I doing? Boring you?” he demanded.
I took his hand and kissed it. “You introduce me to your sister and she’ll
measure you for a straitjacket.”
After a while, he laughed. “Yes.” And then, “I don’t care.”
“You might, sooner or later.”
“You’ll come with me, then.”
“No. I’d like to, but no.”
He smiled. “Yes. You’ll come.”
I watched him. I tried to read the smile, but it’s hard to read a bearded
face. It’s easier to say what I didn’t see—or didn’t recognize. I didn’t see
condescension or that particular kind of disregard that some men reserve for
women. He wasn’t deciding that my “no” was a secret “yes.” Something else
was going on.
“I own three hundred acres,” he said. “I bought the property years ago as
an investment. There was going to be a big housing development up there,
and speculators like me were going to make tons of money, selling our land to
the developers. The project fell through for some reason, and I was stuck with
land that I could either sell at a loss or keep. I kept it. Most of it is good for
farming. It’s got some trees on it, and some big tree stumps. My sister and her
husband have built a house and a few outbuildings.”
“You might have dozens or hundreds of squatters on that land now,” I
said.
“I don’t think so. Access is a problem. It’s not convenient to any real road,
and it’s well away from the big highways. It’s a great place to hide.”

“Water?”
“There are wells. My sister says the area is getting dryer, warmer. That’s
no surprise. But the ground water seems dependable so far.”
I thought I could see where he was headed now, but he was going to have
to get there all by himself. His land; his choice.
“There aren’t many black people up that way, are there?” I asked.
“Not many,” he agreed. “My sister hasn’t had much trouble, though.”
“What does she do for a living? Farm the land?”
“Yes, and her husband does odd jobs for cash—which is dangerous
because it leaves her and the children alone for days, weeks, even months at a
time. If we can manage to support ourselves without becoming a drain on her
few resources, we might be useful to her. We might give her more security.”
“How many kids?”
“Three. Let’s see…eleven, thirteen, and fifteen years old by now. She’s
only forty herself.” His mouth twitched. Only. Yeah. Even his little sister was
old enough to be my mother. “Her name’s Alex. Alexandra. Married to Don
Casey. They both hate cities. They thought my land was a godsend. They
could raise children who might live to grow up.” He nodded. “And their
children have done all right.”
“How have you kept in touch?” I asked. “Phone?”
“That was part of our agreement,” he said. “They don’t have a phone, but
when Don goes to one of the towns to get work, he phones me and lets me
know how everyone is. He won’t know what’s happened to me. He won’t be
expecting me. If he’s tried to phone, both he and Alex will be worried.”
“You should have flown up,” I said. “But I’m glad you didn’t.”
“Are you? So am I. Listen, you are coming with me. I can’t think of
anything I want as much as I want you. I haven’t wanted anything at all for a
long time. Too long.”
I leaned back against a tree. Our campsite wasn’t as completely private as
the one at San Luis had been, but there were trees, and the couples could get
away from each other. Each couple had one gun, and the Gilchrist sisters were
babysitting Dominic as well as Justin. We had put them in the middle of a
rough triangle and given them my gun. On I-5 they and Travis had had a
chance to do a little target practice. It was all of our duty to look around now
and then and make sure no strangers wandered into the area. I looked around.
Sitting up I could see Justin running around, chasing pigeons. Jill was
keeping an eye on him, but not trying to keep up with him.
Bankole took me by the shoulder and turned me to face him. “I’m not
boring you, am I?” he asked for the second time.
I had been trying not to look at him. I looked now, but he had not yet said

what he had to say if he wanted to keep me with him. Did he know? I thought
he did.
“I want to go with you,” I said. “But I’m serious about Earthseed. I
couldn’t be more serious. You have to understand that.” Why did this sound
strange to me? It was the absolute truth, but I felt odd telling it.
“I know my rival,” he said.
Maybe that’s why it sounded strange. I was telling him there was someone
else—something else. Maybe it would have sounded less strange if the
something were another man.
“You could help me,” I said.
“Help you what? Do you have any real idea what you want to do?”
“Begin the first Earthseed Community.”
He sighed.
“You could help me,” I repeated. “This world is falling apart. You could
help me begin something purposeful and constructive.”
“Going to fix the world, are you?” he said with quiet amusement.
I looked at him. For a moment I was too angry to let myself speak. When
I could control my voice, I said, “It’s all right if you don’t believe, but don’t
laugh. Do you know what it means to have something to believe in? Don’t
laugh.”
After a while he said, “All right.”
After a longer while, I said, “Fixing the world is not what Earthseed is
about.”
“The stars. I know.” He lay flat on his back, but turned his head to look at
me instead of looking up.
“This world would be a better place if people lived according to
Earthseed,” I said. “But then, this world would be better if people lived
according to the teachings of almost any religion.”
“That’s true. Why do you think they’ll live according to the teaching of
yours?”
“A few will. Several thousand? Several hundred thousand? Millions? I
don’t know. But when I have a home base, I’ll begin the first community. In
fact, I’ve already begun it.”
“Is that what you need me for?” He didn’t bother to smile or pretend it
was a joke. It wasn’t. I moved over closer to him and sat next to him so that I
could look down into his face.
“I need you to understand me,” I said. “I need you to take me the way I
am or go off to your land by yourself.”
“You need me to take you and all your friends off the street so you can
start a church.” Again, he was altogether serious.

“That or nothing,” I said with equal seriousness. He gave me a humorless
smile. “So now we know where we stand.”
I smoothed his beard, and saw that he wanted to move away from my
hand, but that he did not move. “Are you all that sure you want God as your
rival?” I asked.
“I don’t seem to have much choice, do I?” He covered my caressing hand
with one of his own. “Tell me, do you ever lose your temper and scream and
cry?”
“Sure.”
“I can’t picture it. In all honesty, I can’t.”
And that reminded me of something that I hadn’t told him, had better tell
him before he found out and felt cheated or decided that I didn’t trust him—
which I still didn’t, quite. But I didn’t want to lose him to stupidity or
cowardice. I didn’t want to lose him at all.
“Still want me with you?” I asked.
“Oh, yes,” he said. “I intend to marry you once we’ve settled.”
He had managed to surprise me. I stared at him with my mouth open.
“A genuine spur-of-the-moment reaction,” he said. I’ll have to remember
it. Will you marry me, by the way?”
“Listen to me first.”
“No more. Bring your church. Bring your congregation. I doubt they care
any more about the stars than I do, but bring them. I like them, and there’s
room for them.”
If they would come. My next effort would be to convince them. But this
effort wasn’t over yet.
“That isn’t all,” I said. “Let me tell you one more thing. Then, if you still
want me, I’ll marry you anytime you say. I want to. You must know I want
to.”
He waited.
“My mother was taking—abusing—a prescription drug when she got
pregnant with me. The drug was Paracetco. As a result, I have hyperempathy
syndrome.”
He took that in with no sign of how he felt about it. He sat up and looked
at me—looked at me with great curiosity, as though he hoped to see some
sign of my hyperempathy on my face or body. “You feel other people’s
pain?” he asked.
“I share other people’s pain and pleasure,” I said. “There hasn’t been
much pleasure to share lately, except with you.”
“Do you share bleeding?”
“No more. I did when I was little.”

“But you… I saw you kill a man.”
“Yes.” I shook my head, remembering what he had seen. “I had to, or he
would have killed me.”
“I know that. It’s just that… I’m surprised you were able to do it.”
“I told you, I had to.”
He shook his head. “I’ve read about the syndrome, of course, although
I’ve never seen a case. I remember thinking that it might not be so bad a thing
if most people had to endure all the pain they caused. Not doctors or other
medical people, of course, but most people.”
“Bad idea,” I said.
“I’m not sure.”
“Take my word for it. Bad, bad idea. Self-defense shouldn’t have to be an
agony or a killing or both. I can be crippled by the pain of a wounded person.
I’m a very good shot because I’ve never felt that I could afford just to wound
someone. Also…” I stopped, looked past him for a moment and drew a deep
breath, then focused on him again. “The worst of it is, if you got hurt, I might
not be able to help you. I might be as crippled by your injury—by your pain, I
mean—as you are.”
“I suspect you’d find a way.” He smiled a little.
“Don’t suspect that, Bankole.” I stopped and hunted for words that would
make him understand. “I’m not looking for compliments or even reassurance.
I want you to understand: If you broke your leg badly, if you were shot, if
anything serious and disabling happened to you, I might be disabled, too. You
must know how disabling real pain can be.”
“Yes. I know a little about you, too. No, don’t tell me again that you
aren’t fishing for compliments. I know. Let’s go back to camp. I’ve got some
pain medications in my bag. I’ll teach you how and when to use them on me
or whoever needs them. If you can just hold on and be yourself long enough
to use them, you can do whatever else may be necessary.”
“…okay. So…do you still want to marry me?” It surprised me how much
I didn’t want to ask the question. I knew he still wanted me. Yet there I was,
asking him, almost begging him to say it. I needed to hear it.
He laughed. Big, full laughter that sounded so real, I couldn’t take
offense. “I’ll have to remember this,” he said. “Do you imagine for one
minute, girl, that I would let you get away?”

23
❏❏❏
Your teachers
Are all around you.
All that you perceive,
All that you experience,
All that is given to you
or taken from you,
All that you love or hate,
need or fear
Will teach you—
If you will learn.
God is your first
and your last teacher.
God is your harshest teacher:
subtle,
demanding.
Learn or die.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2027
WE HAD ANOTHER BATTLE to try to sleep through before dawn this morning. It
began to the south of us out on or near the highway, and worked its way first
toward, then away from us.
We could hear people shooting, screaming, cursing, running… Same old
stuff—tiresome, dangerous, and stupid. The shooting went on for over an
hour, waxing and waning. There was a final barrage that seemed to involve
more guns than ever. Then the noise stopped.
I managed to sleep through some of it. I got over being afraid, even got
over being angry. In the end, I was only tired. I thought, if the bastards are
going to kill me, I can’t stop them by staying awake. If that wasn’t altogether

true, I didn’t care. I slept.
And somehow, during or after the battle, in spite of the watch, two people
slipped into our camp and bedded down among us. They slept, too.
We awoke early as usual so that we could start walking while the heat
wasn’t too terrible. We’ve learned to wake up without prompting at the first
light of dawn. Today, four of us sat up in our bags at almost the same time. I
was crawling out of my bag to go off and urinate when I spotted the extra
people—two gray lumps in the dawn light, one large and one small, lying
against each other, asleep on the bare ground. Thin arms and legs extended
like sticks from rags and mounds of clothing.
I glanced around at the others and saw that they were staring where I was
staring—all of them except Jill, who was supposed to be on watch. We began
trusting her to stand night watch last week with a partner. This was only her
second solitary watch. And where was she looking? Away into the trees. She
and I would have to talk.
Harry and Travis were already reacting to the figures on the ground. In
silence, each man was peeling out of his bag in his underwear, and standing
up. More fully clothed, I matched them, move for move, and the three of us
closed in around the two intruders.
The larger of the two awoke all at once, jumped up, darted two or three
steps toward Harry, then stopped. It was a woman. We could see her better
now. She was brown-skinned with a lot of long, straight, unkempt black hair.
Her coloring was as dark as mine, but she was all planes and angles—a wiry,
hawk-faced woman who could have used a few decent meals and a good
scrubbing. She looked like a lot of people we’ve seen on the road.
The second intruder awoke, saw Travis standing nearby in his underwear,
and screamed. That got everyone’s attention. It was the high, piercing shriek
of a child—a little girl who looked about seven. She was a tiny, pinched
image of the woman—her mother, or her sister perhaps.
The woman ran back to the child and tried to scoop her up. But the child
had folded herself into a tight fetal knot and the woman, trying to lift her,
could not get a grip. She stumbled, fell over, and in an instant she too had
rolled herself into a tight ball. By then everyone had come to see.
“Harry,” I said, and waited until he looked at me. “Would you and Zahra
keep watch—make sure nothing else surprises us.”
He nodded. He and Zahra detached from the cluster, separated, and took
up positions on opposite sides of the camp, Harry nearest to the approach
from the highway and Zahra on the approach from the nearest lesser road. We
had buried ourselves as well as we could in a deserted area that Bankole said
must once have been a park, but we didn’t kid ourselves that we were alone.

We’d followed I-5 to a small city outside Sacramento, away from the worst of
the sprawl, but there were still plenty of poor people around—local paupers
and refugees like us.
Where had this pair of ragged, terrified, filthy people come from?
“We won’t hurt you,” I said to them as they lay, still rolled up on the
ground. “Get up. Come on, get up. You’ve come into our camp unasked. You
can at least talk to us.”
We didn’t touch them. Bankole seemed to want to, but he stopped when I
grasped his arm. They were already scared to death. A strange man, reaching
out to them, might make them hysterical.
Trembling, the woman unrolled herself and gazed up at us. Now I realized
she looked Asian except for her coloring. She put her head down and
whispered something to the child. After a moment, the two of them stood up.
“We didn’t know this was your place,” she whispered. “We’ll go away.
Let us go away.”
I sighed and looked at the terrified face of the little girl. “You can go,” I
said. “Or if you like, you can eat with us.”
They both wanted to run away. They were like deer, frozen in terror,
about to bolt. But I’d said the magic word. Two weeks ago, I wouldn’t have
said it, but I said today to these two starved-looking people: “eat.”
“Food?” the woman whispered.
“Yes. We’ll share a little food with you.”
The woman looked at the little girl. I was certain now that they were
mother and daughter. “We can’t pay,” she said. “We don’t have anything.”
I could see that. “Just take what we give you and nothing more than we
give you,” I said. “That will be pay enough.”
“We won’t steal. We aren’t thieves.”
Of course they were thieves. How else could they live. Some stealing and
scavenging, maybe some whoring… They weren’t very good at it or they’d
look better. But for the little kid’s sake, I wanted to help them at least with a
meal.
“Wait, then,” I said. “We’ll put a meal together.”
They sat where they were and watched us with hungry, hungry eyes.
There was more hunger in those eyes than we could fill with all our food. I
thought I had probably made a mistake. These people were so desperate, they
were dangerous. It didn’t matter at all that they looked harmless. They were
still alive and strong enough to run. They were not harmless.
It was Justin who eased some of the tension in those bottomless, hungry
eyes. Stark naked, he toddled over to the woman and the girl and looked them
over. The little girl only stared back, but after a moment, the woman began to

smile. She said something to Justin, and he smiled. Then he ran back to Allie
who held on to him long enough to dress him. But he had done his work. The
woman was seeing us with different eyes. She watched Natividad nursing
Dominic, then watched Bankole combing his beard. This seemed funny to her
and to the child, and they both giggled.
“You’re a hit,” I told Bankole.
“I don’t see what’s so funny about a man combing his beard,” he
muttered, and put way his comb.
I dug sweet pears out of my pack, and took one each to the woman and the
girl. I had just bought them two days before, and I had only three left. Other
people got the idea and began sharing what they could spare. Shelled walnuts,
apples, a pomegranate, Valencia oranges, figs…little things.
“Save what you can,” Natividad told the woman as she gave her almonds
wrapped in a piece of red cloth. “Wrap things in here and tie the ends
together.”
We all shared corn bread made with a little honey and the hard-boiled
eggs we bought and cooked yesterday. We baked the corn bread in the coals
of last night’s fire so that we could get away early this morning. The woman
and the girl ate as though the plain, cold food were the best they had ever
tasted, as though they couldn’t believe someone had given it to them. They
crouched over it as though they were afraid we might snatch it back.
“We’ve got to go,” I said at last. “The sun’s getting hotter.”
The woman looked at me, her strange, sharp face hungry again, but now
not hungry for food.
“Let us go with you,” she said, her words tumbling over one another.
“We’ll work. We’ll get wood, make fire, clean dishes, anything. Take us with
you.”
Bankole looked at me. “I assume you saw that coming.”
I nodded. The woman was looking from one of us to the other.
“Anything,” she whispered—or whimpered. Her eyes were dry and
starved, but tears streamed from the little girl’s eyes.
“Give us a moment to decide,” I said. I meant, Go away so my friends can
yell at me in private, but the woman didn’t seem to understand. She didn’t
move.
“Wait over there,” I said, pointing toward the trees nearest to the road.
“Let us talk. Then we’ll tell you.”
She didn’t want to do it. She hesitated, then stood up, pulled her even
more reluctant daughter up, and trudged off to the trees I had indicated.
“Oh God,” Zahra muttered. “We’re going to take them, aren’t we?”
“That’s what we have to decide,” I said.

“What, we feed her, and then we get to tell her to go away and finish
starving?” Zahra made a noise of disgust.
“If she isn’t a thief,” Bankole said. “And if she doesn’t have any other
dangerous habits, we may be able to carry them. That little kid…”
“Yes,” I said. “Bankole, is there room for them at your place?”
“His place?” three others asked. I hadn’t had a chance to tell them about
it. And I hadn’t had the nerve.
“He has a lot of land up north and over by the coast,” I said. “There’s a
family house that we can’t live in because his sister and her family are there.
But there’s room and trees and water. He says…” I swallowed, looked at
Bankole who was smiling a little. “He says we can start Earthseed there—
build what we can.”
“Are there jobs?” Harry asked Bankole.
“My brother-in-law manages with year-round gardens and temporary jobs.
He’s raising three kids that way.”
“But the jobs do pay money?”
“Yes, they pay. Not well, but they pay. We’d better hold off talking about
this for a while. We’re torturing that young woman over there.”
“She’ll steal,” Natividad said. “She says she won’t, but she will. You can
look at her and tell.”
“She’s been beaten,” Jill said. “The way they rolled up when we first
spotted them. They’re used to being beaten, kicked, knocked around.”
“Yeah.” Allie looked haunted. “You try to keep from getting hit in the
head, try to protect your eyes and…your front. She thought we would beat
her. She and the kid both.”
Interesting that Allie and Jill should understand so well. What a terrible
father they had. And what had happened to their mother? They had never
talked about her. It was amazing that they had escaped alive and sane enough
to function.
“Should we let her stay?” I asked them.
Both girls nodded. “I think she’ll be a pain in the ass for a while, though,”
Allie said. “Like Natividad says, she’ll steal. She won’t be able to stop
herself. We’ll have to watch her real good. That little kid will steal, too. Steal
and run like hell.”
Zahra grinned. “Reminds me of me at that age. They’ll both be pains in
the ass. I vote we try them. If they have manners or if they can learn manners,
we keep them. If they’re too stupid to learn, we throw them out.”
I looked at Travis and Harry, standing together. “What do you guys say?”
“I say you’re going soft,” Harry said. “You would have raised hell if we’d
tried to take in a beggar woman and her child a few weeks ago.”

I nodded. “You’re right. I would have. And maybe that’s the attitude we
should keep. But these two… I think they might be worth something—and I
don’t think they’re dangerous. If I’m wrong, we can always dump them.”
“They might not take to being dumped,” Travis said. Then he shrugged. “I
don’t want to be the one to send that little kid out to be one more thiefbeggar-whore. But think, Lauren. If we let them stay, and it doesn’t work out,
it might be damned hard to get rid of them. And if they turn out to have
friends around here—friends that they’re scouting for, we might have to kill
them.”
Both Harry and Natividad began to protest. Kill a woman and a child?
No! Not possible! Never!
The rest of us let them talk. When they ran down, I said, “It could get that
bad, I suppose, but I don’t think it will. That woman wants to live. Even
more, she wants the kid to live. I think she’d put up with a lot for the kid’s
sake, and I don’t think she’d put the kid in danger by scouting for a gang.
Gangs are more direct out here, anyway. They don’t need scouts.”
Silence.
“Shall we try them?” I asked. “Or shall we turn them away now?”
“I’m not against them,” Travis said. “Let them stay, for the kid’s sake. But
let’s go back to having two watchers at once during the night. How the hell
did those two get in here like that, anyway?”
Jill shrank a little. “They could have gotten in anytime last night,” she
said. “Anytime.”
“What we don’t see can kill us,” I said. “Jill, you didn’t see them?”
“They could have been there when I took over the watch!”
“You still didn’t see them. They could have cut your throat—or your
sister’s.”
“Well. They didn’t.”
“The next one might.” I leaned toward her. “The world is full of crazy,
dangerous people. We see signs of that every day. If we don’t watch out for
ourselves, they will rob us, kill us, and maybe eat us. It’s a world gone to hell,
Jill, and we’ve only got each other to keep it off us.”
Sullen silence.
I reached out and took her hand. “Jill.”
“It wasn’t my fault!” she said. “You can’t prove I—”
“Jill!”
She shut up and stared at me.
“Listen, no one is going to beat you up, for heaven sake, but you did
something wrong, something dangerous. You know you did.”
“So what do you want her to do?” Allie demanded. “Get on her knees and

say she’s sorry?”
“I want her to love her own life and yours enough not to be careless.
That’s what I want. That’s what you should want, now more than ever. Jill?”
Jill closed her eyes. “Oh shit!” she said. And then, “All right, all right! I
didn’t see them. I really didn’t. I’ll watch better. No one else will get by me.”
I clasped her hand for a moment longer, then let it go. “Okay. Let’s get
out of here. Let’s collect that scared woman and her scared little kid and get
out of here.”
The two scared people turned out to be the most racially mixed that I had
ever met. Here’s their story, put together from the fragments they told us
during the day and tonight. The woman had a Japanese father, a black mother,
and a Mexican husband, all dead. Only she and her daughter are left. Her
name is Emery Tanaka Solis. Her daughter is Tori Solis. Tori is nine years
old, not seven as I had guessed. I suspect she has rarely had enough to eat in
her life. She’s tiny, quick, quiet, and hungry-eyed. She hid bits of food in her
filthy rags until we made her a new dress from one of Bankole’s shirts. Then
she hid food in that. Although Tori is nine, her mother is only twenty-three.
At thirteen, Emery married a much older man who promised to take care of
her. Her father was already dead, killed in someone else’s gunfight. Her
mother was sick, and dying of tuberculosis. The mother pushed Emery into
marriage to save her from victimization and starvation in the streets.
Up to that point, the situation was dreary, but normal. Emery had three
children over the next three years—a daughter and two sons. She and her
husband did farm work in trade for food, shelter, and hand-me-downs. Then
the farm was sold to a big agribusiness conglomerate, and the workers fell
into new hands. Wages were paid, but in company scrip, not in cash. Rent
was charged for the workers’ shacks. Workers had to pay for food, for
clothing—new or used—for everything they needed, and, of course they
could only spend their company notes at the company store. Wages—
surprise!—were never quite enough to pay the bills. According to new laws
that might or might not exist, people were not permitted to leave an employer
to whom they owed money. They were obligated to work off the debt either
as quasi-indentured people or as convicts. That is, if they refused to work,
they could be arrested, jailed, and in the end, handed over to their employers.
Either way, such debt slaves could be forced to work longer hours for less
pay, could be “disciplined” if they failed to meet their quotas, could be traded
and sold with or without their consent, with or without their families, to
distant employers who had temporary or permanent need of them. Worse,
children could be forced to work off the debt of their parents if the parents

died, became disabled, or escaped.
Emery’s husband sickened and died. There was no doctor, no medicine
beyond a few expensive over-the-counter preparations and the herbs that the
workers grew in their tiny gardens. Jorge Francisco Solis died in fever and
pain on the earthen floor of his shack without ever seeing a doctor. Bankole
said it sounded as though he died of peritonitis brought on by untreated
appendicitis. Such a simple thing. But then, there’s nothing more replaceable
than unskilled labor.
Emery and her children became responsible for the Solis debt. Accepting
this, Emery worked and endured until one day, without warning, her sons
were taken away. They were one and two years younger than her daughter,
and too young to be without both their parents. Yet they were taken. Emery
was not asked to part with them, nor was she told what would be done with
them. She had terrible suspicions when she recovered from the drug she had
been given to “quiet her down.” She cried and demanded the return of her
sons and would not work again until her masters threatened to take her
daughter as well.
She decided then to run away, to take her daughter and brave the roads
with their thieves, rapists, and cannibals. They had nothing for anyone to
steal, and rape wasn’t something they could escape by remaining slaves. As
for the cannibals…well, perhaps they were only fantasies—lies intended to
frighten salves into accepting their lot.
“There are cannibals,” I told her as we ate that night. “We’ve seen them. I
think, though, that they’re scavengers, not killers. They take advantage of
road kills, that kind of thing.”
“Scavengers kill,” Emery said. “If you get hurt or if you look sick, they
come after you.”
I nodded, and she went on with her story. Late one night, she and Tori
slipped out past the armed guards and electrified fences, the sound and motion
detectors and the dogs. Both knew how to be quiet, how to fade from cover to
cover, how to lie still for hours. Both were very fast. Slaves learned things
like that—the ones who lived did. Emery and Tori must have been very lucky.
Emery had some notion of finding her sons and getting them back, but she
had no idea where they had been taken. They had been driven away in a
truck; she knew that much. But she didn’t know even which way the truck
turned when it reached the highway. Her parents had taught her to read and
write, but she had seen no writing about her sons. She had to admit after a
while that all she could do was save her daughter.
Living on wild plants and whatever they could “find” or beg, they drifted
north. That was the way Emery said it: they found things. Well, if I were in

her place, I would have found a few things, too.
A gang fight drove her to us. Gangs are always a special danger in cities.
If you keep to the road while you’re in individual gang territories, you might
escape their attentions. We have so far. But the overgrown park land where
we camped last night was, according to Emery, in dispute. Two gangs shot at
each other and called insults and accusations back and forth. Now and then
they stopped to shoot at passing trucks. During one of these intervals, Emery
and Tori who had camped close to the roadside had slipped away.
“One group was coming closer to us,” Emery said. “They would shoot
and run. When they ran, they got closer. We had to get away. We couldn’t let
them hear us or see us. We found your clearing, but we didn’t see you. You
know how to hide.”
That, I suppose was a compliment. We try to disappear into the scenery
when that’s possible. Most of the time it isn’t. Tonight it isn’t. And tonight we
watch two at a time.
SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 2027
Tori Solis has found us two more companions today: Grayson Mora and his
daughter Doe. Doe was only a year younger than Tori, and the two little girls,
walking along, going the same way, became friends. Today we turned west on
State Highway 20 and were heading back toward U.S. 101. We spent a lot of
time talking about settling on Bankole’s land, about jobs and crops and what
we might build there.
Meanwhile, the two little girls, Tori and Doe were making friends and
pulling their parents together. The parents were alike enough to attract my
attention. They were about the same age—which meant that the man had
become a father almost as young as the woman had become a mother. That
wasn’t unusual, but it was unusual that he had taken charge of his child.
He was a tall, thin, black Latino, quiet, protective of his child, yet
tentative, somehow. He liked Emery. I could see that. Yet on some level he
wanted to get away from her—and away from us. When we left the road to
make camp, he would have gone on if his daughter had not begged, then cried
to stay with us. He had his own food so I told him he could camp near us if he
wanted to. Two things hit me as I talked to him.
First, he didn’t like us. That was obvious. He didn’t like us at all. I
thought he might resent us because we were united and armed. You tend to
resent the people you’re afraid of. I told him we kept a watch, and that if he
could put up with that, he was welcome. He shrugged and said in his soft,
cold voice, “Oh, yeah.”

He’ll stay. His kid wants it and some part of him wants it, but something’s
wrong. Something beyond ordinary traveler caution.
The second thing is only my suspicion. I believe Grayson and Doe Mora
were also slaves. Yet Grayson is now a rich pauper. He has a pair of
sleepsacks, food, water, and money. If I’m right, he took them off someone—
or off someone’s corpse.
Why do I think he was a slave? That odd tentativeness of his is just too
much like Emery’s. And Doe and Tori, though they don’t look alike at all,
seem to understand each other like sisters. Little kids can do that sometimes,
without it meaning anything. Just being little kids together is enough. But I’ve
never seen any kids but these two both show the tendency to drop to the
ground and roll into a fetal knot when frightened.
Doe did just that when she tripped and fell, and Zahra stepped over to see
whether she was hurt. Doe’s body snapped into a trembling ball. Was that, as
Jill and Allie supposed, what people did when they expected to be beaten or
kicked—a posture of protection and submission both at once?
“Something wrong about that fellow,” Bankole said, glancing at Grayson
as we bedded down next to each other. We had eaten and heard more of
Emery’s story, and talked a little, but we were tired. I had my writing to do,
and Travis and Jill were on watch. Bankole, who had an early morning watch
with Zahra just wanted to talk. He sat beside me and spoke into my ear in a
voice so low that if I leaned away from him, I lost words. “Mora’s too
jumpy,” he said. “He flinches if someone walks close to him.”
“I think he’s another ex-slave,” I said in a voice just as low. “That might
not be his only problem, but it’s his most obvious one.”
“So you picked up on that, too.” He put his arm around me and sighed. “I
agree. Both he and the child.”
“And he doesn’t love us.”
“He doesn’t trust us. Why should he? We’ll have to watch all four of them
for a while. They’re…odd. They might be stupid enough to try to grab some
of our packs and leave some night. Or it might just be a matter of little things
starting to disappear. The children are more likely to get caught at it. Yet if
the adults stay, it will be for the children’s sake. If we take it easy on the
children and protect them, I think the adults will be loyal to us.”
“So we become the crew of a modern underground railroad,” I said.
Slavery again—even worse than my father thought, or at least sooner. He
thought it would take a while.
“None of this is new.” Bankole made himself comfortable against me. “In
the early 1990s while I was in college, I heard about cases of growers doing
some of this—holding people against their wills and forcing them to work

without pay. Latins in California, blacks and Latins in the south… Now and
then, someone would go to jail for it.”
“But Emery says there’s a new law—that forcing people or their children
to work off debt that they can’t help running up is legal.”
“Maybe. It’s hard to know what to believe. I suppose the politicians may
have passed a law that could be used to support debt slavery. But I’ve heard
nothing about it. Anyone dirty enough to be a slaver is dirty enough to tell a
pack of lies. You realize that that woman’s children were sold like cattle—
and no doubt sold into prostitution.”
I nodded. “She knows, too.”
“Yes. My God.”
“Things are breaking down more and more.” I paused. “I’ll tell you,
though, if we can convince ex-slaves that they can have freedom with us, no
one will fight harder to keep it. We need better guns, though. And we need to
be so careful… It keeps getting more dangerous out here. It will be especially
dangerous with those little girls around.”
“Those two know how to be quiet,” Bankole said. “They’re little rabbits,
fast and silent. That’s why they’re still alive.”

24
❏❏❏
Respect God:
Pray working.
Pray learning,
planning,
doing.
Pray creating,
teaching,
reaching.
Pray working.
Pray to focus your thoughts,
still your fears,
strengthen your purpose.
Respect God.
Shape God.
Pray working.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 2027
WE READ SOME VERSES and talked about Earthseed for a while this morning. It
was a calming thing to do—almost like church. We needed something
calming and reassuring. Even the new people joined in, asking questions,
thinking aloud, applying the verses to their experiences.
God is Change, and in the end, God does prevail. But we have something
to say about the whens and the whys of that end.
Yeah.
It’s been a horrible week.
We’ve taken both today and yesterday as rest days. We might take
tomorrow as well. I need it whether the others do or not. We’re all sore and
sick, in mourning and exhausted—yet triumphant. Odd to be triumphant. I

think it’s because most of us are still alive. We are a harvest of survivors. But
then, that’s what we’ve always been.
This is what happened.
At our noon stop on Tuesday, Tori and Doe, the two little girls, went away
from the group to urinate. Emery went with them. She had kind of taken
charge of Doe as well as her own daughter. The night before, she and
Grayson Mora had slipped away from the group and stayed away for over an
hour. Harry and I were on watch, and we saw them go. Now they were a
couple—all over each other, but at arm’s length from everyone else. Strange
people.
So Emery took the girls off to pee—not far away. Just across the hill face
and out of sight behind a patch of dead bushes and tall, dry grass. The rest of
us sat eating, drinking, and sweating in what shade we could get from a copse
of oak trees that looked only half dead. The trees had been robbed of a great
number of branches, no doubt by people needing firewood. I was looking at
their many jagged wounds when the screaming began.
First there were the high, needle thin, needle sharp shrieks of the little
girls, then we heard Emery shouting for help. Then we heard a man’s voice,
cursing.
Most of us jumped up without thinking and ran toward the noise. In
midstride, I grabbed Harry and Zahra by the arms to get their attention. Then I
gestured them back to guard our packs and Natividad and Allie who had
stayed with the babies. Harry had the rifle and Zahra had one of the Berettas,
and in that moment, they both resented the hell out of me. No matter. For the
moment, I was just glad to see them go back. They could cover us if
necessary, and keep us from being overwhelmed.
We found Emery fighting with a big bald man who had grabbed Tori. Doe
was already running back to us, screaming. She ran straight into her father’s
arms. He swept her up and ran off toward the highway, then he veered back
toward the oaks and our people. There were other bald people coming up
from the highway. Like us, they ran toward the screams. I saw metal
gleaming among them—perhaps only knives. Perhaps guns. Travis spotted
the group, too, and yelled a warning before I could.
I fell back, dropped to one knee, aimed my .45 two-handed, and waited
for a clear shot at Emery’s attacker. The man was much taller than Emery,
and his head and shoulders were exposed except where he held Tori against
him. The little girl looked like a doll that he was clutching in one arm. Emery
was the problem. She, small and quick, was darting at the man, tearing at his
face, trying to reach his eyes. He was trying to protect his eyes and to knock
or throw her away from him. With both hands free, he might have been quick

enough to bat her aside, but he wouldn’t let go of the struggling Tori, and
Emery wouldn’t be beaten off.
For an instant, he did knock Emery back from him. In that brief window
of time, my own ears ringing from his blow, I shot him.
I knew at once that I’d hit him. He didn’t fall, but I felt his pain, and I
wasn’t good for anything else for a while. Then he toppled, and I collapsed
with him. But I could still see and hear, and I still had the gun.
I heard shouting. The bald gang from the highway was almost on us—six,
seven, eight people. I couldn’t do anything while I was dealing with the pain,
but I saw them. Instants later when the man I had shot lost consciousness or
died, I was free—and needed.
Bankole had our only other gun away from camp.
I got up before I should have, almost fell down again, then shot a second
attacker off Travis who was carrying Emery.
I went down again, but didn’t lose consciousness. I saw Bankole grab Tori
and all but throw her to Jill. Jill caught her, turned, and ran back toward camp
with her.
Bankole reached me, and I was able to get up and help him cover our
retreat.
We had only the scarred trees to retreat to, but they had thick, solidlooking trunks. An attacker fired several bullets into them as we reached
them.
It took me several seconds to understand that someone was shooting at us.
Once I did, I dropped behind the trees with the others and looked for the
opposing gun.
Our rifle thundered behind me before I could spot anything. Harry, on the
job. He fired twice more. I fired twice myself, barely aiming, barely in
control. I believe Bankole fired. Then I was lost, no more good for anything. I
died with someone. The shooting stopped.
I died with someone else. Someone laid hands on me and I came within a
fingers twitch of squeezing the trigger once more.
Bankole.
“You stupid asshole!” I whimpered. “I almost killed you.”
“You’re bleeding,” he said.
I was surprised. I tried to remember whether I’d been shot. Maybe I had
just come down on a sharp piece of wood. I had no sense of my own body. I
hurt, but I couldn’t have said where—or even whether the pain was mine or
someone else’s. The pain was intense, yet defuse somehow. I felt…
disembodied.
“Is everyone else all right?” I asked.

“Be still,” he said.
“Is it over, Bankole?”
“Yes. The survivors have run away.”
“Take my gun, then, and give it to Natividad—in case they decide to
come back.”
I think I felt him take the gun from my hand. I heard muffled talk that I
didn’t quite understand. That was when I realized I was losing consciousness.
All right then. At least I had held on long enough to do some good.
Jill Gilchrist is dead.
She was shot in the back as she ran toward the trees carrying Tori.
Bankole didn’t tell me, didn’t want me to know before I had to because, as it
turned out, I was wounded myself. I was lucky. My wound was minor. It hurt,
but other than that, it didn’t matter much. Jill was unlucky. I found out about
her death when I came to and heard Allie’s hoarse screaming grief.
Jill had gotten Tori back to the trees, put her down, then, without a sound,
folded to the ground as though taking cover. Emery had grabbed Tori and
huddled, crying with her in terror and relief. Everyone else had been busy,
first taking cover, then firing or directing fire. Travis was the first to see the
blood pooling around Jill. He shouted for Bankole, then turned Jill onto her
back and saw blood welling from what turned out to be an exit wound in her
chest. Bankole says she died before he reached her. No last words, no last
sight of her sister, not even the assurance that she had saved the little girl. She
had. Tori was bruised, but fine. Everyone was fine except Jill.
My own wound, to be honest, was a big scratch. A bullet had plowed a
furrow straight through the flesh of my left side, leaving little damage, a lot of
blood, a couple of holes in my shirt, and a lot of pain. The wound throbbed
worse than a burn, but it wasn’t disabling.
“Cowboy wound,” Harry said when he and Zahra came to look me over.
They looked dirty and miserable, but Harry tried to be upbeat for me. They
had just helped to bury Jill. The group had, with hands, sticks, and our
hatchet, dug a shallow grave for her while I was unconscious. They put her
among the trees’ roots, covered her, and rolled big rocks atop her grave. The
trees were to have her, but the dogs and the cannibals were not.
The group had decided to bed down for the night where we were, even
though our oak copse should have been rejected as an overnight camp
because it was too close to the highway.
“You’re a goddamn fool and too big to carry” Zahra told me. “So just rest
there and let Bankole take care of you. Not that anyone could stop him.”
“You’ve just got a cowboy wound,” Harry repeated. “In that book I

bought, people are always getting shot in the side or the arm or the shoulder,
and it’s nothing—although Bankole says a good percentage of them would
have died of tetanus or some other infection.”
“Thanks for the encouragement,” I said.
Zahra gave him a look, then patted my arm. “Don’t worry,” she said. “No
germ will get past that old man. He’s mad as hell at you for getting yourself
shot. Says if you had any sense, you would have stayed back here with the
babies.”
“What?”
“Hey, he’s old,” Harry said. “What do you expect.”
I sighed. “How’s Allie?”
“Crying.” He shook his head. “She won’t let anyone near her except
Justin. Even he keeps trying to comfort her. It upsets him that she’s crying.”
“Emery and Tori are kind of beaten up, too,” Zahra said. “They’re the
other reason we’re not moving.” She paused. “Hey, Lauren, you ever notice
anything funny about those two—Emery and Tori, I mean? And about that
guy Mora, too.”
Something clicked into place for me, and I sighed again. “They’re sharers,
aren’t they?”
“Yes, all of them—both adults and both kids. You knew?”
“Not until now. I did notice something odd: that tentativeness and
touchiness—not wanting to be touched, I mean. And they were all slaves. My
brother Marcus once said what good slaves sharers would make.”
“That Mora guy wants to leave,” Harry said.
“So let him go,” I answered. “He tried to run out on us just before the
shooting.”
“He came back. He even helped dig Jill’s grave. I mean he wants us all to
leave. He says that gang we beat will come back when it’s dark.”
“He’s sure?”
“Yeah. He’s going crazy, wanting to get his kid out of here.”
“Can Emery and Tori make it?”
“I’ll carry Tori,” a new voice said. “Emery can make it.” Grayson Mora,
of course. Last seen abandoning ship.
I got up slowly. My side hurt. Bankole had cleaned and bandaged the
wound while I was unconscious, and that was a piece of luck. Now, though, I
felt half-conscious, half-detached from my body. I felt everything except pain
as though through a thick layer of cotton. Only the pain was sharp and real. I
was almost grateful for it.
“I can walk,” I said after trying a few steps. “But I feel like I’m walking
on stilts. I don’t know if I can keep the usual pace.”

Grayson Mora stepped close to me. He glanced at Harry as though he
wished Harry would go away. Harry just stared back at him.
“How many times did you die?” Mora asked me.
“Three at least,” I answered, as though this were a sane conversation.
“Maybe four. I never did it like that before—over and over. Insane. But you
look well enough.”
His expression hardened as though I’d slapped him. Of course, I had
insulted him. I’d said, Where were you, man and fellow sharer, while your
woman and your group were in danger. Funny. There I was, speaking a
language I hadn’t realized I knew.
“I had to get Doe out of danger,” he said. “I had no gun, anyway.”
“Can you shoot?”
He hesitated. “Never shot before,” he admitted, dropping his voice to a
mumble. Again I’d shamed him—this time without meaning to.
“When we teach you to shoot, will you, to protect the group?”
“Yeah!” Though at that moment, I think he would have preferred to shoot
me.
“It hurts like hell,” I warned.
He shrugged. “Most things do.”
I looked into his thin, angry face. Were all slaves so thin—underfed,
overworked, and taught that most things hurt? “Are you from this area?”
“Born in Sacramento.”
“Then we need all the information you can give us. Even without a gun,
we need you to help us survive here.”
“My information is to get out of here before those things up the hill throw
paint on themselves and start shooting people and setting fires.”
“Oh, shit,” I said. “So that’s what they are.”
“What’d you think they were?”
“I didn’t have a chance to think about them. It wouldn’t have mattered
anyway. Harry, did you guys strip the dead?”
“Yeah.” He gave me a thin smile. “We got another gun—a .38. I put some
stuff in your pack from the ones you killed.”
“Thank you. I don’t know that I can carry my pack yet. Maybe Bankole
—”
“He’s already got it on his cart. Let’s go.”
We headed out toward the road.
“Is that how you do it?” Grayson Mora asked, walking next to me.
“Whoever kills takes?”
“Yes, but we don’t kill unless someone threatens us,” I said. “We don’t
hunt people. We don’t eat human flesh. We fight together against enemies. If

one of us is in need, the rest help out. And we don’t steal from one another,
ever.”
“Emery said that. I didn’t believe her at first.”
“Will you live as we do?”
“…yeah. I guess so.”
I hesitated. “So what else is wrong? I can see that you don’t trust us, even
now.”
He walked closer to me, but did not touch me. “Where’d that white man
come from?” he demanded.
“I’ve known him all my life,” I said. “He and I and the others have kept
one another alive for a long time, now.”
“But…him and those others, they don’t feel anything. You’re the only one
who feels.”
“We call it sharing. I’m the only one.”
“But they… You…”
“We help each other. A group is strong. One or two people are easier to
rob and kill.”
“Yeah.” He looked around at the others. There was no great trust or liking
in his expression, but he looked more relaxed, more satisfied. He looked as
though he had solved a troubling puzzle.
Testing him, I let myself stumble. It was easy. I still had little feeling in
my feet and legs.
Mora stepped aside. He didn’t touch me or offer help. Sweet guy.
I left Mora, went over to Allie, and walked with her for a while. Her grief
and resentment were like a wall against me—against everyone, I suppose, but
I was the one bothering her at the moment. And I was alive and her sister was
dead, and her sister was the only family she had left, and why didn’t I just get
the hell out of her face?
She never said anything. She just pretended I wasn’t there. She pushed
Justin along in his carriage and wiped tears from her stony face now and then
with a swift, whiplike motion. She was hurting herself, doing that. She was
rubbing her face too hard, too fast, rubbing it raw. She was hurting me, too,
and I didn’t need any more pain. I stayed with her, though, until her defenses
began to crumble under a new wave of crippling grief. She stopped hurting
herself and just let the tears run down her face, let them fall to her chest or to
the broken blacktop. She seemed to sag under a sudden weight.
I hugged her then. I put my hands on her shoulders and stopped her halfblind plodding. When she swung around to face me, hostile and hurting, I
hugged her. She could have broken free. I was feeling far from strong just

then, but after a first angry pulling away, she hung on to me and moaned. I’ve
never heard anyone moan like that. She cried and moaned there at the
roadside, and the others stopped and waited for us. No one spoke. Justin
began to whimper and Natividad came back to comfort him. The wordless
message was the same for both child and woman: In spite of your loss and
pain, you aren’t alone. You still have people who care about you and want you
to be all right. You still have family.
After a while, Allie and I let each other go. She isn’t a chatty woman,
especially not in her pain. She took Justin from Natividad, smoothed his hair,
and held him. When we began walking again, she carried him for a while, and
I pushed the carriage. We walked together, and there didn’t seem to be any
need to say anything.
On the road, there was a fair amount of foot traffic in both directions.
Still, I worried that a big group like ours would be noticeable and locatable,
no matter what. I worried because I didn’t understand the ways of our
attackers.
Sometime later when Allie put Justin back into the carriage and took the
carriage from me, I moved to walk with Bankole and Emery. Emery was the
one who explained things to me, and she was the one who spotted the smoke
from the first fire—no doubt because she was looking for it. We couldn’t tell
for sure, but the fire looked as though it might have begun back as far as
where we had stopped at the oak copse.
“They’ll burn everything,” Emery whispered to Bankole and me. “They
won’t stop until they’ve used up all the ’ro they have. All night, they’ll be
burning things. Things and people.”
’Ro, pyro, pyromania. That damned fire drug again.
“Will they follow us?” I asked.
She shrugged. “There are a lot of us, and you killed some of them. I think
they’ll take their revenge on other, weaker travelers.” Another shrug. “To
them we’re all the same. A traveler is a traveler.”
“So unless we get caught in one of their fires…”
“We’ll be okay, yeah. They hate everybody who isn’t them. They would
have sold my Tori to get some more ’ro.”
I looked at her bruised, swollen face. Bankole had given her something
for her pain. I was grateful for that, and half-angry at him for refusing to give
me anything. He didn’t understand my numbness and grogginess back at the
copse, and it disturbed him. Well at least that had faded away. Let him die
three or four times and see how he feels. No, I’m glad he’ll never know how
it feels. It makes no sense. That brief, endless agony, over and over. It makes

no sense at all. I keep catching myself wondering how it is that I’m still alive.
“Emery?” I said, keeping my voice low.
She looked at me.
“You know I’m a sharer.”
She nodded, then glanced sidelong at Bankole.
“He knows,” I assured her. “But…look, you and Grayson are the first
sharers I’ve known who had children.” There was no reason to tell her she
and Grayson and their children were the first sharers I’d known period. “I
hope to have kids myself someday, so I need to know…do they always inherit
the sharing?”
“One of my boys didn’t have it,” she said. “Some feelers—sharers—can’t
have any kids. I don’t know why. And I knew some who had two or three
kids who didn’t have it at all. Bosses, though, they like you to have it.”
“I’ll bet they do.”
“Sometimes,” she continued, “sometimes they pay more for people who
have it. Especially kids.”
Her kids. Yet they had taken a boy who wasn’t a sharer and left a girl who
was. How long would it have been before they came back for the girl?
Perhaps they had a lucrative offer for the boys as a pair, so they sold them
first.
“My god,” Bankole said. “This country has slipped back two hundred
years.”
“Things were better when I was little,” Emery said. “My mother always
said they would get better again. Good times would come back. She said they
always did. My father would shake his head and not say anything.” She
looked around to see where Tori was and spotted her on Grayson Mora’s
shoulders. Then she caught sight of something else, and she gasped.
We followed her gaze and saw fire creeping over the hills behind us—far
behind us, but not far enough. This was some new fire, whipping along in the
dry evening breeze. Either the people who attacked us had followed us,
setting fires, or someone was imitating them, echoing them.
We went on, moving faster, trying to see where we could go to be safe.
On either side of the highway, there was dry grass, there were trees, living
and dead. So far, the fire was only on the north side.
We kept to the south side, hoping it would be safe. There was a lake
ahead, according to my map of the area—Clear Lake, it was called. The map
showed it to be large, and the highway followed its northern shore for a few
miles. We would reach it soon. How soon?
I calculated as we walked. Tomorrow. We should be able to camp near it
tomorrow evening. Not soon enough.

I could smell the smoke now. Did that mean the wind was blowing the fire
toward us?
Other people began hurrying and keeping to the south side of the road and
heading west. No one went east now. There were no trucks yet, but it was
getting late. They would be barreling through soon. And we should be
camping for the night soon. Did we dare?
The south side still seemed free of fire behind us, but on the north side the
fire crawled after us, coming no closer, but refusing to be left behind.
We went on for a while, all of us looking back often, all of us tired, some
of us hurting. I called a halt and gestured us off the road to the south at a place
where there was room to sit and rest.
“We can’t stay here,” Mora said. “The fire could jump the road any time.”
“We can rest here for a few moments,” I said. “We can see the fire, and it
will tell us when we’d better start walking again.”
“We’d better start now!” Mora said. “If that fire gets going good, it will
move faster than we can run! Best to keep well ahead of it!”
“Best to have the strength to keep ahead of it,” I said, and I took a water
bottle from my pack and drank. We were within sight of the road and we had
made it a rule not to eat or drink in such exposed places, but today that rule
had to be suspended. To go into the hills away from the road might mean
being cut off from the road by fire. We couldn’t know when or where a
windblown piece of burning debris might land.
Others followed my example and drank and ate a little dried fruit, meat,
and bread. Bankole and I shared with Emery and Tori. Mora seemed to want
to leave in spite of us, but his daughter Doe was sitting half asleep on the
ground against Zahra. He stooped next to her and made her drink a little water
and eat some fruit.
“We might have to keep moving all night,” Allie said, her voice almost
too soft to hear. “This might be the only rest we get.” And to Travis, “You’d
better put Dominic into the carriage with Justin when he’s finished eating.”
Travis nodded. He’d carried Dominic this far. Now he tucked him in with
Justin. “I’ll push the carriage for a while,” he said.
Bankole looked at my wound, rebandaged it, and this time gave me
something for the pain. He buried the bloody bandages he had removed,
digging a shallow hole with a flat rock.
Emery, with Tori gone to sleep against her, looked to see what Bankole
was doing with me, then jumped and looked away, her hand going to her own
side.
“I didn’t know you were hurt so much,” she whispered.
“I’m not,” I said, and made myself smile. “It looks nastier than it is with

all the blood, but it isn’t bad. I’m damned lucky compared to Jill. And it
doesn’t stop me from walking.”
“You didn’t give me any pain when we were walking,” she said.
I nodded, glad to know I could fake her out. “It’s ugly,” I said, “but not
too painful.”
She settled down as though she felt better. No doubt she did. If I moaned
and groaned, I’d have all four of them moaning and groaning. The kids might
even bleed along with me. I would have to be careful and keep lying at least
as long as the fire was a threat—or as long as I could.
The truth was, those blood-saturated bandages scared the hell out of me,
and the wound hurt worse than ever. But I knew I had to keep going or burn.
After a few minutes, Bankole’s pills began to take the edge off my pain, and
that made the whole world easier to endure.
We had about an hour’s rest before the fire made us too nervous to stay
where we were. Then we got up and walked. By then, at some point behind
us, the fire had already jumped the road. Now, neither the north nor the south
side looked safe. Until it was dark, all we could see in the hills behind us was
smoke. It was a terrifying, looming, moving wall.
Later, after dark, we could see the fire eating its way toward us. There
were dogs running along the road with us, but they paid no attention to us.
Cats and deer ran past us, and a skunk scuttled by. It was live and let live.
Neither humans nor animals were foolish enough to waste time attacking one
another. Behind us and to the north, the fire began to roar.
We put Tori in the carriage and Justin and Dominic between her legs. The
babies never even woke up while we were moving them. Tori herself was
more than half asleep. I worried that the carriage might break down with the
extra weight, but it held. Travis, Harry, and Allie traded off pushing it.
Doe, we put atop the load on Bankole’s cart. She couldn’t have been
comfortable there, but she didn’t complain. She was more awake than Tori,
and she had been walking on her own most of the time since our encounter
with the would-be kidnappers. She was a strong little kid—her father’s
daughter.
Grayson Mora helped push Bankole’s cart. In fact, once Doe was loaded
aboard, Mora pushed the cart most of the time. The man wasn’t likeable, but
in his love for his daughter, he was admirable.
At some point in the endless night, more smoke and ash than ever began
to swirl around us, and I caught myself thinking that we might not make it.
Without stopping, we wet shirts, scarves, whatever we had, and tied them
around our noses and mouths.
The fire roared and thundered its way past us on the north, singeing our

hair and clothing, making breathing a terrible effort. The babies woke up and
screamed in fear and pain, then choked and almost brought me down. Tori,
crying herself with their pain and her own, held on to them and would not let
them struggle out of the carriage.
I thought we would die. I believed there was no way for us to survive this
sea of fire, hot wind, smoke, and ash. I saw people—strangers—fall, and we
left them lying on the highway, waiting to burn. I stopped looking back. In the
roar of the fire, I could not hear whether they screamed. I could see the babies
before Natividad threw wet rags over them. I knew they were screaming.
Then I couldn’t see them, and it was a blessing.
We began to run out of water.
There was nothing to do except keep going or burn. The terrible,
deafening noise of the fire increased, then lessened, and again, increased, then
lessened. It seemed that the fire went north away from the road, then whipped
back down toward us.
It teased like a living, malevolent thing, intent on causing pain and terror.
It drove us before it like dogs chasing a rabbit. Yet it didn’t eat us. It could
have, but it didn’t.
In the end, the worst of it roared off to the northwest. Firestorm, Bankole
called it later. Yes. Like a tornado of fire, roaring around, just missing us,
playing with us, then letting us live.
We could not rest. There was still fire. Little fires that could grow into big
ones, smoke, blinding and choking smoke… No rest.
But we could slow down. We could emerge from the worst of the smoke
and ash, and escape the lash of hot winds. We could pause by the side of the
road for a moment, and gag in peace. There was a lot of gagging. Coughing
and gagging and crying muddy tracks onto our faces. It was incredible. We
were going to survive. We were still alive and together—scorched and
miserable, in great need of water, but alive. We were going to make it.
Later, when we dared, we went off the road, unloaded my pack from
Bankole’s cart, and dug out his extra water bottle. He dug it out. He’d told us
he had it when he could have kept it for himself.
“We’ll reach Clear Lake sometime tomorrow,” I said. “Early tomorrow, I
think. I don’t know how far we’ve come or where we are now, so I can only
guess that we’ll get there early. But it is there waiting for us tomorrow.”
People grunted or coughed and downed swallows from Bankole’s extra
bottle. The kids had to be prevented from guzzling too much water. As it was,
Dominic choked and began to cry again.
We camped where we were, within sight of the road. Two of us had to
stay awake on watch. I volunteered for first watch because I was in too much

pain to sleep. I got my gun back from Natividad, checked to see that she had
reloaded it—she had—and looked around for a partner.
“I’ll watch with you,” Grayson Mora said.
That surprised me. I would have preferred someone who knew how to use
a gun—someone I would trust with a gun.
“I’m not going to be able to sleep until you do,” he said. “It’s that simple.
So let’s both put our pain to good use.”
I looked at Emery and the two girls to see whether they’d heard, but they
seemed to be already asleep. “All right,” I said. “We’ve got to watch for
strangers and fire. Give me a yell if you see anything unusual.”
“Give me a gun,” he said. “If anybody comes close, I can at least use it to
scare them.”
In the dark, sure. “No gun,” I said. “Not yet. You don’t know enough
yet.”
He stared at me for several seconds, then went over to Bankole. He turned
his back to me as he spoke to Bankole. “Look, you know I need a gun to do
any guarding in a place like this. She doesn’t know how it is. She thinks she
does, but she doesn’t.”
Bankole shrugged. “If you can’t do it, man, go to sleep. One of us will
take the watch with her.”
“Shit.” Mora made the word long and nasty. “Shiiit. First time I saw her, I
knew she was a man. Just didn’t know she was the only man here.”
Absolute silence.
Doe Mora saved the situation to the degree that it could be saved. At that
moment she stepped up behind her father and tapped him on the back. He
spun around, more than ready to fight, spun with such speed and fury that the
little girl squealed and jumped back.
“What the hell are you doing up!” he shouted. “What do you want!”
Frightened, the little girl just stared at him. After a moment, she extended
her hand, offering a pomegranate. “Zahra said we could have this,” she
whispered. “Would you cut it?”
Good thinking, Zahra! I didn’t turn to look at her, but I was aware of her
watching. By now, everyone still awake was watching.
“Everyone’s tired and everyone’s hurting,” I told him. “Everyone, not just
you. But we’ve managed to keep ourselves alive by working together and by
not doing or saying stupid things.”
“And if that’s not good enough for you,” Bankole added, in a voice low
and ugly with anger, “tomorrow you can go out and find yourself a different
kind of group to travel with—a group too goddamn macho to waste its time
saving your child’s life twice in one day.”

There must be something worthwhile in Mora. He didn’t say anything. He
took out his knife and cut the pomegranate into quarters for Doe, then kept
half of it because she insisted that he was supposed to have half. They sat
together and ate the juicy, seedy, red fruit, then Mora tucked Doe in again and
found himself a perch where, gunless, he began his first watch.
He said nothing more about guns, and he never apologized. Of course he
didn’t leave us. Where would he go? He was a runaway slave. We were the
best thing he’d found so far—the best he was going to find as long as he had
Doe with him.
We didn’t reach Clear Lake the next morning. To tell the truth it was
already the next morning when we went to sleep. We were too tired and sore
to get up at dawn—which came early in the second watch. Only the need for
water made us move out when we did—at a hot, smoky 11 A.M.
We found the corpse of a young woman when we got back to the road.
There wasn’t a mark on her, but she was dead.
“I want her clothes,” Emery whispered. She was near me or I wouldn’t
have heard her. The dead woman was about her size, and dressed in a cotton
shirt and pants that looked almost new. They were dirty, but far less so than
Emery’s clothes.
“Strip her, then,” I said. “I’d help you, but I’m not bending too well this
morning.”
“I’ll give her a hand,” Allie whispered. Justin was asleep in his carriage
with Dominic, so she was free to help with the ordinary, unspeakable things
that we did now to live.
The dead woman had not even soiled herself in her dying. That made the
job less disgusting than it could have been. Rigor mortis had set in, however,
and stripping her was a job for two.
There was no one but us on this stretch of road, so Emery and Allie had
all the time they needed. We had seen no other walkers yet this morning.
Emery and Allie took every scrap of clothing, including underwear, socks,
and boots, though Emery thought the boots would be too big for her. No
matter. If no one could wear them, she could sell them.
In fact, it was the boots that yielded Emery the first cash she had ever
owned. On the farm where she had been a slave, she had been paid only in
company scrip, worthless except on the farm, and almost worthless there.
Stitched into the tongue of each of the dead woman’s boots were five,
folded one hundred-dollar bills—a thousand dollars in all. We had to tell her
how little that was. If she were careful, and shopped only at the cheapest
stores, and ate no meat, wheat, or dairy products, it might feed her for two

weeks. It might feed both her and Tori for a week and a half. Still, it seemed
riches to Emery.
Late that day, when we reached Clear Lake—much smaller than I had
expected—we came across a tiny, expensive store, being run from the back of
an old truck near a cluster of half-burned, collapsed cabins. It sold fruit,
vegetables, nuts, and smoked fish. We all had to buy a few things, but Emery
squandered too much money on pears and walnuts for everyone. She
delighted in passing these around, in being able to give us something for a
change. She’s all right. We’ll have to teach her about shopping and the value
of money, but she’s worth something, Emery is. And she’s decided she’s one
of us.
SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2027
Somehow, we’ve reached our new home—Bankole’s land in the coastal hills
of Humboldt County. The highway—U.S. 101—is to the east and north of us,
and Cape Mendocino and the sea are to the west. A few miles south are state
parks filled with huge redwood trees and hoards of squatters. The land
surrounding us, however, is as empty and wild as any I’ve seen. It’s covered
with dry brush, trees, and tree stumps, all far removed from any city, and a
long, hilly walk from the little towns that line the highway. There’s farming
around here, and logging, and just plain isolated living. According to
Bankole, it’s best to mind your own business and not pay too much attention
to how people on neighboring plots of land earn a living. If they hijack trucks
on 101, grow marijuana, distill whisky, or brew up more complicated illegal
substances… Well, live and let live.
Bankole guided us along a narrow blacktopped road that soon became a
narrow dirt road. We saw a few cultivated fields, some scars left by past fires
or logging, and a lot of land that seemed unused. The road all but vanished
before we came to the end of it. Good for isolation. Bad for getting things in
or out. Bad for traveling back and forth to get work. Bankole had said his
brother-in-law had to spend a lot of time in various towns, away from his
family. That was easier to understand now. There’s no possibility here of
coming home every day or two. So what did you have to do to save cash?
Sleep in doorways or parks in town? Maybe it was worth the inconvenience to
do just that if you could keep your family together and safe—far from the
desperate, the crazy, and the vicious.
Or that’s what I thought until we reached the hillside where Bankole’s
sister’s house and outbuildings were supposed to be.
There was no house. There were no buildings. There was almost nothing:

A broad black smear on the hillside; a few charred planks sticking up from
the rubble, some leaning against others; and a tall brick chimney, standing
black and solitary like a tombstone in a picture of an old-style graveyard. A
tombstone amid the bones and ashes.

25
❏❏❏
Create no images of God.
Accept the images
that God has provided.
They are everywhere,
in everything.
God is Change—
Seed to tree,
tree to forest;
Rain to river,
river to sea;
Grubs to bees,
bees to swarm.
From one, many;
from many, one;
Forever uniting, growing, dissolving—
forever Changing.
The universe
is God’s self-portrait.
EARTHSEED: THE BOOKS OF THE LIVING
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 1, 2027
WE’VE BEEN ARGUING ALL week about whether or not we should stay here with
the bones and ashes.
We’ve found five skulls—three in what was left of the house and two
outside. There were other scattered bones, but not one complete skeleton.
Dogs have been at the bones—dogs and cannibals, perhaps. The fire
happened long enough ago for weeds to begin to grow in the rubble. Two
months ago? Three? Some of the far-flung neighbors might know. Some of
the far-flung neighbors might have set the fire.

There was no way to be certain, but I assumed that the bones belonged to
Bankole’s sister and her family. I think Bankole assumed that, too, but he
couldn’t bring himself to just bury the bones and write off his sister. The day
after we got here, he and Harry hiked back to Glory, the nearest small town
that we had passed through, to talk to the local cops. They were, or they
professed to be, sheriff’s deputies. I wonder what you have to do to become a
cop. I wonder what a badge is, other than a license to steal. What did it used
to be to make people Bankole’s age want to trust it. I know what the old
books say, but still, I wonder.
The deputies all but ignored Bankole’s story and his questions. They
wrote nothing down, claimed to know nothing. They treated Bankole as
though they doubted that he even had a sister, or that he was who he said he
was. So many stolen IDs these days. They searched him and took the cash he
was carrying. Fees for police services, they said. He had been careful to carry
only what he thought would be enough to keep them sweet-tempered, but not
enough to make them suspicious or more greedy than they already were. The
rest—a sizeable packet—he left with me. He trusted me enough to do that.
His gun he left with Harry who had gone shopping.
Jail for Bankole could have meant being sold into a period of hard, unpaid
labor—slavery. Perhaps if he had been younger, the deputies might have
taken his money and arrested him anyway on some trumped-up charge. I had
begged him not to go, not to trust any police or government official. It seemed
to me such people were no better than gangs with their robbing and slaving.
Bankole agreed with me, yet he insisted on going.
“She was my little sister,” he said. “I have to try, at least, to find out what
happened to her. I need to know who did this. Most of all, I need to know
whether any of her children could have survived. One or more of those five
skulls could have belonged to the arsonists.” He stared at the collection of
bones. “I have to risk going to the sheriff’s office,” he continued. “But you
don’t. I don’t want you with me. I don’t want them getting any ideas about
you, maybe finding out by accident that you’re a sharer. I don’t want my
sister’s death to cost you your life or your freedom.”
We fought about it. I was afraid for him; he was afraid for me, and we
were both angrier than we had ever been at each other. I was terrified that he
would be killed or arrested, and we’d never find out what happened to him.
No one should travel alone in this world.
“Look,” he said at last, “you can do some good here with the group.
You’ll have one of the four guns left here, and you know how to survive.
You’re needed here. If the cops decide they want me, you won’t be able to do
a thing. Worse, if they decide they want you, there’ll be nothing I can do

except take revenge, and be killed for it.”
That slowed me down—the thought that I might cause his death instead of
backing him up. I didn’t quite believe it, but it slowed me down. Harry
stepped in then and said he would go. He wanted to anyway. He could buy
some things for the group, and he wanted to look for a job. He wanted to earn
some money.
“I’ll do what I can,” he told me just before they left. “He’s not a bad old
guy. I’ll bring him back to you.”
They brought each other back, Bankole a few thousand dollars poorer, and
Harry still jobless—though they did bring back supplies and a few hand tools.
Bankole knew no more than he had when he left about his sister and her
family, but the cops had said they would come out to investigate the fire and
the bones.
We worried that sooner or later, they might show up. We’re still keeping a
lookout for them, and we’ve hidden—buried—most of our valuables. We
want to bury the bones, but we don’t dare. It’s bothering Bankole. Bothering
him a lot. I’ve suggested we hold a funeral and go ahead and bury the bones.
The hell with the cops. But he says no. Best to give them as little provocation
as possible. If they came, they would do enough harm with their stealing. Best
not to give them reason to do more.
There’s a well with an old-fashioned hand pump under the rubble of an
outbuilding. It still works. The solar-powered electric pump near the house
does not. We couldn’t stay here long without a dependable water source. With
the well, though, it’s hard to leave—hard to walk away from possible
sanctuary—in spite of arsonists and cops.
Bankole owns this land, free and clear. There’s a huge, half ruined garden
plus citrus trees full of unripe fruit. We’ve already been pulling carrots and
digging potatoes here. There are plenty of other fruit and nut trees plus wild
pines, redwoods, and Douglas firs. None of these last were very big. This area
was logged sometime before Bankole bought it. Bankole says it was clear-cut
back in the 1980s or 1990s, but we can make use of the trees that have grown
since then, and we can plant more. We can build a shelter, put in a winter
garden from the seed I’ve been carrying and collecting since we left home.
Granted, a lot of it is old seed, I hadn’t renewed it as often as I should have
while I was at home. Strange that I hadn’t. Things kept getting worse and
worse at home, yet I had paid less and less attention to the pack that was
supposed to save my life when the mob came. There was so much else to
worry about—and I think I was into my own brand of denial, as bad in its way
as Cory’s or Joanne’s mother’s. But all that feels like ancient history. Now

was what we had to worry about. What were we going to do now?
“I don’t think we can make it here,” Harry said earlier this evening as we
sat around the campfire. There should be something cheerful about sitting
around a campfire with friends and a full stomach. We even had meat tonight,
fresh meat. Bankole took the rifle and went off by himself for a while. When
he came back, he brought three rabbits which Zahra and I skinned, cleaned,
and roasted. We also roasted sweet potatoes that we had dug out of the
garden. We should have been content. Yet all we were doing was rehashing
what had become an old argument over the past few days. Perhaps it was the
bones and ashes just over the rise that were bothering us. We had camped out
of sight of the burned area in the hope of recovering a little peace of mind, but
it hadn’t helped. I was thinking that we should figure out a way to capture a
few wild rabbits alive and breed them for a sure meat supply. Was that
possible? Why not, if we stay here? And we should stay.
“Nothing we find farther north will be any better or any safer than this,” I
said. “It will be hard to live here, but if we work together, and if we’re
careful, it should be possible. We can build a community here.”
“Oh, god, there she goes with her Earthseed shit again,” Allie said. But
she smiled a little as she said it. That was good. She hadn’t smiled much
lately.
“We can build a community here,” I repeated. “It’s dangerous, sure, but,
hell, it’s dangerous everywhere, and the more people there are packed
together in cities, the more danger there is. This is a ridiculous place to build a
community. It’s isolated, miles from everywhere with no decent road leading
here, but for us, for now, it’s perfect.”
“Except that someone burned this place down last time,” Grayson Mora
said. “Anything we build out here by itself is a target.”
“Anything we build anywhere is a target,” Zahra argued. “But the people
out here before… I’m sorry, Bankole, I gotta say this: They couldn’t have
kept a good watch—a man and a woman and three kids. They would have
worked hard all day, then slept all night. It would have been too hard on just
two grown people to try to sit up and watch for half the night each.”
“They didn’t keep a night watch,” Bankole said. “We’ll have to keep one,
though. And we could use a couple of dogs. If we could get them as puppies
and train them to guard—”
“Give meat to dogs?” Mora demanded, outraged.
“Not soon.” Bankole shrugged. “Not until we have enough for ourselves.
But if we can get dogs, they’ll help us keep the rest of our goods.”
“I wouldn’t give a dog nothing but a bullet or a rock,” Mora said. “I saw
dogs eat a woman once.”

“There are no jobs in that town Bankole and I went to,” Harry said.
“There was nothing. Not even work for room and board. I asked all over
town. No one even knew of anything.”
I frowned. “The towns around here are all close to the highway,” I said.
“They must get a lot of people passing through, looking for a place to settle—
or maybe a place to rob, rape, kill. The locals wouldn’t welcome new people.
They wouldn’t trust anyone they didn’t know.”
Harry looked from me to Bankole.
“She’s right,” Bankole said. “My brother-in-law had a hard time before
people began to get used to him, and he moved up here before things got so
bad. He knew plumbing, carpentry, electrical work, and motor vehicle
mechanics. Of course, it didn’t help that he was black. Being white might
help you win people over faster than he did. I think, though, that any serious
money we make here will come from the land. Food is gold these days, and
we can grow food here. We have guns to protect ourselves, so we can sell our
crops in nearby towns or on the highway.”
“If we survive long enough to grow anything to sell,” Mora muttered. “If
there’s enough water, if the bugs don’t eat our crops, if no one burns us out
the way they did those people over the hill, if, if, if!”
Allie sighed. “Shit, it’s if, if, if anywhere you go. This place isn’t so bad.”
She was sitting on her sleepsack, holding the sleeping Justin’s head in her lap.
As she spoke, she stroked the boy’s hair. It occurred to me, not for the first
time, that no matter how tough Allie tried to seem, that little boy was the key
to her. Children were the keys to most of the adults present.
“There are no guarantees anywhere,” I agreed. “But if we’re willing to
work, our chances are good here. I’ve got some seed in my pack. We can buy
more. What we have to do at this point is more like gardening than farming.
Everything will have to be done by hand—composting, watering, weeding,
picking worms or slugs or whatever off the crops and killing them one by one
if that’s what it takes. As for water, if our well still has water in it now, in
October, I don’t think we have to worry about it going dry on us. Not this
year, anyway.
“And if people threaten us or our crop, we kill them. That’s all. We kill
them, or they kill us. If we work together, we can defend ourselves, and we
can protect the kids. A community’s first responsibility is to protect its
children—the ones we have now and the ones we will have.”
There was silence for a while, people digesting, perhaps measuring it
against what they had to look forward to if they left this place and continued
north.
“We should decide,” I said. “We have building and planting to do here.

We have to buy more food, more seed and tools.” It was time for directness:
“Allie, will you stay?”
She looked across the dead fire at me, stared hard at me as though she
hoped to see something on my face that would give her an answer.
“What seed do you have?” she asked.
I drew a deep breath. “Most of it is summer stuff—corn, peppers,
sunflowers, eggplant, melons, tomatoes, beans, squash. But I have some
winter things; peas, carrots, cabbage, broccoli, winter squash, onions,
asparagus, herbs, several kinds of greens… We can buy more, and we’ve got
the stuff left in this garden plus what we can harvest from the local oak, pine,
and citrus trees. I brought tree seeds too: more oak, citrus, peach, pear,
nectarine, almond, walnut, a few others. They won’t do us any good for a few
years, but they’re a hell of an investment in the future.”
“So is a kid,” Allie said. “I didn’t think I would be dumb enough to say
this, but yeah, I’ll stay. I want to build something, too. I never had a chance to
build anything before.”
Allie and Justin were a yes, then.
“Harry? Zahra?”
“Of course we’re staying,” Zahra said.
Harry frowned. “Wait a minute. We don’t have to.”
“I know. But we are. If we can make a community like Lauren says and
not have to hire out to strangers and trust them when they shouldn’t be
trusted, then we should do it. If you grew up where I did, you’d know we
should.”
“Harry,” I said, “I’ve known you all my life. You’re the closest thing to a
brother that I have left. You aren’t really thinking about leaving, are you?” It
wasn’t the world’s best argument. He had been both cousin and lover to
Joanne, and he’d let her go when he could have gone with her.
“I want something of my own,” he said. “Land, a home, maybe a store or
a small farm. Something that’s mine. This land is Bankole’s.”
“Yes,” Bankole said. “And you’ll be getting the use of it rent free—and
all the water you need. What are those things going to cost you farther north
—if you can get them at all farther north—if you can get yourself out of
California.”
“But there’s no work here!”
“There’s nothing but work here, boy. Work, and a lot of cheap land. How
cheap do you think land will be up where you and all the rest of the world are
heading?”
Harry thought about that, then spread his hands. “What I’m worried about
is spending all our money here, then discovering we can’t make it here.”

I nodded. “I’ve thought about that, too, and it bothers me. But it’s a
possibility anywhere, you know. You could settle in Oregon or Washington,
not be able to get a job, and run out of money. Or you could be forced to work
under the conditions that Emery and Grayson found. After all, with rivers of
people flowing north, looking for work, employers can take their pick, and
pay what they feel like paying.”
Emery put her arm around Tori, who sat drowsing next to her. “You might
be able to get a job as a driver,” she said. “They like white men to be drivers.
If you can read and write, and if you’d do the work, you might get hired.”
“I don’t know how to drive, but I could learn,” Harry said. “You mean
driving those big armored trucks, don’t you?”
Emery looked confused. “Trucks? No, I mean driving people. Making
them work. Pushing them to work faster. Making them do…whatever the
owners says.”
Harry’s expression had dissolved from hopeful to horrified to outraged.
“Jesus God, do you think I’d do that! How could you think I’d do anything
like that?”
Emery shrugged. It startled me that she could be indifferent about such a
thing, but she seemed to be. “Some people think it’s a good job,” she said.
“Last driver we had, he used to do something with computers. I don’t know
what. His company went out of business and he got a job driving us. I think
he liked it.”
“Em,” Harry said. He pitched his voice low and waited until she looked at
him. “Are you telling me you believe I’d like a job pushing slaves around and
taking away their children?”
She stared back, searching his face. “I hope not,” she said. And then,
“Sometimes jobs like that are the only jobs—slave or slave driver. I heard that
just on this side of the Canada border there are a lot of factories with jobs like
that.”
I frowned. “Factories that use slave labor?”
“Yeah. Workers make things for companies in Canada or Asia. They
don’t get paid much, so they get into debt. They get hurt or sick, too. Their
drinking water’s not clean and the factories are dangerous—full of poisons
and machines that crush or cut you. But people think they can make some
cash and then quit. I worked with some women who had gone up there, taken
a look, and come back.”
“And you were going up there?” Harry demanded.
“Not to work in those places. The women warned me.”
“I’ve heard of places like that,” Bankole said. “They were supposed to
provide jobs for that northward-flowing river of people. President Donner’s

all for them. The workers are more throw-aways than slaves. They breathe
toxic fumes or drink contaminated water or get caught in unshielded
machinery… It doesn’t matter. They’re easy to replace—thousands of jobless
for every job.”
“Borderworks,” Mora said. “Not all of them are that bad. I heard some
pay cash wages, not company scrip.”
“Is that where you want to go?” I asked. “Or do you want to stay here?”
He looked down at Doe who was still nibbling at a piece of sweet potato.
“I want to stay here,” he said, surprising me. “I’m not sure you have a hope in
hell of building anything here, but you’re just crazy enough to make it work.”
And if it didn’t work, he’d be no worse off than he was when he escaped
slavery. He could rob someone and continue his journey north. Or maybe not.
I’d been thinking about Mora. He did a lot to keep people away from him—
keep them from knowing too much about him, keep them from seeing what
he was feeling, or that he was feeling anything—a male sharer, desperate to
hide his terrible vulnerability? Sharing would be harder on a man. What
would my brothers have been like as sharers? Odd that I hadn’t thought of
that before.
“I’m glad you’re staying,” I said. “We need you.” I looked at Travis and
Natividad. “We need you guys, too. You’re staying, aren’t you?”
“You know we are,” Travis said. “Although I think I agree more than I
want to with Mora. I’m not sure we have a prayer of succeeding here.”
“We’ll have whatever we can shape,” I said. And I turned to face Harry.
He and Zahra had been whispering together. Now he looked at me.
“Mora’s right,” he said. “You’re nuts.”
I sighed.
“But this is a crazy time,” he continued. “Maybe you’re what the time
needs—or what we need. I’ll stay. I may be sorry for it, but I’ll stay.”
Now the decision is acknowledged, and we can stop arguing about it.
Tomorrow we’ll begin to prepare a winter garden. Next week, several of us
will go into town to buy tools, more seed, supplies. Also, it’s time we began
to build a shelter. There are trees enough in the area, and we can dig into the
ground and into the hills. Mora says he’s built slave cabins before. Says he’s
eager to build something better, something fit for human beings. Besides, this
far north and this near the coast, we might get some rain.
SUNDAY, OCTOBER 10, 2027
Today we had a funeral for Bankole’s dead—the five people who died in the
fire. The cops never came. At last Bankole has decided that they aren’t going

to come, and that it’s time his sister and her family had a decent burial. We
collected all the bones that we could find, and yesterday, Natividad wrapped
them in a shawl that she had knitted years ago. It was the most beautiful thing
she owned.
“A thing like that should serve the living,” Bankole said when she offered
it.
“You are living,” Natividad said. “I like you. I wish I could have met your
sister.”
He looked at her for a while. Then he took the shawl and hugged her.
Then, beginning to cry, he went off by himself into the trees, out of our sight.
I let him alone for an hour or so, then went after him.
I found him, sitting on a fallen log, wiping his face. I sat with him for
some time, saying nothing. After a while, he got up, waited for me to stand,
then headed back toward our camp.
“I would like to give them a grove of oak trees,” I said. “Trees are better
than stone—life commemorating life.”
He glanced back at me. “All right.”
“Bankole?”
He stopped, looked at me with an expression I could not read.
“None of us knew her,” I said. “I wish we had. I wish I had, no matter
how much I would have surprised her.”
He managed a smile. “She would have looked at you, then looked at me,
then, right in front of you, I think she would have said, ‘Well, there’s no fool
like an old fool.’ Once she got that out of her system, I think she would have
gotten to like you.”
“Do you think she could stand…or forgive company now?”
“What?”
I drew a deep breath and wondered about what I meant to say. It could go
wrong. He could misunderstand. It still needed to be said.
“We’ll bury your dead tomorrow. I think you’re right to want to do it.
And I think we should bury our dead as well. Most of us have had to walk
away—or run—away from our unburned, un-buried dead. Tomorrow, we
should remember them all, and lay them to rest if we can.”
“Your family?”
I nodded. “Mine, Zahra’s, Harry’s, Allie’s—both her son and her sister—
maybe Emery’s sons, maybe others that I don’t know about. Mora doesn’t
talk about himself much, but he must have losses. Doe’s mother, perhaps.”
“How do you want to do it?” he asked.
“Each of us will have to bury our own dead. We knew them. We can find
the words.”

Words from the Bible, perhaps?
“Any words, memories, quotations, thoughts, songs… My father had a
funeral, even though we never found his body. But my three youngest
brothers and my stepmother had nothing. Zahra saw them die, or I wouldn’t
have any idea what happened to them.” I thought for a moment. “I have
acorns enough for each of us to plant live oak trees to our dead—enough to
plant one for Justin’s mother, too. I’m thinking about a very simple ceremony.
But everyone should have a chance to speak. Even the two little girls.”
He nodded. “I don’t have any objection. It isn’t a bad idea.” And a few
steps later: “There’s been so much dying. There’s so much more to come.”
“Not for us, I hope.”
He said nothing for a while. Then he stopped and put his hand on my
shoulder to stop me. At first he only stood looking at me, almost studying my
face. “You’re so young,” he said. “It seems almost criminal that you should
be so young in these terrible times. I wish you could have known this country
when it was still salvageable.”
“It might survive,” I said, “changed, but still itself.”
“No.” He drew me to his side and put one arm around me. “Human beings
will survive of course. Some other countries will survive. Maybe they’ll
absorb what’s left of us. Or maybe we’ll just break up into a lot of little states
quarreling and fighting with each other over whatever crumbs are left. That’s
almost happened now with states shutting themselves off from one another,
treating state lines as national borders. As bright as you are, I don’t think you
understand—I don’t think you can understand what we’ve lost. Perhaps that’s
a blessing.”
“God is Change,” I said.
“Olamina, that doesn’t mean anything.”
“It means everything. Everything!”
He sighed. “You know, as bad as things are, we haven’t even hit bottom
yet. Starvation, disease, drug damage, and mob rule have only begun. Federal,
state, and local governments still exist—in name at least—and sometimes
they manage to do something more than collect taxes and send in the military.
And the money is still good. That amazes me. However much more you need
of it to buy anything these days, it is still accepted. That may be a hopeful
sign—or perhaps it’s only more evidence of what I said: We haven’t hit
bottom yet.”
“Well, the group of us here doesn’t have to sink any lower,” I said.
He shook his shaggy head, his hair, beard, and serious expression making
him look more than a little like an old picture I used to have of Frederick
Douglass.

“I wish I believed that,” he said. Perhaps it was his grief talking. “I don’t
think we have a hope in hell of succeeding here.”
I slipped my arm around him. “Let’s go back,” I said. “We’ve got work to
do.”
So today we remembered the friends and the family members we’ve lost.
We spoke our individual memories and quoted Bible passages, Earthseed
verses, and bits of songs and poems that were favorites of the living or the
dead.
Then we buried our dead and we planted oak trees.
Afterward, we sat together and talked and ate a meal and decided to call
this place Acorn.
A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by
the way side; and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air
devoured it. And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was
sprung up, it withered away because it lacked moisture. And some
fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked
it. And others fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bore fruit
an hundredfold.
The Bible
Authorized King James Version
St. Luke 8: 5-8

A Conversation with Octavia E. Butler
1. What attracted you to writing?
I’ve been telling myself stories since I was four years old. I was an only
child, shy and often alone. Telling myself stories was my way of entertaining
myself. It didn’t occur to me to begin to write down my stories until I was ten,
when I realized I was forgetting some of my early stories. One day while my
mother was combing my hair, I sat writing a story in an old half-used
notebook. My mother asked me what I was doing. When I told her I was
writing a story, she said, “Oh. Maybe you’ll be a writer.”
This was absolutely my first indication that people could be “writers,” but
I understood the idea and accepted it at once. People could earn a living
writing stories. People had been paid to write the books I enjoyed reading.
The Pasadena Public Library had been one of my favorite places for years. I
loved not only reading books, but being surrounded by them. For the first
time in my life, I considered seriously that I might be able to do something
that I enjoyed for a living—and I did enjoy writing stories. They were terrible,
but I had fun with them. Until that day, “work” had been, to me, something
tiresome that adults made me do. Adult work was something even more
tiresome that a boss made the adult do. Work was, by definition, unpleasant.
But if writing were my work…!
2. How did you wind up writing science fiction and fantasy?
I never told myself ordinary stories. I was never interested in fantasizing
about the world I was stuck in. In fact, I fantasized to get away from that drab,
limited world. I was a little “colored” girl in that era of conformity and
segregation, the 1950s, and no matter how much I dreamed about becoming a
writer, I couldn’t help seeing that my real future looked bleak. I was supposed
to get married and have babies and, if I were lucky, my husband would
support me and I could stay home, wash the floor, and mind the babies. If I
were a little less lucky, I would have to get a job, but a job that allowed me to
dress nicely and stay clean all day. I would become a secretary, perhaps. My
mother, who had only been permitted three years of education, was a maid.
Housecleaning was all she knew how to do. Her dream for me was that I

should become a secretary. My aunt, the nurse, thought I should become a
nurse. The other two occupations most open to women during those years
were grade-school teacher and social worker. I knew kids who wanted to be
social workers, but I wasn’t even sure what a social worker did. I knew
enough, though, about secretaries, nurses, and teachers to know that for me,
those jobs would be like a life sentence in hell.
I fantasized about traveling and seeing some of the things I found in the
secondhand National Geographic magazines that my mother brought home. I
fantasized living impossible, but interesting lives—magical lives in which I
could fly like Superman, communicate with animals, control people’s minds.
I became a magical horse on an island of horses. My horse friends and I made
fools of the men who came to catch us.
Then when I was twelve, I discovered science fiction. It appealed to me
more, even, than fantasy had because it required more thought, more research
into things that fascinated me. I was developing an interest in geology and
paleontology—the origin of the Earth and the development of life on Earth.
The manned space program was getting started, and I was fascinated with
that. My favorite class in junior high school was eighth-grade science. Other
planets, evolutionary biology, botany, microbiology… I wasn’t a particularly
good student, but I was an avid one, I wanted to know about everything, and
as I learned, I wanted to play with the knowledge, explore it, think about what
it might mean, or where it might lead, write stories about it.
I’ve never lost that fascination.
And science fiction and fantasy are so wide open that I never had to drop
them to be able to pick up other things. There doesn’t seem to be any aspect
of humanity or the universe around us that I can’t explore.
3. Where did the Earthseed religion come from? What inspired the belief
system?
Earthseed is a result of several of my efforts and interests coming
together. First, I had a great deal of trouble beginning Parable of the Sower. I
knew that I wanted to tell the story, the fictional autobiography, of Lauren
Olamina, who begins a new religion and who, sometime after her death—
after people have had time to forget how human she was—might easily be
considered a god. I wanted her to be an intelligent, believable person. I didn’t
want to write satire. I didn’t want to write about a hypocrite or a fool. I
wanted her to believe deeply in what she taught and I wanted her teachings to
be reasonable, intellectually respectable. I wanted them to be something that
someone I could admire might truly believe and teach. She didn’t have to be

always right, but she had to be reasonable.
I put Earthseed together by asking myself questions and coming up with
answers. For instance, I asked what was the most powerful force I could think
of? What one thing could we not stop no matter how hard we tried? The
answer I came up with after some thought was “change.” We can do a lot of
things to influence the ongoing processes of change. We can focus them, alter
their speed or impact, in general we can shape change, but we can’t stop it no
matter how hard we try. Throughout the universe, the ongoing reality is
change.
That’s where I began. I was a bit disconcerted when I read about other
religions and was reminded that in Buddhism, change was also very
important, although in a different way. To put it simply, in Buddhism, since
everything is ephemeral, we can avoid suffering only by avoiding attachment
because all things to which we might become attached are bound to pass
away. But Lauren Olamina says that since change is the one inescapable truth,
change is the basic clay of our lives. In order to live constructive lives, we
must learn to shape change when we can and yield to it when we must. Either
way, we must learn and teach, adapt and grow.
Once I established Change as Olamina’s god, I had to be true to the idea.
That meant I had to work out what such a belief would mean in the various
aspects of life. I looked to science, to other philosophies and religions, and to
my own observations of how people behave, how the world works.
Writing Olamina’s beliefs in verse somehow helped me get going with the
novel. I hadn’t tried to write verse since I was forced to in school. I didn’t do
it very well, either. But trying to do it was a good challenge. I had to focus on
learning a little about this different kind of writing, and I had to figure out
how to use it to do the job I wanted to do. My physical model for my
character’s religious book was the Tao de Ching. It’s a slender book of a few
seemingly simple verses. I didn’t want to copy any of the Taoist verses, but I
immediately liked the form.
4. You’ve called Parable of the Sower a cautionary tale because the future
presented in Sower is alarming, but possible. Do you have other ideas
about the future that didn’t make it into the book?
The idea in Parable of the Sower and Parable of the Talents is to consider
a possible future unaffected by parapsychological abilities such as telepathy
or telekinesis, unaffected by alien intervention, unaffected by magic. It is to
look at where we are now, what we are doing now, and to consider where
some of our current behaviors and unattended problems might take us. I

considered drugs and the effects of drugs on the children of drug addicts. I
looked at the growing rich/poor gap, at throwaway labor, at our willingness to
build and fill prisons, our reluctance to build and repair schools and libraries,
and at our assault on the environment. In particular, I looked at global
warming and the ways in which it’s likely to change things for us. There’s
food-price driven inflation that’s likely because, as the climate changes, some
of the foods we’re used to won’t grow as well in the places we’re used to
growing them. Not only will temperatures be too high, not only will there not
be enough water, but the increase in carbon dioxide won’t affect all plants in
the same ways. Some will grow a little faster while their weeds grow a lot
faster. Some will grow faster but not be as nutritious—forcing both their bests
and us to need more to be decently nourished. It’s a much more complex
problem than a simple increase in temperature. I considered spreading hunger
as a reason for increased vulnerability to disease. And there would be less
money for inoculations or treatment. Also, thanks to rising temperatures,
tropical diseases like malaria and dengue would move north. I considered loss
of coastline as the level of the sea rises. I imagined the United States
becoming, slowly, through the combined effects of lack of foresight and
short-term unenlightened self-interest, a third world country.
And our only way of cleaning up, adapting, and compensating for all this
in Parable of the Sower and Parable of the Talents is to use our brains and our
hands—the same tools we used to get ourselves into so much trouble.
Now in some of my other novels, Dawn, Adulthood Rites, and Imago, for
instance, my Xenogenesis novels, answers come through the intervention of
extrasolar aliens. Our problem as a species, we are told, results from our
having two inherited characteristics that don’t work and play well together,
especially since the wrong one is in control. The two characteristics are
intelligence and hierarchical behavior—with hierarchical behavior dominant.
The aliens fix things by altering us genetically.
In Mind of My Mind, Clay’s Ark, and related novels in my Patternist
series, the future is changed by people with parapsychological abilities. It
isn’t changed for the better. It simply puts another powerful group in charge
and their particular shortsightedness and unenlightened self-interests bring
about different changes.
These are all ideas I’ve had about the future in earlier novels. Other
possibilities I’ll save for other novels.
5. What kind of research did you do for Parable of the Sower?
I read books and listened to taped classes that focused on religions. I

found books on African religion and took a particular interest in the Orishas
of the Yoruba people. Lauren Olamina’s middle name is Oya because I liked
both the name and the Orisha the name represented. Oya is, among other
things, the deity of the Niger River. She’s unpredictable, intelligent, and
dangerous—a good namesake for Lauren Oya Olamina.
I indulged my weakness for specialized dictionaries and encyclopedias by
falling in love with The Perennial Dictionary of World Religions. I found it at
the library and liked it so much that I hunted it down and bought it.
I brushed up on guns. I had my research for my novel Clay’s Ark to fall
back on there. All I had to do was dig it out and add to it a little.
I tacked detailed maps of different parts of California all over my walls. I
used to travel up and down California on Greyhound buses, but I’ve never
walked the length of the state. Since my characters had to do that, I had to
understand how they would manage. I also read books by people who had
walked the state, bicycled it, or ridden the length of it on horseback.
I listened to my local National Public Radio and Pacifica stations and read
newspapers and magazines. This wasn’t so much research as my normal
behavior, but because Parable of the Sower and Parable of the Talents were
largely inspired by the news, by the trends that seemed important to me [see
question 4], the news I absorbed fed right into the novel.
And finally, I pestered my mother, who had a green thumb, and I read
books on gardening. I also took notes on my morning walks. What was in
flower? What was in fruit? When? Gardening is popular in the Pasadena area.
Most people who have houses have big yards, and everyone can grow
something. My mother, who knew a good thing when she saw it, put me to
work—so that I could get some practical experience.
6. Parable of the Sower is, among other things, a coming-of-age story.
What are the most important lessons Lauren Olamina learns as she
matures?
One of the first lessons Olamina learns is to value community. She learns
this as a young girl, learns it without knowing she’s learning. Her father’s
community is her teacher. She cannot agree with her father or other adults
when they close their eyes in fear and hope to wait for the return of the good
old days. But she can see that the people around her could not sustain
themselves if they did not find ways to work together.
When Olamina’s birth community is destroyed, she begins to build
another. She doesn’t know at first that that’s what she’s doing, and she’s
afraid—terrified—of potentially dangerous strangers. But she learns to reach

out in spite of her fear, to choose the best people she can find and bring them
together. With her acceptance of Earthseed, she relinquishes hope for
supernatural help. She recognizes a god, but not a knowing, caring,
anthropomorphic entity. She believes that our only dependable help must
come from ourselves and from one another. She never develops a “things will
work themselves out somehow” attitude. She learns to be an activist.
7. Who or what are the most important influences on your writing?
These change from novel to novel. When I’m working on a novel,
anything that catches my attention might wind up affecting the writing.
Sometimes there’s an incident on a bus or on the street or in some other
public place, sometimes it’s something someone says or does, or something I
read.
Early literary influences were fairy tales, mythology, comic books, and
animal stories—especially horse stories (A Forest World; Bambi; Bambi’s
Children; Black Beauty; Lad, a Dog; King of the Wind; Big Red; The Black
Stallion…).
Later, I read science fiction indiscriminately. I particularly liked writers
who created interesting and believable characters, but I read whoever I found
at the library or in the magazines that I bought at the supermarket. My first
science fiction magazines were Amazing, Fantastic, Galaxy, Analog, and The
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. Some of the authors I especially
liked when I was in my early teens were Theodore Sturgeon, Eric Frank
Russell, Zenna Henderson, Ray Bradbury, J. T. McIntosh, Robert A.
Heinlein, Clifford D. Simak, Lester del Rey, Fredric Brown, and Isaac
Asimov. Later, I discovered Marion Zimmer Bradley, John Brunner, Harlan
Ellison, and Arthur C. Clarke. I devoured the many anthologies of Judith
Merril and Groff Conklin.
In short, like many science fiction fans, I read too much science fiction
and too little of anything else. I also, as I mentioned earlier, read popular
science. At school, I did very well in English and in history. History also took
me to fascinatingly different places and made me think about the way people
behave toward one another, the ways in which they handled power, for
instance. These things held my interest and found their way into my writing.
Writers use everything. We can’t help it. Whatever touches us touches our
writing.
8. What would you like readers to get from this novel? What would you
like them to think about?

I hope people who read Parable of the Sower will think about where we
seem to be heading—we the United States, even we the human species.
Where are we going? What sort of future are we creating? Is it the kind of
future you want to live in? If it isn’t, what can we do to create a better future?
Individually and in groups, what can we do?
Octavia E. Butler
Pasadena, California
May 1999

