Ace	Books	by	Mark	Lawrence

The	Broken	Empire
PRINCE	OF	THORNS
KING	OF	THORNS

EMPEROR	OF	THORNS

The	Red	Queen’s	War
PRINCE	OF	FOOLS






THE	BERKLEY	PUBLISHING	GROUP
Published	by	the	Penguin	Group
Penguin	Group	(USA)	LLC

375	Hudson	Street,	New	York,	New	York	10014

USA	•	Canada	•	UK	•	Ireland	•	Australia	•	New	Zealand	•	India	•	South	Africa	•	China

penguin.com

A	Penguin	Random	House	Company

This	book	is	an	original	publication	of	The	Berkley	Publishing	Group.

Copyright	©	2014	by	Bobalinga,	Ltd.
Penguin	supports	copyright.	Copyright	fuels	creativity,	encourages	diverse	voices,	promotes	free	speech,	and	creates	a	vibrant
culture.	Thank	you	for	buying	an	authorized	edition	of	this	book	and	for	complying	with	copyright	laws	by	not	reproducing,
scanning,	or	distributing	any	part	of	it	in	any	form	without	permission.	You	are	supporting	writers	and	allowing	Penguin	to

continue	to	publish	books	for	every	reader.

Ace	Books	are	published	by	The	Berkley	Publishing	Group.
ACE	and	the	“A”	design	are	trademarks	of	Penguin	Group	(USA)	LLC.

eBook	ISBN:	978-1-101-63093-8

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data

Lawrence,	Mark,	1966–
Prince	of	fools	/	Mark	Lawrence.	—	First	Edition.

pages	cm.	—	(The	Red	Queen’s	War;	1)
ISBN	978-0-425-26878-0	(hardback)

1.	Queens—Fiction.	2.	Imaginary	wars	and	battles—Fiction.	I.	Title.
PS3612.A9484P45	2014

813'.6—dc23
2013048142

FIRST	EDITION:	June	2014

Cover	art	by	Christian	McGrath.
Map	reprinted	by	permission	of	HarperCollins	Publishers	Ltd	©	2014	Andrew	Ashton.

This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	Names,	characters,	places,	and	incidents	either	are	the	product	of	the	author’s	imagination	or	are	used
fictitiously,	and	any	resemblance	to	actual	persons,	living	or	dead,	business	establishments,	events,	or	locales	is	entirely

coincidental.

Version_1



CONTENTS

Ace	Books	by	Mark	Lawrence
Title	Page
Copyright
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Map

ONE
TWO
THREE
FOUR
FIVE
SIX
SEVEN
EIGHT
NINE
TEN
ELEVEN
TWELVE
THIRTEEN
FOURTEEN
FIFTEEN
SIXTEEN
SEVENTEEN
EIGHTEEN
NINETEEN
TWENTY
TWENTY-ONE
TWENTY-TWO
TWENTY-THREE
TWENTY-FOUR
TWENTY-FIVE
TWENTY-SIX
TWENTY-SEVEN



TWENTY-EIGHT
TWENTY-NINE
THIRTY
THIRTY-ONE



Dedicated	to	my	daughter,	Heather



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many	thanks	to	the	good	folk	at	Ace	Books	who	have	made	this	all	happen
and	put	the	book	in	your	hands.	Special	thanks	to	Ginjer	Buchanan	and
Rebecca	Brewer.

Thanks	also	to	Justin	Landon,	who	read	the	early	portion	of	the	book	and
provided	much-appreciated	feedback.

And	finally,	another	round	of	applause	for	my	agent,	Ian	Drury,	and	the
team	at	Sheil	Land	for	all	their	sterling	work.






ONE
I’m	a	liar	and	a	cheat	and	a	coward,	but	I	will	never,	ever,	let	a	friend	down.	Unless
of	course	not	letting	them	down	requires	honesty,	fair	play,	or	bravery.

I’ve	always	found	hitting	a	man	from	behind	to	be	the	best	way	to	go	aboutthings.	This	can	sometimes	be	accomplished	by	dint	of	a	simple	ruse.
Classics	such	as,	“What’s	that	over	there?”	work	surprisingly	often,	but	for
truly	optimal	results	it’s	best	if	the	person	doesn’t	ever	know	you	were	there.

“Ow!	Jesu!	What	the	hell	did	you	do	that	for?”	Alain	DeVeer	turned,
clamping	his	hand	to	the	back	of	his	head	and	bringing	it	away	bloody.

When	the	person	you	hit	doesn’t	have	the	grace	to	fall	over,	it’s	generally
best	to	have	a	backup	plan.	I	dropped	what	remained	of	the	vase,	turned,	and
ran.	In	my	mind	he’d	folded	up	with	a	pleasing	“oofff”	and	left	me	free	to
leave	the	mansion	unobserved,	stepping	over	his	prone	and	senseless	form	on
the	way.	Instead	his	senseless	form	was	now	chasing	me	down	the	hall
bellowing	for	blood.

I	crashed	back	through	Lisa’s	door	and	slammed	it	behind	me,	bracing
myself	for	the	impact.

“What	the	hell?”	Lisa	sat	in	the	bed,	silken	sheets	flowing	off	her
nakedness	like	water.

“Uh.”	Alain	hammered	into	the	door,	jolting	the	air	from	my	lungs	and
scraping	my	heels	over	the	tiles.	The	trick	is	to	never	rush	for	the	bolt.	You’ll
be	fumbling	for	it	and	get	a	face	full	of	opening	door.	Brace	for	the	impact;
when	that’s	done,	slam	the	bolt	home	while	the	other	party	is	picking	himself
off	the	floor.	Alain	proved	worryingly	fast	in	getting	back	on	his	feet	and	I
nearly	got	the	door	handle	for	breakfast	despite	my	precautions.

“Jal!”	Lisa	was	out	of	bed	now,	wearing	nothing	but	the	light	and	shade
through	the	shutters.	Stripes	suited	her.	Sweeter	than	her	elder	sister,	sharper
than	her	younger	sister.	Even	then	I	wanted	her,	even	with	her	murderous
brother	held	back	by	just	an	inch	of	oak	and	with	my	chances	for	escape
evaporating	by	the	moment.

I	ran	to	the	largest	window	and	tore	the	shutters	open.	“Say	sorry	to	your
brother	for	me.”	I	swung	a	leg	over	the	casement.	“Mistaken	identity	or



something	.	.	.”	The	door	started	to	shudder	as	Alain	pounded	the	far	side.
“Alain?”	Lisa	managed	to	look	both	furious	with	me	and	terrified	at	the

same	time.
I	didn’t	stop	to	reply	but	vaulted	down	into	the	bushes,	which	were

thankfully	the	fragrant	rather	than	thorny	variety.	Dropping	into	a	thorn	bush
can	lead	to	no	end	of	grief.

Landing	is	always	important.	I	do	a	lot	of	falling	and	it’s	not	how	you
start	that	matters	so	much	as	how	you	finish.	In	this	instance,	I	finished
concertinaed,	heels	to	arse,	chin	to	knees,	half	an	azalea	bush	up	my	nose	and
all	the	air	driven	from	my	lungs,	but	with	no	bones	broken.	I	fought	my	way
out	and	limped	towards	the	garden	wall,	gasping	for	breath	and	hoping	the
staff	were	too	busy	with	predawn	chores	to	be	poised	and	ready	to	hunt	me
down.

I	took	off,	across	the	formal	lawns,	through	the	herb	garden,	cutting	a
straight	path	through	all	the	little	diamonds	of	sage,	and	triangles	of	thyme
and	whatnot.	Somewhere	back	at	the	house	a	hound	bayed,	and	that	put	the
fear	in	me.	I’m	a	good	runner	any	day	of	the	week.	Scared	shitless	I’m	world
class.	Two	years	ago,	in	the	“border	incident”	with	Scorron,	I	ran	from	a
patrol	of	Teutons,	five	of	them	on	big	old	destriers.	The	men	I	had	charge	of
stayed	put,	lacking	any	orders.	I	find	the	important	thing	in	running	away	is
not	how	fast	you	run	but	simply	that	you	run	faster	than	the	next	man.
Unfortunately	my	lads	did	a	piss-poor	job	of	slowing	the	Scorrons	down,	and
that	left	poor	Jal	running	for	his	life	with	hardly	twenty	years	under	his	belt
and	a	great	long	list	of	things	still	to	do—with	the	DeVeer	sisters	near	the	top
and	dying	on	a	Scorron	lance	not	even	making	the	first	page.	In	any	event,	the
borderlands	aren’t	the	place	to	stretch	a	warhorse’s	legs,	and	I	kept	a	gap
between	us	by	running	through	a	boulder	field	at	breakneck	speed.	Without
warning	I	found	myself	charging	into	the	back	of	a	pitched	battle	between	a
much	larger	force	of	Scorron	irregulars	and	the	band	of	Red	March
skirmishers	I’d	been	scouting	on	behalf	of	in	the	first	place.	I	rocketed	into
the	midst	of	it	all,	flailed	around	with	my	sword	in	blind	terror	trying	to
escape,	and	when	the	dust	settled	and	the	blood	stopped	squirting,	I
discovered	myself	the	hero	of	the	day,	breaking	the	enemy	with	a	courageous
attack	that	showed	complete	disregard	for	my	own	safety.

So	here’s	the	thing:	Bravery	may	be	observed	when	a	person	tramples	one
fear	whilst	in	secret	flight	from	a	greater	terror.	And	those	whose	greatest
terror	is	being	thought	a	coward	are	always	brave.	I,	on	the	other	hand,	am	a
coward.	But	with	a	little	luck,	a	dashing	smile,	and	the	ability	to	lie	from	the
hip,	I’ve	done	a	surprisingly	good	job	of	seeming	a	hero	and	of	fooling	most
of	the	people	most	of	the	time.

The	DeVeers’	wall	was	a	high	and	forbidding	one,	but	it	and	I	were	old
friends:	I	knew	its	curves	and	foibles	as	well	as	any	contour	Lisa,	Sharal,	or



Micha	might	possess.	Escape	routes	have	always	been	an	obsession	of	mine.
Most	barriers	are	there	to	keep	the	unwashed	out,	not	the	washed	in.	I

vaulted	a	rain	barrel,	onto	the	roof	of	a	gardener’s	outbuilding,	and	jumped
for	the	wall.	Teeth	snapped	at	my	heels	as	I	hauled	myself	over.	I	clung	by	my
fingers	and	dropped.	A	shiver	of	relief	ran	through	me	as	the	hound	found	its
voice	and	scrabbled	against	the	far	side	of	the	wall	in	frustration.	The	beast
had	run	silent	and	almost	caught	me.	The	silent	ones	are	apt	to	kill	you.	The
more	sound	and	fury	there	is,	the	less	murderous	the	animal.	True	of	men	too.
I’m	nine	parts	bluster	and	one	part	greed	and	so	far	not	an	ounce	of	murder.

I	landed	in	the	street,	less	heavily	this	time,	free	and	clear,	and	if	not
smelling	of	roses	then	at	least	of	azalea	and	mixed	herbs.	Alain	would	be	a
problem	for	another	day.	He	could	take	his	place	in	the	queue.	It	was	a	long
one	and	at	its	head	stood	Maeres	Allus	clutching	a	dozen	promissory	notes,
IOUs,	and	intents	to	pay	drunkenly	scrawled	on	whores’	silken	lingerie.	I
stood,	stretched,	and	listened	to	the	hound	complain	behind	the	wall.	I’d	need
a	taller	wall	than	that	to	keep	Maeres’s	bullies	at	bay.

Kings	Way	stretched	before	me,	strewn	with	shadows.	On	Kings	Way	the
town	houses	of	noble	families	vie	with	the	ostentation	of	merchant-princes’
mansions,	new	money	trying	to	gleam	brighter	than	the	old.	The	city	of
Vermillion	has	few	streets	as	fine.

“Take	him	to	the	gate!	He’s	got	the	scent.”	Voices	back	in	the	garden.
“Here,	Pluto!	Here!”
That	didn’t	sound	good.	I	set	off	sprinting	in	the	direction	of	the	palace,

sending	rats	fleeing	and	scattering	dungmen	on	their	rounds,	the	dawn
chasing	after	me,	throwing	red	spears	at	my	back.



TWO

The	palace	at	Vermillion	is	a	sprawling	affair	of	walled	compounds,
exquisite	gardens,	satellite	mansions	for	extended	family,	and	finally	the

Inner	Palace,	the	great	stone	confection	that	has	for	generations	housed	the
kings	of	Red	March.	The	whole	thing	is	garnished	with	marble	statuary	teased
into	startlingly	lifelike	forms	by	the	artistry	of	Milano	masons,	and	a
dedicated	man	could	probably	scrape	enough	gold	leaf	off	the	walls	to	make
himself	slightly	richer	than	Croesus.	My	grandmother	hates	it	with	a	passion.
She’d	be	happier	behind	granite	barricades	a	hundred	feet	thick	and	spiked
with	the	heads	of	her	enemies.

Even	the	most	decadent	of	palaces	can’t	be	entered	without	some
protocol,	though.	I	slipped	in	via	the	Surgeons’	Gate,	flipping	a	silver	crown
to	the	guard.

“Got	you	out	early	again,	Melchar.”	I	make	a	point	of	knowing	the
guards’	names.	They	still	think	of	me	as	the	hero	of	Aral	Pass	and	it’s	helpful
to	have	the	gatekeepers	on	side	when	your	life	dangles	from	as	large	a	web	of
lies	as	mine	does.

“Aye,	Prince	Jal.	Them’s	as	works	best	works	hardest,	they	do	say.”
“So	true.”	I	had	no	idea	what	he’d	said	but	my	fake	laugh	is	even	better

than	my	real	one,	and	nine-tenths	of	being	popular	is	the	ability	to	jolly	the
menials	along.	“I’d	get	one	of	those	lazy	bastards	to	take	a	turn.”	I	nodded
towards	the	lantern	glow	bleeding	past	the	crack	of	the	guardhouse	door	and
strolled	on	through	the	gates	as	Melchar	drew	them	open.

Once	inside,	I	made	a	straight	line	for	the	Roma	Hall.	As	the	queen’s	third
son,	Father	got	invested	in	the	Roma	Hall,	a	palatial	Vatican	edifice
constructed	by	the	pope’s	own	craftsmen	for	Cardinal	Paracheck	way	back
whenever.	Grandmother	has	little	enough	time	for	Jesu	and	his	cross,	though
she’ll	say	the	words	at	celebrations	and	look	to	mean	them.	She	has	far	less
time	for	Roma,	and	none	at	all	for	the	pope	that	sits	there	now—the	Holy
Cow,	she	calls	her.

As	Father’s	third	son	I	get	bugger-all.	A	chamber	in	Roma	Hall,	an
unwanted	commission	in	the	Army	of	the	North,	one	that	didn’t	even	swing
me	a	cavalry	rank	since	the	northern	borders	are	too	damn	hilly	for	horse.



Scorron	deploy	cavalry	on	the	borders,	but	Grandmother	declared	their
pigheadedness	a	failing	the	Red	March	should	exploit	rather	than	a
foolishness	we	should	continue	to	follow.	Women	and	war	don’t	mix.	I’ve
said	it	before.	I	should	have	been	breaking	hearts	on	a	white	charger,
armoured	for	tourney.	But	no,	that	old	witch	had	me	crawling	around	the
peaks	trying	not	to	get	murdered	by	Scorron	peasants.

I	entered	the	Hall—really	a	collection	of	halls,	staterooms,	a	ballroom,
kitchens,	stables,	and	a	second	floor	with	endless	bedchambers—by	the	west
port,	a	service	door	meant	for	scullions	and	such.	Fat	Ned	sat	at	guard,	his
halberd	against	the	wall.

“Ned!”
“Master	Jal!”	He	woke	with	a	start	and	came	perilously	close	to	tipping

the	chair	over	backwards.
“As	you	were.”	I	gave	him	a	wink	and	went	by.	Fat	Ned	kept	a	tight	lip

and	my	excursions	were	safe	with	him.	He’d	known	me	since	I	was	a	little
monster	bullying	the	smaller	princes	and	princesses	and	toadying	to	the	ones
big	enough	to	clout	me.	He’d	been	fat	back	in	those	days.	The	flesh	hung	off
him	now	as	the	reaper	closed	in	for	the	final	swing,	but	the	name	stuck.
There’s	power	in	a	name.	“Prince”	has	served	me	very	well—something	to
hide	behind	when	trouble	comes,	and	“Jalan”	carries	echoes	of	King	Jalan	of
the	Red	March,	Fist	of	the	Emperor	back	when	we	had	one.	A	title	and	a
name	like	Jalan	carry	an	aura	with	them,	enough	to	give	me	the	benefit	of	the
doubt—and	there	was	never	a	doubt	I	needed	that.

I	nearly	made	it	back	to	my	room.
“Jalan	Kendeth!”
I	stopped	two	steps	from	the	balcony	that	led	to	my	chambers,	toe	poised

for	the	next	step,	boots	in	my	hand.	I	said	nothing.	Sometimes	the	bishop
would	just	bellow	my	name	when	he	discovered	random	mischief.	In	fairness
I	was	normally	the	root	cause.	This	time,	however,	he	was	looking	directly	at
me.

“I	see	you	right	there,	Jalan	Kendeth,	footsteps	black	with	sin	as	you
creep	back	to	your	lair.	Get	down	here!”

I	turned	with	an	apologetic	grin.	Churchmen	like	you	to	be	sorry	and
often	it	doesn’t	matter	what	you’re	sorry	about.	In	this	case	I	was	sorry	for
being	caught.

“And	the	best	of	mornings	to	you,	Your	Excellency.”	I	put	the	boots
behind	my	back	and	swaggered	down	towards	him	as	if	it	had	been	my	plan
all	along.

“His	Eminence	directs	me	to	present	your	brothers	and	yourself	at	the
throne	room	by	second	bell.”	Bishop	James	scowled	at	me,	cheeks	grey	with
stubble	as	if	he	too	had	been	turfed	out	of	bed	at	an	unreasonable	hour,	though
perhaps	not	by	Lisa	DeVeer’s	shapely	foot.



“Father	directed	that?”	He’d	said	nothing	at	table	the	previous	night,	and
the	cardinal	was	not	one	to	rise	before	noon	whatever	the	good	book	had	to
say	about	sloth.	They	call	it	a	deadly	sin,	but	in	my	experience	lust	will	get
you	into	more	trouble	and	sloth’s	only	a	sin	when	you’re	being	chased.

“The	message	came	from	the	queen.”	The	bishop’s	scowl	deepened.	He
liked	to	attribute	all	commands	to	Father	as	the	church’s	highest,	albeit	least
enthusiastic,	representative	in	Red	March.	Grandmother	once	said	she’d	been
tempted	to	set	the	cardinal’s	hat	on	the	nearest	donkey,	but	Father	had	been
closer	and	promised	to	be	more	easily	led.	“Martus	and	Darin	have	already
left.”

I	shrugged.	“They	arrived	before	me	too.”	I’d	yet	to	forgive	my	elder
brothers	that	slight.	I	stopped,	out	of	arm’s	reach	as	the	bishop	loved	nothing
better	than	to	slap	the	sin	out	of	a	wayward	prince,	and	turned	to	go	upstairs.
“I’ll	get	dressed.”

“You’ll	go	now!	It’s	almost	second	bell	and	your	preening	never	takes	less
than	an	hour.”

As	much	as	I	would	have	liked	to	dispute	the	old	fool,	he	happened	to	be
right	and	I	knew	better	than	to	be	late	for	the	Red	Queen.	I	suppressed	a	sneer
and	hurried	past	him.	I	had	on	what	I’d	worn	for	my	midnight	escapades	and
whilst	it	was	stylish	enough,	the	slashed	velvets	hadn’t	fared	too	well	during
my	escape.	Still,	it	would	have	to	serve.	Grandmother	would	rather	see	her
spawn	battle-armoured	and	dripping	blood	in	any	event,	so	a	touch	of	mud
here	and	there	might	earn	me	some	approval.



THREE

Icame	late	to	the	throne	room	with	the	second	bell’s	echoes	dying	before	I
reached	the	bronze	doors,	huge	out-of-place	things	stolen	from	some	still-

grander	palace	by	one	of	my	distant	and	bloody-handed	relatives.	The	guards
eyed	me	as	if	I	might	be	bird	crap	that	had	sailed	uninvited	through	a	high
window	to	splat	before	them.

“Prince	Jalan.”	I	rolled	my	hands	to	chivvy	them	along.	“You	may	have
heard	of	me?	I	am	invited.”

Without	commentary	the	largest	of	them,	a	giant	in	fire-bronze	mail	and
crimson-plumed	helm,	hauled	the	left	door	wide	enough	to	admit	me.	My
campaign	to	befriend	every	guard	in	the	palace	had	never	penetrated	as	far	as
Grandmother’s	picked	men;	they	thought	too	much	of	themselves	for	that.
Also	they	were	too	well	paid	to	be	impressed	by	my	largesse,	and	perhaps
forewarned	against	me	in	any	case.

I	crept	in	unannounced	and	hurried	across	the	echoing	expanse	of	marble.
I’ve	never	liked	the	throne	room.	Not	for	the	arching	grandness	of	it,	or	the
history	set	in	grim-faced	stone	and	staring	at	us	from	every	wall,	but	because
the	place	has	no	escape	routes.	Guards,	guards,	and	more	guards,	along	with
the	scrutiny	of	that	awful	old	woman	who	claims	to	be	my	grandmother.

I	made	my	way	towards	my	nine	siblings	and	cousins.	It	seemed	this	was
to	be	an	audience	exclusively	for	the	royal	grandchildren:	the	nine	junior
princes	and	singular	princess	of	Red	March.	By	rights	I	should	have	been
tenth	in	line	to	the	throne	after	my	two	uncles,	their	sons,	and	my	father	and
elder	brothers,	but	the	old	witch	who’d	kept	that	particular	seat	warm	these
past	forty	years	had	different	ideas	about	succession.	Cousin	Serah,	still	a
month	shy	of	her	eighteenth	birthday,	and	containing	not	an	ounce	of
whatever	it	is	that	makes	a	princess,	was	the	apple	of	the	Red	Queen’s	eye.	I
won’t	lie,	Serah	had	more	than	several	ounces	of	whatever	it	is	that	lets	a
woman	steal	the	sense	from	a	man,	and	accordingly	I	would	gladly	have
ignored	the	common	views	on	what	cousins	should	and	shouldn’t	get	up	to.
Indeed	I’d	tried	to	ignore	them	several	times,	but	Serah	had	a	vicious	right
hook	and	a	knack	for	kicking	the	tenderest	of	spots	that	a	man	owns.	She’d
come	today	wearing	some	kind	of	riding	suit	in	fawn	and	suede	that	looked



better	suited	to	the	hunt	than	to	court.	But	damn,	she	looked	good.
I	brushed	past	her	and	elbowed	my	way	in	between	my	brothers	near	the

front	of	the	group.	I’m	a	decent-sized	fellow,	tall	enough	to	give	men	pause,
but	I	don’t	normally	care	to	stand	by	Martus	and	Darin.	They	make	me	look
small	and,	with	nothing	to	set	us	apart,	all	with	the	same	dark-gold	hair	and
hazel	eyes,	I	get	referred	to	as	“the	little	one.”	That	I	don’t	like.	On	this
occasion,	though,	I	was	prepared	to	be	overlooked.	It	wasn’t	just	being	in	the
throne	room	that	made	me	nervous.	Nor	even	because	of	Grandmother’s
pointed	disapproval.	It	was	the	blind-eye	woman.	She	scares	the	hell	out	of
me.

I	first	saw	her	when	they	brought	me	before	the	throne	on	my	fifth
birthday,	my	name	day,	flanked	by	Martus	and	Darin	in	their	church	finest,
Father	in	his	cardinal’s	hat,	sober	despite	the	sun	having	passed	its	zenith,	my
mother	in	silks	and	pearls,	a	clutch	of	churchmen	and	court	ladies	forming	the
periphery.	The	Red	Queen	sat	forwards	in	her	great	chair	booming	out
something	about	her	grandfather’s	grandfather,	Jalan,	the	Fist	of	the	Emperor,
but	it	passed	me	by—I’d	seen	her.	An	ancient	woman,	so	old	it	turned	my
stomach	to	look	at	her.	She	crouched	in	the	shadow	of	the	throne,	hunched	up
so	she’d	be	hidden	away	if	you	looked	from	the	other	side.	She	had	a	face	like
paper	that	had	been	soaked	then	left	to	dry,	her	lips	a	greyish	line,	cheekbones
sharp.	Clad	in	rags	and	tatters,	she	had	no	place	in	that	throne	room,	at	odds
with	the	finery,	the	fire-bronzed	guards	and	the	glittering	retinue	come	to	see
my	name	set	in	place	upon	me.	There	was	no	motion	in	the	crone;	she	could
almost	have	been	a	trick	of	the	light,	a	discarded	cloak,	an	illusion	of	lines
and	shade.

“.	.	.	Jalan?”	The	Red	Queen	stopped	her	litany	with	a	question.
I	had	answered	with	silence,	tearing	my	gaze	from	the	creature	at	her	side.
“Well?”	Grandmother	narrowed	her	regard	to	a	sharp	point	that	held	me.
Still	I	had	nothing.	Martus	had	elbowed	me	hard	enough	to	make	my	ribs

creak.	It	hadn’t	helped.	I	wanted	to	look	back	at	the	old	woman.	Was	she	still
there?	Had	she	moved	the	moment	my	eyes	left	her?	I	imagined	how	she’d
move.	Quick	like	a	spider.	My	stomach	made	a	tight	knot	of	itself.

“Do	you	accept	the	charge	I	have	laid	upon	you,	child?”	Grandmother
asked,	attempting	kindness.

My	glance	flickered	back	to	the	hag.	Still	there,	exactly	the	same,	her	face
half-turned	from	me,	fixed	on	Grandmother.	I	hadn’t	noticed	her	eye	at	first,
but	now	it	drew	me.	One	of	the	cats	at	the	Hall	had	an	eye	like	that.	Milky.
Pearly	almost.	Blind,	my	nurse	called	it.	But	to	me	it	seemed	to	see	more	than
the	other	eye.

“What’s	wrong	with	the	boy?	Is	he	simple?”	Grandmother’s	displeasure
had	rippled	through	the	court,	silencing	their	murmurs.

I	couldn’t	look	away.	I	stood	there	sweating.	Barely	able	to	keep	from



wetting	myself.	Too	scared	to	speak,	too	scared	even	to	lie.	Too	scared	to	do
anything	but	sweat	and	keep	my	eyes	on	that	old	woman.

When	she	moved,	I	nearly	screamed	and	ran.	Instead	just	a	squeak
escaped	me.	“Don-don’t	you	see	her?”

She	stole	into	motion.	So	slow	at	first	you	had	to	measure	her	against	the
background	to	be	sure	it	wasn’t	imagination.	Then	speeding	up,	smooth	and
sure.	She	turned	that	awful	face	towards	me,	one	eye	dark,	the	other	milk	and
pearl.	It	had	felt	hot,	suddenly,	as	if	all	the	great	hearths	had	roared	into	life
with	one	scorching	voice,	sparked	into	fury	on	a	fine	summer’s	day,	the
flames	leaping	from	iron	grates	as	if	they	wanted	nothing	more	than	to	be
amongst	us.

She	was	tall.	I	saw	that	now,	hunched	but	tall.	And	thin,	like	a	bone.
“Don’t	you	see	her?”	My	words	rising	to	a	shriek,	I	pointed	and	she

stepped	towards	me,	a	white	hand	reaching.
“Who?”	Darin	beside	me,	nine	years	under	his	belt	and	too	old	for	such

foolishness.
I	had	no	voice	to	answer	him.	The	blind-eye	woman	had	laid	her	hand	of

paper	and	bones	over	mine.	She	smiled	at	me,	an	ugly	twisting	of	her	face,
like	worms	writhing	over	each	other.	She	smiled,	and	I	fell.

I	fell	into	a	hot,	blind	place.	They	tell	me	I	had	a	fit,	convulsions.	A
“lepsy,”	the	chirurgeon	said	to	Father	the	next	day,	a	chronic	condition,	but
I’ve	never	had	it	again,	not	in	nearly	twenty	years.	All	I	know	is	that	I	fell,
and	I	don’t	think	I’ve	stopped	falling	since.

Grandmother	had	lost	patience	and	set	my	name	upon	me	as	I	jerked	and
twitched	on	the	floor.	“Bring	him	back	when	his	voice	breaks,”	she	said.

And	that	was	it	for	eight	years.	I	came	back	to	the	throne	room	aged
thirteen,	to	be	presented	to	Grandmother	before	the	Saturnalia	feast	in	the
hard	winter	of	89.	On	that	occasion,	and	all	others	since,	I’ve	followed
everyone	else’s	example	and	pretended	not	to	see	the	blind-eye	woman.
Perhaps	they	really	don’t	see	her,	because	Martus	and	Darin	are	too	dumb	to
act	and	poor	liars	at	that,	and	yet	their	eyes	never	so	much	as	flicker	when
they	look	her	way.	Maybe	I’m	the	only	one	to	see	her	when	she	taps	her
fingers	on	the	Red	Queen’s	shoulder.	It’s	hard	not	to	look	when	you	know	you
shouldn’t.	Like	a	woman’s	cleavage,	breasts	squeezed	together	and	lifted	for
inspection,	and	yet	a	prince	is	supposed	not	to	notice,	not	to	drop	his	gaze.	I
try	harder	with	the	blind-eye	woman	and	for	the	most	part	I	manage	it—
though	Grandmother’s	given	me	an	odd	look	from	time	to	time.

In	any	event,	on	this	particular	morning,	sweating	in	the	clothes	I	wore
the	night	before	and	with	half	the	DeVeers’	garden	to	decorate	them,	I	didn’t
mind	in	the	least	being	wedged	between	my	hulking	brothers	and	being	“the
little	one,”	easy	to	overlook.	Frankly,	the	attention	of	either	the	Red	Queen	or
her	silent	sister	were	things	I	could	do	without.



We	stood	for	another	ten	minutes,	unspeaking	in	the	main,	some	princes
yawning,	others	shifting	weight	from	one	foot	to	the	other	or	casting	sour
glances	my	way.	I	do	try	to	keep	my	misadventures	from	polluting	the	calm
waters	of	the	palace.	It’s	ill	advised	to	shit	where	you	eat,	and	besides,	it’s
hard	to	hide	behind	one’s	rank	when	the	offended	party	is	also	a	prince.	Even
so,	over	the	course	of	the	years,	I’d	given	my	cousins	few	reasons	to	love	me.

At	last	the	Red	Queen	came	in,	without	fanfare	but	flanked	by	guards.
The	relief	was	momentary—the	blind-eye	woman	followed	in	her	wake,	and
although	I	turned	away	quicker	than	quick,	she	saw	me	looking.	The	queen
settled	herself	into	her	royal	seat	and	the	guardsmen	arrayed	themselves
around	the	walls.	A	single	chamberlain—Mantal	Drews,	I	think—stood	ill	at
ease	between	the	royal	progeny	and	our	sovereign,	and	once	more	the	hall
returned	to	silence.

I	watched	Grandmother	and,	with	some	effort,	kept	my	gaze	from	sliding
towards	the	white	and	shrivelled	hand	resting	behind	her	head	on	the	throne’s
shoulder.	Over	the	years	I’d	heard	many	rumours	about	Grandmother’s	secret
counsellor,	an	old	and	half-mad	woman	kept	hidden	away—the	Silent	Sister,
they	called	her.	It	seemed,	though,	that	I	stood	alone	in	knowing	that	she
waited	at	the	Red	Queen’s	side	each	day.	Other	people’s	eyes	seemed	to	avoid
her	just	as	I	always	wished	mine	would.

The	Red	Queen	cleared	her	throat.	In	taverns	across	Vermillion	they	tell	it
that	my	grandmother	was	once	a	handsome	woman,	though	monstrous	tall
with	it.	A	heartbreaker	who	attracted	suit	from	all	corners	of	the	Broken
Empire	and	even	beyond.	To	my	eye	she	had	a	brutal	face,	raw-boned,	her
skin	tight	as	if	scorched,	but	still	showing	wrinkles	as	crumpled	parchment
will.	She	had	to	have	seventy	years	on	her,	but	no	one	would	have	called	her
more	than	fifty.	Her	hair	dark	and	without	a	hint	of	grey,	still	showing	deepest
red	where	the	light	caught	it.	Handsome	or	not,	though,	her	eyes	would	turn
any	man’s	bowels	to	water.	Flinty	chips	of	dispassion.	And	no	crown	for	the
warrior	queen,	oh	no.	She	sat	near-swallowed	by	a	robe	of	blacks	and	scarlets,
just	the	thinnest	circlet	of	gold	to	keep	her	locks	in	place,	scraped	back	across
her	head.

“My	children’s	children.”	Grandmother’s	words	came	so	thick	with
disappointment	that	you	felt	it	reach	out	and	try	to	throttle	you.	She	shook	her
head,	as	if	we	were	all	of	us	an	experiment	in	horse	breeding	gone	tragically
astray.	“And	some	of	you	whelping	new	princes	and	princesses	of	your	own,	I
hear.”

“Yes,	w—”
“Idle,	numerous,	and	breeding	sedition	in	your	numbers.”	Grandmother

rolled	over	Cousin	Roland’s	announcement	before	he	could	puff	himself	up.
His	smile	died	in	that	stupid	beard	of	his,	the	one	he	grew	to	allow	people	at
least	the	suspicion	that	he	might	have	a	chin.	“Dark	times	are	coming	and	this



nation	must	be	a	fortress.	The	time	for	being	children	has	passed.	My	blood
runs	in	each	of	you,	thin	though	it’s	grown.	And	you	will	be	soldiers	in	this
coming	war.”

Martus	snorted	at	that,	though	quiet	enough	that	it	would	be	missed.
Martus	had	been	commissioned	into	the	heavy	horse,	destined	for	knight-
general,	commander	of	Red	March’s	elite.	The	Red	Queen	in	a	fit	of	madness
five	years	earlier	had	all	but	eliminated	the	force.	Centuries	of	tradition,
honour,	and	excellence	ploughed	under	at	the	whim	of	an	old	woman.	Now
we	were	all	to	be	soldiers	running	to	battle	on	foot,	digging	ditches,	endlessly
practising	mechanical	tactics	that	any	peasant	could	master	and	that	set	a
prince	no	higher	than	a	potboy.

“.	.	.	greater	foe.	Time	to	put	aside	thoughts	of	empty	conquest	and	draw
in	.	.	.”

I	looked	up	from	my	disgust	to	find	Grandmother	still	droning	on	about
war.	It’s	not	that	I	care	overmuch	about	honour.	All	that	chivalry	nonsense
loads	a	man	down	and	any	sensible	fellow	will	ditch	it	the	moment	he	needs
to	run—but	it’s	the	look	of	the	thing,	the	form	of	it.	To	be	in	one	of	the	three
horse	corps,	to	earn	your	spurs	and	keep	a	trio	of	chargers	at	the	city
barracks	.	.	.	it	had	been	the	birthright	of	young	nobles	since	time
immemorial.	Damn	it,	I	wanted	my	commission.	I	wanted	in	at	the	officers’
mews,	wanted	to	swap	tall	tales	around	the	smoky	tables	at	the	Conarrf	and
ride	along	the	Kings	Way	flying	the	colours	of	the	Red	Lance	or	Iron	Hoof,
with	the	long	hair	and	bristling	moustache	of	a	cavalryman	and	a	stallion
between	my	legs.	Tenth	in	line	to	a	throne	will	get	you	into	a	not-insignificant
number	of	bedchambers,	but	if	a	man	dons	the	scarlet	cloak	of	the	Red	March
riders	and	wraps	his	legs	around	a	destrier,	there	are	few	ladies	of	quality	who
won’t	open	theirs	when	he	flashes	a	smile	at	them.

At	the	corner	of	my	vision	the	blind-eye	woman	moved,	spoiling	my
daydream	and	putting	all	thoughts	of	riding,	of	either	kind,	from	my	head.

“.	.	.	burning	all	dead.	Cremation	is	to	be	mandatory,	for	noble	and
commoner	alike,	and	damn	any	dissent	from	Roma	.	.	.”

That	again.	The	old	bird	had	been	banging	on	about	death	rites	for	over	a
year	now.	As	if	men	my	age	gave	a	fig	for	such	things!	She’d	become
obsessed	with	sailors’	tales,	ghost	stories	from	the	Drowned	Isles,	the
ramblings	of	muddy	drunkards	from	the	Ken	Marshes.	Already	men	went
chained	into	the	ground—good	iron	wasted	against	superstition—and	now
chains	weren’t	enough?	Bodies	must	be	burned?	Well,	the	church	wouldn’t
like	it.	It	would	put	a	crimp	in	their	plans	for	Judgment	Day	and	us	all	rising
from	the	grave	for	a	big	grimy	hug.	But	who	cared?	Really?	I	watched	the
early	light	slide	across	the	walls	high	above	me	and	tried	to	picture	Lisa	as	I’d
left	her	that	morning,	clad	in	brightness	and	shadow	and	nothing	more.

The	crash	of	the	chamberlain’s	staff	on	flagstones	jerked	my	head	back



up.	In	fairness	I’d	had	very	little	sleep	the	night	before	and	a	trying	morning.
If	I	hadn’t	been	caught	a	yard	from	my	bedchamber	door	I	would	have	been
safely	ensconced	therein	until	well	past	noon,	dreaming	better	versions	of	the
daydream	Grandmother	kept	interrupting.

“Bring	in	the	witnesses!”	The	chamberlain	had	a	voice	that	could	make	a
death	sentence	boring.

Four	guardsmen	entered,	flanking	a	Nuban	warrior,	scar-marked	and	tall,
manacled	wrist	and	ankle,	the	chains	all	threaded	through	an	iron	ring	belted
around	his	waist.	That	perked	my	interest.	I	misspent	much	of	my	youth
gambling	at	the	pit	fights	in	the	Latin	Quarter,	and	I	intended	to	misspend
much	of	what	life	remained	to	me	there	too.	I’ve	always	enjoyed	a	good	fight
and	a	healthy	dose	of	bloodshed,	as	long	as	it’s	not	me	being	pummelled	or
my	blood	getting	spilled.	Gordo’s	pits,	or	the	Blood	Holes	down	by	Mercants,
got	you	close	enough	to	wipe	the	occasional	splatter	from	the	toe	of	your
boot,	and	offered	endless	opportunity	for	betting.	Of	late	I’d	even	entered
men	on	my	own	ticket.	Likely	lads	bought	off	the	slave	boats	out	of	Maroc.
None	had	lasted	more	than	two	bouts	yet,	but	even	losing	can	pay	if	you
know	where	to	place	your	wagers.	In	any	event,	the	Nuban	looked	like	a	solid
bet.	Perhaps	he	might	even	be	the	ticket	that	could	get	Maeres	Allus	off	my
back	and	silence	his	tiresome	demands	for	payment	for	brandy	already
consumed	and	for	whores	already	fucked.

A	weedy	half-caste	with	a	decorative	arrangement	of	missing	teeth
followed	the	Nuban	to	translate	his	mumbo	jumbo.	The	chamberlain	posed	a
question	or	two	and	the	man	answered	with	the	usual	nonsense	about	dead
men	rising	from	the	Afrique	sands,	elaborating	the	tales	this	time	to	make	it
small	legions	of	them.	No	doubt	he	hoped	for	freedom	if	his	story	proved
sufficiently	entertaining.	He	did	a	fine	job	of	it,	throwing	in	a	djinn	or	two	for
good	measure,	though	not	the	normal	jolly	fellows	in	satin	pantaloons
offering	wishes.	I	felt	tempted	to	applaud	at	the	end,	but	Grandmother’s	face
suggested	that	might	not	be	a	wise	idea.

Two	more	reprobates	followed,	each	similarly	chained,	each	with	a	more
outrageous	fable	than	the	last.	The	corsair,	a	swarthy	fellow	with	torn	ears
where	the	gold	had	been	ripped	from	him,	spun	a	yarn	about	dead	ships
rising,	crewed	by	drowned	men.	And	the	Slav	spoke	of	bone-men	from	the
barrows	out	in	the	grass	sea.	Ancient	dead	clad	in	pale	gold	and	grave	goods
from	before	the	Builders’	time.	Neither	man	had	much	potential	for	the	pits.
The	corsair	looked	wiry	and	was	no	doubt	used	to	fighting	in	close	quarters,
but	he’d	lost	fingers	from	both	hands	and	age	was	against	him.	The	Slav	was
a	big	fellow,	but	slow.	Some	men	have	a	special	kind	of	clumsiness	that
announces	itself	in	every	move	they	make.	I	started	to	dream	about	Lisa
again.	Then	Lisa	and	Micha	together.	Then	Lisa,	Micha,	and	Sharal.	It	got
quite	complicated.	But	when	more	guards	marched	in	with	the	fourth	and	last



of	these	“witnesses,”	Grandmother	suddenly	had	all	my	attention.	You	only
had	to	look	at	the	man	to	tell	the	Blood	Holes	wouldn’t	know	what	had	hit
them.	I’d	found	my	new	fighter!

The	prisoner	strode	into	the	throne	room	with	head	held	high.	He	dwarfed
the	four	guards	around	him.	I’ve	seen	taller	men,	though	not	often.	I’ve	seen
men	more	heavily	muscled,	but	seldom.	I’ve	even	on	rare	occasions	seen	men
larger	in	both	dimensions,	but	this	Norseman	carried	himself	like	a	true
warrior.	I	may	not	be	much	of	a	one	for	fighting,	but	I’ve	a	great	eye	for	a
fighter.	He	walked	in	like	murder,	and	when	they	jerked	him	to	a	halt	before
the	chamberlain,	he	snarled.	Snarled.	I	could	almost	count	the	gold	crowns
spilling	into	my	hands	when	I	got	this	one	to	the	pits!

“Snorri	ver	Snagason,	purchased	off	the	slave	ship	Heddod.”	The
chamberlain	took	a	step	back	despite	himself	and	kept	his	staff	between	them
as	he	read	from	his	notes.	“Sold	in	trade	exchange	off	the	Hardanger	Fjord.”
He	traced	a	finger	down	the	scroll,	frowning.	“Describe	the	events	you
recounted	to	our	agent.”

I	had	no	idea	where	the	place	might	be,	but	clearly	they	bred	men	tough
up	in	Hardanger.	The	slavers	had	hacked	off	most	of	the	man’s	hair,	but	the
thick	shock	remaining	was	so	black	as	to	almost	be	blue.	I’d	thought
Norsemen	fair.	The	deep	burn	across	his	neck	and	shoulders	showed	he	didn’t
take	well	to	the	sun,	though.	Innumerable	lash	marks	intersected	the	sunburn
—that	had	to	sting	a	bit!	Still,	the	fight	pits	were	always	in	shadow	so	he’d
appreciate	that	part	of	my	plans	for	him	at	least.

“Speak	up,	man.”	Grandmother	addressed	the	giant	directly.	He’d	made
an	impression	even	on	her.

Snorri	turned	his	gaze	on	the	Red	Queen	and	gave	her	the	type	of	look
that’s	apt	to	lose	men	eyeballs.	He	had	blue	eyes,	pale.	That	at	least	was	in
keeping	with	his	heritage.	That	and	the	remnants	of	his	furs	and	sealskins,	and
the	Norse	runes	picked	out	in	black	ink	and	blue	around	his	upper	arms.
Writing	too,	some	sort	of	heathen	script	by	the	look	of	it	but	with	the	hammer
and	the	axe	in	there	as	well.

Grandmother	opened	her	mouth	to	speak	again,	but	the	Norseman
preempted	her,	stealing	the	tension	for	his	own	words.

“I	left	the	North	from	Hardanger,	but	it	is	not	my	home.	Hardanger	is
quiet	waters,	green	slopes,	goats,	and	cherry	orchards.	The	people	there	are
not	the	true	folk	of	the	North.”

He	spoke	with	a	deep	voice	and	a	shallow	accent,	sharpening	the	blunt
edges	of	each	word	just	enough	so	you	knew	he	was	raised	in	another	tongue.
He	addressed	the	whole	room,	though	he	kept	his	eyes	on	the	queen.	He	told
his	story	with	an	orator’s	skill.	I’ve	heard	tell	that	the	winter	in	the	North	is	a
night	that	lasts	three	months.	Such	nights	breed	storytellers.

“My	home	was	in	Uuliskind,	at	the	far	reach	of	the	Bitter	Ice.	I	tell	you



my	story	because	that	place	and	time	are	over	and	live	only	in	memory.	I
would	put	these	things	into	your	minds,	not	to	give	them	meaning	or	life,	but
to	make	them	real	to	you,	to	let	you	walk	among	the	Undoreth,	the	Children
of	the	Hammer,	and	to	have	you	hear	of	their	last	struggle.”

I	don’t	know	how	he	did	it,	but	when	he	wrapped	his	voice	around	the
words	Snorri	wove	a	kind	of	magic.	It	set	the	hairs	pricking	on	the	backs	of
my	arms,	and	damned	if	I	didn’t	want	to	be	a	Viking	too,	swinging	my	axe	on
a	longboat	sailing	up	the	Uulisk	Fjord,	with	the	spring	ice	crunching	beneath
its	hull.

Every	time	he	paused	for	breath	the	foolishness	left	me	and	I	counted
myself	very	lucky	to	be	warm	and	safe	in	Red	March,	but	while	he	spoke	a
Viking	heart	beat	in	every	listener’s	chest,	even	mine.

“North	of	Uuliskind,	past	the	Jarlson	Uplands,	the	ice	begins	in	earnest.
The	highest	summer	will	drive	it	back	a	mile	or	three,	but	before	long	you
find	yourself	raised	above	the	land	on	a	blanket	of	ice	that	never	melts,
folded,	fissured,	and	ancient.	The	Undoreth	venture	there	only	to	trade	with
Inowen,	the	men	who	live	in	snow	and	hunt	for	seal	on	the	sea	ice.	The
Inowen	are	not	as	other	men,	sewn	into	their	sealskins	and	eating	the	fat	of
whales.	They	are	.	.	.	a	different	kind.

“Inowen	offer	walrus	tusks,	oils	sweated	from	blubber,	the	teeth	of	great
sharks,	pelts	of	the	white	bear	and	skins.	Also	ivories	carved	into	combs	and
picks	and	into	the	shapes	of	the	true	spirits	of	the	ice.”

When	my	grandmother	interjected	into	the	story’s	flow,	she	sounded	like
a	screeching	crow	trying	to	overwrite	a	melody.	Still,	credit	to	her	for	finding
the	will	to	speak—I’d	forgotten	even	that	I	stood	in	the	throne	room,	sore-
footed	and	yawning	for	my	bed.	Instead	I	was	with	Snorri	trading	shaped	iron
and	salt	for	seals	carved	from	the	bones	of	whales.

“Speak	of	the	dead,	Snagason.	Put	some	fear	into	these	idle	princes,”
Grandmother	told	him.

I	saw	it	then.	The	quickest	flicker	of	his	glance	towards	the	blind-eye
woman.	I’d	come	to	understand	it	was	common	knowledge	that	the	Red
Queen	consulted	with	the	Silent	Sister.	But	as	with	most	such	“common
knowledge,”	the	recipients	would	be	hard	pressed	to	tell	you	how	they	came
by	their	information,	though	willing	to	insist	upon	its	veracity	with
considerable	vigour.	It	was	common	knowledge,	for	example,	that	the	Duke
of	Grast	took	young	boys	to	his	bed.	I	put	that	one	about	after	he	slapped	me
for	making	an	improper	suggestion	to	his	sister—a	buxom	wench	with	plenty
of	improper	suggestions	of	her	own.	The	vicious	slander	stuck	and	I’ve	taken
great	delight	in	defending	his	honour	ever	since	against	heated	opposition
who	“had	it	from	a	trusted	source!”	It	was	common	knowledge	that	the	Duke
of	Grast	sodomized	small	boys	in	the	privacy	of	his	castle,	common
knowledge	that	the	Red	Queen	practised	forbidden	sorceries	in	her	highest



tower,	common	knowledge	that	the	Silent	Sister,	a	parlous	witch	whose	hand
lay	behind	much	of	the	empire’s	ills,	was	either	in	the	Red	Queen’s	palm	or
vice	versa.	But	until	this	brutish	Norseman	glanced	her	way	I’d	never
encountered	any	other	person	who	truly	saw	the	blind-eye	woman	at	my
grandmother’s	side.

Whether	convinced	by	the	Silent	Sister’s	pearl-eyed	stare	or	the	Red
Queen’s	command,	Snorri	ver	Snagason	bowed	his	head	and	spoke	of	the
dead.

“In	the	Jarlson	Uplands	the	frozen	dead	wander.	Corpse	tribes,	black	with
frost,	stagger	in	columns,	lost	in	the	swirl	of	the	frostral.	They	say	mammoth
walk	with	them,	dead	beasts	freed	from	the	ice	cliffs	that	held	them	far	to	the
north	from	times	before	Odin	first	gave	men	the	curse	of	speech.	Their
numbers	are	unknown,	but	they	are	many.

“When	the	gates	of	Niflheim	open	to	release	the	winter,	and	the	frost
giants’	breath	rolls	out	across	the	North,	the	dead	come	with	it,	taking
whoever	they	can	find	to	join	their	ranks.	Sometimes	lone	traders,	or
fishermen	washed	up	on	strange	shores.	Sometimes	they	cross	a	fjord	by	ice
bridges	and	take	whole	villages.”

Grandmother	rose	from	her	throne,	and	a	score	of	gauntleted	hands
moved	to	cover	sword	hilts.	She	cast	a	sour	glance	towards	her	offspring.
“And	how	do	you	come	to	stand	before	me	in	chains,	Snorri	ver	Snagason?”

“We	thought	the	threat	came	from	the	North,	from	the	Uplands	and	the
Bitter	Ice.”	He	shook	his	head.	“When	ships	came	up	the	Uulisk	in	depths	of
night,	black-sailed	and	silent,	we	slept,	our	sentries	watching	north	for	the
frozen	dead.	Raiders	had	crossed	the	Quiet	Sea	and	come	against	the
Undoreth.	Men	of	the	Drowned	Isles	broke	amongst	us.	Some	living,	others
corpses	preserved	from	rot,	and	other	creatures	still—half-men	from	the
Brettan	swamps,	corpse-eaters,	ghouls	with	venomed	darts	that	steal	a	man’s
strength	and	leave	him	helpless	as	a	newborn.

“Sven	Broke-Oar	guided	their	ships.	Sven	and	others	of	the	Hardassa.
Without	their	treachery	the	Islanders	would	never	have	been	able	to	navigate
the	Uulisk	by	night.	Even	by	day	they	would	have	lost	ships.”	Snorri’s	hands
closed	into	huge	fists	and	muscle	heaped	across	his	shoulders,	twitching	for
violence.	“The	Broke-Oar	took	twenty	warriors	in	chains	as	part	of	his
payment.	He	sold	us	in	Hardanger	Fjord.	The	trader,	a	merchant	of	the	Port
Kingdoms,	meant	to	have	us	sold	again	in	Afrique	after	we’d	rowed	his	cargo
south.	Your	agent	bought	me	in	Kordoba,	in	the	port	of	Albus.”

Grandmother	must	have	been	hunting	far	and	wide	for	these	tales—Red
March	had	no	tradition	of	slavery	and	I	knew	she	didn’t	approve	of	the	trade.

“And	the	rest?”	Grandmother	asked,	stepping	past	him,	beyond	arm’s
reach,	seemingly	angled	towards	me.	“Those	not	taken	by	your	countryman?”

Snorri	stared	into	the	empty	throne,	then	directly	at	the	blind-eye	woman.



He	spoke	past	gritted	teeth.	“Many	were	killed.	I	lay	poisoned	and	saw	ghouls
swarm	my	wife.	I	saw	Drowned	men	chase	my	children	and	couldn’t	turn	my
head	to	watch	their	flight.	The	Islanders	returned	to	their	ships	with	red
swords.	Prisoners	were	taken.”	He	paused,	frowned,	shook	his	head.	“Sven
Broke-Oar	told	me	.	.	.	tales.	The	truth	would	twist	the	Broke-Oar’s
tongue	.	.	.	but	he	said	the	Islanders	planned	to	take	prisoners	to	excavate	the
Bitter	Ice.	Olaaf	Rikeson’s	army	is	out	there.	The	Broke-Oar	told	it	that	the
Islanders	had	been	sent	to	free	them.”

“An	army?”	Grandmother	stood	almost	close	enough	to	touch	now.	A
monster	of	a	woman,	taller	than	me—and	I	overtop	six	foot—and	probably
strong	enough	to	break	me	across	her	knee.	“Who	is	this	Rikeson?”

The	Norseman	raised	an	eyebrow	at	that,	as	if	every	monarch	should
know	the	tawdry	history	of	his	frozen	wastes.	“Olaaf	Rikeson	marched	north
in	the	first	summer	of	the	reign	of	Emperor	Orrin	III.	The	sagas	have	it	that	he
planned	to	drive	the	giants	from	Jotenheim	and	bore	with	him	the	key	to	their
gates.	More	sober	histories	say	perhaps	his	goal	was	just	to	bring	the	Inowen
into	the	empire.	Whatever	the	truth,	the	records	agree	he	took	a	thousand	and
more	with	him,	perhaps	ten	thousand.”	Snorri	shrugged	and	turned	from	the
Silent	Sister	to	face	Grandmother.	Braver	than	me,	though	that’s	not	saying
much—I’d	not	turn	my	back	on	that	creature.	“Rikeson	thought	he	marched
with	Odin’s	blessing,	but	the	giants’	breath	rolled	down	even	so,	and	one
summer’s	day	every	warrior	in	his	army	froze	where	he	stood	and	the	snows
drowned	them.

“The	Broke-Oar	has	it	that	those	taken	from	Uuliskind	are	excavating	the
dead.	Freeing	them	from	the	ice.”

Grandmother	paced	along	the	front	line	of	our	number.	Martus,	little	me,
Darin,	Cousin	Roland	with	his	stupid	beard,	Rotus,	lean	and	sour,	unmarried
at	thirty,	duller	than	ditchwater,	obsessed	with	reading—and	histories	at	that!
She	paused	by	Rotus,	another	of	her	favourites	and	third	in	line	by	right—
though	still	it	seemed	she	would	give	her	throne	to	Cousin	Serah	before	him.
“And	why,	Snagason?	Who	has	sent	these	forces	on	such	an	errand?”	She	met
Rotus’s	gaze	as	if	he	of	all	of	us	would	appreciate	the	answer.

The	giant	paused.	It’s	hard	for	a	Norseman	to	pale	but	I	swear	he	did.
“The	Dead	King,	lady.”

A	guard	made	to	strike	him	down,	though	whether	for	the	improper
address	or	for	making	mock	with	foolish	tales	I	couldn’t	say.	Grandmother
stayed	the	man	with	a	lifted	finger.	“The	Dead	King.”	She	made	a	slow
repetition	of	the	words	as	if	they	somehow	sealed	her	opinion.	Perhaps	she’d
mentioned	him	before	when	I	wasn’t	listening.

I’d	heard	tales,	of	course.	Children	had	started	to	tell	them	to	scare	each
other	on	Hallows	Night.	The	Dead	King	will	come	for	you!	Woo,	woo,	woo.
It	took	a	child	to	be	scared.	Anyone	with	a	proper	idea	of	how	far	away	the



Drowned	Isles	were	and	of	how	many	kingdoms	lay	between	us	would	have	a
hard	time	caring.	Even	if	the	stories	held	a	core	of	truth,	I	couldn’t	see	any
serious-minded	gentleman	getting	overly	excited	about	a	bunch	of	heathen
necromancers	playing	with	old	corpses	on	whatever	wet	hillocks	remained	to
the	Lords	of	the	Isles.	So	what	if	they	actually	did	raise	a	hundred	dead	men
twitching	from	their	coffins	and	dropping	corpse-flesh	with	every	step?	Ten
heavy	horse	would	ride	down	any	such	in	half	an	hour	without	loss	and	damn
their	rotting	eyes.

I	felt	tired	and	out	of	sorts,	grumpy	that	I’d	had	to	stand	half	the	morning
and	more	listening	to	this	parade	of	nonsense.	If	I’d	been	drunk	too	I	might
have	given	voice	to	my	thoughts.	It’s	probably	a	good	job	I	wasn’t,	though	the
Red	Queen	could	scare	me	sober	with	a	look.

Grandmother	turned	and	pointed	at	the	Norseman.	“Well	told,	Snorri	ver
Snagason.	Let	your	axe	guide	you.”	I	blinked	at	that.	Some	sort	of	northern
saying,	I	guessed.	“Take	him	away,”	she	said,	and	her	guards	led	him	off,
chains	clanking.

My	fellow	princes	fell	to	muttering,	and	me	to	yawning.	I	watched	the
huge	Norseman	leave	and	hoped	we’d	be	released	soon.	Despite	the	call	of
my	bed	I	had	important	plans	for	Snorri	ver	Snagason	and	needed	to	get	hold
of	him	quickly.

Grandmother	returned	to	her	throne	and	held	her	peace	until	the	doors	had
closed	behind	the	last	prisoner	to	exit.

“Did	you	know	there	is	a	door	into	death?”	The	Red	Queen	didn’t	raise
her	voice	and	yet	it	cut	through	the	princes’	chatter.	“An	actual	door.	One	you
can	set	your	hand	against.	And	behind	it,	all	the	lands	of	death.”	Her	gaze
swept	across	us.	“There’s	an	important	question	you	should	ask	me	now.”

No	one	spoke—I	hadn’t	a	clue	but	was	tempted	to	answer	anyway	just	to
hurry	things	along.	I	decided	against	it	and	the	silence	stretched	until	Rotus
cleared	his	throat	at	last	and	asked,	“Where?”

“Wrong.”	Grandmother	cocked	her	head.	“The	question	was,	‘Why?’
Why	is	there	a	door	into	death?	The	answer	is	as	important	as	anything
you’ve	heard	today.”	Her	stare	fell	upon	me	and	I	quickly	turned	my	attention
to	the	state	of	my	fingernails.	“There	is	a	door	into	death	because	we	live	in
an	age	of	myth.	Our	ancestors	lived	in	a	world	of	immutable	laws.	Times	have
changed.	There	is	a	door	because	there	are	tales	of	that	door,	because	myths
and	legends	have	grown	about	it	over	centuries,	because	it	is	set	in	holy
books,	and	because	the	stories	of	that	door	are	told	and	retold.	There	is	a	door
because	in	some	way	we	wanted	it,	or	expected	it,	or	both.	This	is	why.	And
this	is	why	you	must	believe	the	tales	that	have	been	told	today.	The	world	is
changing,	moving	beneath	our	feet.	We	are	in	a	war,	children	of	the	Red
March,	though	you	may	not	see	it	yet,	may	not	feel	it.	We	are	in	a	war	against
everything	you	can	imagine	and	armed	only	with	our	desire	to	oppose	it.”



Nonsense,	of	course.	Red	March’s	only	recent	war	was	against	Scorron,
and	even	that	had	fallen	into	an	uneasy	truce	this	past	year	.	.	.	Grandmother
must	have	sensed	she	was	losing	even	the	most	gullible	of	her	audience	and
switched	tactics.

“Rotus	asked	‘where,’	but	I	know	where	the	door	is.	And	I	know	that	it
cannot	be	opened.”	She	stood	from	her	throne	again.	“And	what	does	a	door
demand?”

“A	key?”	Serah,	ever	eager	to	please.
“Yes.	A	key.”	A	smile	for	her	protégée.	“Such	a	key	would	be	sought	by

many.	A	dangerous	thing,	but	better	we	should	own	it	than	our	enemies.	I	will
have	tasks	for	you	all	soon:	quests	for	some,	questions	for	others,	new	lessons
for	others	still.	Be	sure	to	commit	yourselves	to	these	labours	as	to	nothing
before.	In	this	you	will	serve	me,	you	will	serve	yourselves,	and	most
importantly—you	will	serve	the	empire.”

Exchanged	glances,	muttering,	“Where	was	Red	March	in	all	that?”
Martus	perhaps.

“Enough!”	Grandmother	clapped	her	hands,	releasing	us.	“Go.	Scurry
back	to	your	empty	luxuries	and	enjoy	them	while	you	can.	Or—if	my	blood
runs	hot	in	you—consider	these	words	and	act	on	them.	These	are	the	end
days.	All	our	lives	draw	in	towards	a	single	point	and	time,	not	too	many
miles	or	years	from	this	room.	A	point	in	history	when	the	emperor	will	either
save	us	or	damn	us.	All	we	can	do	is	buy	him	the	time	he	needs—and	the
price	must	be	paid	in	blood.”

At	last!	I	hurried	out	amongst	the	others,	catching	up	with	Serah.	“Well,
that	settles	it!	The	old	bat’s	cracked.	The	emperor!”	I	laughed	and	flashed	her
my	cavalry	grin.	“Even	Grandmother	isn’t	old	enough	to	have	seen	the	last
emperor.”

Serah	fixed	me	with	a	look	of	disgust.	“Did	you	listen	to	anything	she
said?”	And	off	she	strode,	leaving	me	standing	there,	jostled	by	Martus	and
Darin	as	they	passed	by.



FOUR

From	the	throne	room	I	sprinted	down	the	grand	corridor,	turning	left
where	all	my	family	turned	right.	Armour,	statuary,	portraits,	displays	of

fanned-out	swords,	all	of	them	flashed	past.	My	day	boots	pounded	a	hundred
yards	of	staggeringly	expensive	woven	rug,	luxuriant	silks	patterned	in	the
Indus	style.	I	turned	the	corner	at	the	far	end,	teetering	on	the	edge	of	control,
dodged	two	maids,	and	ran	flat-out	along	the	central	corridor	of	the	guest
range,	where	scores	of	rooms	were	laid	ready	against	the	possibility	of
visiting	nobility.

“Out	the	fucking	way!”	Some	old	retainer	doddered	from	a	doorway	into
my	path.	One	of	my	father’s—Robbin,	a	grey	old	cripple	always	limping
about	the	place	getting	underfoot.	I	swerved	past	him—Lord	knows	why	we
keep	such	hangers-on—and	accelerated	down	the	hallway.

Twice	guardsmen	startled	from	their	alcoves,	one	even	calling	a	challenge
before	deciding	I	was	more	ass	than	assassin.	Two	doors	short	of	the
corridor’s	end	I	stopped	and	made	an	entrance	to	the	Green	Room,	gambling
that	it	would	be	unoccupied.	The	room,	chambered	in	rustic	style	with	a	four-
poster	bed	carved	like	spreading	oaks,	lay	empty	and	shrouded	in	white
linens.	I	passed	the	bed,	wherein	I’d	once	spent	several	pleasant	nights	in	the
company	of	a	dusky	contessa	from	the	southernmost	reaches	of	Roma,	and
threw	back	the	shutters.	Through	the	window,	onto	the	balcony,	vault	the
balustrade,	and	drop	to	the	peaked	roof	of	the	royal	stables,	an	edifice	that
would	put	to	shame	any	mansion	on	the	Kings	Way.

Now,	I	know	how	to	fall,	but	the	drop	from	the	stables	roof	would	kill	a
Chinee	acrobat,	and	so	the	speed	with	which	I	ran	along	the	stone	gutter	was	a
careful	balance	between	my	desire	not	to	fall	to	my	death	and	my	desire	not	to
be	stabbed	to	my	death	by	Maeres	Allus	or	one	of	his	enforcers.	The	giant
Norseman	could	bludgeon	me	a	way	out	of	debt	altogether	if	I	managed	to
secure	his	services	and	make	the	right	wagers.	Hell,	if	people	saw	what	I	saw
in	the	man	and	wouldn’t	give	me	good	odds,	then	I	could	just	slip	him	some
bonewort	and	bet	against	him.

At	the	far	end	of	the	stables	hall	two	Corinthian	pillars	supported	ancient
vines,	or	vice	versa.	Either	way	a	good,	or	desperate,	climber	could	make	his



way	to	ground	there.	I	slid	the	last	ten	foot,	bruised	my	heel,	bit	my	tongue,
and	ran	off	towards	the	Battle	Gate	spitting	blood.

I	arrived	there	winded	and	had	to	bend	double,	palms	on	thighs,	heaving
in	great	lungfuls	of	air	before	I	could	assess	the	situation.

Two	guards	watched	me	with	undisguised	curiosity.	An	old	soak
commonly	known	as	Double,	and	a	youngster	I	didn’t	recognize.

“Double!”	I	straightened	up	and	raised	a	hand	in	greeting.	“What	dungeon
are	the	queen’s	prisoners	being	taken	to?”	It	would	be	the	war	cells	up	in	the
Marsail	keep.	They	might	be	slaves	but	you	wouldn’t	put	the	Norseman	in
with	common	stock.	I	asked	anyway.	It’s	always	good	to	open	with	an	easy
question	to	put	your	man	at	ease.

“Ain’t	no	cells	for	them	lot.”	Double	made	to	spit,	then	thought	better	of
it	and	swallowed	noisily.

“Wh—?”	She	couldn’t	be	having	them	killed!	It	would	be	a	criminal
waste.

“They’s	going	free.	Tha’s	what	I	heard.”	Double	shook	his	head	at	the
badness	of	the	business,	jowls	wobbling.	“Contaph’s	coming	up	to	process
them.”	He	nodded	out	across	the	plaza	and	sure	enough	there	was	Contaph,
layered	in	his	official	robes	and	beetling	towards	us	with	the	sort	of	self-
importance	that	only	minor	functionaries	can	muster.	From	the	high	latticed
windows	above	the	Battle	Gate	I	could	hear	the	distant	clank	of	chains,
drawing	nearer.

“Damn	it.”	I	glanced	from	door	to	subchamberlain	and	back	again.	“Hold
them	here,	Double,”	I	told	him.	“Don’t	tell	them	anything.	Not	a	thing.	I’ll	see
you	right.	Your	friend	too.”	And	with	that	I	hurried	off	to	intercept	Ameral
Contaph	of	House	Mecer.

We	met	in	the	middle	of	the	plaza	where	an	ancient	sundial	spelled	out	the
time	with	morning	shadows.	Already	the	flagstones	were	beginning	to	heat	up
and	the	day’s	promise	simmered	above	the	rooftops.	“Ameral!”	I	threw	my
hands	wide	as	though	he	were	an	old	friend.

“Prince	Jalan.”	He	ducked	his	head	as	if	seeking	to	take	me	from	his
sight.	I	could	forgive	him	his	suspicions;	as	a	child	I	used	to	hide	scorpions	in
his	pockets.

“Those	slaves	that	put	on	this	morning’s	entertainment	in	the	throne
room	.	.	.	what’s	to	become	of	them,	Ameral?”	I	moved	to	intercept	him	while
he	tried	to	circumnavigate	me,	his	order-scroll	clutched	tight	in	one	pudgy
fist.

“I’m	to	set	them	on	a	caravan	for	Port	Ismuth	with	papers	dissolving	any
indenture.”	He	stopped	trying	to	get	past	me	and	sighed.	“What	is	it	that	you
want,	Prince	Jalan?”

“Only	the	Norseman.”	I	gave	him	a	smile	and	a	wink.	“He’s	too
dangerous	to	just	set	free.	That	should	have	been	obvious	to	everyone.	In	any



event,	Grandmother	sent	me	to	take	charge	of	him.”
Contaph	looked	up	at	me,	eyes	narrow	with	distrust.	“I’ve	had	no	such

instructions.”
I	have,	I	must	confess,	a	very	honest	face.	Bluff	and	courageous,	it’s	been

called.	I’m	easy	to	mistake	for	a	hero,	and	with	a	little	effort	I	can	convince
even	the	most	cynical	stranger	of	my	sincerity.	With	people	who	know	me,
that	trick	becomes	more	difficult.	Much	more	difficult.

“Walk	with	me.”	I	set	a	hand	to	his	shoulder	and	steered	him	towards	the
Battle	Gate.	It’s	good	to	steer	a	man	in	the	direction	he	intended	to	go.	It	blurs
the	line	between	what	he	wants	and	what	you	want.

“In	truth	the	Red	Queen	gave	me	a	scroll	with	the	order.	A	hasty	scrawl
on	a	scrap	of	parchment,	really.	And	to	my	shame	I’ve	let	it	drop	in	my	rush
to	get	here.”	I	took	my	hand	from	his	shoulder	and	unfastened	the	gold	chain
from	around	my	wrist,	a	thing	of	heavy	links	set	with	a	small	ruby	on	both
clasps.	“It	would	be	deeply	embarrassing	for	me	to	have	to	return	and	admit
the	loss	to	my	grandmother.	A	friend	would	understand	such	things.”	I	took	to
steering	him	again	as	if	my	only	desire	were	for	him	to	reach	his	destination
safely.	The	chain	I	dangled	before	him.	“You	are	my	friend,	aren’t	you,
Ameral?”	Rather	than	drop	the	chain	into	a	pocket	of	his	robe	and	risk
reminding	him	of	scorpions,	I	pressed	it	into	the	midst	of	his	sweaty	palm	and
risked	him	realizing	it	was	red	glass	and	gold	plated	over	lead,	and	thinly	at
that.	Anything	of	true	value	I’d	long	since	pawned	against	the	interest	on	my
debts.

“You’ll	retrace	your	steps	and	find	this	document?”	Contaph	asked,
pausing	to	stare	at	the	chain	in	his	hand.	“And	bring	it	for	filing	before
sunset?”

“Assuredly.”	I	oozed	sincerity.	Any	more	and	it	would	be	dripping	from
me.

“He	is	dangerous,	this	Norseman.”	Contaph	nodded	as	if	persuading
himself.	“A	heathen	with	false	gods.	I	was	surprised,	I	must	admit,	to	see
freedom	set	against	his	name.”

“An	oversight.”	I	nodded.	“Now	corrected.”	Ahead	of	us	Double
appeared	to	be	engaged	in	heated	conversation	through	the	view	grille	set	into
the	Battle	Gate’s	subdoor.	“You	may	allow	the	prisoners	out,”	I	called	to	him.
“We’re	ready	for	them	now!”

	•	•	•	

“You’re	looking	uncommonly	pleased	with	yourself.”	Darin	strolled
into	the	High	Hall,	a	dining	gallery	named	for	its	elevation	rather

than	the	height	of	its	ceiling.	I	like	to	eat	there	for	the	view	it	offers,	both	out
across	the	palace	compound	and,	via	slit	windows,	into	the	great	entrance	hall



of	my	father’s	house.
“Pheasant,	pickled	trout,	hen’s	eggs.”	I	gestured	at	the	silver	plates	set

before	me	on	the	long	trestle.	“What’s	not	to	be	pleased	about?	Help
yourself.”	Darin	is	self-righteous	and	overly	curious	about	my	doings,	but	not
the	royal	pain	in	the	arse	that	Martus	is,	so	by	dint	of	not	being	Martus	he
carries	the	title	of	“favourite	brother.”

“The	domo	reports	dishes	keep	going	missing	from	the	kitchens	of	late.”
Darin	took	an	egg	and	sat	at	the	far	end	of	the	table	with	it.

“Curious.”	That	would	be	Jula,	our	sharp-eyed	head	cook,	telling	tales	to
the	house	domo,	though	how	such	whispers	came	to	Darin’s	ear	.	.	.	“I’d	have
a	few	of	the	scullions	beaten.	Soon	put	a	stop	to	it.”

“On	what	evidence?”	He	salted	the	egg	and	bit	deep.
“Evidence	be	damned!	Bloody	up	a	few	of	the	menials,	put	the	fear	into

the	lot	of	them.	That’ll	put	an	end	to	it.	That’s	what	Grandmother	would	do.
Light	fingers	get	broken,	she’d	say.”	I	went	for	honest	outrage,	using	my	own
discomfort	to	colour	my	reactions.	No	more	selling	off	the	family	silver	for
Jal,	then	.	.	.	that	line	of	credit	had	come	to	an	end.	Still,	I	had	the	Norseman
safely	stowed	away	in	the	Marsail	keep.	I	could	see	the	keep	from	where	I	sat,
a	slouching	edifice	of	stone	more	ancient	than	any	part	of	the	palace,	scarred
and	disfigured	but	stubbornly	resisting	the	plans	of	a	dozen	former	kings	to
tear	it	down.	A	ring	of	tiny	windows,	heavily	barred,	ran	around	its	girth	like
a	belt.	Snorri	ver	Snagason	would	be	looking	up	at	one	of	those	from	the	floor
of	his	cell.	I’d	told	them	to	give	him	red	meat,	rare	and	bloody.	Fighters	thrive
on	blood.

For	the	longest	time	I	stared	out	the	window,	watching	the	keep	and	the
vast	landscape	of	the	heavens	behind	it,	a	sky	of	white	and	blue,	all	in	motion
so	that	the	keep	seemed	to	move	and	the	clouds	stay	still,	making	a	ship	of	all
that	stone,	ploughing	on	through	white	waves.

“What	did	you	think	of	all	that	rubbish	this	morning?”	I	asked	the
question	without	expecting	an	answer,	sure	that	Darin	had	taken	his	leave.

“I	think	if	Grandmother	is	worried,	we	should	be	too,”	Darin	said.
“A	door	into	death?	Corpses?	Necromancy?”	I	sucked	and	the	flesh	came

easily	off	a	pheasant’s	bone.	“Am	I	to	fear	this?”	I	tapped	the	bone	to	the
table,	looked	away	from	the	window,	and	grinned	at	him.	“Is	it	going	to
pursue	me	for	vengeance?”	I	made	it	walk.

“You	heard	those	men—”
“Have	you	ever	seen	a	dead	man	walk?	Forget	distant	deserts	and	ice

wastes.	Here	in	Red	March,	has	anyone	ever	seen	such?”
Darin	shrugged.	“Grandmother	says	at	least	one	unborn	has	entered	the

city.	That’s	something	to	be	taken	seriously.”
“A	what?”
“Jesu!	Did	you	really	not	listen	to	a	word	she	said?	She	is	the	queen,	you



know.	You’d	do	well	to	pay	attention	from	time	to	time.”
“An	unborn?”	The	term	rang	no	bells.	It	didn’t	even	approach	the	belfry.
“Something	born	into	death	rather	than	life,	remember?”	Darin	shook	his

head	at	my	blank	look.	“Forget	it!	Just	listen	now.	Father	expects	you	at	this
opera	of	his	tonight.	No	showing	up	late,	or	drunk,	or	both.	No	pretending
nobody	told	you.”

“Opera?	Dear	God,	why?”	That	was	the	last	thing	I	needed.	A	bunch	of
fat	and	painted	idiots	wailing	at	me	from	a	stage	for	several	hours.

“Just	be	there.	A	cardinal	is	expected	to	finance	such	projects	from	time	to
time.	And	when	he	does,	his	family	had	better	put	in	an	appearance	or	the
chattering	classes	will	want	to	know	why.”

I	had	opened	my	mouth	to	protest	when	it	occurred	to	me	that	the	DeVeer
sisters	would	be	among	those	chattering	classes.	Phenella	Maitus	too,	the
newly	arrived	and	allegedly	stunning	daughter	of	Ortus	Maitus,	whose
pockets	ran	so	deep	it	might	even	be	worth	a	marriage	contract	to	reach	into
them.	And	of	course	if	I	could	have	Snorri	make	his	debut	in	the	pits	before
the	show	started,	then	I	would	likely	find	no	end	of	aristocratic	and	mercantile
purses	opening	in	the	opera	intermissions	to	wager	on	this	exciting	new
blood.	If	there’s	one	good	thing	to	be	said	about	opera,	it’s	that	it	makes	a
man	appreciate	all	other	forms	of	entertainment	so	much	more.	I	closed	my
mouth	and	nodded.	Darin	left,	still	munching	his	egg.

The	appetite	had	left	me.	I	pushed	the	plate	away.	Idle	fingers	discovered
my	old	locket	beneath	the	folds	of	my	cloak	and	I	fished	it	out,	tapping	it
against	the	table.	A	cheap	enough	thing	of	plate	and	glass,	it	clicked	open	to
reveal	Mother’s	portrait.	I	snapped	it	shut	again.	She	last	saw	me	when	I	was
seven;	a	flux	took	her.	They	call	it	a	flux.	It’s	just	the	shits,	really.	You
weaken,	fever	takes	you,	you	die	stinking.	Not	the	way	a	princess	is	supposed
to	die,	or	a	mother.	I	slipped	the	locket	away	unopened.	Best	she	remember
me	as	seven	and	not	see	me	now.

	•	•	•	

Before	leaving	the	palace	I	picked	up	my	escort,	the	two	elderly
guardsmen	allotted	to	the	task	of	preserving	my	royal	hide	by	my

father’s	generosity.	With	the	pair	in	tow	I	swung	by	the	Red	Hall	and
collected	a	handful	of	my	usual	cronies.	Roust	and	Lon	Greyjar,	cousins	of
the	Prince	of	Arrow,	sent	to	“further	relations,”	which	seemed	to	entail	eating
all	our	best	vittles	and	chasing	chambermaids.	Also	Omar,	seventh	son	of	the
Caliph	of	Liba	and	a	fine	fellow	for	gambling.	I’d	met	him	during	my	brief
and	inglorious	spell	at	the	Mathema,	and	he’d	persuaded	the	caliph	to	send
him	to	the	continent	to	broaden	his	education!	With	Omar	and	the	Greyjars	I
headed	up	to	the	guest	range,	that	wing	of	the	Inner	Palace	where	more



important	dignitaries	were	housed	and	where	Barras	Jon’s	father,	the	Vyene
ambassador	to	court,	kept	a	suite	of	rooms.	We	had	a	servant	fetch	out	Barras
and	he	came	sharp	enough,	with	Rollas,	his	companion-cum-bodyguard,
trailing	behind.

“What	a	perfect	night	to	get	drunk	on!”	Barras	saluted	me	as	he	came
down	the	steps.	He	always	said	it	was	a	perfect	night	to	get	drunk.

“For	that	we’d	need	wine!”	I	spread	my	hands.
Barras	stepped	aside	to	reveal	Rollas	behind	him	carrying	a	large	flask.

“Big	goings-on	in	court	today.”
“A	meeting	of	the	clan,”	I	said.	Barras	never	stopped	fishing	for	court

news.	I	had	a	hunch	half	of	his	allowance	depended	on	feeding	gossip	to	his
father.

“The	Lady	Blue	playing	her	games	again?”	He	flung	an	arm	around	my
shoulders	and	steered	me	towards	the	Common	Gate.	With	Barras	everything
was	a	plot	of	nation	against	nation	or	worse,	a	conspiracy	to	undermine	what
peace	remained	in	the	Broken	Empire.

“Damned	if	I	know.”	Now	he	mentioned	it,	there	had	been	talk	of	the
Lady	Blue.	Barras	always	insisted	that	my	grandmother	and	this	purported
sorceress	were	fighting	their	own	private	war	and	had	been	for	decades—if
true,	then	to	my	mind	it	was	a	piss-poor	excuse	for	one	as	I’d	seen	precious
little	sign	of	it.	Tales	about	the	Lady	Blue	seemed	as	doubtful	as	those	about
the	handful	of	so-called	magicians	who	seemed	to	haunt	the	western	courts.
Kelem,	Corion,	half	a	dozen	others:	charlatans	the	lot	of	them.	Only	the
existence	of	Grandmother’s	Silent	Sister	lent	any	credence	at	all	to	the
rumours	.	.	.	“Last	I	heard	our	friend	in	blue	was	flitting	from	one	Teuton
court	to	the	next.	Probably	been	hung	for	a	witch	by	now.”

Barras	grunted.	“Let’s	hope	so.	Let’s	hope	she’s	not	back	in	Scorron
stirring	up	that	little	war	again.”

I	could	agree	with	him	there.	Barras’s	father	negotiated	the	peace	and
treated	it	like	his	second	son.	I’d	rather	a	close	relative	came	to	harm	than	that
particular	peace	deal.	Nothing	would	induce	me	back	into	the	mountains	to
fight	the	Scorrons.

We	left	the	palace	by	the	Victory	Gate	in	fine	spirits,	passing	our	flask	of
Wennith	red	between	us	while	I	explained	the	virtues	of	wooing	sisters.

As	we	entered	Heroes’	Plaza	the	wine	turned	to	vinegar	in	my	mouth.	I
half-choked	and	dropped	the	flask.

“There!	Do	you	see	her?”	Coughing,	wiping	tears	from	my	eyes,	I	forgot
my	own	rule	and	pointed	at	the	blind-eye	woman.	She	stood	at	the	base	of	a
great	statue,	the	Last	Steward,	sombre	on	his	petty	throne.

“Steady	on!”	Roust	thumped	me	between	the	shoulders.
“See	who?”	Omar	asked,	staring	where	I	pointed.	Dressed	in	tatters,	she

might	in	another	glance	be	nothing	more	than	rags	hanging	on	a	dead	bush.



Perhaps	that	was	what	Omar	saw.
“Nearly	lost	this!”	Barras	retrieved	the	flask,	safe	in	its	reed	casing.

“Come	to	Papa!	I’ll	be	looking	after	you	from	now	on,	little	one!”	And	he
cradled	it	like	a	baby.

None	of	them	saw	her.	She	watched	a	moment	longer,	the	blind	eye
burning	across	me,	then	turned	and	walked	away	through	the	crowds	flowing
towards	Trent	Market.	Jostled	into	action	by	the	others,	I	walked	on	too,
haunted	by	old	fears.

We	approached	the	Blood	Holes	in	the	early	afternoon,	me	sweating	and
nervous,	and	not	just	because	of	the	unseasonal	heat	or	the	fact	that	my
financial	future	was	about	to	ride	on	two	very	broad	shoulders.	The	Silent
Sister	always	unsettled	me,	and	I’d	seen	entirely	too	much	of	her	today.	I	kept
glancing	about,	half-expecting	to	spot	her	again	along	the	crowded	streets.

“Let’s	see	this	monster	of	yours!”	Lon	Greyjar	slapped	a	hand	to	my
shoulder,	shaking	me	out	of	my	rememberings	and	alerting	me	to	the	fact	that
we’d	arrived	at	the	Blood	Holes.	I	made	a	smile	for	him	and	promised	myself
I’d	fleece	the	little	fucker	down	to	his	last	crown.	He	had	an	annoying	way
about	him,	did	Lon,	too	chummy,	too	keen	to	lay	hands	on	you,	and	always
snipping	away	at	anything	you	said	as	if	he	doubted	everything,	even	the
boots	you	were	standing	in.	Fair	enough,	I	lie	a	lot,	but	that	doesn’t	mean
cousins	of	some	minor	princeling	can	take	liberties.

I	paused	before	approaching	the	doors	and	stepped	back,	casting	my	gaze
along	the	outer	walls.	The	place	had	been	a	slaughterhouse	once,	though	a
grand	one,	as	if	the	king	back	in	those	days	had	wanted	even	his	cattle
murdered	in	buildings	that	would	shame	the	homes	of	his	copper-crown
rivals.

On	the	only	other	occasion	I’d	seen	the	blind-eye	woman	outside	the
throne	room,	she	had	been	on	the	Street	of	Nails	up	close	to	one	of	the	larger
manses	towards	the	western	end.	I’d	come	out	of	some	ambassador’s
ballroom	with	an	enticing	young	woman,	got	my	face	slapped	for	my	efforts,
and	was	cooling	off,	watching	the	street	before	going	back	in.	I	had	been
wiggling	one	of	my	teeth	to	check	that	the	damned	girl	hadn’t	knocked	it
loose	when	I	saw	the	Silent	Sister	across	the	broadness	of	the	street.	She	stood
there,	bolder	than	brass,	a	bucket	in	one	white	hand	and	a	horsehair	brush	in
the	other,	painting	symbols	on	the	walls	of	the	manse.	Not	the	garden	walls
facing	the	street	but	the	walls	of	the	building	itself,	seemingly	unnoticed	by
guard	or	dog.	I	watched	her,	growing	colder	by	the	moment	as	if	a	crack	had
run	through	the	night,	letting	all	the	heat	spill	out	of	it.	She	showed	no	sign	of
hurry,	painting	one	symbol,	moving	on	to	the	next.	In	the	moonlight	it	looked
like	blood	she	was	painting	with,	broad	dark	strokes,	each	running	with
countless	dribbles,	and	coming	together	to	make	sigils	that	seemed	to	twist
the	night	around	them.	She	was	encircling	the	building,	throwing	a	painted



noose	about	it,	patient,	slow,	relentless.	I	ran	back	in	then,	far	more	scared	of
that	old	woman	and	her	bucket	of	blood	than	of	the	young	Countess	Loren,
her	overquick	hand,	and	whatever	brothers	she	might	set	upon	me	to	defend
her	honour.	The	joy	of	the	night	was	gone,	though,	and	I	left	for	home	quick
enough.

A	day	later	I	heard	report	of	a	terrible	fire	on	the	Street	of	Nails.	A	house
burned	to	ash	with	not	a	single	survivor.	Even	today	the	site	lies	vacant,	with
nobody	willing	to	build	there	again.

The	walls	of	the	Blood	Holes	were	blessedly	free	of	any	decoration	save
perhaps	the	scratched	names	of	temporary	lovers	here	and	there	where	a
buttress	provided	shelter	for	such	work.	I	cursed	myself	for	a	fool	and	led	on
through	the	doors.

The	Terrif	brothers	who	ran	the	Blood	Holes	had	sent	a	wagon	to	collect
Snorri	from	the	Marsail	keep	earlier	in	the	day.	I’d	been	particular	in	the
message	I	dispatched,	warning	them	to	take	considerable	care	with	the	man
and	demanding	assurances	of	a	thousand	in	crown	gold	if	they	failed	to	ensure
his	attendance	in	the	Crimson	Pit	for	the	first	bout.

Flanked	by	my	entourage	I	strode	into	the	Blood	Holes,	enveloped
immediately	in	the	sweat	and	smoke	and	stink	and	din	of	the	place.	Damn,	but
I	loved	it	there.	Silk-clad	nobles	strolled	around	the	fight	floor,	each	an	island
of	colour	and	sophistication,	close	pressed	by	companions,	then	a	ragged	halo
of	hangers-on,	hawkers,	beer-men,	poppy-men	and	brazens,	and	at	the
periphery,	urchins	ready	to	scurry	between	one	gentleman	and	the	next
bearing	messages	by	mouth	or	hand.	The	bet-takers,	each	sanctioned	and
approved	by	the	Terrifs,	stood	at	their	stalls	around	the	edge	of	the	hall,	odds
listed	in	chalk,	boys	ready	to	collect	or	deliver	at	the	run.

The	four	main	pits	lay	at	the	vertices	of	a	great	diamond,	red-tiled	into	the
floor.	Scarlet,	Umber,	Ochre,	and	Crimson.	All	of	a	likeness,	twenty	foot
deep,	twenty	foot	across,	but	with	Crimson	first	amongst	equals.	The	nobility
wound	their	way	between	these	and	the	lesser	pits,	peering	down,	discussing
the	fighters	on	display,	the	odds	on	offer.	A	sturdy	wooden	rail	surrounded
each	pit,	set	into	a	timber	apron	that	overlapped	the	stonework,	reaching	a
yard	down	into	the	depression.	I	led	the	way	to	Crimson	and	leaned	over,	the
rail	hard	against	my	midriff.	Snorri	ver	Snagason	glowered	up	at	me.

“Fresh	meat	here!”	I	raised	my	hand,	still	staring	down	at	my	meal	ticket.
“Who’ll	take	a	cut?”

Two	small	olive	hands	slid	out	over	the	rail	beside	me.	“I	believe	I	will.	I
feel	you	owe	me	a	cut,	or	two,	Prince	Jalan.”

Aw	hell.	“Maeres,	how	good	to	see	you.”	To	my	credit	I	kept	the	blind
terror	from	my	reply	and	didn’t	soil	myself.	Maeres	Allus	had	the	calm	and
reasonable	voice	that	a	scribe	or	tutor	should	have.	The	fact	that	he	liked	to
watch	when	his	collectors	cut	the	lips	off	a	man	turned	that	reasonable	tone



from	a	comfort	to	a	horror.
“He’s	a	big	fellow,”	Maeres	said.
“Yes.”	I	glanced	around	wildly	for	my	friends.	All	of	them,	even	the	two

old	veterans	picked	specially	by	my	father	to	guard	me,	had	slunk	off	towards
Umber	without	a	word	and	let	Maeres	Allus	slide	up	beside	me	unannounced.
Only	Omar	had	the	grace	to	look	guilty.

“How	would	he	fare	against	Lord	Gren’s	man,	Norras,	do	you	think?”
Maeres	asked.

Norras	was	a	skilled	pugilist,	but	I	thought	Snorri	would	pound	the	man
flat.	I	could	see	Gren’s	fighter	now,	standing	behind	the	barred	gate	opposite
the	one	that	Snorri	had	come	through.

“Shouldn’t	we	call	the	fight?	Get	the	odds	set?”	I	shot	Barras	Jon	a	look
and	called	out	to	him,	“Norras	against	my	fresh	meat?	What	numbers	there?”

Maeres	set	a	soft	hand	to	my	arm.	“Time	enough	for	wagering	when	the
man’s	been	tested,	no?”

“B-but	he	might	come	to	harm,”	I	flustered.	“I	plan	to	make	good	coin
here,	Maeres,	pay	you	back	with	interest.”	My	finger	ached.	The	one	Maeres
had	broken	when	I	came	up	short	two	months	back.

“Indulge	me,”	he	said.	“That	will	be	my	interest.	I’ll	cover	any	losses.	A
man	like	that	.	.	.	he	might	be	worth	three	hundred	crowns.”

I	saw	his	game	then.	Three	hundred	was	just	half	what	I	owed	him.	The
bastard	meant	to	see	Snorri	die	and	keep	a	royal	prince	on	his	leash.	There
didn’t	seem	to	be	a	way	past	it,	though.	You	don’t	argue	with	Maeres	Allus,
certainly	not	in	his	cousins’	fight	hall	and	owing	him	the	best	part	of	a
thousand	in	gold.	Maeres	knew	how	far	he	could	push	me,	minor	princeling
or	not.	He’d	seen	past	my	bluster	to	what	lies	beneath.	You	don’t	get	to	head
an	organization	like	Maeres’s	without	being	a	good	judge	of	men.

“Three	hundred	if	he’s	not	fit	to	fight	wagered	bouts	tonight?”	I	could	slip
back	after	Father’s	ridiculous	opera	and	buy	into	the	serious	fights.	This
afternoon’s	exercise	had	only	ever	been	intended	to	whet	appetites	and	stir	up
interest.

Maeres	didn’t	answer,	only	clapped	his	soft	hands	and	had	the	pit	guards
raise	the	opposite	gate.	At	the	sound	of	iron	grating	on	stone	and	chains
ratcheting	through	their	housings,	the	crowds	came	to	the	rail,	drawn	by	the
pull	of	the	pit.

“He’s	huge!”
“Handsome	fella!”
“Norras	will	ugly	him	up.”
“Knows	his	stuff,	does	Norras.”
The	beefy	Teuton	came	out	of	the	archway,	rolling	his	bald	head	on	a

thick	neck.
“Fists	only,	Norseman,”	Maeres	called	down.	“The	only	way	out	of	that



pit	for	you	is	to	follow	the	rules.”
Norras	raised	both	hands	and	balled	them	into	fists	as	if	to	instruct	the

heathen.	He	closed	the	distance	between	them,	swift	on	his	feet,	jerking	his
head	in	sharp	stutters	designed	to	fool	the	eye	and	tempt	an	ill-advised	swing.
He	looked	rather	like	a	chicken	to	me,	bobbing	his	head	like	that,	fists	at	his
face,	elbows	out	like	little	wings.	A	big	muscular	hen.

Snorri	clearly	had	the	reach,	so	Norras	came	in	fast.	He	ducks	his	head,
does	Norras—takes	punches	on	his	skull.	That’s	what	I	was	going	to	say.	I’d
seen	men	hurt	their	hands	on	the	Teuton’s	thick	and	bony	head	before.	I	didn’t
have	time	to	get	the	words	out.	Norras	jabbed	and	Snorri	caught	the	man’s	fist
in	the	flat	of	his	palm,	closing	his	fingers	to	trap	it.	He	yanked	Norras
forwards,	punching	with	his	other	arm,	brushing	aside	the	wild	swing	of	the
Teuton’s	left	with	his	elbow.	The	Norseman’s	huge	fist	hammered	into
Norras’s	face,	knuckles	impacting	from	chin	to	nose.	The	man	flew	back	a
yard	or	more,	hitting	the	floor	with	a	boneless	thump,	blood	spattered	on	his
upturned	face,	mixed	with	teeth	and	muck	from	his	flattened	snout.

A	moment	of	silence,	then	a	roar	went	up	that	hurt	my	ears.	Half	delight,
half	outrage.	Betting	parchments	flew,	coins	changed	hands,	all	informal
wagers	made	in	the	moment.

“An	impressive	specimen,”	Maeres	said	without	passion.	He	watched
while	two	pitmen	dragged	Norras	away	through	the	double-chambered	exit
valve.	Snorri	let	them	do	their	work.	I	could	see	he’d	calculated	his	chances
of	escape	and	found	them	to	be	zero.	The	second	iron	gate	could	be	raised
only	from	the	outside	and	then	only	when	the	first	had	been	lowered.

“Send	in	Ootana.”	Maeres	never	raised	his	voice	but	was	always	heard
amidst	the	din.	He	offered	me	a	thin	smile.

“No!”	I	strangled	back	the	outrage,	remembering	that	I	had	seen	lipless
men	even	in	the	palace.	Maeres	Allus	had	a	long	arm.	“Maeres,	my	friend,
you	can’t	be	serious?”	Ootana	was	a	specialist,	with	countless	knife	bouts
notched	onto	his	belt.	He’d	sliced	open	half	a	dozen	good	knife-men	this	year
already.	“At	least	let	my	fighter	train	with	the	hook-knife	for	a	few	weeks!
He’s	from	the	ice.	If	it’s	not	an	axe	they	don’t	understand	it.”	I	tried	for
humour,	but	Ootana	already	waited	behind	the	gate,	a	loose-limbed	devil	from
the	farthest	shores	of	Afrique.

“Fight.”	Maeres	raised	his	hand.
“But—”	Snorri	hadn’t	even	been	given	his	weapon.	It	was	murder,	pure

and	simple.	A	public	lesson	to	put	a	prince	firmly	in	his	place.	The	public
didn’t	have	to	like	it,	though!	Boos	rang	out	when	Ootana	stepped	into	the	pit,
his	hooked	blade	held	carelessly	to	the	side.	The	nobles	hooted	as	if	we	were
watching	mummers	in	the	square.	They	might	hoot	again	tonight	with	equal
passion	if	Father’s	opera	contained	a	suitably	villainous	party.

Snorri	glanced	up	at	us.	I	swear	he	was	grinning.	“No	rules	now?”



Ootana	began	a	slow	advance,	passing	his	knife	from	hand	to	hand.	Snorri
spread	his	arms,	not	fully	but	enough	to	make	a	wide	man	wider	still	in	that
confined	space,	and	with	a	roar	that	drowned	out	the	many	voices	above,	he
charged.	Ootana	jigged	to	one	side,	intending	to	slash	and	dodge	clear,	but	the
Norseman	came	too	fast,	swerved	to	compensate,	and	reached	with	arms
every	bit	as	long	as	the	Afriqan’s.	At	the	last	Ootana	could	do	no	more	than
attempt	the	killing	blow;	nothing	else	would	save	him	from	Snorri’s	grapple.
The	exchange	was	lost	in	the	collision.	Snorri	pounded	into	his	man,	driving
him	back	a	yard	and	slamming	him	into	the	pit	wall.	He	held	there	for	a
heartbeat—perhaps	a	word	passed	between	them—then	stepped	away.	Ootana
slid	to	a	crumpled	heap	at	the	base	of	the	wall,	white	fragments	of	bone
showing	through	dark	skin	at	the	back	of	his	head.

Snorri	turned	to	us,	shot	an	unreadable	glance	my	way,	then	looked	down
to	inspect	the	hook-knife	driven	through	his	hand,	hilt	hard	against	his	palm.
The	sacrifice	he’d	made	to	keep	the	blade	from	his	throat.

“The	bear.”	Maeres	said	it	more	quietly	than	ever	into	the	noise	of	the
erupting	crowd.	I’d	never	seen	him	angry,	few	men	had,	but	I	could	see	it	now
in	the	thinness	of	his	lips	and	the	paling	of	his	skin.

“Bear?”	Why	not	just	shoot	him	with	crossbows	from	the	rail	and	be
done!	I’d	seen	a	Blood	Holes	bear	once	before,	a	black	beast	from	the	western
forests.	They	set	it	against	a	Conaught	man	with	spear	and	net.	It	wasn’t	any
bigger	than	him,	but	the	spear	just	made	it	angry	and	when	it	got	in	close	it
was	all	over.	It	doesn’t	matter	how	much	muscle	a	man	may	carry,	a	bear’s
strength	is	a	different	thing	and	makes	any	warrior	seem	weak	as	a	child.

It	took	them	a	while	to	produce	the	bear.	This	clearly	hadn’t	been	part	of
the	plan	that	involved	Norras	and	Ootana.	Snorri	simply	stood	where	he	was,
holding	his	injured	hand	high	above	his	head	and	gripping	the	wrist	with	his
other	hand.	He	left	the	hook-knife	where	it	was,	embedded	in	his	palm.

The	fury	the	crowd	had	shown	at	Ootana’s	entrance	flared	to	new	heights
when	the	bear	approached	the	gate,	but	Snorri’s	booming	laugh	silenced	them.

“Call	that	a	bear?”	He	lowered	his	arms	and	thumped	his	chest.	“I	am	of
the	Undoreth,	the	Children	of	the	Hammer.	The	blood	of	Odin	runs	in	our
veins.	Storm-born	we!”	He	pointed	up	at	Maeres	with	his	transfixed	hand,
dripping	crimson,	knowing	his	tormentor.	“I	am	Snorri,	Son	of	the	Axe.	I
have	fought	trolls!	You	have	a	bigger	bear.	I	saw	it	back	in	the	cells.	Send	that
one.”

“Bigger	bear!”	Roust	Greyjar	shouted	out	behind	me,	and	his	fool	brother
took	up	the	chant.	“Bigger	bear!”	Within	moments	they	were	all	baying	it	and
the	old	slaughterhouse	pulsed	with	the	demand.

Maeres	said	nothing,	only	nodded.
“Bigger	bear!”	The	crowd	roared	it	time	and	again	until	at	last	the	bigger

bear	arrived	and	awed	them	to	silence.



Where	Maeres	had	procured	the	beast	I	couldn’t	say,	but	it	must	have	cost
him	a	fortune.	The	creature	was	simply	the	biggest	thing	I’d	ever	seen.
Dwarfing	the	black	bears	of	the	Teuton	forests,	overtopping	even	the	grizzled
bears	from	beyond	the	Slav	lands.	Even	slouched	behind	the	gate	in	its	off-
white	pelt	it	stood	nine	foot	and	more,	and	heavy	with	muscle	beneath	fur	and
fat.	The	crowd	drew	breath	and	howled	its	delight	and	its	horror,	ecstatic	at
the	prospect	of	death	and	gore,	outraged	at	the	unfairness	of	the	killing	to
come.

As	the	gate	lifted,	and	the	bear	snarled	and	went	to	all	fours	behind	it,
Snorri	took	hold	of	the	hook-knife	and	pulled	it	free,	making	that	curious	turn
of	the	blade	at	the	last	moment	necessary	to	prevent	the	wound	from
becoming	larger	still.	He	bunched	the	injured	hand	into	a	scarlet	fist	and	took
the	blade	in	an	overhand	grip	in	the	other.

The	bear,	clearly	some	arctic	breed,	came	in	unhurriedly	on	all	fours,
swinging	its	head	from	side	to	side	in	great	sweeps,	drawing	in	the	stink	of
men	and	blood.	Snorri	charged,	stamping	his	great	feet,	arms	wide,	roaring
that	deafening	challenge	of	his.	He	drew	up	short	but	it	was	enough	to	make
the	bear	rear,	returning	the	challenge	with	a	snarl	that	nearly	unloosed	my
waters	even	behind	the	safety	of	the	rail.	The	bear	stood	ten	foot,	forelegs
lifted,	its	black	claws	longer	than	fingers.	Snorri’s	knife,	crimson	with	his
own	blood,	looked	a	sorry	little	thing.	It	would	hardly	penetrate	the	bear’s	fat.
It	would	take	a	longsword	to	reach	its	vitals.

The	Norseman	shouted	out	some	curse	in	his	heathen	tongue	and	flung
out	his	wounded	hand,	holding	it	wide,	splattering	blood	across	the	bear’s
chest,	a	pattern	of	red	on	white.	“Madness!”	Even	I	knew	not	to	let	a	wild
thing	see	that	you’re	wounded.

The	bear,	more	curious	than	enraged,	bent	down,	folding	up	to	sniff	and
lick	at	its	bloody	fur.	And	at	that	instant	Snorri	charged.	For	a	moment	I
wondered	if	he	could	actually	kill	the	thing.	If	by	some	miracle	of	war	he
could	drive	his	blade	just	so	into	its	spine	while	its	head	was	down.	All	of	us
drew	a	single	breath.	Snorri	leapt.	He	set	his	injured	hand	flat	to	the	top	of	the
bear’s	head	and	like	some	court	tumbler	vaulted	onto	its	shoulders,	crouching.
Roaring	outrage,	the	bear	snapped	erect,	reaching	for	the	annoyance,
powering	up	to	its	full	height	as	if	Snorri	were	a	child	and	it	the	father
carrying	him	aback.	As	the	bear	straightened	Snorri	straightened	too,	leaping
upwards	with	their	combined	thrust	and	reaching	high	with	his	knife	hand.	He
drove	the	blade	into	the	wooden	skirts	of	the	rail	some	twenty	feet	above	the
floor	of	the	pit.	He	pulled,	reached,	swung,	and	in	a	broken	second	he	was
amongst	us.

Snorri	ver	Snagason	surged	through	the	highborn	crowd,	trampling	full-
grown	men	underfoot.	Somewhere	in	those	first	few	steps	he	found	a	new
knife.	He	left	a	trail	of	flattened	and	bleeding	citizens,	using	his	blade	only



three	times	when	members	of	the	Terrif	pit	team	made	more	earnest	efforts	to
stop	him.	Those	he	left	gutted,	one	with	his	head	nearly	taken	off.	He	was	out
into	the	street	before	half	the	crowd	even	knew	what	had	happened.

I	leaned	over	the	rail.	The	hall	was	in	chaos;	everywhere	men	were
finding	their	courage	and	starting	to	give	chase	now	that	their	quarry	was	long
gone.	The	bear	had	returned	to	sniffing	the	pit	floor,	licking	blood	from	the
flagstones,	the	red	print	of	Snorri’s	hand	stark	across	the	back	of	its	head.

Maeres	had	vanished.	He	had	a	way	for	coming	and	going,	that	one.	I
shrugged.	The	Norseman	was	clearly	too	dangerous	to	keep.	He	would	have
been	the	death	of	me,	one	way	or	another.	At	least	this	way	I’d	put	a	three-
hundred-crown	dent	in	my	debt	to	Maeres	Allus.	It	would	keep	him	off	my
back	for	a	good	three	months,	maybe	six.	And	a	lot	can	happen	in	six	months.
Six	months	is	an	eternity.



FIVE

Opera!	There’s	nothing	like	it.	Except	wild	boars	rutting.
The	only	good	thing	about	Father’s	interminable	opera	was	the

venue,	a	fine	domed	building	in	Vermillion’s	eastern	quarter	where	a
preponderance	of	Florentine	bankers	and	Milano	merchants	gave	the	city	a
very	different	flavour.	For	the	first	hour	I	gazed	up	at	the	nymphs	cavorting
nude	across	the	dome,	somehow	painted	so	that	the	curved	surface	presented
them	without	distortion.	As	much	as	I	admired	the	artist’s	eye	for	detail,	I
found	the	scene	frequently	interrupted	by	flashes	of	imagery	from	the	Blood
Holes.	Snorri	felling	Norras	with	what	must	have	been	a	fatal	punch.	Ootana
falling	forwards	from	the	pit	wall,	the	back	of	his	head	broken	open.	That
leap.	That	spectacular,	impossible,	insane	leap!	On	stage	a	soprano	soared
through	an	aria	as	I	replayed	the	Norseman	launching	himself	to	freedom.

In	the	intermission	I	searched	for	familiar	faces.	I	had	come	late	to	the
showing	and	had	shuffled	my	way	noisily	to	a	seat	blocking	everyone’s	view.
In	the	dim	light	and	separated	from	my	more	punctual	companions	I	had	to
settle	for	sitting	amongst	strangers.	Now	under	the	lanterns	of	the	intermisso
hall	and	plucking	glasses	of	wine	from	every	passing	tray,	I	found	that	despite
my	brother	Darin’s	dire	warnings	the	opening	night	was	surprisingly	poorly
attended.	It	seemed	that	Father	himself	had	failed	to	arrive.	Taken	to	his	bed,
the	gossip	had	it.	He	was	never	a	music	lover	but	the	Vatican’s	coffers	had
financed	this	tripe	of	angels	and	devils	wailing	one	against	the	other,	fat	men
sweltering	under	wings	of	wax	and	feathers	whilst	belting	out	the	chorus.	The
least	their	most	senior	local	representative	could	do	was	attend	and	suffer	with
the	rest	of	us.	Damn	it	all,	I	couldn’t	even	spot	Martus,	or	fucking	Darin.

I	jostled	past	a	man	in	a	white	enamel	mask,	as	though	he	were	attending
a	masquerade	rather	than	an	opera.	Or	at	least	I	attempted	to	jostle	past,
failed,	and	bounced	off	him	as	if	he	were	cast	from	iron.	I	turned,	rubbing	my
shoulder.	Something	in	the	eyes	watching	from	those	slits	swept	away	in	a
cold	wash	of	fear	any	inclination	I	had	to	complain.	I	let	the	press	of	people
separate	us.	Had	it	even	been	a	man?	The	eyes	haunted	me.	The	irises	white,
the	whites	grey.	My	shoulder	ached	as	though	infection	ate	at	the	bone	.	.	.
Unborn.	Darin	had	said	something	about	an	unborn	in	the	city	.	.	.



“Prince	Jalan!”	Ameral	Contaph	hailed	me	with	irritating	familiarity,
puffed	up	in	ridiculous	finery	no	doubt	purchased	for	just	this	occasion.	They
must	have	been	desperate	to	fill	the	seats	if	toadies	of	Contaph’s	water	were
invited	to	the	premiere.	“Prince	Jalan!”	The	flow	of	the	crowd	somehow
pulled	us	farther	apart	and	I	affected	not	to	see	him.	The	fellow	was	probably
just	pursuing	me	for	the	fictional	paperwork	regarding	Snorri.	Worse	still,	he
might	have	already	heard	the	Norseman	was	running	amok	in	Vermillion’s
streets	.	.	.	Or	perhaps	he’d	scratched	off	the	gold	plate	from	my	gift.	Either
way,	none	of	the	reasons	he	might	want	to	talk	to	me	seemed	to	be	reasons	I
might	want	to	talk	to	him!	I	turned	sharply	away	and	found	myself	face	to
face	with	Alain	DeVeer,	sporting	an	unbecoming	bandage	around	his	head
and	flanked	by	two	large	and	ugly	men	in	ill-fitting	opera	cloaks.

“Jalan!”	Alain	reached	for	me,	finding	only	a	handful	of	my	own
exquisitely	tailored	cape.	I	shrugged	the	garment	off	and	let	him	keep	it	while
I	sprinted	for	the	stairs,	weaving	a	dangerous	path	around	dowagers	sporting
diamonds	in	their	hair	and	gruff	old	lords	knocking	back	the	wine	with	the
grim	determination	of	men	wishing	to	dull	their	senses.

I	have	quick	feet,	but	it’s	probably	my	total	disregard	for	other	people’s
safety	that	allowed	me	to	open	a	considerable	lead	so	swiftly.

There	are	communal	privies	at	the	rear	of	the	opera	house.	For	the	men,	a
dozen	open	seats	above	water	flowing	in	channels	that	pour	out	into	the	alley
behind.	The	water	runs	from	a	large	tank	on	the	roof.	A	small	band	of	urchins
spend	all	day	filling	it	with	buckets—an	activity	I	had	occasion	to	note	when
using	one	of	the	cast	changing	rooms	for	an	assignation	with	Duchess	Sansera
a	season	previously.	I	was	banging	away	dutifully	as	a	chap	does	with	a
woman	of	declining	years	and	increasing	fortune	when	hoping	to	cadge	a
loan,	but	every	time	I	seemed	to	be	getting	anywhere	a	small	boy	would
wander	past	the	door,	heavy	buckets	sloshing.	Quite	put	me	off	my	stride.
And	the	old	cow	didn’t	loan	me	so	much	as	a	silver	penny.

That	afternoon	with	Duchess	Money-Buckets	wasn’t	a	complete	waste,
though.	After	I’d	let	her	usher	me	out	of	there	with	a	wet	kiss	and	a	goosing
of	my	buttocks,	I	chased	down	as	many	of	those	ratty	little	children	as	I	could
and	kicked	some	arse.	It’s	true	that	my	foe	outnumbered	me,	but	I	am	the	hero
of	Aral	Pass,	after	all,	and	sometimes	when	Prince	Jalan	Kendeth	is	roused	to
anger	it’s	best	to	flee,	whatever	your	number.	If	you’re	eight.

I	had	found	three	of	the	little	bastards	cowering	in	the	tiny	utility	room
where	the	buckets	are	stored	along	with	assorted	brooms	and	mops.	And	that
was	the	payoff—another	hiding	place	to	add	to	my	list.

Racing	along	the	same	corridor	now,	with	Alain	and	friends	a	corner	or
two	behind	me,	I	stopped	dead,	hauled	the	closet	door	open,	and	dived	in.	The
thing	with	closing	doors	behind	you	is	to	do	it	quickly	but	quietly.	That
proved	a	challenge	whilst	trying	to	disentangle	myself	from	various	broom



handles	in	the	dark	without	the	teetering	bucket	towers	crashing	down	around
me.	Seconds	later	when	Alain	and	his	heavies	clattered	down	the	corridor,	the
hero	of	Aral	Pass	was	crouched	amongst	the	mops,	hands	clamped	to	mouth
to	stifle	a	sneeze.

I	managed	to	hold	the	sneeze	back	almost	long	enough,	but	no	man	can	be
in	complete	control	of	his	body,	and	there’s	no	stopping	such	things
sometimes—as	I	told	the	Duchess	Sansera	when	she	expressed	her
disappointment.

“Achoo!”
The	footsteps,	fading	at	the	edge	of	hearing,	stopped.
“What	was	that?”	Alain’s	voice,	distant	but	not	distant	enough.
Cowards	divide	into	two	broad	groups.	Those	paralysed	by	their	fear,	and

those	galvanized	by	it.	Fortunately	I	belong	to	the	latter	group	and	burst	out	of
that	closet	like	a	.	.	.	well,	like	a	lecherous	prince	hoping	to	escape	a	beating.

I’ve	always	made	a	close	study	of	windows,	and	the	most	accessible
windows	in	the	opera	house	were	in	the	aforementioned	communal	privies,
which	needed	them	for	obvious	reasons.	I	pounded	down	the	corridor,
swerved,	banked,	and	crashed	through	into	the	fetid	gloom	of	the	men’s	privy.
One	old	gent	had	settled	himself	there	with	a	flagon	of	wine,	clearly	feeling
that	breathing	in	the	sewer	stink	was	preferable	to	a	seat	closer	to	the	stage.	I
ran	straight	past,	climbed	onto	the	rear	throne,	and	tried	to	jam	my	head
between	the	shutters.	Normally	they	were	propped	ajar	to	offer	sufficient
ventilation	to	prevent	the	place	exploding	if	one	more	overfed	lordling	passed
wind.	Today,	like	everything	else	since	I	got	up,	they	seemed	to	be	against	me
and	stood	firmly	closed.	I	shook	them	hard.	They	weren’t	latched	and	it	made
no	sense	that	they	wouldn’t	give.	Fear	lent	strength	to	my	arm,	and	when	the
damn	things	wouldn’t	open	I	ripped	out	the	slats	before	thrusting	my	head
through.

For	a	half	second	I	just	stood	with	that	cool,	slightly	less	fetid	air	on	my
face.	Salvation!	There’s	something	almost	orgasmic	about	getting	out	from
under	a	heap	of	trouble,	winning	free	and	thumbing	your	nose	at	it.	Tomorrow
maybe	that	same	trouble	will	be	waiting	around	a	corner	for	you,	but	today,
right	now,	it’s	beaten,	left	in	the	dust.	Cowards,	overburdened	with
imagination	as	we	are,	spend	most	of	our	attention	on	the	future,	worrying
what’s	coming	next,	so	when	that	rare	opportunity	to	live	in	the	moment
arrives	I	seize	it	with	as	many	hands	as	I’ve	got	spare.

In	the	next	half	second	I	realized	that	we	were	on	the	third	floor	and	the
drop	to	the	street	below	seemed	likely	to	injure	me	more	grievously	than
Alain	and	his	friends	would	dare	to.	I	should	perhaps	puff	myself	up,	brazen	it
out,	and	remind	Alain	whose	damned	father’s	opera	this	was	and	whose
grandmother	happened	to	be	warming	the	throne.	No	part	of	me	wanted	to
bank	on	Alain’s	common	sense	outweighing	his	anger,	but	an	ankle-breaking



drop	into	the	alley	where	they	flushed	the	shit	.	.	.	that	didn’t	appeal	either.
And	then	I	saw	her.	A	tattered	figure	in	the	alley,	bent	over	some	burden.

A	bucket?	For	one	ridiculous	moment	I	thought	it	was	another	of	those	little
boys	lugging	water	for	the	tank.	A	pale	hand	lifted	a	brush;	moonlight
glimmered	on	what	dripped	from	it.

“Jalan	Kendeth,	hiding	in	the	privies.	How	appropriate.”	Alain	DeVeer,
banging	open	the	door	behind	me.	I	didn’t	turn	my	head	even	a	fraction.	If	I
hadn’t	taken	care	of	business	at	the	start	of	the	intermission	I	would	have
rapidly	filled	the	privy	I	was	standing	on	by	way	of	both	trouser	legs.	The
figure	in	the	alley	looked	up	and	one	eye	caught	the	moonbeams,	glowing
pearly	in	the	darkness.	My	shoulder	ached	with	a	sudden	memory	of	the
masked	figure	I’d	barged	into.	Conviction	seized	me	by	the	throat.	That	had
not	been	a	man.	There	had	been	nothing	human	in	that	stare.	Outside	the
blind-eye	woman	painted	her	fatal	runes,	and	inside,	amongst	the	lords	and
ladies,	hell	walked	with	us.

I	would	have	run	headfirst	into	a	dozen	Alain	DeVeers	to	get	away	from
the	Silent	Sister.	Hell,	I’d	have	flattened	Maeres	Allus	to	put	some	space
between	me	and	that	old	witch.	I’d	have	put	my	foot	in	his	groin	and	told	him
to	add	it	to	the	debt.	I	would	have	charged	right	at	Alain	and	his	two	friends
but	for	the	memory	of	a	fire	on	the	Street	of	Nails.	The	walls	themselves	had
burned.	There	had	been	nothing	left	but	fine	ash.	Nobody	got	out.	Not	one
person.	And	there	had	been	four	other	fires	like	that	across	the	city.	Four	in
five	years.

“Oh,	Jalan!”	Alain	drew	the	a	out,	making	it	a	singsong	taunt,
“Jaaaalaan.”	He	really	hadn’t	taken	having	that	vase	broken	over	his	head
very	well.

I	jammed	myself	farther	through	the	broken	shutter,	wedging	both
shoulders	into	the	gap	and	splintering	more	slats.	Some	kind	of	webbing
stretched	across	my	face.	Because	right	now	I	needed	a	big	spider	on	my
head?	Once	more	the	gods	of	fate	were	crapping	on	me	from	a	height.	I
looked	to	the	left.	Black	symbols	covered	the	wall,	each	like	some	horrifying
and	twisted	insect	caught	in	its	death	throes.	To	the	right,	more	of	them,
reaching	up	from	where	the	blind-eye	woman	had	returned	to	her	work.	They
seemed	to	have	grown	along	the	sides	of	the	building,	like	vines	.	.	.	or
crawled	up.	There	was	no	way	she	could	reach	so	high.	She	planted	her
hideous	seeds	as	she	circled	the	building,	painting	a	noose	of	symbols,	and
from	each	one	more	grew,	and	more,	rising	until	the	noose	became	a	net.

“Hey!”	Alain,	his	gloating	turning	to	irritation	at	being	ignored.
“We’ve	got	to	get	out	of	here.”	I	pulled	free	and	glanced	back	at	the	three

of	them	in	the	doorway,	the	old	man	clutching	his	wine	looking	on,	bemused.
“There’s	no	time—”

“Get	him	down	from	there.”	Alain	shook	his	head	in	disgust.



The	drop	to	the	street	had	been	knocked	off	the	top	of	the	list	of	today’s
most	terrifying	things,	where	it	had	nestled	just	above	Alain	and	friends.	The
writing	on	the	wall	immediately	outside	swept	all	that	other	stuff	right	off	the
list	and	into	the	privies.	I	stuck	both	arms	through	the	hole	I’d	made	and
launched	myself	out.	I	made	it	a	couple	of	feet	and	came	to	a	splintering	halt
with	my	chest	wedged	into	the	shutter	frame.	Something	dark	and	very	cold
stretched	across	my	face	again,	feeling	for	all	the	world	like	a	web	spun	by
the	world’s	toughest	spider.	The	strands	of	it	closed	my	left	eye	for	me	and
resisted	any	further	advance.

“Quick!”
“Grab	him!”
Pounding	feet	as	Alain	led	the	charge.	When	it	comes	to	wriggling	out	of

things	I’m	pretty	good,	but	my	current	situation	offered	little	purchase.	I
seized	the	windowsill	with	both	hands	and	tried	to	propel	myself	forwards,
managing	an	advance	of	a	few	inches,	jacket	ripping.	The	black	stuff	over	my
face	pulled	even	harder,	pressing	my	head	back	and	threatening	to	throw	me
back	into	the	room	if	I	lessened	my	grip	even	a	little.

Now,	nature	may	have	gifted	me	a	pretty	decent	physique	but	I	do	try	to
avoid	any	strenuous	activity,	at	least	whilst	clothed,	and	I’ll	lay	no	claims	to
any	great	strength.	Raw	terror	does,	however,	have	a	startling	effect	on	me
and	I’ve	been	known	to	toss	extraordinarily	heavy	items	aside	if	they	stood
between	me	and	a	swift	escape.

Anticipating	the	arrival	of	Alain	DeVeer’s	hand	on	my	flailing	shin
occasioned	just	the	right	level	of	terror.	It	wasn’t	the	thought	of	being	dragged
back	in	and	given	a	good	kicking	that	worried	me—although	it	normally
would	.	.	.	a	lot.	It	was	the	idea	that	whilst	they	were	kicking	me,	and	whilst
poor	old	Jalan	was	rolling	about	manfully	taking	his	lumps	and	screaming	for
mercy,	the	Silent	Sister	would	complete	her	noose,	the	fire	would	ignite,	and
we’d	each	and	every	one	of	us	burn.

Whatever	had	stretched	across	my	face	had	stopped	stretching	and	was
instead	keeping	me	from	getting	any	farther	forwards,	all	its	elasticity	used
up.	It	felt	more	like	a	length	of	wire	now,	cutting	across	my	forehead	and
face.	With	my	feet	finding	nothing	to	push	against,	I	hung,	one-third	out,	two-
thirds	in,	thrashing	helplessly	and	roaring	all	manner	of	threats	and	promises.
I	rather	suspect	Alain	and	his	friends	might	have	paused	to	have	a	laugh	at	my
expense	because	it	took	longer	than	I	expected	before	someone	laid	a	hand	on
me.

They	should	have	taken	the	matter	more	seriously.	Flailing	legs	are	a
dangerous	proposition.	Fuelled	by	desperation	I	struck	out	and	made	a	solid
connection,	booted	heel	to	something	that	crunched	like	a	nose.	Someone
made	a	noise	very	similar	to	the	one	Alain	had	made	that	morning	when	I
broke	the	vase	over	his	head.



The	added	thrust	proved	sufficient.	The	wirelike	obstruction	bit	deeper,
like	a	cold	knife	carving	through	me,	then	something	gave.	It	felt	more	as
though	it	were	me	that	gave	rather	than	the	obstruction,	as	if	I	cracked	and	it
ran	through	me,	but	either	way	I	won	free	and	tumbled	out	in	one	piece	rather
than	two.

As	victories	go	it	proved	fairly	Pyrrhic,	my	prize	being	the	liberty	to	pitch
out	face	first	with	a	two-storey	drop	between	me	and	the	flagstones.	When
you	run	out	of	screaming	during	a	fall,	you	know	that	you’ve	dropped	way
too	far.	Too	far	and	too	fast	in	general	for	there	to	be	any	reasonable	prospect
of	you	ever	getting	up	again.	Something	tugged	at	me,	though,	slowing	my
descent	a	fraction,	an	awful	ripping	sound	overriding	my	scream	as	I	fell.
Even	so,	I	hammered	into	the	ground	with	more	than	enough	force	to	kill	me
but	for	the	large	mound	of	semisolid	dung	accumulated	beneath	the	privy
outlet.	I	hit	with	a	splat.

I	staggered	up,	spitting	out	mouthfuls	of	filth,	roared	an	oath,	slipped,	and
plunged	immediately	back	in.	Derisive	laughter	from	on	high	confirmed	I	had
an	audience.	My	second	attempt	left	me	on	my	back,	scraping	dung	from	my
eyes.	Looking	up	I	saw	the	whole	side	of	the	opera	house	clothed	in
interlocking	symbols,	with	one	exception.	The	window	from	which	I	tumbled
lay	bare,	a	man’s	face	peering	from	the	hole	I’d	left.	Elsewhere	the	black
limbs	of	the	Silent	Sister’s	calligraphy	bound	the	shutters	closed,	but	across
the	broken	privy	shutter,	not	even	a	trace.	And	leading	down	from	it,	a	crack,
running	deep	into	the	masonry,	following	the	path	of	my	descent.	A	peculiar
golden	light	bled	from	the	crack,	flickering	with	shadows	all	along	its	length,
illuminating	both	alley	and	building.

With	more	speed	and	less	haste	I	found	my	feet	and	cast	around	for	the
Silent	Sister.	She’d	rounded	the	corner,	quite	possibly	before	I	fell.	How	far
she	had	to	go	until	completing	her	noose	I	couldn’t	see.	I	backed	to	the
middle	of	the	alley,	out	of	the	dung	heap,	wiping	the	muck	from	my	clothes	to
little	avail.	Something	snagged	at	my	fingers	and	I	found	myself	holding	what
looked	like	black	ribbon	but	felt	more	like	the	writhing	leg	of	some	nightmare
insect.	With	a	cry	I	tore	it	from	me	and	found	the	whole	of	one	of	the	witch’s
symbols	hanging	from	my	hand,	nearly	reaching	to	the	ground	and	twisting	in
a	breeze	that	just	wasn’t	there—as	if	it	were	somehow	trying	to	wrap	itself
back	around	me.	I	flung	it	down	in	revulsion,	sensing	it	was	more	filthy	than
anything	else	that	coated	me.

A	sharp	retort	returned	my	gaze	to	the	building.	As	I	watched,	the	crack
spread,	darting	down	another	five	yards,	almost	reaching	the	ground.	The
shriek	that	burst	from	me	was	more	girlish	than	I	would	have	hoped	for.
Without	hesitation,	I	turned	and	fled.	More	laughter	from	above.	I	paused	at
the	alley’s	end,	hoping	for	something	clever	to	shout	back	at	Alain.	But	any
witticism	that	might	have	materialized	vanished	as	all	along	the	wall	beside



me	the	symbols	started	to	light	up.	Each	cracked	open,	glowing,	as	if	they	had
become	fissures	into	some	world	of	fire	waiting	for	us	all	just	beneath	the
surface	of	the	stone.	I	realized	in	that	instant	that	the	Silent	Sister	had
completed	her	work	and	that	Alain,	his	friends,	the	old	man	with	his	wine,
and	every	other	person	inside	was	about	to	burn.	I	swear,	in	that	moment	I
even	felt	sorry	for	the	opera	singers.

“Jump,	you	idiots!”	I	shouted	it	over	my	shoulder,	already	running.
I	rounded	the	corner	at	speed	and	slipped,	shoes	still	slick	with	muck.

Sprawling	across	cobbles,	I	saw	back	along	the	alleyway,	now	lit	in	blinding
incandescence	shot	through	with	pulsing	shadow.	Each	symbol	blazed.	At	the
far	end,	one	particular	shadow	stayed	constant:	the	Silent	Sister,	ragged	and
immobile,	still	little	more	than	a	stain	on	the	eye	despite	the	glare	from	the
wall	beside	her.

I	gained	my	feet	to	the	sound	of	awful	screaming.	The	old	hall	rang	to
notes	that	had	never	before	issued	from	any	mouth	within	it	down	the	long
years	of	its	history.	I	ran	then,	feet	sliding	and	skittering	beneath	me—and	out
of	the	brilliance	of	that	alleyway	something	gave	chase.	A	bright	and	jagged
line	zigzagged	along	my	trail	as	if	the	broken	pattern	sought	to	reclaim	me,	to
catch	me	and	light	me	up	so	that	I	too	might	share	the	fate	I’d	fought	so	hard
to	escape.

You	would	think	it	best	to	save	your	breath	for	running,	but	I	often	find
screaming	helps.	The	street	I	had	turned	into	from	the	alley	ran	past	the	back
of	the	opera	house	and	was	well-trodden	even	at	this	hour	of	the	night,	though
nowhere	near	as	crowded	as	Paint	Street,	which	runs	past	the	grand	entrance
and	delivers	patrons	to	the	doors.	My	.	.	.	manly	bellowing	.	.	.	served	to	clear
my	path	somewhat,	and	where	townsfolk	proved	too	slow	to	move	I	variously
sidestepped	or,	if	they	were	sufficiently	small	or	frail,	flattened	them.	The
crack	emerged	into	the	street	behind	me,	advancing	in	rapid	stuttering	steps,
each	accompanied	by	a	sound	like	something	expensive	shattering.

Turning	sideways	to	slot	between	two	town-laws	on	patrol,	I	managed	a
glance	back	and	saw	the	crack	jag	left,	veering	down	the	street,	away	from	the
opera	house	and	in	the	direction	I’d	taken.	The	people	in	the	road	hardly
noticed,	transfixed	as	they	were	by	the	glow	of	the	building	beyond,	its	walls
now	wreathed	in	pale	violet	flame.	The	crack	itself	seemed	more	than	it	first
appeared,	being	in	truth	two	cracks	running	close	together,	crossing	and
recrossing,	one	bleeding	a	hot	golden	light	and	the	other	revealing	a
consuming	darkness	that	seemed	to	swallow	what	illumination	fell	its	way.	At
each	point	where	they	crossed	golden	sparks	boiled	in	darkness	and	the
flagstones	shattered.

I	barged	between	the	town-laws,	the	impact	spinning	me	round,	hopping
on	one	foot	to	keep	my	balance.	The	crack	ran	under	an	old	fellow	I’d	felled
in	my	escape.	More	than	that,	it	ran	through	him,	and	where	the	dark	crossed



the	light	something	broke.	Smaller	fissures	spread	from	each	crossing	point,
encompassing	the	man	for	a	heartbeat	before	he	literally	exploded.	Red
chunks	of	him	were	thrown	skyward,	burning	as	they	flew,	consumed	with
such	ferocity	that	few	made	it	to	the	ground.

Whatever	anyone	may	say	about	running,	the	main	thing	is	to	pick	your
feet	up	as	quickly	as	possible—as	if	the	ground	has	developed	a	great	desire
to	hurt	you.	Which	it	kind	of	had.	I	took	off	at	a	pace	that	would	have	left	my
dog-fleeing	self	of	only	that	morning	stopping	to	check	whether	his	legs	were
still	moving.	More	people	exploded	in	my	wake	as	the	crack	ran	through
them.	I	vaulted	a	cart,	which	immediately	detonated	behind	me,	pieces	of
burning	wood	peppering	the	wall	as	I	dived	through	an	open	window.

I	rolled	to	my	feet	inside	what	looked	to	be,	and	certainly	smelled	like,	a
brothel	of	such	low	class	I	hadn’t	even	been	aware	of	its	existence.	Shapes
writhed	in	the	gloom	to	one	side	as	I	pelted	across	the	chamber,	knocking
over	a	lamp,	a	wicker	table,	a	dresser,	and	a	small	man	with	a	toupee,	before
pulverizing	the	shutters	on	the	rear	window	on	my	way	out.

The	room	lit	behind	me.	I	crashed	across	the	alleyway	into	which	I’d
spilled,	let	the	opposite	wall	arrest	my	momentum,	and	charged	off.	The
window	I	came	through	cracked,	sill	and	lintel,	the	whole	building	splitting.
The	twin	fissures,	light	and	dark,	wove	their	path	after	me,	picking	up	still
more	speed.	I	jumped	a	poppy-head	slumped	in	the	alley	and	raced	on.	From
the	sound	of	it	the	fissure	cured	his	addiction	permanently	a	heartbeat	later.

Eyes	forward	is	the	second	rule	of	running,	right	after	the	one	about
picking	up	your	feet.	Sometimes,	though,	you	can’t	follow	all	the	rules.
Something	about	the	crack	demanded	my	attention,	and	I	shot	another	glance
back	at	it.

Slam!	At	first	I	thought	I’d	run	into	a	wall.	Drawing	breath	for	more
screaming	and	more	running,	I	pulled	away,	only	to	discover	the	wall	was
holding	me.	Two	huge	fists,	one	bandaged	and	bloody,	bunched	in	the	jacket
over	my	chest.	I	looked	up,	then	up	some	more,	and	found	myself	staring	into
Snorri	ver	Snagason’s	pale	eyes.

“What—”	He	hadn’t	time	for	more	words.	The	crack	ran	through	us.	I
saw	a	black	fracture	race	through	the	Norseman,	jagged	lines	across	his	face,
bleeding	darkness.	In	the	same	moment	something	hot	and	unbearably
brilliant	cut	through	me,	filling	me	with	light	and	stealing	the	world	away.

My	vision	cleared	just	in	time	to	see	Snorri’s	forehead	descending.	I	heard
a	crack	of	an	entirely	different	kind.	My	nose	breaking.	And	the	world	went
away	again.



SIX

First	check	where	my	money	pouch	is,	and	pat	for	my	locket.	It’s	a	habit
I’ve	developed.	When	you	wake	up	in	the	kinds	of	places	I	wake	up	in,

and	in	the	company	I	often	pay	to	keep	.	.	.	well,	it	pays	to	keep	your	coin
close.	The	bed	was	harder	and	more	bumpy	than	I	tend	to	like.	As	hard	and
bumpy	as	cobbles,	in	fact.	And	it	smelled	like	shit.	The	glorious	safe	moment
between	being	asleep	and	being	awake	was	over.	I	rolled	onto	my	side,
clutching	my	nose.	Either	I’d	not	been	unconscious	very	long,	or	the	stink	had
kept	even	the	beggars	off.	That	and	the	excitement	down	the	road,	the	trail	of
exploded	citizens,	the	burning	opera	house,	the	blazing	crack.	The	crack!	I
staggered	to	my	feet	at	that,	expecting	to	see	the	jagged	path	leading	down	the
alley	and	pointing	straight	at	me.	Nothing.	At	least	nothing	to	see	by	starlight
and	a	quarter	moon.

“Shit.”	My	nose	hurt	more	than	seemed	reasonable.	I	remembered	fierce
eyes	beneath	heavy	brows	.	.	.	and	then	those	heavy	brows	smacking	into	my
face.	“Snorri	.	.	.”

The	Norseman	was	long	gone.	Why	small	charred	chunks	of	us	both
weren’t	decorating	the	walls,	I	couldn’t	say.	I	remembered	the	way	those	two
fissures	had	run	side	by	side,	crossing	and	recrossing,	and	at	every	junction,	a
detonation.	The	dark	fracture	line	had	run	through	Snorri—I	had	seen	it
across	his	face.	The	light—

I	patted	myself	down,	sudden	frantic	hands	searching	for	injury.	The	light
one	had	run	through	me.	Pulling	up	my	trouser	legs	revealed	grubby	shins
with	no	sign	of	golden	light	shining	from	any	cracks.	But	the	street	showed	no
sign	of	the	fissure	either.	Nothing	remained	but	the	damage	it	had	wrought.

I	shook	thoughts	of	that	blinding	golden	light	from	my	mind.	I’d
survived!	The	screams	from	the	opera	house	returned	to	me.	How	many	had
died?	How	many	of	my	friends?	My	relatives?	Had	Alain’s	sisters	been	there?
Pray	God	Maeres	Allus	had	been.	Let	it	be	one	of	those	nights	he	pretended	to
be	a	merchant	and	used	his	money	to	buy	him	into	social	circles	far	above	his
station.	For	now,	though,	I	needed	to	put	more	distance	between	me	and	the
site	of	the	fire.	But	where	to	go?	The	Silent	Sister’s	magic	had	pursued	me.
Would	she	be	waiting	at	the	palace	to	finish	the	job?



When	in	doubt,	run.
I	took	off	again,	along	dark	streets,	lost	but	knowing	in	time	that	I	would

hit	the	river	and	gain	my	bearings	anew.	Running	blind	is	apt	to	get	you	a
broken	nose,	and	since	I	had	one	of	those	already	and	wasn’t	keen	to	find	out
what	came	next	I	kept	my	pace	on	the	sensible	side	of	breakneck.	I	normally
find	that	showing	trouble	my	heels	and	putting	a	few	miles	behind	me	makes
things	a	whole	lot	better.	As	I	ran,	though,	breathing	through	my	mouth	and
catching	my	side	where	a	muscle	kept	cramping,	I	felt	worse	and	worse.	A
general	unease	grew	minute	by	minute	and	hardened	into	a	general	crippling
anxiety.	I	wondered	whether	this	was	what	conscience	felt	like.	Not	that	any
of	it	had	been	my	fault.	I	couldn’t	have	saved	anyone	even	if	I’d	tried.

I	paused	and	leaned	against	a	wall,	catching	my	breath	and	trying	to	shake
off	whatever	it	was	that	plagued	me.	My	heart	kept	fluttering	behind	my	ribs
as	if	I’d	started	to	sprint	rather	than	come	to	a	halt.	Each	part	of	me	seemed
fragile,	somehow	brittle.	My	hands	looked	wrong,	too	white,	too	light.	I
started	to	run	again,	accelerating,	any	fatigue	left	behind.	Spare	energy	boiled
off	my	skin,	rattled	through	me,	set	my	teeth	buzzing	in	their	sockets,	my	hair
seeming	to	float	up	around	my	head.	Something	was	wrong	with	me,	broken;
I	couldn’t	slow	down	if	I	wanted	to.

Ahead	the	street	forked,	starlight	offering	just	the	lines	of	the	building	that
divided	the	way.	I	veered	from	one	side	of	the	street	to	the	other,	unsure
which	path	to	follow.	Moving	to	the	left	made	me	worse,	my	speed
increasing,	sprinting,	my	hands	almost	glowing	as	they	pumped,	head	aching,
ready	to	split,	bright	light	fracturing	across	my	vision.	Veering	right	restored	a
touch	of	normality.	I	took	the	right	fork.	Suddenly	I	knew	the	direction.
Something	had	been	tugging	at	me	since	I	picked	myself	up	off	the	cobbles.
Now,	as	if	a	lamp	had	been	lit,	I	knew	the	direction	of	its	pull.	If	I	turned	from
it,	then	whatever	malady	afflicted	me	grew	worse.	Head	towards	it	and	the
symptoms	eased.	I	had	a	direction.

What	the	destination	might	be	I	couldn’t	say.
It	seemed	to	be	my	day	for	charging	headlong	down	the	streets	of

Vermillion.	My	path	now	followed	the	gentle	gradient	towards	the	Seleen
where	she	eased	her	slow	passage	through	the	city.	I	started	to	pass	the
markets	and	cargo	bays	behind	the	great	warehouses	that	fronted	the	river
docks.	Even	at	this	hour	men	moved	back	and	forth,	hauling	crates	from
mule-drawn	trolleys,	loading	wagons,	labouring	by	the	mean	light	of	lanterns
to	push	the	stuff	of	commerce	through	Vermillion’s	narrow	veins.

My	path	took	me	across	a	deserted	marketplace	smelling	of	fish	and
fetched	me	up	against	a	wide	expanse	of	wall,	one	of	the	city’s	most	ancient
buildings,	now	co-opted	into	service	as	a	docks	warehouse.	The	thing
stretched	a	hundred	yards	and	more	both	left	and	right,	and	I	had	no	interest
in	either	direction.	Forwards.	My	route	lay	straight	ahead.	That’s	where	the



pull	came	from.	A	broad-planked	door	cracked	open	a	few	yards	off	and
without	thought	I	was	there,	yanking	it	wide,	slipping	past	the	bewildered
menial	with	his	hand	still	trying	to	push.	A	corridor	ran	ahead,	going	my	way,
and	I	gave	chase.	Shouts	from	behind	as	men	startled	into	action	and	tried	to
catch	me.	Builder-globes	burned	here,	shedding	the	cold	white	light	of	the
ancients.	I	hadn’t	realized	quite	how	old	the	structure	was.	I	charged	on
regardless,	flashing	past	archway	after	archway	each	opening	on	to	Builder-lit
galleries,	all	packed	with	green-laden	benches	and	walled	with	shelf	upon
shelf	of	many-leaved	plants.	When,	about	halfway	through	the	width	of	the
warehouse,	a	plank-built	door	opened,	slamming	out	into	my	path,	all	I	had
time	to	think	before	blacking	out	was	that	hitting	Snorri	ver	Snagason	had
hurt	more.

	•	•	•	

Icame	back	to	consciousness	lying	horizontal	once	again,	and	hurting	in	so
many	places	that	I	missed	out	the	blissful	ignorance	stage	and	went	directly

into	the	asking	of	stupid	questions.
“Where	am	I?”	Nasal	and	hesitant.
The	bright	but	flickering	light	and	the	faint	unnatural	whine	helped	me	to

remember.	Somewhere	with	Builder-globes.	I	made	to	sit	up	and	found
myself	tied	to	a	table.	“Help!”	A	little	louder.	Panicked,	I	tested	my	strength
against	the	ropes	and	found	no	give	in	them.	“Help!”

“Best	save	your	breath!”	The	voice	came	from	the	shadows	by	the	door.	I
squinted.	A	thickset	ruffian	leaned	against	the	wall,	looking	back	at	me.

“I’m	Prince	Jalan!	I’ll	have	your	fucking	head	for	this!	Untie	these
ropes.”

“Yeah,	that’s	not	going	to	happen.”	He	leaned	forwards,	chewing
something,	the	flickering	light	gleaming	on	his	baldness.

“I’m	Prince	Jalan!	Don’t	you	recognize	me?”
“Like	I	know	what	the	princes	look	like.	I	don’t	even	know	the	princes’

names!	Far	as	I’m	concerned	you’re	some	toff	who	got	juiced	up	and	went
swimming	in	a	sewer.	Just	your	bad	luck	to	end	up	here.	Horace,	though,	he
did	seem	to	know	you	from	somewhere.	Told	me	to	keep	you	here	and	off	he
went.	‘Keep	an	eye	on	that	one,	Daveet,’	he	said.	‘Keep	a	good	watch.’	You
must	be	some	kind	of	important	or	you’d	be	floating	down	the	river	by	now
with	your	throat	cut.”

“Kill	me	and	my	grandmother	will	raze	this	quarter	to	the	ground.”	A
blatant	lie,	but,	spoken	with	conviction,	it	made	me	feel	better.	“I’m	a	rich
man.	Let	me	go	and	I’ll	see	you’re	fixed	up	for	life.”	I’ll	admit	I	have	a	gift
for	lying.	I	sound	least	convincing	when	I	tell	the	truth.

“Money’s	nice	an’	all,”	the	man	said.	He	took	a	step	away	from	the	wall



and	let	the	flickers	illuminate	the	brutality	of	his	face.	“But	if	I	let	you	go
without	Horace’s	say-so	then	I	wouldn’t	have	no	fingers	to	count	it	all	with.
And	if	it	turned	out	you	really	were	a	prince	and	we	let	you	go	without	the
boss’s	say-so,	well	me	and	Horace	would	think	having	our	fingers	taken	was
the	easy	part.”	He	bared	his	teeth	at	me—more	gaps	than	teeth,	truth	be	told
—and	settled	back	into	the	shadow.

I	lay	back,	moaning	from	time	to	time,	and	asking	questions	that	he
ignored.	At	least	the	strange	compulsion	that	had	me	running	headlong	into
this	mess	in	the	first	place	had	now	faded.	I	still	had	that	sense	of	direction,
but	the	need	to	pursue	it	had	lessened	and	I	felt	more	my	old	self.	Which	in
this	instance	meant	terrified.	Even	in	my	terror,	though,	I	noticed	that	the
direction	that	nagged	at	me	was	changing,	swinging	round,	the	urge	to	pursue
it	growing	more	faint	by	the	minute.

I	drew	a	deep	breath	and	took	stock	of	my	surroundings.	A	smallish	room,
not	one	of	those	long	galleries.	They’d	been	growing	plants	there?	That	made
no	sense.	No	plants	in	here,	though.	The	broken	light	probably	meant	it
wasn’t	suitable.	Just	a	table	and	me	tied	to	it.

“Why—”	The	door	juddered	open	and	cut	through	my	nineteenth
question.

“Good	lord,	it	stinks	in	here!”	A	calm	and	depressingly	familiar	voice.
“Stand	our	guest	up,	why	don’t	you,	and	let’s	see	if	you	can’t	sluice	some	of
that	filth	off	him.”

Men	loomed	to	either	side,	strong	hands	grasped	the	table,	and	the	world
turned	through	a	right	angle,	leaving	the	table	standing	on	end,	and	me
standing	too,	still	bound	to	it.	A	bucket	of	cold	water	took	my	breath	and
vision	before	I	had	a	chance	to	look	around.	Another	followed	in	quick
succession.	I	stood	gasping,	trying	to	get	a	breath—no	mean	task	with	your
nose	clogged	with	blood	and	water	everywhere—whilst	a	fragrant	brown	pool
began	to	spread	around	my	feet.

“Well,	bless	me.	There	seems	to	be	a	prince	hidden	under	all	this
unpleasantness.	A	diamond	in	the	muck,	as	they	say.	Albeit	a	very	low-carat
one.”

I	shook	the	wet	hair	from	my	eyes,	and	there	he	stood,	Maeres	Allus,
dressed	in	his	finest	as	if	bound	for	high	company	.	.	.	and	an	opera	perhaps?

“Ah,	Maeres!	I	was	hoping	to	see	you.	Had	a	little	something	to	hand	over
towards	our	arrangement.”	I	never	called	it	my	debt.	Our	arrangement
sounded	better.	A	little	more	as	if	it	was	both	our	problems,	not	just	mine.

“You	were?”	Just	the	slightest	smile	mocking	at	the	corners	of	his	mouth.
He’d	worn	that	same	smile	when	one	of	his	heavies	snapped	my	index	finger.
The	ache	of	it	still	ran	through	me	on	cold	mornings	when	I	reached	for	the
flagon	of	small	beer	they	put	by	my	bed.	It	ran	through	that	same	finger	now,
secured	at	my	side.



“Yes.”	I	didn’t	even	stutter.	“Had	it	with	me	at	the	opera.”	By	my
reckoning	the	business	with	Snorri	had	bought	me	in	the	region	of	six	months’
grace,	but	it	never	hurts	to	sound	willing.	Besides,	the	main	thing	when	tied	to
tables	by	criminals	is	to	remind	them	how	much	more	valuable	you	are	to
them	when	not	tied	to	a	table.	“The	gold	was	right	in	my	pocket.	I	think	I
must	have	lost	it	in	the	panic.”

“Tragic.”	Maeres	lifted	a	hand,	cupped	his	fingers,	and	a	man	came	from
the	shadows	to	stand	at	his	shoulder.	A	dry	rustling	accompanied	his	advance
and	stopped	when	he	did.	I	didn’t	like	this	one	at	all.	He	looked	too	pleased	to
see	me.	“Another	fire	with	no	survivors.”

“Well	.	.	.”	I	didn’t	want	to	contradict	Maeres.	My	eyes	slid	to	the	man
beside	him.	Maeres	is	a	slight	fellow,	unremarkable,	the	kind	of	little	man	you
might	find	bent	over	the	ledgers	at	some	merchant’s	office.	Neat	brown	hair,
eyes	that	are	neither	kind	nor	cruel.	In	fact,	remarkably	similar	to	my	father	in
age	and	appearance.	Maeres’s	companion,	though,	he	looked	like	the	sort	of
man	who	would	drown	kittens	recreationally.	His	face	reminded	me	of	the
skulls	in	the	palace	catacombs.	Stretch	skin	over	one	and	press	in	some	pale
staring	eyes,	and	you’d	have	this	man,	his	smile	too	wide,	teeth	too	long	and
white.

Maeres	clicked	his	fingers,	snapping	my	attention	back	to	him.	“This	is
Cutter	John.	I	was	telling	him	as	we	came	in	just	how	unfortunate	it	is	that
you’ve	seen	my	operation	here.”

“O-o-operation?”	I	stuttered	the	question	out.	Victory	could	be	measured
now	by	a	lack	of	soiling	myself.	Cutter	John	was	a	name	everyone	knew,	but
not	many	claimed	to	have	seen	him.	Cutter	John	came	into	play	when	Maeres
wanted	to	hurt	people	more	creatively.	When	a	broken	finger,	amputated	toe,
or	good	beating	wouldn’t	suffice,	when	Maeres	wanted	to	stamp	his	authority,
set	his	trademark	upon	some	poor	soul,	Cutter	John	would	be	the	man	to	do
the	work.	Some	called	it	artistry.

“The	poppies.”
“I	didn’t	see	any	poppies.”	Row	upon	row	of	green	things	growing,	here

under	Builder-lights.	My	Uncle	Hertert—the	heir-apparently-not,	as	Father
liked	to	call	him—had	made	countless	initiatives	to	cut	the	opium	supply.
He’d	had	town-law	out	on	boats	patrolling	God	knows	how	many	miles	of	the
Seleen,	convinced	it	came	upriver	from	the	port	of	Marsail.	But	Maeres	grew
his	own.	Right	here.	Under	Hertert’s	nose	and	ready	to	go	up	everyone	else’s.
“I	didn’t	see	a	thing,	Maeres.	I	ran	into	a	door,	for	godsakes.	Blind	drunk.”

“You	sobered	up	remarkably	well.”	He	lifted	a	golden	vinaigrette	to	his
nose,	as	if	the	stink	of	me	offended	him.	Which	it	probably	did.	“In	any	event
it’s	a	risk	I	can’t	run,	and	if	we	have	to	part	company	we	may	as	well	make	it
a	memorable	event,	no?”	He	tilted	his	head	at	Cutter	John.

That	was	enough	to	let	my	bladder	go.	It	wasn’t	as	if	anyone	would



notice,	soaked	and	reeking	as	I	was.	“C-come	now,	Maeres,	you’re	joking?	I
owe	you	money.	Who’ll	pay	if	I	.	.	.	if	I	don’t	pay?”	He	needed	me.

“Well,	Jalan,	the	thing	is,	I	don’t	think	you	can	pay.	If	a	man	owes	me	a
thousand	crowns	he’s	in	trouble.	If	he	owes	me	a	hundred	thousand,	then	I’m
in	trouble.	And	you,	Jalan,	owe	me	eight	hundred	and	six	crowns,	less	some
small	amount	for	your	amusing	Norseman.	All	of	which	makes	you	a	small
fish	that	can	neither	swallow	me	nor	feed	me.”

“But	.	.	.	I	can	pay.	I’m	the	Red	Queen’s	grandson.	I’m	good	for	the	debt!”
“One	of	many,	Jalan.	Too	much	of	any	denomination	waters	down	the

currency.	I’d	call	‘prince’	an	overvalued	commodity	in	Red	March	these
days.”

“But—”	I’d	always	known	Maeres	Allus	for	a	businessman,	a	cruel	and
implacable	one	of	a	certainty,	but	sane.	Now	it	seemed	that	madness	might	be
spiralling	behind	those	dark	little	eyes.	Too	much	blood	in	the	water	for	the
shark	in	him	to	lie	quiet	any	longer.	“But	.	.	.	what	good	would	killing	me
do?”	He	couldn’t	ever	tell	anyone.	My	death	wouldn’t	serve	him.

“You	died	in	the	fire,	Prince	Jalan.	Everyone	knows	that.	None	of	my
doing.	And	if	a	hint	of	a	rumour	floated	behind	Vermillion’s	conversations,	a
whisper	that	you	might	have	died	elsewhere,	in	even	less	pleasant
circumstances,	over	a	matter	of	debt	.	.	.	well	then,	what	new	heights	might
my	clients	reach	in	their	efforts	not	to	disappoint	me	in	future?	Might	there	be
ladies	of	ill	repute	who	would	recognize	Cutter’s	latest	bracelet	and	spread	the
word	as	they	spread	their	legs?”	He	glanced	towards	Cutter	John,	who	raised
his	right	arm.	Dry	bands	of	pale	gristle	encircled	the	limb,	rustling	against
each	other,	dozens	of	them,	starting	at	his	wrist	and	reaching	past	his	elbow.

“Wh-what?”	I	didn’t	understand	what	I	was	seeing,	or	perhaps	some	part
of	my	brain	was	sensibly	stopping	me	from	understanding.

Cutter	John	circled	his	own	lips	with	one	finger.	The	trophies	along	his
arm	whispered	together	as	he	did	so.	“Open	wide.”	His	voice	slithered	as
though	he	were	something	not	human.

“You	shouldn’t	have	come	here,	Jalan.”	Maeres	spoke	into	the	silence	of
my	horror.	“It’s	unfortunate	that	you	can’t	unsee	my	poppies,	but	the	world	is
full	of	misfortunes.”	He	stepped	back	to	stand	by	Daveet	at	the	door—the
lights	flickering	across	his	face	providing	the	only	animation,	a	shadow	smile
there	and	gone,	there	and	gone.

“No!”	For	the	first	time	ever	I	wanted	Maeres	Allus	not	to	leave.
Anything	was	better	than	being	abandoned	to	Cutter	John.	“No!	I	won’t	talk!
I	won’t.	Not	ever.”	I	put	some	anger	into	it—who	would	believe	a	sobbing
promise	of	strength?	“I’m	saying	nothing!”	I	strained	at	my	ropes,	rocking	the
table	back	against	its	legs.	“Pull	my	nails.	I	won’t	talk.	Hot	pincers	won’t	drag
it	from	me.”

“How	about	cold	ones?”	Cutter	John	raised	the	short-handled	iron	pincers



he’d	been	holding	all	this	time	in	his	other	hand.
I	roared	at	them	then,	thrashing,	useless	in	the	ropes.	If	one	of	Maeres’s

men	hadn’t	been	standing	on	the	table	legs,	it	would	have	tipped	forwards	and
I’d	have	gone	face	first	into	the	flagstones,	which	bad	as	it	sounds	would	have
been	far	less	painful	than	what	Cutter	John	had	in	mind	for	me.	I	was	still
roaring	and	screaming,	working	my	way	rapidly	towards	sobbing	and
pleading,	when	a	hot	wet	something	splattered	across	my	face.	It	was	enough
to	make	me	unscrew	my	eyes	and	pause	my	bellowing.	Although	I’d	stopped
yelling	the	din	was	no	less	deafening,	only	now	it	wasn’t	me	screaming.	I’d
drowned	out	the	crash	of	the	door	bursting	open,	too	far	gone	in	my	terror	to
notice	it.	Only	Daveet	stood	there	now,	framed	in	the	doorway.	He	turned	as	I
watched,	slit	from	collarbone	to	hip,	spilling	coils	of	his	guts	to	the	floor.	To
the	left	a	large	figure	moved	at	the	edge	of	my	vision.	As	I	turned	my	head
the	action	shifted	behind	the	table;	another	scream	and	a	pale	arm	wrapped	in
bracelets	made	from	men’s	lips	landed	on	the	flagstones	about	a	foot	from
where	Daveet’s	head	hit	the	stone	when	he	tripped	on	his	intestines.	And	in
one	moment	there	was	silence.	Not	a	sound	save	for	men	shouting	far	down
the	corridor	outside,	echoey	in	the	distance.	Daveet	appeared	to	have	knocked
himself	out	or	died	from	sudden	blood	loss.	If	Cutter	John	missed	his	arm,	he
wasn’t	complaining.	I	could	see	one	more	of	Maeres’s	men	lying	dead.	The
others	might	be	dead	behind	me	or	taking	a	leaf	from	my	book	and	sprinting
for	the	hills.	If	I	hadn’t	been	tied	to	the	damn	table	I	would	have	been
overtaking	them	on	the	way	to	the	aforementioned	hills	myself.

Snorri	ver	Snagason	stepped	into	view.	“You!”	he	said.
The	hooded	robe	he’d	been	wearing	when	I	ran	into	him	was	half-torn

from	his	shoulders;	blood	splattered	his	chest	and	arms	and	dripped	from	the
scarlet	sword	in	his	fist.	More	of	the	stuff	ran	down	his	face	from	a	shallow
cut	on	his	forehead.	It	wouldn’t	be	hard	to	mistake	him	for	a	demon	risen
from	hell.	In	fact,	in	the	flickering	light,	blood-clad	and	with	battle	in	his
eyes,	it	was	quite	hard	not	to.

“You?”	The	eloquence	Snorri	had	demonstrated	in	Grandmother’s	throne
room	had	wholly	abandoned	him.

He	reached	for	me,	and	I	shrank	back,	but	not	far	because	that	fucking
table	was	in	the	way.	As	that	big	hand	came	close,	I	felt	a	tingle	on	my
cheekbones,	my	lips,	forehead,	like	pins	and	needles,	a	kind	of	pressure
building.	He	felt	it	too—I	saw	his	eyes	widen.	The	direction	that	had	led	me,
the	destination	that	had	drawn	me	on	.	.	.	it	was	him.	The	same	force	had	led
Snorri	here	and	set	him	amongst	Maeres’s	men.	We	both	recognized	it	now.

The	Norseman	slowed	his	hand,	fingers	an	inch	or	two	from	my	neck.
The	skin	there	buzzed,	almost	crackling	with	.	.	.	something.	He	stopped,	not
wanting	to	find	out	what	would	happen	if	he	touched	me	skin	to	skin.	The
hand	withdrew,	returned	full	of	knife,	and	before	I	could	squeal	he	set	to



cutting	my	bonds.
“You’re	coming	with	me.	We	can	sort	this	out	somewhere	else.”
Abandoning	me	amongst	loops	of	sliced	rope,	Snorri	returned	to	the

doorway,	pausing	only	to	stamp	on	someone’s	neck.	Not	Maeres’s,
unfortunately.	He	ducked	his	head	through,	pulling	back	immediately,	a	quick
bobbing	motion.	Something	hissed	past	the	entrance,	several	somethings.

“Crossbows.”	Snorri	spat	on	Daveet’s	corpse.	“I	hate	bowmen.”	A	glance
back	at	me.	“Grab	a	sword.”

“A	sword?”	The	man	clearly	thought	he	was	still	in	the	wilds	amongst	the
overly	hairy	folk	of	the	North.	I	cast	my	eye	across	the	carnage,	looking
behind	the	table.	Cutter	John	lay	sprawled,	the	stump	of	his	arm	barely
pulsing,	an	ugly	wound	on	his	forehead.	No	sign	of	Maeres.	I	couldn’t
imagine	how	he’d	escaped.

None	of	them	had	any	weapon	more	offensive	than	a	six-inch	knife;
carrying	anything	larger	within	the	city	walls	just	wasn’t	worth	the	trouble
from	town-laws.	I	took	the	dagger	and	kicked	Cutter	John	in	the	head	a	few
times.	It	really	hurt	my	toes,	but	I	felt	it	a	price	worth	paying.

I	hobbled	back	round	the	table	holding	my	new	weapon	and	earned	a
withering	look	from	the	Norseman.	He	picked	up	the	door.	“Catch.”	I	didn’t
quite	manage	it.	Whilst	I	hopped	on	my	good	foot,	clutching	my	face	and
swearing	nasally,	Snorri	quickly	hacked	the	legs	from	the	table	and,	bearing	it
like	a	huge	shield,	advanced	towards	the	corridor.	“Get	my	back!”

The	fear	of	being	left	behind,	and	finding	myself	in	Maeres	Allus’s
clutches	again,	spurred	me	into	action.	With	some	effort	I	picked	up	the	door
and	together	we	propelled	our	shields	into	the	corridor	before	stepping
between	them.	Crossbow	bolts	thudded	into	both	immediately,	iron	heads
splintering	partway	through.

“Which	direc—”	Snorri	was	already	too	far	away	to	hear	me	even	if	he
hadn’t	been	shouting	his	battle	cry.	He’d	stormed	off	down	the	corridor
behind	me.	I	followed	as	best	I	could,	trying	to	hold	the	door	across	my	back
while	I	stumbled	after	him,	keeping	my	head	down,	reaching	over	my
shoulders	to	hold	the	door	in	place.	Shouts	and	screams	ahead	indicated	that
Snorri	had	gotten	to	grips	with	his	hated	bowmen,	but	by	the	time	I	got	there
it	was	all	blood	and	pieces.	The	main	difficulty	lay	in	not	slipping	over	in	the
gore.	Several	more	bolts	hit	the	boards	across	my	back	with	powerful	thuds,
and	another	skipped	between	my	ankles,	letting	me	know	that	I’d	left	a	gap.
Fortunately	I	had	just	ten	yards	to	reach	the	exit.	With	the	door	scraping	the
floor	behind	me,	and	just	the	tips	of	my	fingers	exposed,	I	broke	out	into	the
night	air.	My	traditional	moment	of	triumph	at	escaping	yet	again	was
curtailed	by	a	muscular	arm	that	reached	from	the	darkness	and	yanked	me	to
one	side.

“I’ve	got	a	boat,”	Snorri	growled.	Normally	when	you	say	someone



growled	something	it’s	just	a	turn	of	phrase,	but	Snorri	really	put	something
feral	into	his	words.

“What?”	I	shook	my	arm	free,	or	he	let	it	go,	a	mutual	thing,	neither	of	us
liking	the	burning	needling	sensation	where	his	fingers	gripped	me.

“I’ve	got	a	boat.”
“Of	course	you	do,	you’re	a	Viking.”	Everything	seemed	rather	surreal.

Perhaps	I’d	been	hit	in	the	face	one	too	many	times	since	Alain	made	a	grab
for	me	in	the	opera	house	only	an	hour	or	two	earlier.

Snorri	shook	his	head.	“Follow.	Quick!”
He	took	off	into	the	night.	The	sounds	of	men	approaching	down	the

warehouse	corridor	convinced	me	to	give	chase.	We	crossed	a	wide	space
stacked	with	barrels	and	crates,	passed	dozens	of	hanging	nets,	the	sails	of
riverboats	poking	up	above	the	river	wall	beside	us.	By	moonlight	we	crossed
a	quay	and	descended	stone	steps	to	the	water,	where	a	rowing	boat	lay	tied	to
one	of	the	great	iron	rings	set	into	the	wall.

“You’ve	got	a	boat,”	I	said.
“I	was	a	mile	downstream,	free	and	clear.”	Snorri	tossed	his	sword	in,

stepped	in	after	it,	and	picked	up	an	oar.	“Something	happened	to	me.”	He
paused,	staring	for	a	moment	into	his	hand,	though	it	held	only	darkness.
“Something	.	.	.	I	was	getting	sick.”	He	sat	and	took	both	oars.	“I	knew	I	had
to	come	back—knew	the	direction.	And	then	I	found	you.”

I	stood	on	the	step.	The	Silent	Sister’s	magic	had	done	this.	I	knew	it.	The
crack	had	run	through	us,	the	light	through	me,	the	dark	through	him,	and	as
Snorri	and	I	separated,	some	arcane	force	tried	to	rejoin	those	two	lines,	the
dark	and	the	light.	We	had	drawn	away	from	each	other,	the	river	carrying
Snorri	west,	and	those	hidden	fissures	started	to	open	again,	started	to	tear	us
both	apart	just	so	they	could	be	free	to	run	together	once	more.	I	remembered
what	happened	when	they	joined.	It	wasn’t	pretty.

“Don’t	stand	there	like	an	idiot.	Loose	the	rope	and	get	in.”
“I	.	.	.”	The	rowing	boat	moved	as	the	current	tried	to	wrest	it	from	its

mooring.	“It	doesn’t	look	very	stable.”	I’ve	always	viewed	boats	as	a	thin
plank	between	me	and	drowning.	As	a	sensible	fellow	I’d	never	entrusted	my
safety	to	one	before,	and	close	up	they	looked	even	more	dangerous.	The	dark
river	slurped	at	the	oars	as	if	hungry.

Snorri	nodded	up	at	the	steps,	up	towards	the	gap	in	the	river	wall	they	led
to.	“In	a	moment	a	man	with	a	crossbow	will	stand	there	and	convince	you
that	waiting	was	a	mistake.”

I	hopped	in	sharp	enough	at	that,	Snorri	deploying	his	weight	to	stop	me
turning	the	boat	over	before	I	managed	to	sit	down.

“The	rope?”	he	asked.	Shouts	rang	out	above	us,	drawing	closer.
I	pulled	my	knife,	slashed	the	rope,	nearly	lost	the	knife	in	the	river,	tried

again,	and	finally	sawed	at	the	strands	until	at	last	they	gave	and	we	were	off.



The	current	took	us	and	the	wall	vanished	into	the	gloom	along	with	all	sight
of	land.



SEVEN

“Are	you	going	to	be	sick	again?”
“Has	the	river	stopped	flowing?”	I	asked.

Snorri	snorted.
“Then	yes.”	I	demonstrated,	adding	another	streak	of	colour	into	the	dark

waters	of	the	Seleen.	“If	God	had	intended	men	to	go	on	water	he	would	have
given	them	.	.	.”	I	felt	too	ill	for	wit	and	hung	limp	over	the	side	of	the	boat,
scowling	at	the	grey	dawn	coming	up	behind	us.	“.	.	.	given	them	whatever	it
is	you	need	for	that	kind	of	thing.”

“A	messiah	who	walked	on	water	to	show	you	all	it	was	exactly	where
God	intended	men	to	go?”	Snorri	shook	that	big	chiselled	head	of	his.	“My
people	have	older	learning	than	the	White	Christ	brought.	Aegir	owns	the	sea
and	he	doesn’t	intend	that	we	go	onto	it.	But	we	do	even	so.”	He	rumbled
through	a	bar	of	song:	“Undoreth,	we.	Battle-born.	Raise	hammer,	raise	axe,
at	our	war-shout	gods	tremble.”	He	rowed	on,	humming	his	tuneless	tunes.

My	nose	hurt	like	buggery,	I	felt	cold,	most	of	me	ached,	and	when	I	did
manage	to	sniff	through	my	twice-broken	snout	I	could	tell	that	I	still	smelled
only	slightly	less	bad	than	that	dung	heap	that	saved	my	life.

“My—”	I	fell	silent.	My	pronunciation	sounded	comical;	my	nose	would
have	come	out	“by	dose.”	And	although	I	had	every	right	to	complain,	it
might	rile	the	Norseman,	and	it	doesn’t	pay	to	rile	the	kind	of	man	who	can
jump	on	a	bear	to	escape	a	fight	pit.	Especially	if	it	was	you	who	put	him	in
that	pit	in	the	first	place.	As	my	father	would	say,	“To	err	is	human,	to	forgive
is	divine	.	.	.	but	I’m	only	a	cardinal	and	cardinals	are	human,	so	rather	than
forgiving	you	I’m	going	to	err	towards	beating	you	with	this	stick.”	Snorri
didn’t	look	the	forgiving	kind	either.	I	settled	for	another	groan.

“What?”	He	looked	up	from	his	rowing.	I	remembered	the	remarkable
number	of	bodies	he	left	in	his	wake	coming	in	and	out	of	Maeres’s	poppy
farm	to	get	me.	All	with	his	weapon	hand	badly	injured.

“Nothing.”

	•	•	•	



e	rowed	on	through	the	garden	lands	of	Red	March.	Well,	Snorri	rowed	on,

Wand	I	lay	moaning.	In	truth	he	mostly	steered	us	and	the	Seleen	did	the
rest.	Where	his	right	hand	clutched	the	oar	he	left	it	bloodstained.

Scenery	passed,	green	and	monotonous,	and	I	slumped	over	the
side,	muttering	complaints	and	vomiting	sporadically.	I	also	wondered	about
how	I’d	moved	from	waking	beside	the	naked	delights	of	Lisa	DeVeer	to
sharing	a	shitty	rowing	boat	with	a	huge	Norse	maniac	all	in	the	space
between	two	dawns.

“Will	we	have	trouble?”
“Huh?”	I	looked	up	from	my	misery.
Snorri	tilted	his	head	downstream	to	where	several	rickety	wooden	quays

reached	out	into	the	river,	a	number	of	fishing	boats	tied	up	at	them.	Men
moved	here	and	there	along	the	shore	checking	fish	traps,	mending	nets.

“Why	should—”	I	remembered	that	Snorri	was	very	far	from	home	in
lands	he	had	probably	only	glimpsed	from	the	back	of	a	slave	wagon.	“No,”	I
said.

He	grunted	and	set	an	oar	to	angle	us	into	deeper	water	where	the	current
ran	fastest.	Perhaps	in	the	fjords	of	the	frozen	North	any	passing	stranger	was
game	and	you	became	a	stranger	ten	yards	from	your	doorstep.	Red	March
enjoyed	ways	a	touch	more	civilized,	due	in	no	small	part	to	the	fact	that	my
grandmother	would	have	anyone	who	broke	the	bigger	laws	nailed	to	a	tree.

We	carried	on	past	various	nameless	hamlets	and	small	towns	that
probably	had	names	but	held	too	few	distractions	ever	to	make	me	care	what
those	names	were.	Occasionally	a	field	hand	would	rest	fingers	on	hoe,	chin
on	knuckles,	and	watch	us	pass	with	the	same	vacancy	that	the	cows	used.
Urchins	chased	us	from	time	to	time,	following	along	the	banks	for	a	hundred
yards,	some	throwing	stones,	others	baring	their	grimy	arses	in	mock	threat.
Washerwomen	splatting	husbands’	second	smocks	against	flat	stones	would
raise	their	heads	and	hoot	appreciatively	at	the	Norseman	as	he	flexed	his
arms	against	the	oars.	And	finally	on	a	lonely	stretch	of	river	where	the
Seleen	explored	her	floodplain,	with	the	sun	hot	and	high,	Snorri	deflected	us
beneath	the	broad	fringe	of	a	great	willow.	The	tree	leaned	out	across	lazy
waters	at	the	extreme	of	a	long	meander	and	encompassed	us	beneath	its
canopy.

“So,”	he	said,	and	the	prow	bumped	up	against	the	willow	trunk.	The	hilt
of	his	sword	slipped	from	the	bench	and	clunked	on	the	planks,	blade	dark
with	dried	blood.

“Look	.	.	.	about	the	fight	pits	.	.	.	I—”	Much	of	the	morning	of	my
maiden	voyage	had	been	spent	planning	the	smooth	denials	that	now	refused
to	stutter	from	my	tongue.	In	between	the	vomiting	and	the	complaining	I’d
been	rehearsing	my	lies,	but	under	the	focused	gaze	of	a	man	who	appeared	to
be	more	than	ready	to	slaughter	his	way	through	any	situation,	I	ran	out	of	the



spit	required	for	falsehoods.	For	a	moment	I	saw	him	staring	up	at	Maeres
from	the	pit	floor.	“Bring	a	bigger	bear?”	I	remembered	the	smile	he	had	on
him.	A	snort	of	laughter	broke	out	of	me	and,	fuck,	yes	it	hurt.	“Who	even
says	that	kind	of	thing?”

Snorri	grinned.	“The	first	one	was	too	small.”
“And	the	last	one	was	just	right?”	I	shook	my	head,	trying	not	to	laugh

again.	“You	beat	Goldilocks	to	the	punch	line	by	one	bear.”
He	frowned	at	that.	“Goldilocks?”
“Never	mind.	Never	mind.	And	Cutter	John!”	I	sucked	in	a	huge	breath

and	surrendered	to	the	joy	of	the	memory,	of	escaping	that	goggle-eyed
demon	and	his	knives.	The	mirth	bubbled	out	of	me.	I	doubled	up,	gasping
with	hysterical	laughter,	beating	the	side	of	the	boat	to	stop	myself.	“Ah,	Jesu!
You	took	the	bastard’s	arm	off.”

Snorri	shrugged,	holding	back	another	grin.	“Must	have	gotten	in	my	way.
Once	your	Red	Queen	changed	her	mind	about	letting	me	go,	she	put	her	city
at	war	with	me.”

“The	Red	Qu—”	I	caught	myself.	I’d	said	it	was	the	queen’s	order	that	he
be	sent	to	the	pits.	He	had	no	reason	not	to	believe	me.	Remembering	the
anchor	points	of	any	web	of	lies	is	part	of	the	basics	when	practising	to
deceive.	Normally	I’m	world	class	at	it.	I	blamed	my	failure	on	extenuating
circumstances.	I	had,	after	all,	escaped	from	Alain	DeVeer’s	frying	pan	into
the	fire	of	the	opera	only	to	plunge	from	that	into	something	even	worse.
“Yes.	That	was	.	.	.	harsh	of	her.	But	my	grandmother	is	known	as	somewhat
of	a	tyrant.”

“Your	grandmother?”	Snorri	raised	his	eyebrows.
“Um.”	Shit.	He	hadn’t	even	noticed	me	in	the	throne	room	and	now	he

knew	me	for	a	prince,	a	prize	hostage.	“I’m	a	very	distant	grandson.	Hardly
related	at	all,	really.”	I	raised	a	hand	to	my	nose.	All	that	laughing	had	left	it
pulsing	with	hurt.

“Take	a	breath.”	Snorri	leaned	forwards.
“What?”
He	snaked	out	an	arm,	catching	my	head	from	behind,	fingers	like	iron

rods.	For	a	second	I	thought	he	was	just	going	to	crush	my	skull,	but	then	his
other	hand	blocked	my	view	and	the	world	exploded	in	white	agony.	Pinching
the	bridge	of	my	nose	with	finger	and	thumb,	he	pulled	and	twisted.
Something	grated	and	if	I’d	had	anything	left	to	vomit	I’d	have	filled	the	boat
with	it.

“There.”	He	released	me.	“Fixed.”
I	hollered	out	the	pain	and	surprise	in	one	burst,	trailing	into	coherence	at

the	end	of	it,	“.	.	.	Jesu	fuck	me	with	a	cross!”	The	words	came	out	clear,	the
nasal	twang	gone.	I	couldn’t	bring	myself	to	say	thank	you,	though,	so	I	said,
“Ouch.”



Snorri	leaned	back,	arms	resting	on	the	sides	of	the	boat.	“You	were	in	the
throne	room	then?	You	must	have	heard	the	tale	we	prisoners	were	brought	in
to	tell.”

“Well,	yes	.	.	.”	Certainly	bits	of	it.
“So	you’ll	know	where	I’m	headed,	then,”	Snorri	said.
“South?”	I	ventured.
He	looked	puzzled	at	that.	“I’d	be	more	at	ease	going	by	sea,	but	that	may

be	hard	to	arrange.	It	might	be	I	need	to	trek	north	through	Rhone	and	Renar
and	Ancrath	and	Conaught.”

“Well,	of	course	.	.	.”	I	had	no	idea	what	he	was	talking	about.	If	there	had
been	a	word	of	truth	in	his	story	he	wouldn’t	want	to	go	back.	And	his
itinerary	sounded	like	the	trek	from	hell.	Rhone,	our	uncouth	neighbour	to	the
north,	was	always	a	place	best	avoided.	I’d	yet	to	meet	a	Rhonish	man	I’d	piss
on	if	he	were	on	fire.	Renar	I’d	never	heard	of.	Ancrath	was	a	murky	kingdom
on	the	edge	of	a	swamp	and	full	of	murderous	inbreds,	and	Conaught	lay	so
far	away	there	was	bound	to	be	something	wrong	with	it.	“I	wish	you	luck	of
the	journey,	Snagason,	wherever	you’re	bound.”	I	held	my	hand	out	for	a
manly	clasping,	a	prelude	to	a	parting	of	our	ways.

“I’m	going	north.	Home	to	rescue	my	wife,	my	family	.	.	.”	He	paused	for
a	moment,	pressing	his	lips	tight,	then	shook	off	the	emotion.	“And	it	went
poorly	the	first	time	I	left	you	behind,”	Snorri	said.	He	eyed	my	outstretched
hand	with	a	measure	of	suspicion	and	extended	his	own	cautiously.	“You
didn’t	feel	that	just	now?”	He	touched	his	own	nose	with	his	other	hand.

“’Course	I	bloody	felt	it!”	It	was	quite	possibly	the	most	painful	thing	I’d
ever	experienced,	and	that	from	someone	who	learned	the	hard	way	not	to
jump	into	the	saddle	from	a	bedroom	window.

He	brought	his	hand	closer	to	mine	and	a	pressure	built	against	my	skin,
all	pins	and	needles	and	fire.	Closer	still,	and	more	slow,	and	my	hand	started
to	pale,	almost	to	glow	from	within,	while	his	darkened.	With	an	inch
between	our	extended	palms	it	seemed	that	a	cold	fire	ran	through	my	veins,
my	hand	brighter	than	the	day,	his	looking	as	if	it	had	been	dipped	in	dark
waters,	stained	with	blackest	ink	that	collected	in	every	crease	and	filled	each
pore.	His	veins	ran	black	while	mine	burned,	darkness	bled	from	his	skin	like
mist,	a	wisp	of	pale	flame	ghosted	across	my	knuckles.	Snorri	met	my	gaze,
his	teeth	gritted	against	a	pain	that	mirrored	mine.	Eyes	that	had	been	blue
were	now	holes	into	some	inner	night.

I	gave	one	of	those	yelps	that	I	always	hope	will	go	unnoticed	and
whipped	my	hand	away.	“Damnation!”	I	shook	it,	trying	to	shake	the	pain	out,
and	watched	as	it	shaded	back	to	normality.	“That	bloody	witch!	Point	taken.
We	won’t	shake	on	it.”	I	gestured	to	a	gravel	beach	on	the	outer	edge	of	the
meander.	“You	can	drop	me	off	there.	I’ll	find	my	own	way	back.”

Snorri	shook	his	head,	eyes	returning	to	blue.	“It	was	worse	when	we	got



too	far	apart.	Didn’t	you	notice?”
“I	was	rather	distracted,”	I	said.	“But,	yes,	I	do	recall	some	problems.”
“What	witch?”
“What?”
“You	said	‘bloody	witch.’	What	witch?”
“Oh	nothing,	I—”	I	remembered	the	fight	pits.	Lying	to	the	man	on	this

point	would	probably	be	a	mistake.	I	was	lying	out	of	habit,	in	any	case.
Better	to	tell	him.	It	might	be	that	his	heathen	ways	could	lead	to	some	kind
of	solution.	“You	met	her.	Well,	you	saw	her	in	the	Red	Queen’s	throne
room.”

“The	old	völva?”	Snorri	asked.
“The	old	what?”
“That	crone	at	the	Red	Queen’s	side.	She’s	the	witch	you’re	talking

about?”
“Yes.	The	Silent	Sister,	everyone	calls	her.	Most	don’t	see	her,	though.”
Snorri	spat	into	the	water.	The	current	took	it	away	in	a	series	of	lazy

swirls.	“I	know	this	name,	the	Silent	Sister.	The	völvas	of	the	North	speak	it,
but	not	loudly.”

“Well,	now	you’ve	seen	her.”	I	still	wondered	at	that.	Perhaps	the	fact	that
we	could	both	see	her	had	something	to	do	with	her	magic	failing	to	destroy
us.	“She	set	a	spell	that	was	to	kill	everyone	at	the	opera	I	went	to	last	night.”

“Opera?”	he	asked.
“Better	not	to	know.	In	any	event,	I	escaped	the	spell,	but	when	I	forced

my	way	through,	something	broke,	a	crack	ran	after	me.	Two	cracks,
interwoven,	one	dark,	one	light.	When	you	grabbed	hold	of	me,	the	crack
caught	up	and	ran	through	both	of	us.	And	somehow	stopped.”

“And	when	we	separate?”
“The	dark	fissure	ran	through	you,	the	light	through	me.	When	we	pull

them	apart	it	seems	the	cracks	try	to	tear	free,	to	rejoin.”
“And	when	they	join?”	Snorri	asked.
I	shrugged.	“It’s	bad.	Worse	than	opera.”	However	nonchalant	my	words

might	be,	though,	and	despite	the	heat	of	the	day,	my	blood	ran	colder	than
the	river.

Snorri	set	his	jaw	in	that	way	I’d	come	to	recognize	as	consideration.	His
hands	quietly	strangled	the	oars.	“So	your	grandmother	sentences	me	to	the
fight	pit	and	then	you	bring	down	her	witch’s	curse	on	me?”

“I	didn’t	seek	you	out!”	The	nonchalance	I’d	been	striving	for	wouldn’t
come	from	a	dry	mouth.	“You	stopped	me	dead	in	the	street,	remember?”	I
regretted	using	the	word	dead	immediately.

“You’re	a	man	of	honour,”	he	said	to	no	one	in	particular.	I	looked	for	the
smirk	and	found	nothing	but	sincerity.	If	he	was	acting,	then	I	needed	lessons
from	the	same	place	he’d	gotten	his.	I	concluded	that	he	was	reminding



himself	of	his	duties,	which	seemed	odd	in	a	Viking	whose	duties	traditionally
extended	to	remembering	to	pillage	before	raping,	or	the	other	way	around.
“You’re	a	man	of	honour.”	Louder	this	time,	looking	right	at	me.	Where	the
hell	he	got	that	idea,	I	had	no	notion.

“Yes,”	I	lied.
“We	should	settle	this	like	men.”	Absolutely	the	last	words	I	wanted	to

hear.
“Here’s	the	thing,	Snorri.”	I	eyed	the	various	escape	options	open	to	me.	I

could	jump	overboard.	Unfortunately	I’d	always	viewed	boats	as	a	thin	plank
between	me	and	drowning,	and	swimming	as	the	same	again	but	without	the
plank.	The	tree	offered	the	next	best	option,	but	willow	fronds	aren’t	climbing
material	unless	you	happen	to	be	a	squirrel.	I	selected	the	last	option.	“What’s
that	over	there?”	I	pointed	to	a	spot	on	the	riverbank	behind	the	Norseman.
He	didn’t	so	much	as	turn	his	head.	Shit.	“Ah,	my	mistake.”	And	that	was	me
out	of	options.	“As	I	was	saying.	The	thing	is.	The	thing.	Well,	honestly.”	The
thing	had	to	be	something.	“Um.	I’m	afraid	that	when	I	kill	you,	the	crack
will	run	out	of	you	just	the	same	as	it	would	if	we	got	too	far	apart.	And	then
—boom—a	split	second	later	I’d	be	too	far	apart.	So	tempting	as	it	is	to	pit
my	princely	fighting	skills	against	those	of	a	.	.	.	what	is	your	rank?	I	never
found	out.”

“Hauldr.	I	own	my	land,	ten	acres	from	Uulisk	shore	to	the	ridge	top.”
“So	as	much	as	it	tempts	me	to	break	with	societal	rules	and	pit	the	arm	of

a	prince	of	Red	March	against	a	.	.	.	a	hauldr,	I’m	concerned	that	I	wouldn’t
survive	your	death.”	From	his	frown	I	could	see	that	it	might	be	a	risk	he	was
willing	to	take	if	no	better	alternative	were	on	offer,	so	to	forestall	him	I
added,	“But	as	it	happens	I’ve	always	had	a	hankering	to	visit	the	North
myself	and	see	firsthand	just	how	reaving	is	done.	And	besides,	my
grandmother	worries	so	about	these	dead	ghost-men	of	yours.	It	would	put	her
heart	at	ease	to	have	the	business	sorted	out.	So	I’d	best	come	with	you.”

“I	mean	to	travel	fast.”	Snorri’s	frown	deepened.	“I’ve	left	it	too	long
already	and	the	distance	is	great.	And	be	warned:	It	will	be	a	bloody	business
when	I	get	there.	Slow	me	down	and	.	.	.	but	you	were	moving	pretty	quick
when	you	crashed	into	me.”	His	brow	smoothed,	thunderclouds	clearing,	and
that	smile	lit	him	up,	half-wild,	half-friendly,	and	all	dangerous.	“Besides,
you’ll	know	more	about	the	terrain	than	me.	Tell	me	about	the	men	of
Rhone.”

And	just	like	that	we	were	travelling	companions.	I’d	bound	myself	to	his
quest	for	rescue	and	vengeance	in	some	distant	land.	Hopefully	it	wouldn’t
take	too	long.	Snorri	could	save	his	family,	then	slaughter	his	enemies	to	the
last	man,	necromancer,	and	corpse	monster,	and	that	would	be	that.	I’m	good
at	self-deception	but	I	couldn’t	manage	to	make	the	plan	sound	like	anything
other	than	a	suicidal	nightmare.	Still,	the	icy	North	was	a	long	way	off—



plenty	of	opportunity	to	break	the	spell	that	bound	us	together	and	run	away
home.

Snorri	took	up	the	oars	again,	paused,	then,	“Stand	a	moment.”
“Really?”
He	nodded.	I’ve	good	balance	on	a	horse	and	none	at	all	on	water.	Even

so,	not	wanting	to	fall	out	with	the	man	within	moments	of	our	new
understanding,	I	got	to	my	feet,	arms	out	to	steady	myself.	He	tipped	the	boat,
a	sharp	deliberate	move,	and	I	pitched	into	the	river,	grasping	desperately	at
willow	twigs	as	a	man	about	to	drown	will	clutch	at	straws.

Above	the	splashing	I	could	hear	Snorri	having	a	good	old	laugh	to
himself.	He	was	saying	something	too:	“.	.	.	clean	.	.	.	together	.	.	.”	But	I
could	only	catch	the	odd	word	since	drowning	is	a	noisy	business.	Eventually,
when	I’d	given	up	trying	to	save	myself	by	swallowing	all	the	water	and	had
slipped	below	the	surface	for	the	third	and	final	time,	he	snagged	my
waistcoat	and	hauled	me	back	in	with	distressing	ease.	I	lay	in	the	bottom
flopping	about	like	a	fish	and	retching	up	enough	of	the	river	almost	to
swamp	the	boat.

“Bastard!”	My	first	coherent	word	before	I	remembered	quite	how	big
and	murderous	he	was.

“I	couldn’t	have	you	come	to	the	North	smelling	like	that!”	Snorri
laughed	and	steered	back	out	into	the	current,	the	willow	trailing	its	fingers
over	us	in	regret.	“And	how	can	a	man	not	know	how	to	swim?	Madness!”



EIGHT

The	river	took	us	to	the	sea.	A	journey	of	two	days.	We	slept	by	the	banks,
far	enough	back	to	escape	the	worst	of	the	mosquitoes.	Snorri	laughed	at

my	complaints.	“In	the	northern	summer	the	biters	are	so	thick	in	the	air	they
cast	a	shadow.”

“Probably	why	you’re	all	so	pale,”	I	said.	“No	tan	and	blood	loss.”
I	found	sleep	elusive.	The	hard	ground	didn’t	help,	nor	did	the	itchiness	of

anything	I	used	to	soften	it.	The	whole	business	reminded	me	of	the	misery
that	had	been	the	Scorron	Campaign	two	summers	earlier.	It’s	true	I	wasn’t
there	more	than	three	weeks	before	returning	to	be	feted	as	the	hero	of	the
Aral	Pass	and	to	nurse	my	bad	leg,	strained	in	combat,	or	at	least	in
inadvertently	sprinting	away	from	one	combat	into	another.	In	any	event,	I	lay
on	the	too-hard	and	too-scratchy	ground	looking	at	the	stars,	with	the	river
whispering	in	the	dark	and	the	bushes	alive	with	things	that	chirruped	and
rustled	and	creaked.	I	thought	then	of	Lisa	DeVeer	and	suspected	that	few
nights	would	pass	between	now	and	my	return	to	the	palace	when	I	wouldn’t
find	occasion	to	ask	myself	how	I	ended	up	in	such	straits.	And	in	the
smallest	hours	of	the	night,	feeling	deeply	sorry	for	myself,	I	even	found	time
to	wonder	again	if	Lisa	and	her	sisters	might	have	survived	the	opera.	Perhaps
Alain	had	convinced	his	father	to	keep	them	home	as	punishment	for	the
company	they’d	been	keeping.

“Why	don’t	you	sleep,	Red	March?”	Snorri	spoke	from	the	darkness.
“We’re	in	Red	March,	Norseman.	It	only	makes	sense	to	call	someone	by

their	place	of	origin	when	you’re	a	long	way	from	it.	We’ve	been	through
this.”

“And	the	sleeping?”
“Women	on	my	mind.”
“Ah.”	Enough	silence	that	I	thought	he’d	dropped	off,	then,	“One	in

particular?”
“Mostly	all	of	them,	and	their	absence	from	this	riverbank.”
“Better	to	think	of	one,”	he	said.
For	the	longest	time	I	watched	the	stars.	People	say	they	spin,	but	I

couldn’t	see	it.	“Why	are	you	awake?”



“My	hand	pains	me.”
“A	scratch	like	that?	And	you	a	great	big	Viking?”
“We’re	made	of	meat	just	like	other	men.	This	needs	cleaning,	stitching.

Done	right	and	I’ll	keep	the	arm.	We’ll	leave	the	boat	when	the	river	widens,
then	skirt	the	coast.	I’ll	find	someone	in	Rhone.”

He	knew	there	would	be	a	port	at	the	mouth	of	the	river,	but	if	the	Red
Queen	had	marked	him	for	death	then	it	would	be	madness	to	go	there
seeking	treatment.	The	fact	that	Grandmother	had	ordered	his	release	and	that
the	port	of	Marsail	was	a	renowned	centre	of	medicine,	with	a	school	that	had
produced	the	region’s	finest	doctors	for	close	on	three	hundred	years,	I	kept	to
myself.	Telling	him	would	unravel	my	lies	and	paint	me	as	the	architect	of	his
fate.	I	didn’t	feel	good	about	it,	but	better	than	I	would	if	he	decided	to	trim
me	with	his	sword.

I	returned	to	my	imaginings	of	Lisa	and	her	sisters,	but	in	the	deepest	part
of	the	night	it	was	that	fire	that	lit	my	dreams,	colouring	them	violet,	and	I
saw	through	the	flames,	not	the	agonies	of	the	dying	but	two	inhuman	eyes	in
the	dark	slit	of	a	mask.	Somehow	I’d	broken	the	Silent	Sister’s	spell,	escaped
the	inferno,	and	borne	away	part	of	the	magic	.	.	.	but	what	else	might	have
escaped	and	where	might	it	be	now?	Suddenly	each	noise	in	the	dark	was	the
slow	step	of	that	monster,	sniffing	me	out	in	the	blind	night,	and	despite	the
heat	my	sweat	lay	cold	upon	me.

	•	•	•	

Morning	struck	with	the	promise	of	a	blazing	summer’s	day.	More	of	a
threat	than	a	promise.	When	you	watch	from	a	shaded	veranda,	sipping

iced	wine	as	the	Red	March	summer	paints	lemons	onto	garden	boughs—
that’s	promise.	When	you	have	to	toil	a	whole	day	in	the	dust	to	cover	a
thumb’s	distance	on	the	map—that’s	threat.	Snorri	scowled	at	the	east,
breaking	his	fast	on	the	last	stale	remains	of	the	bread	he’d	stolen	in	the	city.
He	said	little	and	ate	left-handed,	his	right	swelling	and	red,	the	skin	blistering
like	that	on	his	shoulders	but	not	burned	by	the	sun.

The	river	held	a	brackish	air,	its	banks	parting	company	and	surrendering
to	mud	flats.	We	stood	by	our	boat,	the	water	now	fifty	yards	off,	sucked	back
by	tidal	flow.

“Marsail.”	I	pointed	to	a	haze	on	the	horizon,	a	smear	of	darkness	against
the	wrinkled	blue	where	the	distant	sea	crowded	beneath	the	sky.

“Big.”	Snorri	shook	his	head.	He	went	to	the	rowing	boat	and	made	a
slight	bow,	muttering.	Some	damn	heathen	prayer,	no	doubt,	as	if	the	thing
needed	thanking	for	not	drowning	us.	Finished	at	last,	he	turned	and	gestured
for	me	to	lead	the	way.	“Rhone.	And	by	swift	roads.”

“They’d	be	swifter	if	we	had	horses.”



Snorri	snorted	as	if	offended	by	the	idea.	And	waited.	And	waited	some
more.

“Oh,”	I	said,	and	led	off,	though	in	truth	my	expertise	ended	with	the
knowledge	that	Rhone	lay	north	and	a	little	west.	I	hadn’t	the	least	clue	about
local	roads.	In	fact,	past	Marsail	I	would	struggle	to	name	any	of	the	region’s
major	towns.	No	doubt	Cousin	Serah	could	reel	them	off	pat,	her	breasts
defying	gravity	all	the	while,	and	Cousin	Rotus	could	probably	bore	a
librarian	to	death	with	the	populace,	produce,	and	politics	of	each	settlement
down	to	the	last	hamlet.	My	attentions,	however,	had	always	been	focused
closer	to	home	and	on	less	worthy	pursuits.

We	left	the	broad	strip	of	cultivated	floodplain	and	climbed	by	a	series	of
ridges	into	drier	country.	Snorri	ran	with	sweat	by	the	time	the	land	levelled
out.	He	seemed	to	be	struggling;	perhaps	a	fever	from	his	wound	had	its
hooks	in	him.	It	didn’t	take	long	for	the	sun	to	become	a	burden.	After	a	mile
or	three	of	trekking	through	stony	valleys	and	rough	scrub,	and	with	my	feet
already	sore,	my	boots	already	too	tight,	I	returned	to	the	subject	of	horses.

“You	know	what	would	be	good?	Horses.	That’s	what.”
“Norsemen	sail.	We	don’t	ride.”	Snorri	looked	embarrassed,	or	perhaps	it

was	the	sunburn.
“Don’t	or	can’t?”
He	shrugged.	“How	hard	can	it	be?	You	hold	the	reins	and	go	forwards.	If

you	find	us	horses,	we’ll	ride.”	His	expression	darkened.	“I	need	to	be	back
there.	I’ll	sleep	in	the	saddle	if	a	horse	will	get	me	north	before	Sven	Broke-
Oar	finishes	his	work	in	the	Bitter	Ice.”

It	occurred	to	me	then	that	the	Norseman	truly	hoped	his	family	might	yet
survive.	He	thought	this	a	rescue	mission	rather	than	just	some	matter	of
revenge.	That	made	it	even	worse.	Revenge	is	a	business	of	calculation,	best
served	cold.	Rescue	holds	more	of	sacrifice,	suicidal	danger,	and	all	manner
of	other	madness	that	should	have	me	running	in	the	opposite	direction.	It
made	breaking	whatever	spell	bound	us	an	even	higher	priority.	By	the	look
of	his	hand,	which	seemed	worse	from	one	hour	to	the	next,	with	the
infection’s	spread	now	marked	by	a	darkening	of	the	veins,	any	spell-breaking
would	need	to	be	done	soon.	Otherwise	he	might	die	on	me	and	then	my	dire
predictions	concerning	the	consequence	for	one	of	us	if	the	other	expired
might	soon	be	put	to	the	test.	I’d	made	the	claim	as	a	lie,	but	it	had	felt	true
when	I	spoke	it.

	•	•	•	

We	trudged	on	through	the	heat	of	the	day,	forcing	a	path	through	a	dry
and	airless	conifer	forest.	Hours	later	the	trees	released	us,	scratched,

and	sticky	with	both	sap	and	sweat.	As	luck	would	have	it,	we	spilled	from



the	forest’s	margins	directly	onto	a	broad	track	punctuated	with	remnants	of
ancient	paving.

“Good.”	Snorri	nodded,	clearing	the	side	ditch	with	one	stride.	“I’d
thought	you	lost	back	there.”

“Lost?”	I	feigned	hurt.	“Every	prince	should	know	his	realm	like	the	back
of	.	.	.	of	.	.	.”	A	glimpsed	memory	of	Lisa	DeVeer’s	back	came	to	me,	the
pattern	of	freckles,	the	knobs	of	her	spine	casting	shadows	in	lamplight	as	she
bent	to	some	sweet	task.	“Of	something	familiar.”

The	road	wound	up	to	a	plateau	where	innumerable	springs	chuckled
from	the	eastern	hills	along	stony	beds	and	the	land	returned	to	cultivation.
Olive	groves,	tobacco,	cornfields.	Here	and	there	a	lone	farmhouse	or
collection	of	stone	huts,	slate-roofed	and	huddled	together	for	protection.

Our	first	encounter	was	an	elderly	man	driving	a	still	more	venerable
donkey	ahead	of	him	with	flicks	of	his	switch.	Two	huge	panniers	of	what
looked	to	be	sticks	almost	engulfed	the	beast.

“Horse?”	Snorri	muttered	the	suggestion	as	we	approached.
“Please.”
“It’s	got	four	legs.	That’s	better	than	two.”
“We’ll	find	something	more	sturdy.	And	not	some	plough-horse	either.

Something	fitting.”
“And	fast,”	said	Snorri.
The	donkey	ignored	us,	and	the	old	fellow	paid	scarcely	more	attention,

as	if	he	encountered	giant	Vikings	and	ragged	princes	every	day.	“Ayuh.”	And
he	was	past.

Snorri	pursed	his	blistered	lips	and	walked	on,	until	a	hundred	yards
farther	down	the	road	something	stopped	him	in	his	tracks.	“That,”	he	said,
looking	down,	“is	the	biggest	pile	of	dung	I’ve	seen	in	my	life.”

“Oh,	I	don’t	know,”	I	said.	“I’ve	seen	bigger.”	In	fact,	I’d	fallen	in	bigger,
but	as	this	appeared	to	have	dropped	from	the	behind	of	a	single	beast	I	had	to
agree	that	it	was	pretty	damned	impressive.	You	could	have	heaped	a	score	of
dinner	plates	with	it	if	one	were	so	inclined.	“It’s	big,	but	I	have	seen	the	like
before.	In	fact,	it’s	quite	possible	that	we’ll	soon	have	something	in	common.”

“Yes?”
“It’s	quite	possible,	my	friend,	that	we’ll	both	have	had	our	lives	saved	by

a	big	pile	of	shit.”	I	turned	towards	the	retreating	old	man.	“Hey!”	I	hollered
down	the	road	at	his	back.	“Where’s	the	circus?”

The	ancient	didn’t	pause	but	simply	extended	a	bony	arm	towards	an
olive-studded	ridge	to	the	south.

“Circus?”	Snorri	asked,	still	transfixed	by	the	dung	pile.
“You’re	about	to	see	an	elephant,	my	friend!”
“And	this	effelant	will	cure	my	poisoned	hand?”	He	held	the	offending

article	up	for	inspection,	wincing	as	he	did	so.



“Best	place	to	get	wounds	seen	to	outside	a	battle	hospital!	These	people
juggle	axes	and	burning	brands.	They	swing	from	trapezes	and	walk	on	ropes.
There’s	not	a	circus	in	the	Broken	Empire	that	doesn’t	have	half	a	dozen
people	who	can	stitch	wounds	and	with	luck	an	herbman	for	other	ailments.”

A	sidetrack	turned	from	the	road	a	quarter	of	a	mile	on	and	led	towards
the	ridge.	It	bore	evidence	of	recent	traffic,	and	large	traffic	at	that—the	hard-
baked	ground	scarred	by	wheel	ruts,	the	overhanging	trees	sporting	fresh-
broken	branches.	On	cresting	the	ridge	we	could	see	an	encampment	ahead:
three	large	circles	of	wagons,	a	scattering	of	tents.	Not	a	circus	set	up	to
entertain	but	one	on	the	move	and	enjoying	a	rest	stop.	A	dry-stone	wall
enclosed	the	field	where	the	travellers	had	camped.	Such	walls	were	common
in	the	region,	being	as	much	a	place	to	put	the	ubiquitous	chunks	of	rock	that
the	soil	yielded	as	they	were	a	means	of	containing	livestock	or	marking
boundaries.	A	sour-looking	grey-haired	dwarf	sat	guarding	the	three-barred
gate	at	the	field’s	entrance.

“We	already	got	a	strongman.”	He	eyed	Snorri	with	a	short-sighted	squint
and	spat	an	impressive	amount	of	phlegm	into	the	dust.	The	dwarf	was	the
kind	that	resemble	common	men	in	the	size	of	their	head	and	hands,	but
whose	torsos	have	been	concertinaed	into	too	small	a	space,	their	legs	left	thin
and	bandy.	He	sat	on	the	wall	cleaning	his	fingernails	with	a	knife,	and	his
expression	announced	him	more	than	happy	to	stick	strangers	with	it.

“Come	now!	You’ll	offend	Sally!”	I	remonstrated.	“If	you’ve	already	got
a	bearded	lady	I	can	scarce	believe	she’s	as	comely	as	this	young	wench.”

That	got	the	dwarf’s	attention.	“Well,	hello,	Sally!	Gretcho	Marlinki	at
your	service!”

I	could	feel	Snorri	looming	behind	me	in	the	way	that	suggested	my	head
might	get	twisted	off	in	short	order.	The	little	fellow	jumped	from	the	wall,
leered	up	at	Snorri,	and	unhitched	the	gate.

“In	you	go.	Blue	tent	inside	the	circle	on	the	left.	Ask	for	Taproot.”
I	led	on	in,	thankful	that	Gretcho	was	too	short	to	pinch	Snorri’s	backside

or	we	might	be	owing	this	Taproot	for	a	new	midget.
“Sally?”	the	Norseman	rumbled	behind	me.
“Work	with	me,”	I	said.
“No.”
Most	of	the	circus	folk	were	probably	sleeping	out	the	noon	heat,	but	a

fair	number	worked	at	assorted	tasks	around	the	wagons.	Repairs	to	wheels
and	tack,	tending	animals,	stitching	canvas,	a	pretty	girl	practising	a	pirouette,
a	heavily	pregnant	woman	tattooing	the	back	of	a	shirtless	man,	the	inevitable
juggler	throwing	things	up	and	catching	them.

“Utter	waste	of	time.”	I	nodded	at	the	juggler.
“I	love	jugglers!”	Snorri’s	grin	showed	white	teeth	in	the	cropped

blackness	of	his	beard.



“God!	You’re	probably	the	sort	that	likes	clowns!”
The	grin	broadened	as	if	the	mere	mention	of	clowns	were	hilarious.	I

hung	my	head.	“Come	on.”
We	passed	a	stone-walled	well	beyond	which,	away	down	the	slope,	a

scattering	of	headstones	stood.	Clearly	generations	had	used	this	place	to
pause	their	travels.	And	some	had	never	left.

The	blue	tent,	though	faded	almost	to	grey,	proved	easy	to	spot.	Larger
and	cleaner	and	taller	than	the	rest,	it	stood	centrally	and	sported	a	battered
painted	sign	outside	on	two	posts.

Dr.	Taproot’s	famous	circus	
Lions,	tigers,	bears,	oh	my!	

By	appointment	to	the	Imperial	Court	of	Vyene

Since	knocking	is	difficult	with	tents,	I	leaned	in	towards	the	entrance	flap
and	coughed.

“.	.	.	couldn’t	just	paint	some	stripes	on	the	lion?”
“.	.	.”
“Well,	no	.	.	.	but	you	could	wash	them	off	again	before	that?”
“.	.	.”
“No,	it’s	been	a	while	since	I	last	gave	a	lion	a	bath,	but—”
My	second,	more	theatrical	cough,	caught	their	attention.
“Come!”
And	so	I	ducked,	Snorri	ducked	lower,	and	we	went	in.
It	took	a	moment	for	my	eyes	to	adjust	to	the	blue	gloom	within	the	tent.

Dr.	Taproot	I	judged	to	be	the	skinny	figure	seated	behind	a	desk,	and	the
more	substantial	form	leaning	over	at	him,	hands	planted	firmly	on	the	papers
between	them,	must	be	the	fellow	objecting	to	bathing	lions.

“Ah!”	said	the	seated	figure.	“Prince	Jalan	Kendeth	and	Snorri	ver
Snagason!	Welcome	to	my	abode.	Welcome!”

“How	the	hell—”	I	caught	myself.	It	was	good	that	he	knew	me.	I’d	been
wondering	how	to	convince	anyone	that	I	was	a	prince.

“Oh,	I’m	Dr.	Taproot,	I	know	everything,	my	prince.	Watch	me!”
Snorri	passed	me	and	snagged	an	empty	chair.	“Word	gets	around.

Especially	about	princes.”	He	seemed	less	impressed	than	I	was.
“Watch	me!”	Taproot	nodded,	birdlike,	a	sharp-featured	head	on	a	thin

neck.	“Message-riders	on	the	Lexicon	Road	carry	gossip	along	with	their
sealed	scrolls.	And	what	a	story!	Did	you	truly	jump	an	arctic	bear,	Mr.
Snagason?	Do	you	think	you	could	jump	one	of	ours?	The	pay’s	good.	Oh,
but	you’ve	injured	your	hand.	A	hook-knife,	I	hear?	Watch	me!”	Taproot’s
chatter	came	so	rapid	and	moved	so	fast	that	without	your	full	attention	the



flow	of	it	would	hypnotize	you.
“Yes,	the	hand.”	I	latched	onto	that.	“Have	you	a	chirurgeon?	We’re	light

on	funds”—Snorri	scowled	at	that—“but	I’m	good	for	credit.	The	royal
coffers	underwrite	my	purse.”

Dr.	Taproot	offered	a	knowing	smile.	“Your	debts	are	the	stuff	of	legend,
my	prince.”	He	raised	his	hands	as	if	trying	to	frame	the	enormity	of	them.
“But	fear	not,	I	am	a	civilized	man.	We	of	the	circus	do	not	let	a	wounded
traveller	go	untended!	I	shall	have	our	sweet	Varga	see	to	the	matter	presently.
A	drink,	perhaps?”	He	reached	for	the	desk	drawer.	“You	may	go,
Walldecker.”	He	shooed	away	the	scar-faced	man	who	had	stood	in	silent
disapproval	through	our	conversation.	“Stripes!	Watch	me!	Good	ones.	Serra
has	black	paint.	See	Serra.”	Returning	his	attention	to	me,	he	fished	out	a	dark
glass	bottle,	small	enough	for	poison.	“I	have	a	little	rum.	Ancient	stuff	from
the	wreck	of	the	Hunter	Moon,	dredged	up	by	scallop	men	off	the	Andoran
coast.	Try	it.”	He	magicked	three	tiny	silver	cups	into	being.	“I’m	always	one
to	sit	and	chat.	It’s	my	burden.	Watch	me.	Gossip	runs	through	my	veins	and	I
must	feed	the	habit.	Tell	me,	my	prince,	is	your	grandmother	well?	How	is	her
heart?”

“Well	she’s	got	one,	I	suppose.”	I	didn’t	like	the	man’s	impertinence.	And
his	rum	smelled	like	the	stuff	the	herbmen	rub	on	chilblains.	Now	that	I	had	a
chair	under	my	arse	and	a	tent	about	me	and	my	name	and	station	recognized,
I	began	to	feel	a	little	more	my	old	self.	I	sipped	his	rum	and	damned	him	for
it.	“Don’t	know	anything	about	how	it’s	ticking,	though.”	The	idea	of	my
grandmother	suffering	any	frailties	of	the	flesh	seemed	alien	to	me.	She’d
been	carved	from	bedrock	and	would	outlast	us	all.	That	was	how	Father	had
it.

“And	your	elder	brothers,	Martus,	isn’t	it,	and	Darin?	Martus	must	be
coming	up	to	twenty-seven	now?	Yes,	in	two	weeks?”

“Um.”	Damned	if	I	knew	their	birthdays.	“They’re	well.	Martus	misses
the	cavalry,	of	course,	but	at	least	he	got	a	damn	chance	at	it.”

“Of	course,	of	course.”	Taproot’s	hands	were	never	still,	plucking	at	the
air	as	if	snatching	scraps	of	information	from	it.

“And	your	great-uncle?	He	was	never	a	well	man.”
“Garyus?”	Nobody	knew	about	the	old	man.	I	didn’t	even	know	he	was	a

relative	for	the	first	few	years	after	I	took	to	visiting	him	in	the	tower	where
they	kept	him.	I	climbed	in	through	the	window	so	nobody	saw	me	come	and
go.	It	was	Great-Uncle	Garyus	who	gave	me	Mother’s	picture	in	a	locket.	I
must	have	been	about	five	or	six.	Yes,	not	long	after	the	Silent	Sister	touched
me.	The	blind-eye	woman,	I	called	her	back	then.	Gave	me	a	lepsy.	Fits	and
shakes	for	a	month.	I	found	old	Garyus	by	accident	when	I	was	small,
clambered	in	before	I	noticed	the	room	wasn’t	empty.	He	scared	me,	hunched
on	his	sickbed,	twisted	in	ways	a	man	shouldn’t	twist.	Not	evil,	but	wrong.	I



feared	catching	it,	that’s	the	honest	truth.	And	he	knew	it.	Good	at	knowing	a
man’s	mind	was	Garyus,	and	a	boy’s.

“I	was	born	this	way,”	he	had	said.	Not	unkindly,	though	I	had	stared	at
him	as	if	he	were	a	sin.	His	skull	bulged	as	if	overfilled,	misshapen,	like	a
potato.

He	lay	propped	up	in	his	bed,	a	jug	and	goblet	on	the	table	close	at	hand,
lit	by	dusty	sunlight.	No	one	came	to	him	in	this	high	tower,	just	a	nurse	to
clean	him,	and	sometimes	a	small	boy	clambering	through	the	window.

“Born	broken.”	Each	sentence	gasped	between	breaths.	“I	had	a	twin,	and
when	we	were	birthed	they	had	to	break	us	apart.	A	boy	and	a	girl,	the	first
joined	twins	that	weren’t	both	boys	or	both	girls,	they	say.	They	broke	us
apart.	But	we	didn’t	break	even.	And	I	got	.	.	.	this.”	He	lifted	a	twisted	arm	as
if	doing	so	were	a	labour	of	Hercules.

He	had	reached	out	from	his	sheets—a	grave	shroud,	that	was	what	those
sheets	made	me	think—he	had	reached	out	and	given	me	that	locket,	a	cheap
enough	thing	but	with	my	mother’s	picture	inside,	so	fine	and	real	you’d
swear	she	was	looking	right	at	you.

“Garyus,”	Taproot	agreed,	breaking	a	silence	I’d	not	noticed.
I	shook	off	the	memory.	“He’s	well	enough.”	None	of	your	damn

business,	I	wanted	to	say,	but	when	you’re	far	from	home	and	poorer	than
church	mice	it	pays	to	curb	your	pride.	Garyus	was	the	only	one	of	them	I	had
time	for,	really.	He	couldn’t	leave	his	room.	Not	unless	someone	carried	him.
So	I	visited.	Possibly	it	was	the	only	duty	I’d	ever	kept.	“Well	enough.”

“Good,	good.”	Taproot	wrung	his	hands,	squeezing	out	his	approval,	a
pale	wrestling	of	too-long	fingers.	“And	Hauldr	Snagason,	how	stands	the
North?”

“Cold,	and	too	far	away.”	Snorri	set	down	his	empty	cup,	licking	his	teeth.
“And	the	Uuliskind?	Still	fair?	Red	goats	for	milk	on	the	Scraa	slopes,

black	for	wool	on	the	Nfflr	ridges?”
Snorri	narrowed	his	eyes	at	the	circus-master,	perhaps	wondering	if	the

man	was	reading	his	mind.	“Have	you	.	.	.	been	to	the	Uuliskind?	The
Undoreth	would	remember	a	circus,	and	yet	I’d	never	heard	of	an	effelant
before	today.	And	that	reminds	me.	I	must	see	this	beast.”

Taproot	smiled:	narrow,	even	teeth	behind	thin	lips.	He	uncorked	the	rum
again,	moving	to	replenish	our	cups.	“My	apologies,	but	you	can	see	how	it	is
with	me.	I	pry.	I	question.	I	devour	travellers’	tales.	I	store	each	snippet	of
information.”	He	tapped	his	forehead.	“Here.	Watch	me!”

Snorri	took	the	little	cup	before	him	in	his	good	hand.	“Aye.	Red	goats	on
the	Scraa,	black	on	the	Nfflr.	Though	none	to	tend	them,	most	like.	The	black
ships	came.	Dead	things	from	the	Drowned	Isles.	Sven	Broke-Oar	brought
this	doom	upon	us.”

“Ah.”	Taproot	nodded,	steepled	his	fingers,	pursed	his	lips.	“He	of	the



Hardassa.	A	hard	man.	Not	a	good	one,	I	fear.”	Pale	hands	shaped	his	opinion.
“Perhaps	the	goats,	the	red	and	the	black,	have	new	herders	now.	Boys	of	the
Hardassa.”

Snorri	drank	off	his	rum.	He	set	his	poisoned	hand	upon	the	table,	the
knife	wound	a	livid	and	weeping	slot	between	the	tendons.	“Mend	me	and
you’ll	have	to	change	that	tale,	circus-master.”

“Of	a	certainty.”	A	quick	smile	lit	Taproot’s	face.	“Kill	or	cure,	that’s	our
motto.	Watch	me.”	His	hands	moved	around	the	Norseman’s,	never	touching,
but	framing	it,	following	the	line	of	the	incision.

“Go	to	Varga’s	wagon.	The	smallest,	with	a	red	circle	upon	the	side.	In	the
grouping	close	to	the	gate.	Varga	can	clean	a	wound,	pack	it,	stitch	it.	Best
poultices	you	ever	saw.	Watch	me!	Even	a	sour	wound	may	yield	to	them.”

Snorri	stood,	and	I	rose	to	go	with	him.	It	had	become	a	habit.
“You	might	stay,	Prince	Jalan?”	Taproot	did	not	look	up,	but	something	in

his	tone	kept	me	there.
“I’ll	find	you	later,”	I	told	Snorri.	“Save	you	the	shame	of	weeping	before

me	when	this	Varga	sets	to	his	work.	And	watch	out	for	that	effelant.	They’re
green	and	like	the	taste	of	Vikings.”

Snorri	answered	with	a	snort	and	ducked	out	into	the	blinding	brightness
of	the	day.

“A	fierce	man.	Watch	me!”	Taproot	eyed	the	tent	flap,	swaying	in	Snorri’s
wake.	“Tell	me,	prince.	How	is	it	that	you	travel	together?	I	didn’t	imagine
you	as	one	for	the	hardships	of	the	road.	How	is	it	that	the	Norseman	hasn’t
killed	you	for	the	pits	or	that	you	haven’t	fled	for	your	home	comforts?”

“I’ll	have	you	know	I	learned	a	sight	more	about	hardship	in	the	Scorron
Heights	than—”	Something	in	the	slow	regret	with	which	Taproot	shook	his
head	took	the	bluster	from	my	sails.	I	feared	if	I	mentioned	my	heroism	at	the
Aral	Pass,	he	might	laugh	at	me.	That’s	the	trouble	with	men	who	know	too
much.	A	sigh	escaped	me.	“In	truth?	We’re	bound	by	some	enchantment.	A
damned	inconvenient	one.	You	wouldn’t	happen	to	have	a—”

“A	mind-sworn	wizard?	A	hidden	hand	that	might	separate	you?	Watch
me!	If	I	had	such,	this	circus	would	be	a	gold	mine	and	me	the	richest	of	all
rich	men.”

I	had	expected	him	to	laugh	at	my	claims	of	enchantment,	so	to	be	taken
seriously	was	a	relief,	though	hearing	how	hard	it	might	prove	to	be	to	undo
the	magic	was	less	pleasing.

Taproot	finished	his	drink	and	put	the	little	bottle	back	in	the	drawer.
“Speaking	of	rich	men,	you	might	care	to	know	about	one	Maeres	Allus.”

“You	know—”	Of	course	he	knew.	Taproot	knew	of	the	Red	Queen’s
secret	brother,	too	broken	for	the	throne.	He	knew	about	goats	chewing	on	the
slopes	of	distant	fjords.	He	would	hardly	not	know	of	Vermillion’s	greatest
crime	lord.



“Watch	me.”	Taproot	laid	a	slim	finger	alongside	his	slim	nose.	“Maeres
has	secrets	that	even	I	don’t	know.	And	he	is	not	best	pleased	with	you.”

“Perhaps	a	journey	north	would	be	good	for	my	health	in	any	case,	then,”
I	said.

“True	enough.”	And	Taproot	waved	me	out,	fluttering	his	hands	as	if	I
were	a	tumbler	come	to	beg	more	sawdust	for	the	centre	ring	and	not	a	prince
of	Red	March.	I	let	him	do	it	too,	for	when	a	man	who	knows	too	much
knows	not	to	waste	his	manners	on	you,	it’s	best	to	be	moving	on.



NINE

The	pregnant	woman,	done	for	the	moment	with	her	tattooing,	led	me	to
Varga’s	wagon.	She	waddled	ahead	of	me	looking	fit	to	pop	at	each	step,

though	she	said	her	time	lay	weeks	ahead.
“Daisy,”	she	told	me.	Her	name,	or	perhaps	what	she	planned	to	call	the

whelp	if	it	proved	female.	I	hadn’t	been	listening	too	hard.	We’d	passed	a
wagon	where	a	woman	in	tight	silks	sat	with	her	ankles	crossed	behind	her
head,	and	my	attention	had	wandered.

“Daisy?	A	fine	name.”	For	a	cow.
I	spotted	the	elephant,	corralled	by	a	fence	that	it	could	swat	aside,

tethered	to	a	thick	post	by	a	length	of	chain.	A	number	of	circus	men,	showing
off	lean	and	muscular	bodies,	lounged	around	a	bar	made	of	two	barrels	and	a
plank,	watching	the	elephant	and	whatever	else	might	pass.	Behind	them	a
well-laden	beer	wagon	provided	shade.	Circuses	always	came	amply
provisioned	with	ale	for	the	audience.	I	guess	it	must	be	easier	to	impress	a
drunken	crowd.

Further	on	we	passed	a	shabby	tent	stitched	with	moon	and	stars,	symbols
of	the	horoscope	dotted	amongst	the	faded	heavens.	An	ancient	sat	outside	on
a	three-legged	stool,	snaggle-toothed	and	liver-spotted.

“Cross	my	palm,	stranger.”	I	couldn’t	tell	if	the	creature	was	man	or
woman.

“Don’t	humour	her.”	Daisy	increased	the	speed	of	her	waddle.	“Cracked,
that	one	is.	Everything’s	doom	and	gloom.	Drives	the	punters	away.”

“You’re	quarry.”	The	old	woman	called	after	us,	then	coughed	as	if	a	lung
had	burst.	“Quarry.”	I	couldn’t	tell	which	of	us	she’d	aimed	the	words	at.

“Save	it	for	the	peasants,”	I	called	back,	but	it	left	a	chill.	Always	does.	I
expect	that’s	why	prophecy	sells.

We	walked	on	until	the	hacking	cough	faded	behind	us.	I	laughed,	but	in
truth	I	had	felt	hunted	since	we	left	the	city.	Though	by	what	I	couldn’t	say.
More	than	the	Silent	Sister,	more	than	Maeres’s	terrors	even,	it	was	the	eyes
behind	that	enamel	mask	that	watched	me	from	my	quiet	moments.	Just	a
glimpse	at	the	opera,	just	a	glancing	encounter,	and	yet	it	haunted	me.

“Varga.”	Daisy	pointed	at	a	wagon	much	as	Taproot	described.	She	drew



in	a	deep	sigh	and	started	to	waddle	off,	back	the	way	we’d	come.	I	offered	no
thanks,	distracted	now	by	the	small	crowd	of	scantily	clad	young	women
clustered	around	the	open	end	of	Varga’s	wagon.	Dancers,	by	the	litheness	of
them	and	the	snatches	of	silk	they	wore.

“Ladies.”	I	approached,	flashing	them	my	best	smile.	It	seemed,	however,
that	a	tall	blond	prince	of	Red	March	was	less	interesting	than	a	huge	dark
Norseman	bulging	with	muscle	as	if	his	arms	and	legs	had	been	crammed
with	boulders.	The	girls	pointed	into	the	gloom	beneath	the	awning,	giggling
behind	their	hands,	exchanging	appreciative	whispers.	I	leaned	around	and
stepped	up	onto	the	buckboard.

“You	didn’t	need	to	take	his	shirt	off,”	I	said.	“It’s	his	hand	that	needs
removing.”

Snorri	offered	me	a	dark	look	from	the	sloping	couch	he’d	been	arrayed
upon.	He	really	did	have	an	alarming	topology,	his	stomach	ridged	and
divided	by	muscle,	his	chest	and	arms	bursting	with	power,	veins	writhing
across	him	to	feed	blood	into	the	engines	of	his	strength,	all	tensed	now
against	the	pain	Varga’s	investigations	were	causing	him.

“You’re	blocking	my	light.”	Varga	turned	from	the	messy	work	in	hand.
She	was	a	woman	of	middling	years,	tending	to	grey,	with	a	homely	face	of
the	kind	that	supports	compassion	and	disapproval	in	equal	measures.

“Will	he	live?”	I	asked,	my	interest	genuine	though	self-motivated.
“It’s	a	nasty	wound.	The	tendons	are	undamaged	but	one	of	the	small

bones	of	the	hand	has	been	broken,	others	displaced.	It	will	heal,	but	slowly,
and	only	if	the	infection	is	contained.”

“A	yes	then?”
“Probably.”
“Good	news!”	I	turned	back	to	the	girls	outside.	“That	calls	for	a

celebration.	Let	me	buy	you	fine	ladies	a	drink	and	we	can	afford	my
companion	a	little	privacy.”	I	stepped	down	amongst	them.	They	smelled	of
greasepaint,	cheap	perfume,	sweat.	All	good.	“I’m	Jalan,	but	you	can	call	me
Prince	Jal.”

At	last	my	old	enchantment	started	to	work.	Even	the	sculpted
magnificence	of	Snorri	ver	Snagason	had	a	hard	time	competing	with	the
magic	word	prince.

“Cherri.	Pleased	to	meet	you,	Your	Highness.”	Some	doubt	in	her	voice,
but	I	could	tell	she	wanted	to	believe	her	prince	had	come.

I	took	her	hand.	“Enchanted.”	And	she	smiled	up	at	me,	pretty	enough
with	a	snub	nose	and	wicked	eyes,	fair	hair,	curled,	streaked	with	blond.

“Lula,”	said	her	friend,	a	petite	wench	with	short	black	hair,	pale	despite
the	summer,	and	sculpted	as	if	to	satisfy	a	schoolboy’s	dream.

With	Cherri	on	one	arm,	Lula	on	the	other,	and	a	clutch	of	dancers
following	behind,	I	led	the	way	back	to	the	beer	wagon.	Snorri	let	out	a	sharp



gasp	from	under	Varga’s	awning.	And	life	was	good.

	•	•	•	

The	afternoon	passed	in	a	pleasant	haze	and	parted	me	from	the	company
of	my	last	silver	crowns.	The	circus	men	proved	remarkably	tolerant	of

my	pawing	their	women,	as	did	the	circus	women,	and	we	sprawled	on
cushions	before	the	beer	wagon	drinking	wine	from	amphorae,	growing
louder	as	the	shadows	lengthened.

Annoyingly,	the	dancers	kept	asking	me	about	Snorri,	as	if	the	hero	of
Aral	in	their	midst	weren’t	quite	enough	to	hold	their	attention.

“Is	he	a	chieftain?”	Lula	asked.
“He’s	so	big.”	A	red-haired	beauty	named	Florence.
“What’s	his	name?”	A	tall	Nuban	girl	with	copper	loops	through	her	ears

and	a	mouth	made	for	kissing.	“How	is	he	called?”
“Snorri,”	I	said.	“It	means	wife-beater.”
“No?”	Cherri,	all	round-eyed.
“Yes!”	I	faked	sadness.	“Terrible	temper—if	a	woman	upsets	him	he	cuts

her	face.”	I	drew	a	line	across	my	cheek	with	one	finger.
“What’s	the	North	like?”	The	Nuban	girl	wasn’t	so	easily	deflected.
I	tipped	the	amphora	to	my	mouth,	gulping	wine	while	I	held	my	hand	out

at	a	steep	angle.	“Like	that.”	I	wiped	my	lips.	“Only	icy.	All	the	northmen	slip
to	the	coasts,	where	they	congregate	in	miserable	villages	smelling	of	fish.	It
gets	very	crowded.	Every	now	and	then	a	bunch	more	come	sliding	down
from	the	hills	on	their	arses	and	the	only	place	for	the	ones	closest	to	the
shore	is	on	a	boat.	And	off	they	sail.”	I	mimicked	a	ship’s	progression	across
the	waves.	I	gave	Lula	my	amphora.	“Those	horns	on	their	helms?”	I	made
myself	two	horns,	a	hand	to	each	side	of	my	head.	“Cuckold’s	horns.	The	new
arrivals	are	bouncing	abed	with	the	wives	left	behind.	Terrible	place.	Don’t
ever	go	there.”

A	small	girl	and	small	boy	came	out	to	sing	for	us,	a	remarkable	pair	with
high	clear	voices,	and	even	the	elephant	moved	closer	to	listen.	I	had	to	shush
Cherri	to	hear	uninterrupted	when	the	children	sang	“High-John,”	but	I	let	her
giggle	through	their	rendition	of	“Boogie	Bugle.”	Without	warning	their
voices	soared	into	an	aria	that	drew	me	back	to	Father’s	opera.	They	sang	it
sweeter	and	with	more	heart,	but	still	the	world	seemed	to	close	about	me	and
I	heard	those	screams	in	the	fire.	And	beneath	those	screams	my	memory	ran
a	deeper	sound,	something	heard	but	at	the	time	not	understood,	a	different
kind	of	howling.	The	roar	of	something	angry	rather	than	scared.

“Enough.”	I	threw	a	cushion	at	them.	It	missed	and	the	elephant	snagged
it	from	the	ground.	“Scram!”	The	little	girl’s	lip	wobbled	for	an	instant	and
they	both	fled.



“.	.	.	‘give	them	what	they	want,	dears.’	That’s	all	he	says.	With	Taproot
it’s	all	hips	and	tits.	There’s	no	art	in	it	for	him.”	Lula	looked	up	at	me	over
her	clay	goblet,	seeking	affirmation.

“Well,	to	be	fair,	Lula,	you	are	mostly	hips	and	tits,”	I	said,	a	slight	slur	to
my	words	now.

They	giggled	at	that.	The	combination	of	a	title	and	freely	flowing	wine
will	have	people	laughing	at	anything	you	offer	up	as	funny,	and	I’ve	never
once	complained	about	it.	A	sharp	oath	rang	out	from	the	direction	of	Varga’s
wagon.	I	put	an	arm	around	Cherri,	another	around	Lula,	and	drew	them
close.	Enjoy	the	world	while	you	can,	I	say.	A	shallow	enough	philosophy	by
which	to	live,	but	shallow	is	what	I’ve	got.	Besides,	deep	is	apt	to	drown	you.

The	first	evening	stars	watched	me	being	taken	for	a	guided	tour	of	the
dancers’	wagon,	supported	on	either	side	by	Cherri	and	Lula,	though	who	was
doing	the	most	supporting	would	be	hard	to	say.	We	tumbled	inside	and
strange	to	say	that	in	the	dark	nearly	everything	we	wanted	to	do	required
three	pairs	of	hands.

	•	•	•	

In	the	dead	of	night	a	commotion	interrupted	proceedings	within	thedancers’	wagon.	At	first	we	ignored	it.	Cherri	was	making	her	own
commotion	and	I	was	doing	my	best	to	help.	We	ignored	it	until	the	wagon’s
rocking	stopped	dead,	moving	Cherri	to	draw	breath.	Until	that	point	I’d
heard	little	above	her	exclamations	and	the	creaking	of	axles	and	supports.

“Jalan!”	Snorri’s	voice.
I	stuck	my	head	out	through	the	flaps	into	the	starlight,	far	from	pleased.

Snorri	stood	with	one	thick	arm	gripping	the	wagon	bed,	arresting	its	motion.
“Come.”

I	hadn’t	the	breath	to	tell	him	that	was	what	I	was	trying	to	do.	Instead	I
slipped	out,	lacing	up	what	needed	to	be	laced.	“Yes?”	Not	keeping	the
temper	from	my	voice.

“Come.”	He	led	off	between	the	nearest	wagons.	I	could	hear	weeping
now.	Wailing.

Snorri	followed	the	field’s	gradient,	letting	it	lead	us	a	little	way	out	from
the	wagons	and	carts	encircling	Taproot’s	tent.	Here	several	dozen	of	the
circus	folk	huddled	before	a	bright	fire.

“A	child	died.”	Snorri	set	a	hand	to	my	shoulder	as	if	offering	comfort.
“Unborn.”

“The	pregnant	woman?”	A	foolish	thing	to	say—it	had	to	be	a	pregnant
woman.	Daisy.	I	remembered	her	name.

“The	babe’s	buried.”	He	nodded	to	a	low	mound	in	the	dirt	out	past	the
fire,	snug	between	two	old	grave	markers.	“We	should	show	our	respects.”



I	sighed.	No	more	fun	for	Jal	tonight.	I	felt	sorry	for	the	woman,	of
course,	but	the	troubles	of	people	I	don’t	know	never	reached	that	far	into	me.
My	father,	in	one	of	his	rare	moments	of	coherence,	declared	it	to	be	a
symptom	of	youth.	My	youth,	at	least.	He	called	on	God	to	visit	compassion
upon	me	as	a	burden	to	be	carried	in	later	life.	I	was	just	impressed	that	he’d
noticed	me	or	my	ways	this	once,	and	of	course	it’s	always	nice	for	a	cardinal
to	remember	to	call	on	God	every	now	and	then.

We	sat	a	little	apart	from	the	main	group,	though	close	enough	to	feel	the
fire’s	heat.

“How’s	the	hand?”	I	asked.
“Hurts	more,	feels	better.”	He	held	out	the	appendage	in	question	and

flexed	it	slightly,	wincing.	“She	removed	a	lot	of	the	poison.”
Thankfully	Snorri	omitted	greater	detail.	Some	folk	will	seek	to	entertain

you	with	the	gory	details	of	their	ailments.	My	brother	Martus	would	have
painted	each	glistening	drop	of	pus	for	me	in	one	of	his	woe-is-me
monologues	for	which	the	only	remedy	is	a	swift	exit.

The	night	held	enough	warmth,	combined	with	the	fire	and	my	recent
exercise,	to	leave	me	pleasantly	sleepy.	I	lay	back	on	the	ground,	without
complaint	for	the	hardness	of	it	or	the	dust	in	my	hair.	For	a	moment	or	three	I
watched	the	stars	and	listened	to	the	soft	weeping.	I	yawned	once	and	sleep
took	me.

Strange	dreams	hunted	me	that	night.	I	wandered	an	empty	circus	haunted
by	the	memory	of	the	eyes	behind	that	porcelain	mask	but	finding	only	the
dancers,	each	sobbing	in	her	bed,	and	breaking	into	bright	fragments	as	I
reached	to	touch	them.	Cherri	was	there,	Lula	too,	and	they	broke	together,
speaking	a	single	word.	Quarry.	The	night	fractured,	cracks	running	through
tents,	wheels,	barrels;	an	elephant	bellowed	unseen	in	the	darkness.	My	head
filled	with	light	until	at	last	I	opened	my	eyes	to	keep	from	being	blinded.

Nothing!	Just	Snorri’s	bulk,	seated	beside	me,	knees	drawn	up.	The	fire
had	fallen	to	red	embers.	The	circus	folk	had	gone	to	their	beds,	taking	their
sorrow	with	them.	No	sound	but	for	the	whirr	and	chirp	of	insects.	My	heart’s
pounding	slowed.	My	head	continued	to	ache	as	if	it	were	cracked	through,
but	the	blame	for	that	lay	with	a	quart	of	wine	gulped	down	in	the	heat	of	the
day.

“It’s	a	thing	to	make	the	world	weep,	the	loss	of	a	baby.”	Snorri’s	rumble
was	almost	too	deep	to	make	sense	of.	“In	Asgard	Odin	sees	it	and	his
unblinking	eye	blinks.”

I	thought	it	best	not	to	mention	that	technically	a	one-eyed	god	can	only
wink.	“All	deaths	are	sad.”	It	seemed	like	a	good	thing	to	say.

“Most	of	what	a	man	is	has	been	written	by	the	time	his	beard	starts	to
prickle.	A	babe	is	made	of	maybes.	There	are	few	crimes	worse	than	the
ending	of	something	before	its	time.”



Once	more	I	bit	my	tongue	and	made	no	complaint	that	this	was	exactly
what	he	had	accomplished	at	the	dancers’	wagon	earlier.	It	wasn’t	tact	that
held	me	silent	so	much	as	the	desire	not	to	get	my	nose	broken	yet	again.	“I
suppose	some	sorrows	can	only	truly	touch	a	parent.”	I’d	heard	that
somewhere.	I	think	perhaps	Cousin	Serah	had	said	it	at	her	little	brother’s
funeral.	I	recall	all	the	grey	heads	nodding	and	exchanging	words	about	her.
She	probably	fished	it	from	a	book.	Even	at	fourteen	she	was	scheming	for
Grandmother’s	approval.	And	her	throne.

“When	you	become	a	father,	it	changes	you.”	Snorri	spoke	towards	the
fire’s	glow.	“You	see	the	world	in	new	ways.	Those	who	are	not	changed	were
not	properly	men	to	begin	with.”

I	wondered	if	he	was	drunk.	That’s	when	I	tend	to	speak	profundities	to
the	night.	Then	I	remembered	that	Snorri	was	a	father.	I	couldn’t	picture	it.
Wee	ones	bouncing	on	his	knee.	Tiny	hands	tugging	at	his	battle	braids.	Even
so,	I	understood	his	mood	better	now	I	could	guess	what	he	might	see
amongst	the	embers.	Not	this	unborn	child,	but	his	own	children,	fleeing
horrors	in	the	snows.	The	thing	that	drew	him	north	against	all	sense.

“Why	are	you	still	here?”	I	asked	him.
“Why	are	you?”
“I	passed	out.”	Mild	exasperation	coloured	my	voice.	“I’m	not	sitting

vigil!	In	fact,	now	that	I’m	awake	I’ll	find	a	better	place	to	sleep.”	Perhaps
one	with	more	interesting	contours	and	a	snub	nose.	I	stood,	aching	along	my
side,	and	stamped	to	get	some	life	back	into	my	legs.

“Can’t	you	feel	it?”	he	said	as	I	turned	to	go.
“No.”	But	I	could.	Something	wrong.	A	sense	of	brokenness.	“No,	I

can’t.”	Even	so,	I	didn’t	step	away.
With	one	breath	the	insects	ceased	their	chorus.	A	deep	noise	reached	me,

rumbling	up	through	the	soles	of	my	feet,	still	bare.	“Ah	hell.”	My	hands
trembled,	with	the	customary	terror	of	the	unknown,	but	also	with	something
new,	as	if	they	were	full	of	fractured	light.

“Hel’s	about	right.”	Snorri	stood	too.	He	had	his	stolen	sword	in	hand.
Had	he	held	it	all	the	time	or	gone	to	fetch	it	while	I	slept?	He	pointed	the
blade	towards	the	baby’s	grave.	The	noise	had	come	from	there.	A	burrowing,
a	scratching,	the	sound	of	roots	pushing	blind	paths	through	soil.	The
headstone	to	the	left	tilted	as	the	ground	sank	beneath	it.	The	one	to	the	right
toppled	forwards,	coming	to	rest	with	a	dull	thud.	All	around	the	child’s
mound	the	soil	cracked	and	heaved.

“We	should	run,”	I	said,	having	not	the	least	idea	why	I	was	not	already
doing	so.	The	word	quarry	repeated	over	and	again	behind	my	eyes.	“What’s
happening	down	there?”	Perhaps	a	sick	fascination	kept	me	there,	or	the
immobility	of	the	rabbit	beneath	hawk’s	claws.

“Something	is	being	built,”	Snorri	said.	“When	the	unborn	return,	they



take	what	they	need.”
“Return?”	I	sometimes	ask	even	when	I	really	don’t	want	to	hear	the

answer.	Bad	habit.
“It’s	hard	for	the	unborn	to	return.	They	are	not	like	fallen	that	rise	from

the	deaths	of	men.”	Snorri	began	to	swing	his	sword	left-handed,	blurring	it
around	him	in	fire-glow	glimmers,	making	the	air	sigh.	“They	are	uncommon
things.	The	world	must	be	cracked	open	to	admit	them,	and	their	strength	is
surpassing.	The	Dead	King	must	want	us	very	badly	indeed.”

I	found	my	feet	at	that	and	ran.	As	the	ground	heaved	and	some	dark	thing
rose,	shedding	dry	clods	of	earth	and	shrugging	off	gravestones,	I	raced	five
full	steps	before	tripping	on	an	abandoned	wine	jug—possibly	one	I’d
brought	with	me—and	sprawling	face	first.

I	rolled	and	saw,	edged	by	the	radiance	of	stars	and	the	faint	light	of
embers,	a	horror	still	knee-deep	in	the	earth	and	yet	towering	above	the
Norseman,	a	thin	thing	of	old	bones,	tattered	cloth,	encompassing	arms	with
talons	built	from	too	many	finger	bones	to	count.	And	about	these	dry	and
creaking	remains,	something	wet	and	glistening,	some	vital	freshness	running
along	a	golem	built	of	long-dead	grave	litter,	knitting	this	to	that,	bleeding
quickness	into	the	construct.

Snorri	bellowed	his	wordless	challenge,	but	he	held	his	ground:	No
charging	against	this	foe.	It	overreached	him	by	a	yard	and	more.	The	dead
thing	extended	an	arm,	talons	questing	for	Snorri,	then	snatched	the	hand
back.	A	grey	skull,	filled	with	new	wetness,	craned	down	on	a	neck	that	was
once	the	entirety	of	a	man’s	spine.	And	it	spoke!	Though	it	had	no	lungs	for
bellows,	no	tongue	to	shape	its	words,	it	spoke.	The	unborn’s	voice	squealed
like	tooth	on	tooth,	grated	bone	on	bone,	and	somehow	carried	meaning.

“Red	Queen,”	it	said.
Snorri	took	a	pace	back,	sword	raised.	The	skull	swivelled	and	those

awful	wet	pits	that	served	for	eyes	found	me,	barefoot,	weaponless,	and
scooting	away	on	my	backside.

“Red	Queen.”
“Not	me!	Never	heard	of	her.”	The	strength	went	from	my	legs	and	I

stopped	trying	to	escape,	although	it	was	the	only	thing	I	wanted	to	do.
“You	carry	her	purpose,”	it	said.	“And	her	sister’s	magic.”	It	swung	its

head	towards	Snorri	and	I	could	breathe	again.	“Or	you,”	it	said.	“And	you?”
The	unborn	returned	its	gaze	to	me,	now	on	my	feet.	Under	that	inspection	I
started	to	die	once	more.	“Hidden?”	The	skull	tilted	in	query.	“How	is	it
hidden?”

Snorri	attacked.	As	the	unborn’s	attention	pinned	me	he	leapt	forwards,
sword	in	his	off	hand,	and	hacked	at	its	narrow	waist	of	bone,	dry	skin,	old
gristle.	The	thing	lurched	alarmingly,	recovered	itself,	and	slapped	him	away
with	a	lazy	backhand	that	lifted	the	Norseman	from	his	feet	and	sent	him



sprawling,	his	sword	flying	past	me,	lost	in	the	night.
Battles	are	all	about	strategy,	and	strategy	pivots	on	priorities.	Since	my

priorities	were	Prince	Jalan,	Prince	Jalan,	and	Prince	Jalan,	with	“looking
good”	a	distant	fourth,	I	took	the	opportunity	to	resume	running	away.	I	find
that	the	main	thing	about	success	is	the	ability	to	act	in	the	moment.	A	hero
attacks	in	the	moment;	a	good	coward	runs	in	it.	The	rest	of	the	world	waits
for	the	next	moment	and	ends	up	as	crow	food.

I	made	it	ten	yards	before	nearly	slicing	my	foot	off	on	Snorri’s	sword,
which	had	ended	its	trajectory	point	first.	Nine	inches	of	the	blade	lay	buried
in	the	hard	earth,	the	rest	jutting	up	dangerously.	Even	in	my	terror	I
recognized	the	value	in	three	foot	of	cold	steel	and	paused	to	haul	it	clear.	The
action	spun	me	around	and	I	could	see	the	unborn	looming	over	Snorri,
ghostly	in	the	starlight.	Weaponless,	he	refused	to	run	and	held	what	looked	to
be	a	gravestone	above	him	like	a	shield.	The	stone	shattered	beneath	the
unborn’s	descending	fist.	A	thin	hand	of	many	bones	encircled	the	Viking’s
waist—in	another	moment	he	would	be	gutted	or	have	his	head	torn	off.

Something	huge	and	dark	and	wailing	like	a	banshee	swept	towards	me
from	the	camp.	Rather	than	be	flattened	beneath	its	ground-shaking	bulk	I
ran,	selecting	the	direction	I	happened	to	be	pointing	in.	I	needed	all	my	speed
to	keep	clear	of	the	massive	pounding	feet	behind	me,	and	screaming,	I
charged	directly	at	the	unborn,	desperately	trying	to	find	the	extra	legs	to	veer
to	the	side.

At	the	last	moment,	with	pants-wetting	haste,	I	dived	left,	narrowly
missing	Snorri,	rolled,	rolled	again,	and	somehow	avoided	skewering	myself
on	the	sword.	I	rose	to	watch	in	astonishment	as	Cherri	bounced	past	atop	an
enraged	elephant.	The	unborn	went	down	with	the	sound	of	a	hundred	wet
sticks	snapping,	ground	to	pieces	beneath	blunt	feet	the	size	of	bucklers.	The
elephant	thundered	on	into	the	night,	still	bearing	the	girl,	and	trumpeting
loud	enough	to	wake	the	dead,	if	any	had	still	been	asleep.

Snorri	landed	close	by	with	a	thud	that	made	me	wince.	He	lay	without
moving	for	five	beats	of	my	heart,	then	levered	himself	up	on	thick	arms.	I
held	his	sword	out	to	him	and	he	took	it.

“My	thanks.”
“Least	I	could	do.”
“Not	every	man	would	run	off	to	recover	a	comrade’s	weapon,	then

charge	an	unborn	single-handed.”	He	got	to	his	feet	with	a	groan	and	stared
off	into	the	night.	“Elephant,	eh?”

“Yup.”
“And	a	woman.”	He	went	to	the	fire	and	started	kicking	embers	over	the

unborn’s	remains.
“Yup.”
Circus	folk	were	streaming	towards	us	now,	dark	shapes	against	the	night.



“Think	she’ll	be	all	right?”
I	considered	the	matter,	having	spent	some	time	between	her	thighs

myself.	“I’m	more	worried	for	the	elephant.”



TEN

By	first	light	the	circus	camp	had	been	half	packed	away.	None	of	them
held	any	desire	to	remain,	and	I	expected	Dr.	Taproot	would	have	to	find

a	new	stopover	the	next	time	they	passed	this	way.
Cherri	returned	with	the	elephant	as	I	waited	for	Snorri	by	the	field	gate.

The	dwarf	had	returned	to	his	post	and	we	were	both	trying	to	cheat	each
other	at	cards.	I	stood	and	waved.	Cherri	must	have	had	to	wait	for	dawn	to
find	her	way	back.	She	looked	worn	out,	her	face	paints	smeared,	dark	streaks
around	her	eyes.	A	gentleman	pretends	not	to	notice	these	things,	and	I
hastened	over	to	catch	her	as	she	slipped	from	the	creature’s	back.	She	felt
good	enough	in	my	arms	to	make	me	regret	the	need	to	leave.

“My	thanks,	lady.”	I	set	her	down	and	backed	away	from	the	elephant’s
questing	trunk.	The	beast	made	me	seven	kinds	of	nervous	and	smelled	of
farms	to	boot.	“Good	boy!”	I	slapped	its	wrinkled	flanks	and	dodged	towards
the	gate	again.

“She’s	a	girl,”	Cherri	said.	“Nelly.”
“Ah.	What	else	could	she	be	called?”	Saved	by	a	dancing	girl	on	a	female

elephant.	I	wouldn’t	be	adding	that	to	the	tale	of	the	hero	of	Aral	Pass.
Cherri	took	the	elephant’s	halter	rope	and	led	her	off	into	the	camp,

shooting	me	one	last	wicked	glance	that	made	me	wish	for	another	night,	at
the	least.

Snorri	arrived	moments	later.	“Hell	of	a	thing.”	He	shook	his	head.
“Elephants!”

“You	could	take	one	home,”	I	suggested.
“We	have	mammoths!	Even	bigger,	but	in	fur	coats.	I’ve	never	seen	one,

but	I	want	to	now.”	He	looked	back	into	the	camp.	“I	paid	my	respects	to	the
mother.	There’s	nothing	to	say	at	such	times,	but	it’s	better	to	say	something
than	nothing	even	so.”	He	slapped	an	overly	familiar	hand	to	my	shoulder.
“We	should	go,	Jal,	our	welcome’s	worn	thin.	Unless	you	wanted	to	barter	for
horses?”

“With	what?”	I	pulled	out	my	pockets.	“They	sucked	me	dry.”
Snorri	shrugged.	“That	locket	you’re	always	fiddling	with	would	buy	ten

horses.	Fine	ones.”



“I	hardly	ever	touch	it.”	I	blinked	at	him,	telling	myself	to	remember	his
sharp	eyes.	I	didn’t	recall	looking	at	it	once	since	we	met.	“And	it’s	of	no
value.”	I	doubted	the	old	man	on	the	road	would	have	swapped	his	donkey	for
the	locket	and	a	silver	crown.

The	Norseman	shrugged	and	made	to	leave.	I	nudged	his	arm	as	he
passed.	“Taproot’s	come	to	see	us	off.”

Dr.	Taproot	approached.	He	looked	uncomfortable	in	the	open	air,
removed	from	his	desk.	Two	men	flanked	him,	leading	their	horses,	a	pale
gelding	and	a	dun	mare.	The	first	the	lion	tamer	we	met	in	the	blueness	of
Taproot’s	tent,	the	second	a	hugely	built	man	who	was	obviously	occupying
the	strongman	job	that	Snorri	had	initially	been	taken	to	be	an	applicant	for.	I
wondered	if	the	good	doctor	was	expecting	trouble	of	some	kind.

“Taproot.”	Snorri	inclined	his	head.	The	stolen	sword	hung	at	his	hip	now,
depending	from	an	arrangement	of	rope	and	leather	strips.

“Aha!	The	travellers!”	Taproot	looked	up	at	his	strongman	as	if	weighing
him	in	the	balance	with	Snorri.	“Heading	north	now.	Watch	me!”

Neither	of	us	had	an	answer	to	that.	Taproot	continued.	“Dogged	by	ill
fortune	perhaps?	The	kind	of	misfortune	that	fills	and	empties	graves.	Watch
me!”	His	hands	moved	as	if	performing	each	task	while	he	described	it.	“That
would	have	been	valuable	information.	At	yesterday’s	noon	that	information
would	have	earned	its	keep.”	The	sorrow	on	his	long	features	seemed	almost
too	perfect,	almost	caricature.	It	worried	me	that	I	couldn’t	tell	if	the	baby’s
death	had	meant	anything	to	him	or	not.	“In	any	case,	the	milk	was	spilt.”	He
trailed	off,	then	turned	to	go	but	caught	himself	and	spun	once	more	to	face
us.	“Unborn!”	Almost	a	shout	now.	“You	bring	unborn	into	the	world?	How
—”	He	found	his	control	once	more	and	carried	on,	his	voice	conversational
again.	“This	was	not	well	done.	Not	well	done	at	all.	You	must	go	far	from
here.	And	fast.”	He	indicated	the	two	horses	and	his	companions	stepped
forwards,	holding	the	reins	out	towards	us.	I	took	the	gelding.	“Twenty
crowns	on	your	debt	slate,	my	prince.”	Taproot	inclined	his	head	a	fraction.	“I
know	you	will	be	good	for	it.”

I	looked	my	steed	over,	patted	his	neck,	felt	the	meat	over	his	ribs.	A
decent	enough	nag.	Snorri	stood	woodenly	beside	his	as	if	worried	she	might
bite	him.

“My	thanks,”	I	said,	and	swung	up	into	the	saddle.	Twenty	in	gold	was	a
fair	enough	price.	A	touch	steep,	but	fair	under	the	circumstances.	I	felt	better
mounted.	God	gave	us	horses	so	we	could	run	away	faster.

“Best	be	quick	on	your	path—you’re	at	the	centre	of	a	storm,	young
prince,	and	no	mistake.”	Taproot	nodded	as	if	it	had	been	me	talking	and	him
agreeing.	“There	are	hands	aplenty	in	this	matter,	many	fingers	in	the	pot.	All
stirring.	A	grey	hand	behind	you,	a	black	hand	in	your	path.	Scratch	a	little
deeper,	though,	and	you	might	find	blue	behind	the	black,	red	behind	the	grey.



And	deeper	still?	Does	it	go	deeper?	Who	knows?	Not	this	old	circus-keeper.
Perhaps	everything	goes	deeper	than	deep,	deep	without	end.	But	I’m	old,	my
eyes	grow	dim,	I	only	see	so	far.”

“Um.”	It	seemed	the	only	sensible	reply	to	his	outpouring	of	nonsense.	I
could	see	now	who	trained	up	the	circus	fortune-teller.

Taproot	nodded	at	my	wisdom.	“Let	us	part	friends,	Prince	Jalan.	The
Kendeths	have	been	a	force	for	good	in	Red	March.”	He	held	out	his	thin
hand	and	I	took	it	quick	enough,	for	I	guessed	it	pained	him	to	keep	it	still	so
long.	“There!”	he	said.	“I	was	sorry	to	hear	of	your	mother’s	death,	my
prince.”	I	released	his	hand.	“Too	young—too	young	she	was	for	the
assassin’s	blade.”

I	blinked	at	him,	nodded,	and	nudged	my	new	horse	on	down	the	lane.
“Come	on,	Snorri.”	Over	my	shoulder.	“It’s	like	rowing	a	boat.”

“I’ll	walk	a	little	first,”	he	said,	and	followed	on,	leading	his	nag	by	the
reins.

I’ll	admit	some	regret	in	leaving	the	circus	behind.	I	liked	the	people,	the
air	of	the	place,	even	on	the	move.	And	of	course	the	dancers.	Despite	that,	I
had	a	small	smile	on	my	lips.	It	was	good	to	know	that	even	Taproot’s	vast
stock	of	information	failed	him	from	time	to	time.	My	mother	died	of	a	flux.	I
touched	the	lump	made	by	the	locket	under	my	jacket,	Mother’s	picture
inside.	A	flux.	The	contact	made	me	uneasy	all	of	a	sudden,	my	smile	gone.

	•	•	•	

We	got	to	the	main	road	and	turned	back	along	the	path	we’d	first	taken,
guided	by	directions	from	the	midget	cardsharp	at	the	gate.	Neither	of

us	spoke	until	we	reached	the	pile	of	elephant	dung	that	had	first	alerted	me	to
the	circus’s	proximity.

“So,	you	can’t	ride,	then?”
“Never	tried,”	he	said.
“You’ve	never	even	sat	on	a	horse?”	It	seemed	hard	to	credit.
“I’ve	eaten	plenty,”	he	said.
“That	doesn’t	help.”
“How	difficult	can	it	be?”	he	asked,	making	no	move	to	find	out.
“Less	difficult	than	jumping	onto	bears	and	off	again,	I	suspect.	Luckily

I’m	the	finest	horseman	in	Red	March	and	a	great	teacher.”	I	pointed	at	the
stirrup.	“Put	your	foot	in	there.	Not	the	foot	you	first	thought	of—the	other
one.	Step	up,	and	don’t	fall	off.”

Lessons	continued	slowly	and	to	his	credit	Snagason	did	not	fall	off.	I	did
worry	that	he	might	cave	in	the	horse’s	ribs	with	those	oh-so-muscly	legs	of
his,	but	in	the	end	Snorri	and	the	horse	reached	an	uneasy	truce	where	they
both	adopted	a	fixed	grin	and	got	on	with	moving	forwards.



By	the	time	the	sun	had	passed	its	zenith	I	could	tell	the	Norseman	was
suffering.

“How’s	the	hand?”
“Less	painful	than	the	thighs,”	he	grunted.
“Perhaps	if	you	loosened	your	grip	a	little	and	let	the	poor	horse

breathe	.	.	.”
“Tell	me	about	Rhone,”	he	said.
I	shrugged.	We	wouldn’t	reach	the	border	until	the	next	evening	and	the

last	mile	would	suffice	to	tell	him	anything	worthwhile	about	the	place,	but	it
seemed	he	needed	distraction	from	his	aches	and	pains.

“Not	so	much	to	tell.	Awful	place.	The	food’s	bad,	the	men	surly	and
ignorant,	the	women	cross-eyed.	And	they’re	thieves	to	a	man.	If	you	shake	a
Rhonish	hand,	count	your	fingers	afterward.”

“You’ve	never	been	there,	have	you?”	He	shot	a	narrow	look	back	at	me,
then	lurched	to	keep	his	place	in	the	saddle.

“Did	you	not	listen	to	what	I	said?	Why	would	I	go	somewhere	like	that?”
“I	don’t	understand	it.”	He	risked	another	glance	back.	“Rhonish	kings

founded	Red	March,	did	they	not?	Wasn’t	it	the	Rhonish	who	saved	you	from
Scorron	invasion?	Twice?”

“I	hardly	think	so!”	Now	he	mentioned	it,	though,	it	did	trigger	a	faint
memory	of	too-hot	days	in	the	Grey	Room	with	Tutor	Marcle.	“I	suspect	a
prince	of	Red	March	knows	a	little	more	about	local	history	than	some	.	.	.
hauldr	off	the	frozen	slopes	of	a	fjord.”	I’ll	admit	to	sleeping	through	most	of
Marcle’s	history	lessons,	but	I	probably	would	have	noticed	a	thing	like	that.
“In	any	event,	they’re	a	bad	sort.”

To	change	the	topic	of	conversation,	and	because	every	time	I	glanced
back	my	imagination	hid	monsters	in	the	shadows,	I	brought	up	the	topic	of
pursuit.

“When	I	ran	into	you,	the	fissure,	the	crack	that	was	chasing	me	.	.	.	it
came	from	the	Silent	Sister’s	spell.”

“You	told	me	this.	The	spell	she	placed	to	kill	everyone	at	this	opera	of
yours.”

“Well	.	.	.	it	would	have	killed	everyone,	but	I	don’t	think	that	was	the
reason	she	cursed	the	place.	Maybe	she	wasn’t	out	to	destroy	us	all—maybe
she	had	her	target	and	the	rest	of	us	were	just	in	the	way.	Could	whatever	she
was	after	have	chased	us	to	the	circus?”

Snorri	raised	his	brows,	then	frowned,	then	shook	his	head.	“That	unborn
was	new-formed,	from	Daisy’s	child.	It	didn’t	follow	us	there.”

That	sounded	a	touch	more	hopeful.	“But	.	.	.	it	didn’t	just	happen	by
chance,	surely?	Aren’t	these	things	supposed	to	be	very	rare?	Someone	made
that	happen.	Someone	trying	to	kill	us.”

“Your	Red	Queen	was	gathering	tales	of	the	dead.	She	knows	Ragnarok	is



hard	upon	us—the	last	battle	is	coming.	She’s	drawing	her	plans	against	the
Dead	King	and	likely	he’s	drawing	his	plans	against	her.	The	Dead	King	may
know	about	us,	he	may	know	we’re	headed	north,	dragging	the	witch’s	magic
with	us.	He	may	know	we’re	bound	for	the	Bitter	Ice	where	his	dead	are
gathering.	He	may	want	to	stop	us.”

Whilst	I’d	successfully	steered	the	conversation	away	from	Rhone,	Snorri
had	told	me	absolutely	nothing	to	ease	my	mind.	I	chewed	on	all	that	he’d
said	for	the	next	few	miles	and	very	sour	it	tasted.	We	were	pursued,	I	knew
it,	blood	to	bone.	That	thing	from	the	opera	stalked	us,	and	in	running	before
it	we	plunged	headlong	into	whatever	the	Dead	King	placed	in	our	path.

	•	•	•	

Aday	later	we	met	our	first	examples	of	the	type	of	Rhonishmen	I’d	been
warning	Snorri	against.	A	guard	post	of	five	Rhone	soldiers	attached	to	a

sizable	inn	that	straddled	the	border.	Red	March’s	own	guard	post	of	four	men
adjoined	the	opposite	end	of	the	inn,	and	the	two	groups	dined	together	most
evenings	on	opposing	sides	of	a	long	table	through	which	the	border	ran,
marked	across	the	planks	by	a	line	of	polished	nail	heads.

I	introduced	myself	as	a	down-at-heels	nobleman	since	none	of	them
would	recognize	a	Red	March	prince	and,	thinking	themselves	mocked,
would	take	offence.	I	suppose	I	could	have	held	up	a	gold	crown	with
Grandmother’s	face	on	it	and	remonstrated	about	the	family	resemblance,	but
I	didn’t	have	one.	Or	a	silver	crown.	And	the	coppers	mostly	had	the	Iax
Tower	on	them	or	King	Gholloth,	who	reigned	before	Grandmother	and
looked	nothing	like	his	daughter	or	me.

Snorri	said	little	at	the	inn,	his	tension	clear,	worried	that	word	might	have
been	sent	to	secure	the	borders	against	him.	We	spent	the	remainder	of	my
coppers	on	a	small	meal	of	cabbage	soup	and	mystery	meat	before	moving	on
into	Rhone,	which	despite	my	misgivings,	seemed	very	much	like	Red	March,
except	that	the	people	tended	to	roll	out	their	r’s	in	an	annoying	manner.

The	first	Rhonish	town	we	came	to	coincided	with	our	first	evening.	A
sizable	place	with	the	dull	but	worthy	name	of	Milltown.	We	rode	at	gentle
pace	along	the	muddy	high	street,	a	thoroughfare	crowded	with	traders,
travellers,	and	townsfolk.	Snorri	reined	in	towards	a	smithy	open	to	the	street
and	loud	with	hammers.

“We	should	get	you	a	sword,	Jal.”	He’d	taken	to	calling	me	Jal,	not	“my
prince,”	or	“Prince	Jalan,”	or	even	“Jalan,”	but	“Jal.”	I	didn’t	let	him	know	it
annoyed	me	because	he’d	just	do	it	exactly	the	same	amount	of	times	but	with
a	broader	grin.	“How	are	you	with	a	blade?”

“Better	than	you	are	with	a	horse,”	I	said.
Snorri	snorted	and	his	mare	joined	in.	He’d	called	her	Sleipnir	after	some



heathen	nag,	and	they	seemed	to	be	getting	on	despite	him	riding	like	a	big
log	stuck	on	a	saddle,	and	weighing	about	the	same	as	his	steed.	He
dismounted,	the	effect	not	dissimilar	to	the	aforementioned	log	falling	off	its
perch.

“Show	me?”	He	pulled	out	his	sword	and	offered	it	hilt	first.
I	looked	around.	“You	can’t	just	go	swinging	swords	on	the	main	street.

Someone	will	lose	an	eye!	And	that’s	only	if	the	town-law	aren’t	on	you
first.”

Snorri	looked	puzzled,	as	if	on	the	ice-coated	slopes	of	the	North	it	would
be	the	most	natural	thing	in	the	world.	“It’s	a	blacksmith’s.”	He	waved	to	the
ironmongery	laid	out	beside	us.	“The	smith	makes	swords.	People	must	try
them	out	here	all	the	time.”	The	sword	hilt	poked	my	way	again.

“I	doubt	it.”	Hands	firmly	on	the	reins.	I	nodded	down	to	the	display
tables—scythe	blades,	baling	hooks,	nails,	and	other	domestic	goods	were	all
that	lay	before	me.	“Town	this	size	might	have	a	weapon-smith	somewhere.
This	ain’t	it,	though.”

“Ha!”	Snorri	pointed	to	a	sword	hanging	up	back	in	the	gloom	under	the
awnings.	“Smith!”

The	smith	emerged	at	Snorri’s	booming,	a	short	man,	ugly	with	sweat,
thick	in	the	arms	of	course	but	with	a	surprising	bookish	look	to	him.
“Evenin’.”

“I’ll	test	that	blade.”	Snorri	pointed	to	the	hanging	sword.
“Repairing	that	for	Garson	Host,”	the	smith	said.	“Taking	out	the	notches,

putting	a	fresh	edge	on	it.	T’aint	for	sale.”
“Don’t	humour	him.”	I	nodded	my	approval	at	the	man.
The	smith	bit	his	lip.	I’d	forgotten	that	Rhonish	men	always	look	for	a

chance	to	put	a	Red	March	man	on	his	arse,	and	that	common	men	like
nothing	better	than	seeing	their	betters	knocked	about.	I	would	have	been
wiser	to	hold	my	tongue.	Snorri	might	be	a	foreigner	but	at	least	he	hadn’t
committed	the	cardinal	sin	of	being	a	foreigner	from	the	country	next	door.

“Don’t	s’pose	Garson’ll	mind	if	it’s	three	notches	I	knock	out	of	the	blade
or	five	notches.”	The	smith	went	back	and	reached	up	to	retrieve	the	sword.

Resigned	to	my	fate,	I	dismounted	and	took	the	hilt	that	Snorri	poked	at
me	again.	It	happens	that	I’m	not	that	bad	a	swordsman	when	my	life’s	not	in
danger.	In	the	practice	yard	with	dull	blades	and	sufficient	padding	I	could
always	hold	my	own	well	enough.	More	than	well.	But	all	those	lessons	went
running	down	one	leg	on	the	only	day	I	was	ever	called	on	to	swing	a	sword
in	earnest.	As	we	crashed	in	amongst	those	Scorron	soldiers	up	in	the	Aral
Pass,	raw	terror	washed	away	all	my	training	in	an	instant.	Those	were	great
big	angry	men	with	sharp	swords	actually	wanting	to	cut	pieces	off	me.	It’s
not	until	you’ve	seen	a	red	gaping	wound	and	all	the	complex	little	bits	inside
a	man	all	broken	up	and	sliced	open,	and	known	that	they	weren’t	ever	getting



back	together	again,	and	vomited	your	last	two	meals	over	the	rocks	.	.	.	it’s
not	until	then	that	you	understand	the	business	of	swords	properly	and,	if
you’re	a	sensible	man	you	vow	to	have	nothing	to	do	with	it	ever	again.	I
remember	nothing	from	the	battle	in	the	Aral	Pass	but	frozen	moments
shuffled	together—steel	flashing,	crimson	arcs,	horrified	faces,	one	man
choking	on	blood	as	he	backed	away	from	me	.	.	.	and	the	screaming,	of
course.	I	still	hear	that	today.	Everything	else	about	the	battle	is	a	blank.

Snorri	took	his	new	sword	in	his	uninjured	hand	and	jabbed	at	me.	I
swatted	it	away.	He	grinned	and	came	at	me	again.	We	traded	thrusts	and
parries	for	a	few	moments,	the	clash	of	steel	bringing	much	of	the	street	to	a
halt,	heads	turning	our	way.	Usually	strength,	while	important,	is	not	the
prime	factor	in	swordwork,	even	with	heavier	blades	of	the	type	we
employed.	The	rapier	is	all	about	quickness,	but	even	the	longsword	is	more
about	quickness,	once	you	have	the	strength	to	swing	it,	than	it	is	about
excess	strength.	Properly	trained,	a	swordsman	will	benefit	more	from	a	small
increase	in	skill	and	speed	than	from	a	large	increase	in	strength.	The	sword
is,	after	all,	a	lever.	With	Snorri,	however,	strength	was	a	factor.	He	used	basic
enough	moves,	but	blocking	them	made	my	hand	hurt,	and	the	first	blow	he
put	any	real	effort	into	nearly	took	the	blade	from	my	grasp.	Even	so,	it	was
clear	quite	early	on	that	I	had	more	sword	skills	in	my	right	hand	than	the
Norseman	had	in	his	left.

“Good!”	Snorri	lowered	his	weapon.	“You’re	very	good.”
I	tried	not	to	simper	under	his	praise.	“Grandmother	requires	that	all	her

family	be	well	versed	in	the	arts	of	war.”	Whether	they	want	to	be	or	not	.	.	.	I
recalled	endless	training	as	a	young	prince,	gripping	a	wooden	blade	until	I
got	blisters,	and	being	beaten	mercilessly	by	Martus	and	Darin,	who	saw	it	as
part	of	their	duties	as	elder	brothers.

“Keep	the	sword,”	Snorri	said	to	me.	“You’ll	make	better	use	of	it	than
me.”

I	pursed	my	lips.	As	long	as	having	the	sword	didn’t	mean	I	had	to	use	it,
then	I	was	fine	with	the	arrangement.	I	certainly	cut	a	better	swagger	with	a
longsword	at	my	hip.	I	tilted	the	blade	and	let	the	light	run	along	it.	At	one
point	the	metal	had	taken	on	a	dark	stain.	Perhaps	where	it	had	bit	into	the
unborn	when	Snorri	swung	at	its	body.	I	pushed	the	memory	away.

“What	about	you?”	I	asked,	concerned	with	my	safety	rather	than	his.
“I’ll	buy	a	replacement.”	He	turned	to	the	smith,	who	made	no	effort	to

hide	his	disappointment	at	not	seeing	the	giant	Viking	squash	me.
“You	can’t	afford	another	sword!”	He	couldn’t	afford	anything—he’d

been	a	prisoner	for	months	until	his	recent	escape.	Not	the	most	lucrative	of
occupations.

“You’re	right.”	Snorri	handed	the	smith’s	sword	back.	“It’s	not	for	sale	in
any	case.”	He	nodded	into	the	forge.	“Do	you	have	a	good	axe?	A	war-axe,



not	something	for	cutting	wood.”
As	the	smith	headed	in	to	delve	through	his	stock,	Snorri	pulled	a	pouch

on	a	string	from	about	his	neck.	I	crowded	over	to	see	what	he	had.	Silvers!
At	least	five	of	them.

“Who’d	you	murder	for	those?”	I	frowned,	more	at	the	thought	of	Snorri
being	richer	than	me	than	at	the	thought	of	robbery	with	violence.

“I’m	not	a	thief.”	Snorri	lowered	his	brows.
“All	right,	we’ll	call	it	pillage,”	I	said.
Snorri	shrugged.	“Viking	lands	are	poor,	the	soil	sparse,	winters	cruel.	So

some	do	reach	out	and	take	from	the	weak.	It’s	true.	We	Undoreth,	however,
prefer	to	take	from	the	strong—they	have	better	stuff.	For	each	longboat
launched	against	distant	shores	there	are	ten	and	more	launched	to	raid	close
neighbours.	The	Viking	nations	waste	their	main	strength	on	each	other	and
have	always	done	so.”

“You	still	haven’t	answered	the	question.”
“I	took	from	the	strong!”	Snorri	grinned	and	reached	out	to	take	the	axe

the	smith	brought	him.	“That	big	man	with	Taproot	when	we	left?	The
Amazing	Ronaldo!	Circus	strongman.”	No	Norse	axe	this,	but	a	serviceable
footman’s	axe,	a	single	triangular	blade,	the	ash	haft	iron-banded	and	dark
with	age.	The	axe	was	ever	a	peasant’s	weapon,	but	this	one	at	least	had	been
made	for	a	peasant	signed	to	some	lord’s	levy.	Snorri	twirled	it,	coming
alarmingly	near	to	the	stock	tables,	me,	and	the	smith.	“The	Amazing
Ronaldo	made	a	wager	with	me	regarding	a	feat	of	strength.	He	didn’t	win.
That	dwarf	said	they’ll	call	him	the	Amazed	Ronaldo	now!”	Snorri	hefted	the
axe	and	held	the	blade	close	to	his	ear	as	if	listening	to	it.	“I’ll	take	it.”

“Three.”	The	smith	held	up	the	appropriate	number	of	fingers	as	if	Snorri
hadn’t	been	speaking	the	Empire	Tongue.

“He’s	robbing	you!	Three	silvers	for	what’s	basically	a	farm	implement?”
But	Snorri	paid	over	the	coins.	“Never	haggle	over	a	weapon’s	price.	Buy

or	don’t	buy.	Save	the	arguments	for	when	you	own	it!”
“We’ll	have	to	get	you	a	sword,”	I	said.	“When	funds	allow.”
Snorri	shook	his	head.	“An	axe	for	me.	Swords	trick	you	into	thinking

you	can	defend.	With	an	axe	all	you	can	do	is	attack.	That’s	what	my	father
named	me.	Snorri.	It	means	‘attack.’”	He	lifted	the	axe	above	his	head.	“Men
think	they	can	defend	against	me—but	when	I	knock,	they	open.”

	•	•	•	

“What	the	hell	are	unborn?”	It	took	three	days	for	me	to	ask	the
question.	We’d	come	riding	into	the	town	of	Pentacost,	covering

about	a	hundred	miles	from	the	border.	Snorri	still	rode	like	a	log,	but
fortunately	he	also	endured	like	a	log	and	hadn’t	murmured	a	word	of



complaint.	Rain	found	us	on	the	road	and	poured	on	our	heads	for	the	last	ten
miles,	so	we	came	dripping	from	the	stables	and	now	sat	at	the	centre	of	our
own	little	lakes,	steaming	gently	before	an	empty	hearth	in	the	King	of	Rhone
tavern.

“You	don’t	know?”	Snorri	raised	wet	eyebrows	at	that	and	plastered	his
hair	farther	up	his	forehead,	shaking	the	excess	water	from	his	fingers.

“No.”	I’m	often	like	that.	I	have	a	bad	habit	of	blanking	unpleasantness
from	my	mind—something	I’ve	done	since	I	was	a	child.	Genuine	surprise	is
a	great	help	when	faced	with	an	unwelcome	duty.	Of	course,	when	it’s	the
paying	of	debts	you’re	forgetting,	that	can	lead	to	broken	fingers.	And	worse.
I	guess	it’s	a	form	of	lying—lying	to	oneself.	And	I’m	very	good	at
falsehoods.	They	often	say	the	best	liars	half-believe	their	lies—which	makes
me	the	very	best	because	if	I	repeat	a	lie	often	enough	I	can	end	up	believing
it	entirely,	no	half	measures	involved!	“No,	I	don’t	know.”

During	our	travels,	mainly	down	dull	and	muddy	tracks	and	past
innumerable	dreadful	little	farms,	I’d	spent	a	lot	of	time	reminiscing	to	myself
about	Cherri’s	charms	and	Lula’s	pleasing	sense	of	exploration,	but	of	the
incident	at	the	graves	.	.	.	nothing,	just	a	brief	memory	of	Cherri	riding	to	the
rescue.	A	dozen	times	I’d	pictured	the	bouncing	of	her	breasts	as	she’d
thundered	past.	It	took	a	three-hour	soaking	at	the	end	of	a	three-day	ride	for
the	unborn	to	at	last	surface	with	a	nagging	insistence	that	finally	made	me
ask.	The	truth	could	scarcely	be	worse	than	what	my	imagination	had	begun
to	suggest.	I	hoped.

“How	can	you	not	know?”	Snorri	demanded.	He	didn’t	thump	the	table,
but	I	knew	he	wanted	to.

Snorri	proved	the	ideal	travelling	companion	for	a	man	like	me	who
didn’t	want	to	dwell	on	past	mistakes	and	the	like.	As	far	as	Snorri	was
concerned	all	his	goals,	ambitions,	loves,	and	dangers	lay	ahead—anything	in
our	wake,	Red	March	and	all	its	peoples,	Grandmother	and	her	Silent	Sister,
the	unborn,	all	these	things	of	the	South,	were	to	be	left	behind,	outpaced,	no
longer	of	concern	or	consequence.

“How	can	you	not	know?”	he	repeated.
“How	can	you	not	know	what	eleven	times	twelve	is?”
“A	hundred	and	thirty-two.”
Damn.	“I’m	just	more	interested	in	the	finer	things	in	life,	Snorri.	If	you

can’t	ride	it—one	way	or	another—and	it	doesn’t	play	dice,	or	cards,	or	pour
from	a	wine	bottle,	then	I’m	really	not	that	bothered.	Especially	if	it’s	foreign.
Or	heathen.	Or	both.	But	this	.	.	.	thing	.	.	.	said	something	that	worried	me.”

“Quarry.”	Snorri	nodded.	“It	was	sent	after	us.”
“By?	The	other	day	you	said	it	might	be	the	Dead	King,	but	couldn’t	it	be

someone	else?”	I	wanted	it	to	be	someone	else.	“Some	necromancer	or—”
“The	Dead	King	is	the	only	one	who	can	send	the	unborn	anywhere.	They



laugh	at	necromancers.”
“So.	This	Dead	King.	I’ve	heard	of	him.”
Snorri	spread	his	hands,	inviting	more	of	my	wisdom	on	the	subject.
“A	Brettan	lord.	Some	godless	island-hopper	from	the	Drowned	Lands.”	I

sipped	my	wine.	A	Rhonish	red.	Vile	stuff,	like	vinegar	and	pepper.	Other
countries	wouldn’t	be	so	bad	if	they	weren’t	crammed	with	foreigners	and	all
their	stuff.	This	Dead	King	was	a	case	in	point.

“That’s	it?	That’s	what	you	know	about	the	Dead	King?	‘He’s	from	the
Drowned	Isles.’”	It	seemed	to	me	that	the	steam	was	coming	off	Snorri	rather
more	rapidly	now.

I	shrugged.	“So	why	would	some	Brettan	send	a	monster	after	us?	How
would	he	even	know?	I	bet	Maeres	Allus	put	him	up	to	it.	Six	will	get	you
ten.	Maeres	Allus!”

“Ha!”	Snorri	drained	his	ale,	wiped	the	foam	from	his	moustache,	and
made	to	order	another	before	remembering	our	poverty.	“That,	Jal,	would	be
like	a	minnow	ordering	a	whale.	This	Allus	of	yours	is	nothing.	Get	ten	miles
from	the	walls	of	your	city	and	nobody	knows	the	man.”

Prince	Jalan,	damn	it!	Ten	miles	outside	my	city	and	nobody	knows	I’m	a
prince.	“So	why	send	the	monster?”

“The	Dead	King	and	this	Silent	Sister,	they’re	hidden	hands,	they	play	a
game	across	the	empire,	them	and	others,	pushing	kings	and	lords	across	their
board.	Who	knows	what	it	is	they	want	in	the	end?	Perhaps	to	remake	the
empire	and	give	it	an	emperor	with	strings	by	which	he	can	be	made	to	dance,
or	perhaps	to	wipe	the	board	clear	and	start	the	game	anew.	In	any	event	the
unborn	said	we	carried	the	Red	Queen’s	purpose,	and	then	it	said	we	carried
magic.	Which	we	do.”	He	jabbed	a	finger	at	my	shoulder	and	that	unpleasant
crackling	energy	built	immediately,	remaining	until	he	withdrew	the
offending	digit.

“But	that	was	some	kind	of	accident!	We’re	not	on	anyone’s	purpose!
Certainly	not	my	grandmother’s.”	Not	unless	the	Silent	Sister’s	blind	eye	saw
into	the	future	and	selected	an	unlikely	chance.	An	unsettling	thought.	She
was,	after	all,	battling	the	dead,	and	Snorri	was	dragging	both	me	and	the
witch’s	magic	north	to	where	his	foes	worked	alongside	corpse-men	brought
in	on	the	black	ships	of	the	Drowned	Isles.	“It’s	just	coincidence!”

“So	maybe	the	unborn	was	wrong,	the	Dead	King	too.	Maybe	we’ve	got
them,	the	Silent	Sister,	and	even	your	weasel	Allus	on	our	trail.	Let	them
come.	We’ll	see	how	much	staying	power	they	have!	It’s	a	long	way	to	the
North.”

“So,”	I	said,	returning	to	my	theme.	“What	the	hell	is	an	unborn?”	I	had	a
vague	memory	of	the	name	from	before	the	nightmare	journey	began.	I	think
the	first	time	I	heard	it	I	had	rather	hoped	they	were	just	risen	corpses,	which
given	their	size	would	be	easily	dealt	with.	Not	that	I’m	keen	to	stamp	on



babies,	dead	or	otherwise,	but	it’d	be	a	sight	less	dangerous	than	what
happened	at	the	circus.	“And	how	the	hell	is	an	‘unborn’	a	huge	grave-horror
that	takes	a	charging	elephant	to	put	down?”

“Potential,	that’s	what	the	unborn	are.	Potential.”	Snorri	picked	up	his
empty	tankard,	checked	its	emptiness,	and	put	it	down	again.	“The	one	we
faced	wasn’t	so	dangerous	as	it	had	only	been	dead	a	few	hours.	All	that
potential	for	growth	and	change	a	child	has—all	that	goes	to	the	deadlands	if
the	child	dies	unborn.	It	becomes	twisted	there.	Soured.	Time	passes
differently	there,	nothing	stays	young.	The	unborn	child’s	potential	is	infected
with	older	purpose.	There	are	things	that	have	always	been	dead,	things	that
dwell	in	the	Land	Beyond	Death,	and	it’s	those	ancient	evils	that	ride	the
unborn	potential,	possess	and	haunt	it,	hungry	to	be	born	into	the	world	of
life.	The	longer	the	unborn	stays	in	the	deadlands,	the	more	strength	it	draws
from	that	place	but	the	less	it	can	change,	the	harder	it	becomes	to	return.	No
common	necromancer	can	summon	an	unborn.	Even	the	Dead	King	is	said	to
have	been	able	to	bring	through	only	a	handful,	and	seldom	in	a	place	of	his
choosing.	They	serve	as	his	agents,	his	spies,	able	to	grow	into	new	forms,
disguise	themselves,	walk	amongst	men	unseen	for	what	they	are.”

“New	ones	are	not	so	dangerous?”	I’d	latched	onto	that	and	repeated	it	to
myself	in	disbelief	whilst	the	rest	of	what	he	said	washed	over	me.	“It	would
have	ripped	you	in	half	if	not	for	a	handy	elephant!	Let’s	hope	we	don’t	ever
meet	another	one,	because	elephants	are	in	short	supply	around	here,	if	you
hadn’t	noticed.	Christ!”

Snorri	shrugged.	“You	did	ask.”
“Well,	I	wish	I	hadn’t.	Remind	me	not	to	in	future.”	I	took	a	deep	draught

of	my	wine,	regretting	that	we	lacked	the	wherewithal	to	buy	enough	to	get
roaring	drunk	and	wash	the	whole	business	back	into	convenient	amnesia.

“There	was	something	there	that	night	at	the	opera.”	I	didn’t	want	to
speak	about	it,	but	things	could	hardly	get	worse.

“This	demon	of	yours?”
I	nodded.	“I	broke	the	spell.”	Cracked	it.	“Anyway.	There	was	something

in	there	with	us.	A	demon.	It	looked	like	a	man.	Or	its	body	did—I	never	saw
the	face.	But	there	was	something	wrong.	I	know	it.	I	saw	it	as	clear	as	I	see
the	Silent	Sister	when	everyone	else	looks	past	her.”

“An	unborn,	you	think?”	Snorri	frowned.	“And	now	you	say	it’s
following	us?”	He	shrugged.	“It’s	not	doing	a	very	good	job	of	catching	up.
I’d	worry	more	about	what	lies	ahead	than	behind.”

“Hmmm.”	Stop	worrying	about	the	frying	pan	because	the	fire’s	hotter?	I
shrugged	but	couldn’t	get	those	eyes	out	of	my	imagination.	“But	what	if	it
did	catch	us	up?”

“That	would	be	a	bad	thing.”	Snorri	studied	his	empty	tankard	again.
I	looked	out	at	the	rain,	and	at	the	sky	darkening	with	a	gathering	storm,



and	at	the	night’s	approach.	Whatever	Snorri	said,	out	there	something	that
loved	us	not	was	following	our	trail.	Quarry	it	had	called	us.	I	picked	my	wet
cloak	off	the	floor,	still	dripping.	“We	should	press	on	to	the	next	town.	No
point	dawdling.”	Nice	as	a	night	under	a	good	roof	would	be,	it	was	time	to
be	off.

Keep	still	and	your	troubles	find	you.	I	might	not	have	known	much	about
the	unborn,	but	I	sure	as	hell	knew	about	running!



ELEVEN

“It’s	not	raining!”	I	hadn’t	noticed	at	first.	My	body	still	huddled	as	if
against	the	downpour,	but	on	this	evening,	beside	the	muddy	trail	and

close	enough	to	our	fire	to	make	my	clothes	steam,	there	wasn’t	a	drop	of	rain
to	hide	from.

“Stars.”	Snorri	stabbed	a	finger	at	the	midnight-blue	heavens.
“I	remember	those.”	Not	long	ago	I’d	been	watching	them	on	a	hot	night,

leaning	out	from	Lisa	DeVeer’s	balcony	and	lying.	“Those	there	are	the
lovers,”	I	had	told	her.	Pointing	at	some	random	piece	of	sky.	“Roma	and
Julit.	It	takes	an	expert	to	spot	them.”

“And	is	it	good	luck	when	they	shine	on	us?”	Lisa	had	asked,	half-
disguising	a	smile	that	made	me	think	she	might	well	know	more	astrology
than	I’d	given	her	credit	for.

“Let’s	find	out,”	I	had	said,	and	reached	for	her.	And	they	did	turn	out
lucky	that	night.	Even	so,	I	suspected	myself	a	victim	of	Grandmother’s
insistence	on	education	for	all.	It’s	hard	on	a	chap	when	the	women	he	wishes
to	impress	are	better	schooled	than	he	is.	I	suspect	my	cousin	Serah	could
name	every	constellation	in	the	sky	while	penning	a	sonnet.

“I	wasn’t	captured	on	the	Uulisk	slopes,”	Snorri	said.
I	frowned	at	the	stars,	trying	to	make	sense	of	that.	“What?”
“What	I	told	your	queen	would	lead	her	to	believe	that	I	had	been.”
“Had	been	what?”	I	was	still	trying	to	see	what	this	had	to	do	with	stars.
“I	said	Broke-Oar	sailed	up	the	Uulisk.	That	they	fell	upon	us	there,	that

the	Undoreth	were	broken,	my	children	scattered.	I	said	he	took	me	to	his	ship
in	chains.”

“Yes,”	I	said,	trying	to	remember	any	of	it.	I	recalled	that	the	throne	room
had	been	stuffy,	that	my	legs	ached	with	standing,	that	I’d	lost	a	night’s	sleep
and	found	a	hangover.	The	details	of	Snorri’s	tale,	not	so	much—except	that	I
had	thought	he’d	been	lying	the	horns	off	his	Viking	hat	and	now	he	seemed
to	be	telling	me	that	he	really	had	been.

“When	the	spring	comes	to	the	Uulisk	it	comes	in	a	rush,	ready	for	war!”
Snorri	said,	and	he	told	his	story,	with	the	fire	crackling	at	our	backs	and	our
eyes	upon	the	innumerable	stars.	He	spun	the	tale	out	into	the	darkness,



weaving	pictures	with	his	voice,	too	bright,	too	vivid	to	look	away	from.

	•	•	•	

He	had	woken	that	morning	to	the	groaning	of	the	ice.	For	days	black
water	had	glimmered	at	the	fjord’s	centre.	Today,	though,	today	the	thaw

would	come	in	earnest	and	with	the	sun’s	first	touch,	reaching	down	across
the	high	ridges	of	Uuliskind,	the	shore	ice	groaned	in	protest.

“Get	up!	Up	you	big	ox!”	And	Freja	pulled	the	furs	from	the	cot,	letting
cold	air	nip	at	his	flesh.	Snorri	groaned	as	the	ice	had	groaned.	Some	forces	of
nature	cannot	be	resisted.	Outside,	the	ice	grumbled	and	surrendered	to	the
authority	of	the	spring	thaw;	inside,	a	husband	gave	way	before	a	mother
ready	to	sweep	away	a	whole	winter’s	worth	of	filth	and	to	throw	the	shutters
wide.	Neither	were	to	be	withstood.

Snorri	reached	for	his	shirt	and	breeches,	yawning	wide	enough	to	crack
his	jaw.	Freja	worked	around	him,	twisting	aside	with	practised	ease	when	his
hands	sought	her	hips.

“You	behave,	Snorri	ver	Snagason.”	She	started	to	lift	the	bedskins	and
tug	out	the	heather	beneath.	“There’s	those	pens	want	fixing	on	the	Pel	slope.
Spring’ll	have	the	he-goats	nosing	around	the	she-goats.”

“This	he-goat	wants	his	she-goat,”	Snorri	snorted,	but	he	stood	and	made
for	the	door.	Freja	was	right,	as	always.	The	fences	wouldn’t	keep	kids	in	or
wolves	out.	Not	as	they	stood.	Not	how	the	winter	had	left	them.	He	took	his
iron-toothed	saw	from	the	wall.	“Ver	Magson	will	have	staves.	I’ll	promise
him	a	barrel	of	salted	hake.”

“You’ll	promise	him	half	a	barrel,	and	check	the	timber	first,”	Freja	said.
Snorri	shrugged	and	kept	his	mouth	pressed	closed	on	a	smile.	He	took	a

roll	of	seal	hide,	his	steel	knife,	a	whetstone.	“Where	are	the	children?”
“Karl’s	off	string-fishing	with	the	Magson	boy.	Emy	went	out	to	look	for

her	peg	doll,	and	Egil”—Freja	toed	a	lump	in	the	bed	furs	up	against	the	wall
—“Egil	is	still	sleeping	and	needs	to	wake	up!”	Her	voice	rose	into	a
command	and	the	lump	shifted,	muttering	some	complaint,	a	shock	of	red	hair
now	just	visible	at	the	far	end	of	the	furs.

Snorri	tugged	on	his	boots,	took	his	sheepskin	from	the	hook,	patted	his
battle-axe	secured	high	above	the	lintel,	and	pushed	open	the	door.	The	cold
hit	him	at	once,	but	it	lacked	its	winter	bite—this	was	a	wet	cold	and,	soon
enough,	spring	would	wrestle	it	round	to	mild.

The	rocky	slope	ran	from	his	doorstep	past	a	half	dozen	other	stone-built
huts	to	the	Uulisk’s	ice-locked	shore.	The	fishing	boats	slouched	in	their
winter	berths,	cradled	in	timber	above	the	worst	of	the	snow.	Eight	quays	led
out	over	the	ice,	strutting	on	pine	legs,	planking	warped	by	too	many	harsh
seasons.	The	town	had	been	named	for	them,	Eight	Quays,	back	in	an	age



when	eight	was	a	number	to	boast	of.	Einhaur,	six	miles	seaward,	had	twenty
and	more,	but	Einhaur	had	been	nothing	but	ice	and	rock	when	Snorri’s
grandfather’s	grandfather	had	settled	the	shore	at	Eight	Quays.

A	small	figure	was	making	its	way	out	along	the	longest	of	those	quays	as
Snorri	watched.

“Emy!”	Snorri’s	shout	had	heads	thrusting	from	doorways,	window	hides
lifting.	The	little	girl	almost	fell	from	the	long-quay	in	shock,	which	had	been
precisely	the	threat	that	had	scared	the	shout	out	of	him	in	the	first	place.	But
she	caught	herself	after	jolting	forwards	and	hung	to	an	upright,	little	fingers
clutching	the	icy	timber,	white	hair	falling	across	her	face	and	reaching	for	the
dark	waters	a	couple	of	feet	below.	One	slip	and	the	fjord	would	swallow	her,
the	cold	stealing	both	breath	and	strength.

Snorri	dropped	his	gear	and	ran	out	along	the	long-quay,	sure-footed,
stepping	where	it	would	bear	his	weight	and	losing	no	time	over	the	choices.
He’d	run	the	long-quay	all	his	life.

“Fool	girl!	You	know	you’re	not	to—”	Fear	made	his	voice	harsh	as	he
fell	to	his	knees	and	scooped	Emy	into	his	arms.	He	bit	back	the	anger.	“You
could	have	fallen,	Einmyria!”	A	child	raised	to	the	Undoreth	should	have
more	sense,	even	at	five.	He	held	her	tight	to	his	chest,	still	careful	not	to
crush	her,	his	heart	hammering.	Emy	had	been	a	babe	at	her	mother’s	breast
when	Jarl	Torsteff	led	the	Undoreth	against	Hoddof	of	Iron	Tors.	At	no	point
in	that	battle—not	charging	the	shield	wall,	not	wet	with	Edric	ver	Magson’s
blood,	not	pinned	by	stockade	timber	with	two	men	of	Iron	Tors	approaching
—had	Snorri	known	fear	such	as	that	which	seized	him	seeing	his	own	child
hanging	over	dark	waters.

Snorri	held	Emy	away	from	him.	“What	were	you	doing?”	Soft	now,
almost	beseeching.

Emy	bit	her	lip,	struggling	to	hold	back	the	tears	filling	her	eyes—the
same	cornflower	blue	as	her	mother’s.	“Peggy’s	in	the	water.”

“Peggy?”	Snorri	tried	to	recall	a	child	of	that	name.	He	knew	all	the
children	by	sight,	of	course,	but	.	.	.	it	came	to	him,	a	wash	of	relief	erasing
any	exasperation.	“Your	doll?	You’re	out	here	looking	for	a	peg	doll	you	lost
before	the	snows?”

Emy	nodded,	still	close	to	tears.	“You	find	her!	You	find	her,	Papi.”
“I	don’t—She’s	lost,	Einmyria.”
“You	can	find	her.	You	can.”
“Some	lost	things	can	be	found	again	and	some	can’t.”	He	broke	off	his

explanation,	seeing	in	his	daughter’s	eyes	the	exact	moment	that	a	child	first
understands	there	are	limits	on	what	her	parents	can	do,	rather	than	just	limits
on	what	they	choose	to	do.	He	knelt	before	her	in	a	moment’s	silence,
somewhat	less	than	he	had	been	just	seconds	before,	and	Emy	a	half	step
closer	to	the	woman	she	would	one	day	become.



“Come	on.”	He	stood,	lifting	her.	“Back	to	your	mama.”	And	he	walked
back,	careful	now,	watching	the	planks,	placing	each	foot	with	precision.
Carrying	Emy	up	the	slope,	Snorri	echoed	with	an	old	pain,	the	hurt	of	every
parent	separated	from	their	child,	whether	by	a	sudden	slip	into	deep	and
hungry	water	or	by	slow	steps	along	divergent	paths	bound	for	the	future.

	•	•	•	

They	came	that	night.
Snorri	had	often	said	that	Freja	saved	his	life.	She	took	from	him	the

rage	that	had	forged	his	skill	with	axe	and	spear,	setting	in	its	place	new
passions.	He	said	she	had	given	him	purpose	where	all	he	had	before	was
confusion	that	he	hid,	as	most	young	men	do,	behind	an	illusion	of	action.
Perhaps	she	saved	his	life	again	that	night,	some	dream-murmured	warning
thinning	his	sleep.

What	woke	him,	Snorri	couldn’t	say.	He	lay	in	the	dark	and	the	warmth	of
his	covers,	Freja	close	enough	to	touch	but	not	touching.	For	long	moments
he	heard	only	the	sound	of	her	breathing	and	the	creak	of	ice	re-forming.	He
had	no	concern	over	attack—the	jarls	had	settled	the	worst	of	their	squabbles,
for	the	now.	In	any	case,	only	a	fool	would	risk	a	raid	with	the	season	barely
starting	to	turn.

Snorri	set	a	hand	to	the	smoothness	of	Freja’s	hip.	She	muttered	some
sleepy	rejection.	He	pinched.

“Bear?”	she	asked.	Sometimes	a	white	bear	would	nose	around,	take	a
goat.	The	best	thing	to	do	was	to	let	it.	His	father	advised,	“Never	eat	a	white
bear’s	liver.”	As	a	boy,	Snorri	had	asked	why,	were	they	poisonous?	“Yes,”
his	father	had	said,	“but	the	main	reason	is	that	if	you	try	to,	the	bear	will	be
busy	eating	yours,	and	he	has	bigger	teeth.”

“Maybe.”	Not	a	bear.	Where	his	surety	came	from,	Snorri	didn’t	know.
He	slid	from	the	furs	and	the	cold	gripped	him.	Clad	only	in	skin,	he	took

down	his	axe,	Hel.	His	father	had	given	him	the	weapon,	a	single	broad	blade,
half-moon	cutting	edge.	“This	blade	is	the	start	of	a	journey,”	his	father	had
said.	“It	has	sent	many	men	to	Hel,	and	it	will	send	her	more	souls	before	its
time	is	done.”	With	the	axe	in	his	hand	Snorri	felt	clothed,	the	cold	laying	no
finger	upon	him	for	fear	he	might	hack	it	off.

Someone	stumbled	outside,	close	by	the	hut,	yet	not	so	close	that	it	left	no
room	for	doubt.	“That	you,	Haggerson?	Taking	a	piss	on	the	wrong	ground?”
Sometimes	Haggerson	would	drink	with	Magson	and	Anulf	the	Ship,	then
stumble	off	in	search	of	home—lost	even	though	he	had	but	forty	huts	to
choose	from.

A	soft	but	penetrating	cry	went	up,	almost	the	call	of	a	loon,	but	not	quite,
and	in	any	case	the	birds	were	silent	before	the	ice	left.	Snorri	slipped	the



latch,	set	the	ball	of	his	foot	to	the	timber,	and	kicked	his	door	open	as	hard	as
he	could.	Someone	howled	in	pain	and	staggered	back.	Snorri	barrelled
through,	into	a	moonless	night	pierced	by	lantern	light,	more	lanterns	being
unhooded	by	the	moment.	Snow	lay	thick	on	the	ground.	It	fell	in	fat	and
heavy	flakes:	spring	snow,	not	the	tiny	crystals	of	winter.	Snorri’s	bare	feet
nearly	slid	from	beneath	him,	but	he	kept	his	balance,	swung,	and	sank	his
axe	into	the	spine	of	the	man	still	clutching	his	face	after	kissing	the	door.	A
savage	tug	ripped	the	blade	free	of	the	man’s	lower	back	as	he	collapsed.

“Raid!”	Snorri	bellowed	it.	“To	arms!”
Lower	down	the	slope,	a	fire	struggled	to	keep	burning	on	the	turf	roof	of

a	hut	closer	to	shore.	Dark	shapes	hurried	past	amidst	white	flurries,	caught	in
the	glow	for	a	moment,	then	swallowed	by	the	night	once	more.	Foreigners,
then:	Vikings	might	set	torch	to	thatch	when	raiding	in	warmer	climes,	but
none	of	them	would	waste	time	on	that	in	the	North.

Figures	converged	on	Snorri,	three	rounding	the	hut,	half-running,	one
tripping	over	the	log	stack.	Others	came	up	the	slope.	Smaller,	scrawny
shapes	that	made	no	sense	to	the	eye.	Snorri	rushed	the	closest	trio.	Darkness,
flame,	and	shadow	offered	little	chance	to	pick	out	the	glimmer	of	weapons
and	defend	himself.	Snorri	made	no	attempt	at	it,	relying	instead	on	the	logic
that	says	if	you	kill	your	foe	immediately	you	have	no	need	of	shield	or
armour,	no	need	to	parry	or	to	evade.	He	swung,	double-handed,	arms
extended,	body	turning	with	the	blow.	Hel	sheared	through	the	first	man’s
head,	hit	the	second	in	the	shoulder,	and	buried	deep	enough	to	leave	his	arm
swinging	on	threads.	Snorri	reversed	his	turn,	feeling	but	not	seeing	the	hot
spray	of	blood	across	his	shoulders	as	he	spun.	The	rotation	brought	him	level
with	the	third	man,	rising	with	an	oath	amongst	the	scattered	logs.	Snorri’s
shin	caught	the	man’s	face,	his	momentum	wrenched	Hel	free,	and	he	brought
the	axe	down,	overhead,	as	he	had	so	many	times	before	in	this	very	spot—a
different	axe,	splitting	logs	for	the	fire.	The	result	was	much	the	same.

Something	hissed	past	his	ear.	Cries	and	screams	went	up	across	Eight
Quays	now,	some	terrified,	some	the	terminal	sounds	men	make	when
wounded	beyond	repair.	He	could	hear	Freja	shouting	at	the	children	inside
the	hut,	getting	them	to	stand	behind	her	by	the	stone	hearth.	Something	sharp
struck	him	between	the	shoulders,	not	hard,	but	sharp.	He	turned,	sighting
figures	atop	Hender’s	hut,	straddling	the	roof,	dislodging	the	snow	to	fall	in
miniature	avalanches,	some	kind	of	sticks	in	their	hands	.	.	.	A	dart	struck	him
in	the	shoulder,	no	longer	than	his	finger.	He	pulled	at	it,	running	for	Hender’s
doorway,	where	he	would	be	out	of	sight	from	the	roof.	The	dart	resisted,	its
barbs	hooked	deep	in	his	flesh,	and	yet	there	was	no	pain,	just	a	numbness.
Snorri	ripped	the	thing	free,	careless	of	the	damage.

Hender’s	door	hung	from	one	leather	hinge,	men	in	black	rags	huddled
over	something	at	the	far	end	of	the	main	chamber,	hinted	at	by	the	glow	of	a



dying	fire.	The	place	stank	of	rot,	so	bad	it	made	Snorri’s	eyes	sting,	rotten
meat	and	an	acrid	bog	stench.	Dark	footprints	marked	the	floor	around	a	pool
of	blood	before	the	hearth.

A	roar	from	behind	brought	Snorri	twisting	back	to	the	scene	outside.
Before	Magson’s	hut	Olaaf	Magson	laid	around	him	with	the	broadsword	his
father	won	from	a	Conaught	prince.	His	son,	Alrick,	beside	him	with	a	torch
flaring	in	one	hand	and	a	hand-axe	in	the	other.	Ragged	men	pressed	in	on	all
sides,	weaponless,	their	flesh	sunken,	skins	stained	dark,	hair	in	black	ropes.
They	came	forwards,	even	without	hands,	even	with	Alrick’s	hand-axe	buried
in	the	join	between	neck	and	shoulder.	A	huge	figure	strode	past	the	melee,
wolfskins	trailing	from	his	shoulders,	double-headed	battle-axe	in	one	hand,
small	iron	buckler	in	the	other.	Two	Vikings	kept	at	his	side.

“Broke-Oar.”	Snorri	breathed	the	name,	pressing	back	against	the	log
wall.	Few	men	overtopped	Snorri	and	only	one	was	renegade	and	traitor
enough	for	this	night’s	work.	Though	had	anyone	accused	the	Broke-Oar	of
sailing	with	necromancers	Snorri	would	have	laughed	at	the	notion.	Until
now.

Small	darts	stood	from	Olaaf	Magson’s	neck.	Snorri	saw	them	in	the
torchlight	as	Alrick	went	down,	grappled	by	his	attackers.	Magson	tried	to	lift
his	sword,	arms	trembling,	then	vanished	beneath	his	foes.	Snorri	reached	up
between	his	shoulders	and	pulled	the	dart	there	clear.	He	had	pressed	it	deeper
against	the	wall	and	not	felt	it.	Even	now	a	weakness	ran	through	him.

Dead	men	moved	towards	the	door	of	Snorri’s	hut,	stepping	frozen-footed
through	the	snow.	Between	the	ver	Lutens’	huts	a	hundred	yards	upshore,	the
Broke-Oar	and	a	handful	of	his	men	stood	with	torches	raised.	Around	them
mire-ghouls	found	the	rooftops,	blowpipes	ready.

From	the	shoreline	voices	barked	orders,	their	accents	strange,	clipped
like	those	of	Brettan	men.	The	Drowned	Isles	then,	a	raid	from	the	Drowned
Isles,	guided	in	by	Sven	Broke-Oar.	It	made	no	sense.

The	first	dead	man	set	his	frost-black	hands	upon	Snorri’s	door.	When
Snorri	had	seen	Emy	that	morning	walking	with	a	five-year-old’s	lack	of	guile
along	the	long-quay,	he’d	known	a	terror	like	no	other.	His	child	had	been,	in
that	moment,	out	of	reach,	alone	with	her	danger.	It	hadn’t	been	the	danger
that	unmanned	him	but	his	inability	to	stand	between	it	and	her.

“Thor.	Watch	me.”	Snorri	had	never	had	much	time	for	calling	on	gods.
He	might	raise	a	flagon	to	Odin	on	feast	day,	or	swear	by	Hel	when	they
stitched	his	wounds,	but	in	general	he	saw	them	as	an	ideal,	a	code	to	live	by,
not	an	ear	to	moan	and	complain	into.	Now,	though,	he	prayed.	And	launched
himself	into	the	corpse-crowd	before	his	door.

As	Snorri	broke	cover	he	heard	nothing	above	his	own	battle	roar:	not	the
ghouls’	sharp	exhalations	or	the	hissing	flight	of	their	darts.	Even	the	sting	as
they	punctured	his	shoulder,	arm,	and	neck	he	barely	noticed.	He	took	the



head	from	the	closest	of	the	dead	men,	the	arm	that	reached	for	him,	a	hand,
another	head.	All	the	time	Hel	felt	heavier	in	his	hands,	as	if	the	axe	were
stone.	Even	his	arms	grew	heavy,	muscles	almost	unable	to	bear	the	weight	of
the	bones	they	wrapped.	A	black	fist	struck	him,	frostbitten	knuckles
hammering	his	temples.	Hands	caught	hold	around	his	knees,	some	fallen
opponent	still	unable	to	die	despite	grievous	wounds.	Snorri	started	to	fall,
toppling	to	the	side.	With	the	last	of	his	strength	he	launched	himself	to	break
the	grip	around	his	legs,	rolling	heels	over	head	along	the	icy	margins	of	his
hut.	The	invaders	pressed	on	towards	the	hut’s	door	in	a	tight	huddle,	leaving
only	the	pieces	of	bodies	shorn	by	his	axe	and	a	corpse	near-severed	at	the
spine	but	hauling	itself	towards	him	hand	over	hand.

A	numbness	ran	through	Snorri,	deep	as	any	that	cold	will	put	in	a	man.
He	couldn’t	feel	his	limbs,	though	he	saw	his	arms	before	him	corpse-white
and	smeared	with	the	dark	ichor	that	lay	still	in	the	dead	men’s	veins.	No	part
of	him	would	move,	though	every	fibre	of	his	will	demanded	it.	Only	the
sound	of	door	planks	splintering	shocked	his	traitor	body	into	rising.	An
avalanche	hammered	him	back	to	the	ground.	Something	on	the	roof	of	his
hut—ghouls,	shifting	the	snow	as	they	scampered	into	position—and	in	one
mass	it	fell,	pressing	him	down	with	a	soft	but	implacable	hand.

Snorri	lay	helpless,	the	last	of	his	strength	gone,	his	naked	body	entombed
in	snow,	waiting	for	death,	waiting	for	the	strangling	grip	of	dead	hands	or	the
teeth	of	ghouls	or	the	axe	of	one	of	the	Broke-Oar’s	reavers.	No	matter	what
the	Broke-Oar	was	being	paid,	he	would	want	no	witnesses	to	this	night’s
shame.

A	high	shriek	reached	him,	even	through	his	cocoon	of	snow.	Emy!	Then
Freja’s	screams,	her	battle	cry,	a	mother’s	rage,	the	roar	from	Karl,	his	eldest,
as	he	attacked.	Every	part	of	his	mind	howled	for	motion,	every	ounce	of	his
will	trying	to	force	his	arms	to	reach,	legs	to	pump	.	.	.	but	no	piece	of	him
moved.	All	that	anger	and	desperation,	yet	only	a	sigh	escaped	the	numbness
of	his	lips,	drooling	into	the	blind	white	all	about	him.

	•	•	•	

The	incessant	tapping	had	woken	him.	The	tap-tap-tap	of	rain.	Rain
pouring	off	the	eaves,	washing	away	the	snow,	taking	the	ice	from	his

eyelids	so	he	could	open	them	to	the	day.	He	turned	his	head	and	the	water
ran	from	his	eyes.	The	remains	of	the	snow	heap	lay	around	him,	a	touch
whiter	than	the	marble	of	his	flesh.

Snow	makes	a	soft	bed,	but	no	man	wakes	from	it.	That	was	the	wisdom
of	the	North.	Snorri	had	seen	enough	drunks	frozen	where	they	slept	to	know
the	truth	of	it.	A	groan	escaped	him.	This	was	death.	His	dead	body	would
shamble	after	the	corpse	legions,	his	mind	trapped	within.	He	had	never



thought	that	good	men	might	watch	helpless	from	behind	dead	eyes,	in	thrall
to	necromancers.

Still	the	water	splattered	across	him,	gushing	from	behind	the	fascia
board,	falling	in	a	grey	curtain	all	along	the	roof’s	edge.	It	beat	at	his	ear,	ran
across	his	chest,	almost	warm	though	icicles	fringed	the	eaves,	defying	the
thaw.	He	rolled	clear	across	half-frozen	ground.	The	motion	took	him	by
surprise,	left	him	unsure	whether	he	owned	it	or	not.

The	raid!	As	if	Snorri’s	mind	were	thawing	too,	memory	began	to	leak
behind	his	eyes.	In	a	moment	he	found	his	feet,	rain	starting	to	clean	the	mud
from	his	side.	He	stood,	unsteady,	a	tremble	running	through	him,	the	cold
reaching	him	for	the	first	time.	“Gods	no!”	He	stumbled	forwards,	reaching
for	the	wall	for	support,	though	his	hands	had	no	more	sensation	in	them	than
his	feet.

The	door	lay	flat,	torn	off	its	leather	hinges,	the	interior	beyond	strewn
with	bed	furs,	broken	pots,	scattered	corn.	Snorri	staggered	in,	searching
through	the	furs	with	blunt	fingers,	seized	by	a	shivering	beyond	his	control,
tossing	the	bedding	aside,	dreading	to	find	nothing,	dreading	to	find
something.

In	the	end	he	discovered	only	a	pool	of	blood	on	the	hearthstone,	dark	and
sticky	and	smeared	by	feet.	Against	the	whiteness	of	his	fingers	the	blood
regained	its	crimson	vitality.	Whose	blood?	How	much	spilled?	Nothing	left
of	his	wife,	of	his	children,	but	blood?	At	the	door,	a	clump	of	red	hair	caught
his	attention,	snagged	by	a	crack	in	the	support,	made	to	dance	by	the	wind.
“Egil.”	Snorri	reached	for	his	son’s	hair	with	bloodstained	hands.	Convulsions
overtook	him	and	he	fell	back,	thrashing	and	trembling	amongst	the	hides	of
grey	wolf	and	black	bear.

How	many	hours	it	took	for	the	ghouls’	poison	to	leave	him,	Snorri	could
not	have	said.	The	venom	that	had	preserved	him	in	the	snow,	slowing	his
heart	and	drawing	back	life	into	the	tightest	core,	now	restored	all	sensation
as	it	left	his	system.	It	put	an	edge	on	each	of	the	senses,	heightening	the	pain
of	returning	circulation,	making	a	misery	of	the	cold	despite	being	wrapped
with	many	furs,	even	putting	fresh	barbs	on	a	grief	that	already	seemed
beyond	enduring.	He	raged	and	he	shook	and	by	slow	degrees	both	warmth
and	strength	returned	to	his	limbs.	He	dressed,	tying	laces	with	still-numb
fingers	in	an	ecstasy	of	fumbling,	pulled	his	boots	on,	crammed	the	last	of	the
winter	stores	into	his	travel	pack,	dry	hake	and	black	biscuit,	salt	in	a	wrap	of
sealskin,	fat	in	an	earthenware	jar.	He	took	his	travelling	skins,	seal	in	two
layers,	trapping	the	down	of	the	cliff	gull.	Above	it	he	wore	a	wolfskin,	a	grey
beast	that	like	the	dark	bears	travel	north	with	the	summer	and	retreat	before
the	snows.	It	would	be	enough.	Spring	had	won	her	war,	and	like	the	summer
wolf	Snorri	would	strike	north	and	take	what	he	needed.

“I	will	find	you,”	he	promised	the	empty	room,	promised	the	dent	in	the



bed	where	his	wife	had	slept,	promised	the	roof	above	them,	the	sky	above	it,
the	gods	on	high.

And	ducking	the	lintel,	Snorri	ver	Snagason	left	his	home	to	find	his	axe
amidst	the	thaw.

	•	•	•	

“And	did	you	find	it?”	I	asked,	imagining	his	father’s	axe	lying	there	in
the	melting	snow,	and	Snorri	lifting	it	with	awful	purpose.

“Not	first.”	The	Norseman’s	voice	put	so	much	despair	into	just	two
words	I	couldn’t	ask	him	to	speak	more	and	held	my	peace,	but	a	moment
later	he	spoke	on	unprompted.

“I	found	Emy	first.	Discarded	on	a	midden	heap,	limp	and	ragged,	like	a
lost	doll.”	No	sound	but	for	the	crackle	of	the	fire	beside	us.	I	wanted	him	to
keep	silent,	to	say	nothing	more.	“The	ghouls	had	eaten	most	of	her	face.	She
still	had	eyes,	though.”

“I’m	so	sorry.”	And	I	was.	Snorri’s	magic	had	reached	into	me	again	and
made	me	brave.	In	that	moment	I	wanted	to	be	the	one	to	stand	between	the
child	and	her	attackers.	To	keep	her	safe.	And	failing	that,	to	hunt	them	to	the
ends	of	the	earth.	“Death	must	have	been	a	kindness.”

“She	wasn’t	dead.”	No	emotion	in	his	voice	now.	None.	And	the	night	felt
thick	around	us,	the	dark	deepening	into	blindness,	swallowing	stars.	“I	pulled
two	ghoul-darts	from	her	and	she	started	to	scream.”	He	lay	down	and	the	fire
dimmed	as	if	choked	by	its	own	smoke,	though	it	had	burned	clean	enough
when	set.	“Death	was	kind.”	He	drew	a	sharp	breath.	“But	no	father	should
have	to	give	such	a	kindness	to	his	child.”

I	lay	down	too,	no	care	for	the	hard	ground,	damp	cloak,	empty	stomach.
A	tear	made	its	way	along	the	side	of	my	nose.	Snorri’s	magic	had	left	me.
My	only	desire	lay	south,	back	in	the	comforts	of	the	Red	Queen’s	palace.	An
echo	of	his	misery	rang	in	me	and	confused	itself	with	my	own.	That	tear
might	have	been	for	little	Emy—it	might	have	been	for	me—it	probably	was
for	me,	but	I’ll	tell	myself	it	was	for	both	of	us,	and	perhaps	one	day	I’ll
believe	it.



TWELVE

On	the	morning	after	Snorri’s	tale	of	horror	in	the	North,	we	neither	of	us
spoke	of	it.	He	broke	his	fast	in	a	sombre	mood,	but	by	the	time	it	came

to	ride	on,	his	good	humour	had	returned.	Much	of	the	man	was	a	mystery	to
me,	but	this	I	understood	well	enough.	We	all	practise	self-deception	to	a
degree;	no	man	can	handle	complete	honesty	without	being	cut	at	each	turn.
There’s	not	enough	room	in	a	man’s	head	for	sanity	alongside	each	grief,	each
worry,	each	terror	that	he	owns.	I’m	well	used	to	burying	such	things	in	a	dark
cellar	and	moving	on.	Snorri’s	demons	might	have	escaped	into	a	quiet
moment	the	night	before	while	we	sat	watching	the	stars,	but	now	he’d
harried	them	back	into	some	cellar	of	his	own	and	barred	the	door	once	more.
There’s	tears	enough	in	the	world	to	drown	in,	but	Snorri	and	I	knew	that
action	requires	an	uncluttered	mind.	We	knew	how	to	set	such	things	aside
and	move	on.

Of	course	he	wanted	to	move	on	to	daring	rescue	and	bloody	revenge	in
the	North	whilst	I	wanted	to	move	on	to	sweet	women	and	soft	living	in	the
South.

	•	•	•	

Another	day’s	travel:	damp,	muddy,	grey	skies,	and	a	stiff	wind.	Another
roadside	camp	with	too	little	food	and	too	much	rain.	I	woke	the	next

morning	at	dawn,	disappointed	to	find	myself	beneath	the	same	dripping
hedge	and	wet	cloak	I’d	shivered	myself	to	sleep	under	the	evening	before.
My	dreams	had	been	full	of	strangeness.	At	first	the	usual	horror	of	the
demon	from	the	opera	stalking	us	through	the	rain-dark	night.	Later,	though,
my	nightmare	became	full	of	light	and	it	seemed	a	voice	addressed	me	from	a
great	distance	at	the	heart	of	all	that	brilliance.	I	could	almost	make	out	the
words	.	.	.	and	finally	as	I	opened	my	eyes	to	the	first	grey	hints	of	the	day	it
seemed	I	saw,	through	the	blurry	lash-filled	slit	of	my	eyes,	an	angel,	wings
spread,	outlined	in	a	rosy	glow,	and	at	last	one	word	reached	me.	Baraqel.

	•	•	•	



Three	more	days	riding	through	the	continuous	downpour	that	served	as	a
Rhonish	summer	and	I	was	more	than	ready	to	gallop	back	south	towards

the	myriad	pleasures	of	home.	Only	fear	bound	me	to	our	course.	Fear	of
what	lay	behind	and	fear	of	what	would	happen	if	I	got	too	far	from	Snorri.
Would	the	cracks	run	through	me	from	toe	to	head,	spilling	out	light	and	heat
until	I	crisped?	Also	fear	of	his	pursuit.	He	would	know	the	direction	I	took,
and	though	I	trusted	my	riding	skills	to	keep	me	safely	ahead	in	the	chase	I
had	less	faith	in	the	city	walls,	town	guard,	and	palace	security	to	keep	the
Norseman	out	once	I’d	stopped	running.

Twice	over	the	next	three	days	I	saw	a	figure,	half-imagined	through
miles	of	rain,	on	distant	ridges,	dark	against	the	bright	sky.	Common	sense
said	it	was	a	herder	following	his	flock	or	some	hunter	about	his	business.
Every	nerve	I	owned	told	me	it	was	the	unborn,	escaped	from	the	Sister’s
spell	and	dogging	our	heels.	Both	times	I	urged	my	gelding	into	a	canter	and
kept	Snorri	bouncing	along	behind	me	until	I’d	outrun	the	worst	of	the	cold
terror	the	sight	put	in	me.

With	dwindling	resources	we	ate	mean	fare	in	small	portions,	cooked	by
peasants	I	wouldn’t	trust	to	feed	my	horse.	We	spent	two	more	sleepless
nights	huddled	beneath	lean-to	shelters	of	branches	and	bracken	that	Snorri
constructed	against	the	hedgerows.	He	claimed	it	to	be	all	a	man	needed	for
slumber	and	proceeded	to	snore	all	night.	The	downpour	he	proclaimed	to	be
“fine	damp	weather.”

“North	of	Hardanger	the	children	would	run	naked	in	warm	rains	like
these.	We	don’t	sew	our	bearskins	on	until	the	sea	starts	to	freeze,”	he	said.

I	nearly	hit	him.
I	slept	better	in	the	saddle	than	I	had	in	his	shelter,	but	wherever	sleep

found	me,	dreams	came	too.	Always	the	same	theme—some	inner	darkness,	a
place	of	peace	and	isolation,	violated	by	light.	First	bleeding	through	a
hairline	fracture,	then	brightening	as	the	crack	forks	and	divides,	and	beyond
the	thin	and	breaking	walls	of	my	sanctum,	some	brilliance	too	blinding	to
look	upon	.	.	.	and	a	voice	calling	my	name.

“Jal	.	.	.	Jal?	.	.	.	Jal!”
“Wh-what?”	I	jerked	awake	to	find	myself	cold	and	sodden	in	the	saddle.
“Jal.”	Snorri	nodded	ahead.	“A	town.”

	•	•	•	

The	sixth	night	out	from	Pentacost	saw	us	in	through	the	gates	of	a	small,
walled	town	named	Chamy-Nix.	The	place	sounded	vaguely	promising

but	proved	to	be	a	big	letdown,	just	another	wet	Rhonish	town,	as	dour	and
worthy	as	all	the	rest.	Worse	still,	it	was	one	of	those	damnable	places	where



the	locals	pretend	not	to	speak	the	Empire	Tongue.	They	do,	of	course,	but
they	hide	behind	some	or	other	ancient	language	as	if	taking	pride	in	being	so
primitive.	The	trick	is	to	repeat	yourself	louder	and	louder	until	the	message
gets	through.	That’s	probably	the	one	thing	my	military	training	was	good	for.
I’m	great	at	shouting.	Not	quite	the	boom	that	Snorri	manages,	but	a	definite
blare	that	comes	in	handy	for	dressing	down	unruly	servants,	insubordinate
junior	officers,	and	of	course	as	a	last-ditch	means	of	intimidating	men	who
might	otherwise	put	a	sword	through	me.	Part	of	the	art	of	survival	as	a
coward	is	not	letting	things	get	to	the	point	where	that	cowardice	is	exposed.
If	you	can	bluster	your	way	through	dangerous	situations	it’s	all	to	the	good,
and	a	fine	shouting	voice	helps	immensely.

Snorri	led	us	to	a	dreadful	dive,	a	low-roofed	subterranean	tavern	thick
with	the	stink	of	wet	bodies,	spilled	ale,	and	woodsmoke.

“It’s	a	touch	warmer	and	slightly	less	damp	than	outside,	I’ll	grant	you.”	I
elbowed	my	way	through	the	crowd	at	the	bar.	Local	men,	dark-haired,
swarthy,	variously	missing	teeth	or	sporting	knife	scars,	packed	around	small
tables	towards	the	back	in	a	haze	of	pipe	smoke.

“At	least	the	ale	will	be	cheap.”	Snorri	slapped	what	might	be	our	only
copper	on	the	beer-puddled	counter.

“Qu’est-ce	que	vous	voulez	boire?”	the	barkeep	asked,	still	wiping
someone’s	spit	from	the	tankard	he	intended	to	serve	in.

“Kesquer-what?”	I	leaned	in	over	the	counter,	natural	caution	erased	by
six	days	of	rain	and	the	foul	mood	that	torrent	had	exposed.	“Two	ales.	The
best	you	have!”

The	man	favoured	me	with	the	blankest	of	stares.	I	drew	breath	to	repeat
myself	rather	more	loudly.

“Deux	biéres	s’il	vous	plaît	et	que	vous	vendez	repas?”	Snorri	answered,
sliding	his	coin	forwards.

“What	the	hell?”	I	blinked	at	him,	talking	over	the	barkeep’s	reply.	“How
—I	mean—”

“I	wasn’t	raised	speaking	the	Tongue,	you	know?”	Snorri	shook	his	head
as	if	I	were	an	idiot	and	took	the	first	full	tankard.	“When	you’ve	had	to	learn
one	new	language	you	develop	an	interest	in	others.”

I	took	the	tankard	from	him	and	eyed	the	beer	with	suspicion.	It	looked
foreign.	The	floating	suds	made	an	island	that	put	me	in	mind	of	some	alien
place	where	they’d	never	heard	of	Red	March	and	cut	princes	no	slack.	That
put	a	bad	taste	in	my	mouth	before	I’d	even	sipped	it.

“We	of	the	North	are	great	traders,	you	know?”	Snorri	continued,	though
what	sign	I’d	given	that	I	might	be	interested	I	could	not	imagine.	“Far	more
comes	in	through	our	ports	on	Norse	cargo	ships	than	in	the	holds	of
longboats	returning	from	raids.	Many	a	Norseman	knows	three,	four,	even
five	languages.	Why,	I	myself—”



I	turned	away	and	took	my	foul-tasting	beer	off	towards	the	tables,
leaving	Snorri	to	negotiate	the	food	in	whatever	mangled	tongue	was
required.

Finding	a	space	proved	problematic.	The	first	burly	peasant	I	approached
refused	to	move	despite	my	obvious	station,	instead	hunkering	over	his	huge
bowl	of	what	looked	to	be	shit	soup,	but	smelled	infinitely	worse,	and
ignoring	me.	He	muttered	something	like	“murdtet”	as	I	moved	off.	The	rest
of	the	ill-mannered	louts	kept	to	their	seats,	and	in	the	end	I	had	to	squeeze
into	place	beside	a	nearly	spherical	woman	drinking	gin	from	a	clay	cup.	The
soup	man	then	proceeded	to	give	me	the	evil	eye	whilst	toying	with	his
wicked-looking	knife—an	implement	generally	not	required	for	the
consumption	of	soup—until	Snorri	came	up	with	his	beer	and	two	plates	of
steaming	offal.

“Budge	up,”	he	ordered,	and	the	whole	row	of	locals	edged	along,	my
neighbour	wobbling	like	gelatine	as	she	undulated	to	the	left,	leaving
sufficient	room	for	the	new	addition.

I	eyed	the	plate	before	me.	“This	is	what	any	decent	butcher	removes
from	the	.	.	.	what	I’ll	generously	assume	was	a	cow	.	.	.	before	sending	it	to
the	kitchens.”

Snorri	started	tucking	in.	“And	what	you	leave	will	make	a	meal	for
someone	who’s	really	hungry.	Eat	up,	Jal.”

Jal	again!	I	would	have	to	sort	that	out	with	him	sometime	soon.
Snorri	cleared	his	plate	in	about	the	same	time	it	took	me	to	decide	which

bit	of	mine	looked	least	dangerous.	He	took	a	stale	hunk	of	bread	from	his
pocket	and	started	scraping	up	the	gravy.	“That	fellow	with	the	knife	looks
like	he	wants	to	stick	it	into	you,	Jal.”

“What	can	you	expect	from	this	kind	of	establishment?”	I	tried	for	a
manly	growl.	“You	get	what	you	pay	for,	and	soon	we	won’t	be	able	to	pay
for	even	this.”

Snorri	shrugged.	“Your	choice.	If	you	want	luxury,	sell	your	locket.”
I	restrained	myself	from	laughing	at	the	barbarian’s	ignorance—all	the

more	puzzling,	as	you	would	think	a	man	accustomed	to	the	business	of	loot
and	pillage	would	have	a	better	eye	when	it	came	to	appraising	which
valuables	to	carry	off.	“What	is	it	with	you	and	my	locket?”

“You’re	a	brave	man,	Jal,”	Snorri	said,	apropos	of	nothing.	He	poked	the
last	of	the	bread	between	his	lips	and	started	chewing,	cheeks	bulging.

I	frowned,	trying	to	figure	out	why	he’d	said	that—was	it	some	kind	of
threat?	I	also	tried	to	figure	out	what	the	thing	dangling	from	the	end	of	my
knife	was.	I	put	it	in	my	mouth.	Best	not	to	know.

Finally	Snorri	managed	to	swallow	down	his	huge	mouthful	and
explained.	“You	let	Maeres	Allus	break	your	finger	rather	than	pay	your
debts.	And	yet	you	could	have	paid	the	man	off	at	any	time	with	that	trinket



of	yours.	You	chose	not	to.	You	chose	to	keep	and	honour	the	memory	of	your
mother	over	your	own	safety.	That’s	loyalty	to	family.	That’s	honour.”

“That’s	nonsense!”	Anger	got	the	better	of	me.	It	had	been	a	rotten	day.	A
rotten	week.	The	worst	ever.	I	whipped	the	locket	from	its	hiding	place	in	a
small	pocket	under	my	arm.	Better	judgment	warned	me	against	it.	Worse
judgment	warned	me	too,	but	Snorri	had	worn	both	away.	Snorri	and	the	rain.
“This,”	I	said,	“is	a	simple	piece	of	silver	and	I’ve	never	been	brave	in	my—”

Snorri	tapped	it	out	of	my	hand	and	it	went	sailing	in	a	bright	and
glittering	arc	that	set	it	splashing	down	in	the	soup	man’s	dish,	splattering	him
with	a	generous	helping	of	brown	muck.	“If	it’s	not	worth	anything	and
you’re	not	brave,	then	you	won’t	be	going	over	there	to	get	it	back.”

To	my	astonishment	I	found	myself	most	of	the	way	across	the
intervening	space	before	Snorri	had	got	past	his	third	word.	Soup	man	rose,
bawling	out	some	threat	in	his	gibberish:	“murdtet”	featured	again.	His	knife
looked	even	more	unpleasant	up	close,	and	in	a	desperate	attempt	to	stop	him
sticking	it	into	me	I	caught	hold	of	his	wrist	whilst	punching	him	in	the	throat
as	hard	as	I	could.	Sadly	his	chin	got	in	the	way,	but	I	knocked	him	back	and
as	a	bonus	the	wall	smacked	him	round	the	back	of	the	head.

We	stood	there,	me	frozen	in	fear,	him	spitting	out	blood	and	soup
through	the	gaps	left	by	missing	teeth.	I	clung	onto	his	wrist	for	dear	life
before	realizing	that	he	wasn’t	making	any	effort	to	stab	me.	At	that	point	I
noticed	that	my	dinner	knife	was	still	clenched	in	the	fist	I	had	wedged	under
his	chin.	A	fact	that	he	had	already	registered.	I	stared	expectantly	at	his	knife
hand	and	he	obliged	by	opening	it	to	let	his	blade	fall.	I	released	his	wrist	and
snagged	the	chain	of	my	locket	from	the	edge	of	his	bowl,	bringing	the	trinket
dripping	from	the	soup.

“If	you	have	a	problem,	peasant,	bring	it	up	with	the	man	who	threw	it.”
My	voice	and	hand	shook	with	what	I	hoped	would	be	considered	suppressed
manly	rage	but	was	in	fact	cold	terror.	I	nodded	towards	Snorri.

Having	kicked	the	man’s	knife	under	the	table,	I	withdrew	my	own	from
beneath	his	chin	and	returned	to	sit	by	the	Norseman,	making	sure	my	back
was	to	the	wall.

“You	bastard,”	I	said.
Snorri	tilted	his	head.	“Seems	that	a	man	who	would	come	back	with	my

sword	against	an	unborn	wasn’t	going	to	be	scared	of	a	mill	worker	with	an
eating	knife.	Even	so,	if	it	were	worthless	you	might	have	paused	for	thought
before	going	to	reclaim	it.”

I	wiped	at	the	casing	with	what	had	left	the	city	of	Vermillion	as	a
handkerchief	and	was	now	little	more	than	a	grey	rag.	“It’s	my	mother’s
picture,	you	ignorant—”	The	soup	smeared	away	to	reveal	the	jewel-set
platinum	beneath.	“Oh.”	I’ll	admit	that	seen	through	a	coating	of	muck	and
the	misting	in	my	eyes	it	was	hard	to	judge	the	thing’s	value,	but	Snorri	had



not	been	far	off.	I	remembered	now	the	day	that	Great-Uncle	Garyus	set	the
locket	in	my	hand.	It	had	glittered	then,	catching	the	light	within	cut
diamonds	and	returning	it	in	sparkles.	The	platinum	had	glowed	with	that
silver	fire	that	makes	men	treasure	it	above	gold.	I	remembered	it	now	as	I
hadn’t	for	many	years.	I’m	a	good	liar.	A	great	one.	And	to	be	a	great	liar	you
have	to	live	your	lies,	to	believe	them,	to	the	point	that	when	you	tell	them	to
yourself	enough	times,	even	what’s	right	before	your	eyes	will	bend	itself	to
the	falsehood.	Every	day,	year	on	year,	I	took	that	locket	and	turned	it	in	my
hand	and	saw	only	cheap	silver	and	paste.	Each	time	my	debts	grew,	I	told
myself	the	locket	was	worth	a	little	less.	I	told	myself	it	wasn’t	worth	selling,
and	I	offered	myself	that	lie	because	I	had	promised	old	Garyus,	up	there	on
his	bed	in	that	lonely	tower,	crippled	and	twisted	as	he	was,	that	I	would	keep
it	safe.	And	because	it	held	my	mother’s	picture	and	I	didn’t	want	a	reason	to
sell	it.	Day	by	day,	by	imperceptible	degrees,	the	lie	became	real,	the	truth	so
forgotten,	so	walled	away,	that	I	sat	there	and	denied	Maeres	Allus—the	lie
became	so	real	that	not	even	when	the	bastard	had	his	man	break	my	finger
did	any	whisper	of	the	truth	reach	me	and	allow	me	to	betray	that	trust	to	save
my	hide.

“Ignorant	what?”	asked	Snorri	without	rancour.
“Huh?”	I	looked	up	from	cleaning	the	locket.	One	of	the	diamonds	had

come	loose,	perhaps	from	hitting	the	bowl.	It	came	free	in	my	fingers	and	I
held	it	up.	“Let’s	get	some	real	food.”	Mother	wouldn’t	begrudge	me.	And	so
it	began.

Already	the	gleam	of	the	thing	was	attracting	attention.	A	man	watched
intently	from	the	bar,	a	man	with	short	iron-grey	hair	save	for	a	peculiar	broad
strip,	darker	than	a	raven’s	wing,	across	the	top,	as	though	the	years	had
missed	that	part.	I	hid	the	locket	away	sharpish	and	he	smiled,	but	kept	on
looking	as	if	I’d	been	the	object	of	his	interest	all	along.	For	a	moment	I	felt	a
shudder	of	recognition,	though	I’d	swear	I	never	met	the	man.	The	déjà	vu
passed	as	my	fingers	left	the	locket,	and	I	busied	myself	with	my	ale.

	•	•	•	

Snorri	spent	the	last	of	his	money	on	a	bigger	bowl	of	slop,	more	ale,	and	a
few	square	yards	of	space	on	the	floor	of	the	tavern’s	communal	sleeping

hall.	The	hall	seemed	to	serve	as	a	method	to	prevent	loss	of	drunks	who
might	otherwise	wander	off	in	search	of	a	spot	to	sleep	and	wake	closer	to
some	competing	tavern.	By	the	time	we	were	ready	to	retire,	the	remaining
locals	were	busy	roaring	out	songs	in	Old	Rhonish.

“Alley	wetter,	Jonty’s	alley’s	wetter!”	boomed	Snorri,	rising	from	his	seat.
“A	fine	singing	voice	you	have,	to	be	sure.”	This	from	a	man	close	by,

nursing	a	pewter	cup	that	brimmed	with	dark	liquor.	I	looked	up	to	find	it	was



the	fellow	with	the	blue-black	strip	amidst	his	greying	hair.	“Edris	Dean	I	am.
Traveller	myself.	Will	you	be	heading	north	in	the	morning?”	He	stepped
from	the	bar	and	leaned	in	to	be	heard	above	the	song.

“South,”	Snorri	said,	the	humour	gone	from	him.
“South.	Do	you	say	so?”	Edris	nodded	and	sipped	his	drink.	He	had	a

hard	look	about	him	under	the	smile.	A	smile	that	not	only	reached	his	eyes
but	filled	them	with	good	humour—which	is	a	difficult	trick	to	pull	if	you
don’t	mean	it.	Even	so,	something	in	the	thin-seamed	scars	along	his	arms,
pale	through	the	dirt,	made	me	nervous.	That	and	the	quick	but	solid	build	of
the	body	wrapped	by	the	worn	leather	jerkin,	and	the	knives	at	each	hip—and
not	the	kind	for	eating,	more	the	kind	for	opening	a	bear	from	gut	to	growl.
He	had	a	thick	ridge	of	scar	on	his	cheek	too,	an	old	one,	running	along	the
bone.	That	one	drew	my	eye	and	made	me	hate	him,	though	I	couldn’t	say
why.

Edris	smacked	his	lips	and	called	across	to	two	men	he’d	been	with	at	the
bar.	“South,	he	says!”

Both	men	joined	us.	“My	associates.	Darab	Voir	and	Meegan.”	Darab
looked	to	have	a	touch	of	Afrique	in	his	mix,	swarthy	and	a	bruiser,
overtopping	me	by	an	inch	or	so,	with	the	blackest	eyes	and	ritual	scar
patterns	on	his	neck	vanishing	down	into	his	tunic.	Meegan	scared	me	the
most,	though,	smallest	of	the	three	but	with	long	ropey	arms	and	pale	staring
eyes	that	put	me	in	mind	of	Cutter	John.	Beneath	a	pretence	of	casual	interest,
all	of	them	studied	me	with	an	intensity	that	set	my	teeth	on	edge.	They
marked	Snorri	too,	and	I	found	myself	wishing	he	hadn’t	stowed	his	axe	with
the	horses.

“Stay.	Have	another	ale.	This	lot	are	only	getting	warmed	up.”	Edris
waved	at	the	tables,	where	the	singing	had	reached	a	whole	new	level.

“No.”	Snorri	didn’t	smile.	Snorri	had	smiled	at	the	bear;	now	he	looked
grim.	“We’ll	sleep	well	enough,	song	or	no	song.”	And	with	that	turned	his
broad	back	on	the	trio	and	walked	off.	I	managed	an	apologetic	grin,	spread
my	hands,	and	backed	away	after	him,	instinct	not	allowing	me	to	present	the
space	between	my	shoulder	blades	to	them.

In	the	gloom	of	the	next	hall	it	was	easy	enough	to	find	Snorri—he	made
the	largest	lump.

“What	was	that	about?”	I	hissed	at	him.
“Trouble,”	he	said.	“Mercenaries.	They’ve	been	watching	us	half	the

night.”
“Is	this	about	the	locket?”	I	asked.
“I	hope	so.”
He	was	right;	any	alternatives	I	could	imagine	were	worse	than	robbery.

“Why	would	they	tip	their	hand?	Why	be	so	obvious?”	It	made	no	sense	to
me.



“Because	they	don’t	mean	to	act	now.	They	might	hope	to	spook	us	into
unprepared	action,	but	failing	that	it’s	just	to	give	us	a	night	or	two	without
sleep—to	wear	at	our	nerves.”

I	settled	down	close	by,	kicking	aside	the	outstretched	arm	of	a	rather
pungent	human-shaped	lump	and	the	legs	of	another.	Tomorrow	I’d	sell	that
diamond	and	put	an	end	to	this	nightly	misery	of	choosing	between	stench
and	lice,	or	cold	and	rain.	I	made	a	pillow	of	my	cloak	and	set	my	head	on	it.
“Well,”	I	said.	“If	they	meant	to	spook	us,	it’s	working.”	I	kept	my	eyes	on	the
arch	into	the	barroom	and	the	shapes	in	silhouette	that	passed	back	and	forth.
“Damned	if	I’m	sleeping.	I	wo—”

A	familiar	rumbling	snore	cut	across	me.
“Snorri?	Snorri?”



THIRTEEN
Never	having	been	troubled	by	a	conscience	before,	I	was	far	from	sure	what	to
expect	of	one,	and	so	when	for	a	minute	or	two	each	day	at	dawn	a	voice	began	to
whisper	to	me	to	be	a	better	man,	I	decided	the	shock	of	recent	events	had	finally
woken	mine.	My	conscience	had	a	name—Baraqel.	I	didn’t	like	him	much.

From	the	moment	I	jerked	into	the	waking	world	that	morning,	suddenly
terrified	that	I’d	fallen	asleep	with	Edris	and	his	murderers	waiting	close

by,	to	the	moment	we	left	town	under	a	brightening	sky,	I	had	been	looking
over	my	shoulder.

“You	won’t	miss	them,”	Snorri	said.
“No?”	There	was	no	part	of	Rhone	I	would	miss.	Though	perhaps	now

with	my	purse	fat	and	jingling	once	more,	the	nation	might	open	her	arms	to
me	and	deign	to	show	a	visiting	prince	a	good	time.

“There’ll	be	too	many	to	hide.”	Snorri’s	voice	wobbled	with	the	gait	of
his	steed,	jolting	up	and	down	when	the	mare	picked	up	the	pace.

“How	do	you	know	that?”	Annoyance	coloured	my	question.	I	didn’t	like
the	open	reminder	of	our	troubles.	With	Snorri	troubles	were	always	put	front
and	centre	and	dealt	with.	My	style	was	more	to	shove	them	under	the	rug
until	the	floor	got	too	uneven	to	navigate,	and	then	to	move	house.

“He	was	too	confident,	that	Edris.	There’ll	be	a	dozen	of	them	at	least.”
“Shit.”	A	dozen!	I	squeezed	my	nag	along	that	little	bit	faster.	I’d	named

the	gelding	Ron,	after	the	Amazing	Ronaldo	whose	ill-advised	bet	with	Snorri
had	financed	the	early	part	of	our	trip.

We	rattled	along	up	the	valley	at	a	decent	pace,	fast	enough	to	startle	the
sheep	in	successive	fields	into	waves	of	woolly	panic.	It	had	to	be	said	that,	as
uninspiring	as	Chamy-Nix	was,	the	surroundings	viewed	with	the	morning
coming	up	red	and	rosy	behind	them	were	quite	stunning.	Rhone	gets	hilly	as
you	work	your	way	north.	Hills	become	mountains,	mountains	become	peaks,
and	from	Chamy-Nix	you	can	see	the	white	heights	of	the	Aups,	mountains	so
tall	and	so	legion	that	they	divide	the	empire	more	surely	than	a	blade.	In
many	senses	the	empire	had	always	been	broken	and	the	Aups	were	the	sword
that	divided	it.

An	hour	later,	gaining	height	and	with	our	path	back	to	Chamy-Nix	laid



out	behind	us,	I	spotted	the	pursuit.	“Hell,	that	looks	like	a	lot	more	than	a
dozen!”	And	a	dozen	was	a	lot	more	than	we	could	handle.	In	fact,	if	it	had
been	only	Edris,	Darab,	and	Meegan,	that	would	have	been	too	many.	My
stomach	folded	around	itself	in	a	cold	knot.	I	remembered	the	Aral	Pass.
There’s	no	way	any	sensible	person	could	view	the	prospect	of	someone	else
attempting	to	open	them	with	a	sharp	edge	as	anything	but	terrifying.	I	found
myself	eyeing	up	the	larger	rocks	in	the	hope	I	might	hide	beneath	one	of
them.

“Twenty.	Near	enough.”	Snorri	looked	back	up	the	track	and	nudged
Sleipnir	on.	He’d	told	me	the	original	bearer	of	the	name	in	his	heathen	tales
had	sported	eight	legs.	It’s	possible	that	on	such	an	overendowed	beast	even
Snorri	stood	a	chance	of	outpacing	the	band	on	our	trail.	On	any	regular
mount,	though,	it	was	never	going	to	happen.

“Maybe	if	we	just	left	the	locket	here	.	.	.”	It	took	about	three	seconds	for
my	resolve	to	fail.	I	could	abandon	Snorri	and	set	Edris’s	band	a	stiffer	test.
By	rights	I	would	win	clear,	but	Ron	was	far	from	the	best	of	horses	and	in
such	mountainous	terrain	it’s	easy	to	lame	an	animal	if	you	push	too	hard.
That	would	leave	me	meeting	the	band	alone—if,	of	course,	I	managed	to
survive	Snorri’s	death	given	the	magics	binding	us.	Abandoning	the	locket	to
them	seemed	the	easiest	of	paths.

Snorri	just	laughed	as	if	I’d	made	a	joke.	“We	should	keep	one	of	them
alive,”	he	said.	“I	want	to	know	who	set	them	on	us.”

“Oh,	right.”	A	madman,	I	was	riding	with	a	madman.	“I’ll	try	to	keep	a
small	one	for	later.”	Snorri,	it	seemed,	was	as	capable	of	deluding	himself
about	upcoming	battles	as	I	was	about	the	value	of	my	locket.	Perhaps	that
was	all	bravery	was—a	form	of	delusion.	It	certainly	made	it	much	easier	to
understand	if	that	were	the	case.

“We	need	a	good	place	to	make	a	stand.”	Snorri	cast	about	as	if	this	might
be	such	a	place.	I	could	have	told	him	with	some	confidence	that	no	such
place	existed,	anywhere.	Instead	I	tried	a	different	tactic.

“We	need	to	get	higher	up.”	I	pointed	to	the	barren	slopes	above	us	where
the	mean	grass	lost	its	footing	and	bare	rock	cut	a	path	towards	the	heavens.
“We’ll	have	to	abandon	our	horses,	but	so	will	they,	and	then	the	fact	you
can’t	ride	for	shit	won’t	matter	any	more.”	And	if	I	had	my	way	we’d	lose
Edris’s	party	amongst	the	confusion	of	ridge	and	gorge,	then	win	free	to	buy
better	horses	somewhere	else.

Snorri	rubbed	his	short	beard,	pursed	his	lips,	looked	back	at	the	distant
band,	and	nodded.	“Better	if	everyone	is	on	two	feet.”

I	led	the	way,	urging	Ron	off	the	track	and	up	towards	the	ridges
impossibly	far	above	us.	Beyond	those	ridges	peaks	rose,	white	with	snow
and	brilliant	in	the	sunshine.	A	fresh	breeze	followed	us	up	the	side	of	the
valley,	offering	a	helpful	push,	and	for	a	while	I	felt	hope	sinking	its	cruel



hooks	into	me.
Tough	mountain	grass	gave	way	to	boulder	fields	and	scree;	Sleipnir’s

hooves	skittered	out	from	under	her	and	she	fell,	legs	flailing,	looking	for	a
moment	as	if	she	might	actually	have	eight	of	them.	Snorri	grunted	as	he	hit
the	ground,	pulling	clear	while	Sleipnir	struggled	to	right	herself.

“That	hurt.”	He	brushed	his	thigh	where	the	horse’s	weight	had	pressed,
then	used	his	fingers	to	pry	loose	the	small	stones	bedded	into	his	flesh.	“I’ll
walk	from	here.”

I	stayed	in	the	saddle	for	another	five	or	ten	minutes,	while	Snorri
hobbled	along	without	complaint.	At	last,	though,	even	with	my	expert
guidance,	the	going	became	too	steep	for	Ron.	Rather	than	wait	for	the
inevitable	tumble,	which	would	probably	see	us	both	rolling	down	the	slopes
to	where	Snorri	had	had	his	own	fall,	I	dismounted.

“Off	you	go,	Ronaldo.”	The	climb	ahead	of	us	would	test	a	mountain
goat.	I	gave	his	flank	a	sound	slap	and	moved	on,	burdened	once	more
beneath	my	few	possessions.	The	sword	that	Snorri	had	given	me	was	the
heaviest	of	my	loads	and	kept	trying	to	trip	me.	I	held	on	to	it	mainly	to
please	the	Norseman,	though	my	ultimate	plan	was	to	throw	it	away	and	beg
for	mercy	if	cornered.

The	wind	became	less	friendly	as	we	gained	height,	colder	and	capricious,
seeming	to	press	us	to	the	rocks	one	moment,	then	in	the	next	try	to	yank	us
clear	so	that	we	might	tumble	back	the	way	we’d	come.	I	paused	frequently	to
check	the	progress	of	our	pursuit.	They	had	ridden	harder	than	us	and
abandoned	their	horses	later.	A	bad	sign.	These	were	driven	men.	Ahead	of
me,	Snorri	crested	the	ridge	we’d	been	aiming	for	during	the	long	climb.	He
still	hobbled,	but	his	injury	seemed	no	worse	than	it	had	been	at	the	start.

“Crap.”	The	Aral	Pass	ran	between	two	huge	mountains	in	the	Auger
range	on	the	Scorron	borderlands.	I	had	always	felt	that	mountains	could
come	no	larger—the	rocks	at	the	bottom	would	surely	be	unable	to	support
the	weight.	I	had	been	wrong.	The	Aups	above	Chamy-Nix	deceive	the	eye.
It’s	not	until	you	get	amongst	them	that	you	understand	just	how	ridiculously
big	they	are.	A	whole	city	would	be	little	more	than	a	stain	on	the	flanks	of
the	tallest.	Beyond	the	ridge	we	now	clung	to,	defying	a	murderous	wind,	rose
a	second	ridge	and	a	third	and	a	fourth,	each	separated	by	deep-cut	gorges,	the
slopes	between	variously	lethal	with	scree	or	unclimbably	steep.	And	all	the
ways	open	to	us	lay	divided	by	smaller	gorges	and	littered	with	boulders	the
size	of	buildings,	each	poised	to	fall.

Snorri	set	off	down,	grunting	once	as	his	foot	tried	to	slip	out	from	under
him.	I	knew	if	he	started	to	slow	me	I	would	leave	him	behind.	I	wouldn’t
want	to,	and	I	would	dislike	myself	for	doing	so,	but	nothing	would	compel
me	to	stand	against	twenty	mercenaries.	It	sounded	better	like	that.	More
reasonable.	Twenty	mercenaries.	The	truth	was	that	nothing	would	compel	me



to	stand	against	one	mercenary,	but	twenty	sounded	like	a	better	excuse	to
leave	a	friend	in	the	lurch.	A	friend?	I	pondered	that	one	on	the	way	down.	An
acquaintance	sounded	better.

By	the	time	we	needed	to	start	heading	up	again,	there	were	few	parts	of
me	that	didn’t	hurt.	I’ve	developed	a	good	degree	of	resilience	when	it	comes
to	riding.	Walking,	not	so	much.	Climbing,	none	at	all.	“W-wait	a	minute,”	I
panted,	trying	to	snatch	a	breath	from	the	wind—less	fierce	in	the	valley	but
still	insistent.	The	air	seemed	thinner,	unwilling	to	replenish	my	lungs.	Snorri
didn’t	appear	to	notice,	his	breathing	scarcely	harder	now	than	when	we
started	the	climb.

“Come.”	He	said	it	with	a	grin,	though	he	had	grown	more	sombre	as	we
went	on.	“It’s	good	to	make	a	stand	in	a	high	place.	Good	for	the	battle.	Good
for	the	soul.	We’ll	make	an	end	of	this.”	He	looked	back	at	the	ridge	we
descended	from.	“I	had	dark	dreams	last	night.	Of	late	all	my	dreaming	has
been	dark.	But	there’s	nothing	of	darkness	in	warriors	met	for	battle	on	a
mountainside	beneath	a	wide	sky.	That,	my	friend,	is	the	stuff	of	legend.
Valhalla	awaits!”	He	thumped	my	shoulder	and	turned	to	the	climb.	“My
children	will	forgive	their	father	if	he	dies	fighting	to	be	with	them.”

Rubbing	at	my	shoulder	and	at	the	stitch	in	my	side,	I	followed.	His
“warriors	met	beneath	a	wide	sky”	nonsense	was	full	of	darkness	as	far	as	I
was	concerned,	but	as	long	as	we	were	still	doing	our	best	not	to	meet	the
mercenaries	anywhere	at	all,	then	we	were	in	accord.

We	had	to	scramble	in	places,	leaning	so	far	forwards	we	practically
kissed	the	mountain,	reaching	for	crevices	in	the	folded	bedrock	to	haul
ourselves	up.	My	breath	came	ragged,	the	cold	air	filling	my	lungs	like
knives.	I	watched	Snorri	path-finding,	sure,	measured,	no	fatigue,	but
favouring	his	uninjured	leg.	He	had	spoken	of	his	dreams,	but	he	didn’t	have
to.	I’d	slept	alongside	him,	heard	his	muttering,	as	if	he	argued	the	night	away
with	some	visitor	and	when	he	woke	that	morning	on	the	tavern	floor	his
eyes,	usually	a	Nordic	blue,	sky	pale,	were	black	as	coals.	By	the	time	he	rose
to	break	fast,	no	trace	of	the	change	remained	and	I	could	pretend	it	a	trick	of
shadows	in	a	hall	lit	only	by	borrowed	light.	But	I	had	not	imagined	it.

I	sighted	the	first	of	the	pursuit	cresting	the	ridge	behind	us	while	we
closed	the	last	hundred	yards	to	the	ridge	above	us.	Losing	sight	of	them	as
we	descended	the	next	gorge	gave	me	some	comfort.	Troubles	are
troublesome	enough	without	having	to	look	at	them	all	the	time.	I	hoped
they’d	find	the	going	as	tough	as	I	had	and	that	at	least	a	few	of	the	bastards
would	take	the	last	tumble	of	their	lives.

The	shadows	started	to	reach,	striating	the	slopes.	My	body	told	me	we’d
been	climbing	for	a	month	at	the	least,	but	my	mind	was	surprised	to	discover
the	day	almost	over.	Night	would	at	least	offer	a	chance	to	stop—to	snatch
some	rest.	Nobody	could	navigate	slopes	like	these	in	the	dark.



Mountains	are	pretty	at	a	distance,	but	my	advice	is	to	never	let	them	get
to	be	more	than	scenery.	If	you	have	to	crane	your	neck	to	look	at	something,
you’re	too	close.	By	the	time	we	were	approaching	the	top	of	the	third	ridge	I
was	practically	crawling.	Any	disloyal	thoughts	about	abandoning	Snorri	with
his	injured	leg	were	cast	aside	far	below	us.	I	had	promoted	him	to	best	friend
and	to	man	most	likely	to	carry	me.	In	places	it	wasn’t	the	steepness	that	had
me	crawling	but	sheer	exhaustion,	my	raw	lungs	unable	to	draw	sufficient
breath	to	work	my	limbs.	We	threaded	our	way	along	a	series	of	broad	ledges
littered	with	boulders	from	man-size	to	ones	that	dwarfed	elephants,	hunting
along	each	ledge	for	climbable	access	to	the	next.

“Come.	It’s	easy.”	Snorri	looked	down	at	me	from	the	level	above,
holding	out	a	hand.	I’d	come	to	a	halt	about	two-thirds	of	the	way	up,	caught
on	a	steep	field	of	loose,	frost-shattered	stone	resting	on	solid	rock	beneath.	I
took	a	step	towards	him,	reaching	for	the	offered	hand.

“F—”	I	started	to	say	“Fuck”	but	as	my	boot	continued	to	slide	the	word
drew	out	into	a	wail	that	turned	into	a	scream	and	ended	with	an	“Ooffff!”	and
me	on	my	arse.

“Try	again.”	Snorri.	Ever	helpful.
“I	can’t.”	I	said	it	through	gritted	teeth.	My	ankle	had	filled	with	a	hot,

liquid	pain.	I’d	felt	the	joint	flex	past	the	angle	any	ankle	should	make.	There
might	have	been	a	snapping	under	my	scream,	or	perhaps	just	a	tearing,	but
either	way	the	idea	of	putting	weight	on	it	was	not	one	I	could	entertain.

“Get	up!”	Snorri	roared	it	at	me	as	if	I	were	a	common	soldier	on	parade.
He	would	have	made	a	good	drill	sergeant	because	I	was	on	my	feet	before
better	judgment	could	stop	me.	I	toppled	forwards	and	collapsed	screaming,
hiking	my	breath	in	to	vent	in	successively	louder	outbursts.

When	I	fell	silent	I	could	hear	a	slithering	of	stones,	and	a	second	later
Snorri	loomed	above	me,	blocking	out	the	day.

“I	don’t	abandon	comrades,”	he	said.	“Come	on,	I’ll	help	you.”
Now,	I’m	not	a	man	who	takes	his	pleasure	in	other	men,	but	in	that

moment	Snorri’s	overmuscled	and	sweaty	embrace	was	a	thousand	times
more	welcome	than	any	I	might	get	from	Cherri	or	Lisa.	He	hefted	me	over
one	shoulder	and	started	walking.	The	proximity	caused	that	strange	crackling
energy	to	begin	building	between	us,	but	I	was	prepared	to	risk	it	being	less
fatal	than	Edris	and	his	murderers.

“Thank	you,”	I	burbled,	half-delirious	with	the	pain.	“I	knew	you
wouldn’t	leave	me.	I	knew—”	Snorri	stopped	and	set	me	with	my	back	to	a
boulder,	propped	up	on	one	foot.	“What?”

“It’s	fine.”	Snorri	cast	about,	studying	the	layout	of	the	boulders,	the
width	of	the	ledge.	“This	will	do,	here.	I’m	not	leaving.”

“I	want	you	to	leave!”	I	hissed	the	words	past	gritted	teeth.	“Keep	going,
you	big	lummox.”	Just	take	me	with	you!	I	kept	that	last	part	behind	my	teeth.



Not	because	Snorri	might	think	badly	of	me,	but	just	because	I	didn’t	think	it
would	change	his	mind.	Of	course,	if	he	actually	made	to	leave	I	would	be
immediately	addressing	the	issue	of	being	hauled	along	too.	For	the	now,	me
play-acting	the	bluff	hero	would	at	least	keep	him	happy	and	more	likely	to
put	some	effort	into	defending	me	in	my	incapacitated	state.

Snorri	unlimbered	his	axe.	He	would	have	been	more	content	with	the
broad	crescent	of	a	Norse	axe	suited	to	the	shearing	off	of	limbs.	The	weapon
he	carried	sported	a	heavy	wedge	of	a	blade	designed	to	punch	a	hole	in
armour.	If	the	mercenaries	had	any	significant	armour	and	yet	had	managed	to
climb	to	where	we	were,	then	we	might	as	well	give	up	since	they’d	have	to
be	supermen.

A	short	way	back	the	ledge	narrowed	and	a	huge	rock	sealed	off	all	but
two	or	three	feet	of	it,	leaving	a	harrowing	stretch	where	we	had	had	to	edge
along	the	boulder	beside	a	drop	of	ten	yards	to	the	ledge	below.	Snorri
crouched	down	where	he	would	be	out	of	sight	of	the	men	as	they	came	along
that	open	and	narrow	path.

“That’s	the	plan?	You	surprise	the	first	one	and	then	it’s	just	the	other
nineteen	to	deal	with?”

“Yes.”	He	shrugged.	“I	was	only	running	because	I	knew	you’d	stay	with
me	and	I	didn’t	want	your	death	on	my	hands,	Jal.	Now	we’re	in	it	together	as
the	gods	must	have	wanted	from	the	start.”	The	smile	he	offered	made	me
really	want	to	punch	him.

“We’re	out	of	sight.	We	could	hide.	They	go	past,	spread	out,	lose	us,	give
up.	They	can’t	track	us	on	rock!”	I	didn’t	mention	he’d	have	to	carry	me.

Snorri	shook	his	head.	“They	could	wait	us	out.	If	we	tried	to	leave	the
ledges	they’d	see	us	on	the	more	exposed	slopes.	Better	this	way.”

“But	.	.	.”	There’s	fucking	twenty	of	them,	you	moron!
“They’re	strung	out,	Jal.	A	proper	leader	would	have	kept	them	together,

but	they’re	too	confident,	eager	for	the	kill.	The	four	or	five	at	the	front	are
nearly	a	quarter	of	a	mile	ahead	of	the	last	man.”	He	spat	as	if	to	show	his
disgust	for	their	poor	tactics.	I	would	have	spat	too,	but	my	mouth	was	too
dry.

“Steady	on,	let’s	think	this	one	through—”
Snorri	cut	me	off	with	a	hiss	and	a	raised	hand.	A	clatter	of	rock	on	rock

from	the	ledge	below.	An	oath.	I	hadn’t	realized	how	much	I’d	been	slowing
the	Norseman	down;	our	pursuers	were	only	minutes	behind.	I	lay	back
against	the	cold	rock.	My	final	resting	place?	I	would	likely	die	within	a	yard
of	it.	At	our	elevation	the	mountain	held	nothing	in	common	with	the	world	I
knew,	just	bare	fractured	stone,	too	exposed	and	too	high	for	lichen	or	moss,
not	a	twig	or	scrap	of	grass	or	any	hint	of	green	to	rest	the	eye	upon.	As
lonely	a	spot	as	I’d	ever	seen.	Nearer	to	God,	perhaps,	but	godforsaken.

In	the	west	the	sun	dropped	towards	high	and	snowcapped	peaks,	the	sky



crimson	all	about	them.
Snorri	grinned	across	at	me,	eyes	clear	and	blue	once	more,	the	wind

playing	raven	hair	around	his	neck,	across	his	shoulders.	He	saw	death	as	a
release.	I	could	see	that	now.	Too	much	had	been	taken	from	him.	He
wouldn’t	ever	surrender,	but	he	relished	the	impossibility	of	the	odds.	I
grinned	back—it	seemed	the	only	thing	to	do—that	or	start	crawling	away.

The	wind	brought	faint	sounds	of	men	climbing	now.	Stones	slipping
beneath	boots,	weapons	clattering,	curses	offered	to	each	other	and	to	the
world	in	general.	I	tested	my	ankle	and	nearly	bit	my	tongue	off,	but	only
nearly—so	sprained	rather	than	broken.	I	took	the	quickest	of	steps	on	it	and
found	myself	back	against	the	rock,	having	blacked	out	for	a	moment.
Perhaps	I	could	hop	and	stumble	on	a	bit	farther,	buoyed	up	with	terror,	but
I’d	be	caught	soon	enough	and	without	Snorri	for	protection.	The	moment	he
fell,	though,	I’d	be	off,	hope	or	no	hope.

Find	a	happy	place,	Jalan.	I	hopped	around	my	boulder,	trying	to
remember	my	last	moments	with	Lisa	DeVeer.	Footsteps	sounded	along	the
narrow	path	between	the	drop	and	the	boulder.	The	fall	was	the	least	of	their
worries,	though	they	didn’t	know	it.	Crouching	and	biting	back	on	the	pain,	I
peered	around	the	edge	of	my	rock	to	see	them	arrive.	I	would	have	wet
myself	but	the	mountain	air	is	very	dehydrating.

The	first	man	to	come	into	view	was	Darab	Voir,	just	as	I	recalled	him
from	the	tavern,	a	bald-headed	bruiser,	scar-patterned	in	the	traditions	of	some
Afrique	tribes,	sweat	glistening	on	his	dusky	skin.	He	never	saw	Snorri.	The
Norseman’s	axe	descended	in	an	arc,	paralleling	the	side	of	the	rock	as	Darab
emerged.	I’ve	always	considered	a	head	to	be	a	solid	object,	but	as	Snorri’s
axe	passed	through	the	mercenary’s	I	had	to	reconsider.	The	wedge	of	his
blade	entered	Darab’s	skull	at	the	back,	near	the	top,	and	emerged	beneath	his
chin.	The	man’s	face	literally	bulged,	the	sides	of	his	head	seemed	to	flow
outward,	and	as	he	toppled	away	over	the	drop,	without	cry	or	protest,	the
rocks	were	drenched	with	him.

Snorri	roared	then.	The	ferocity	in	it	would	have	given	Taproot’s	elephant
pause,	but	that	wasn’t	where	the	terror	lay.	The	horror	was	in	the	simple
unabashed	joy	of	it.	He	didn’t	wait	for	anyone	else	to	emerge.	Instead	he
rounded	the	corner	swinging	his	axe	to	cave	in	the	side	of	the	next	man’s	head
and	smash	him	against	the	rock	wall.	He	ran	then,	literally	ran	through	them,
striking	quick	short	blows	as	if	his	axe	were	a	rapier,	light	as	a	willow	switch.
Two,	three,	four	men	variously	pitched	into	empty	space	or	slammed	against
the	rock,	all	of	them	with	a	hole	in	them	big	enough	to	put	your	fist	into.

Somewhere	out	of	sight	Snorri	found	a	pause	and	started	to	declaim,	not
some	Norse	battle	dirge	but	ancient	verse	from	the	“Lays	of	Rome.”



Then	out	spake	brave	Horatius,
the	Captain	of	the	Gate:

“To	every	man	upon	this	earth
Death	cometh	soon	or	late.”

Another	grunt	of	exertion,	a	clatter	of	metal	on	rock.	The	thump	of	bodies
falling.

“And	how	can	man	die	better
than	by	facing	fearful	odds,
For	the	ashes	of	his	fathers,
And	the	temples	of	his	gods.”

Damn	the	barbarian.	He	was	enjoying	this	madness!	He	thought	himself
Horatius	on	the	narrow	bridge	before	the	gates	of	Rome,	holding	back	the
might	of	the	Etruscan	army!	I	started	to	crawl	away.	It’s	shame	that	gets	us
killed.	Shame	is	the	anchor,	the	heaviest	burden	to	carry	from	the	battlefield.
Fortunately	shame	was	an	affliction	I’d	never	suffered	from.	I	did	wonder,
though,	hearing	Snorri	move	on	to	the	next	verse	of	his	epic,	whether	he
might	not	be	able	to	hold	out	there	indefinitely.	Providing	they	didn’t	have
bows	with	them	.	.	.	Of	course,	if	that	Edris	were	any	kind	of	a	leader	he’d
have	sent	men	to	flank	his	enemy.	No	single	man	can	stand	against	many
when	they	come	at	him	from	two	sides.	I	would	have	flank—

“Hello.	What	have	we	here?”
I	looked	up	into	the	pale	staring	eyes	of	Meegan—Edris’s	second

companion	from	the	night	before.	The	setting	sun	framed	him	with	a	bloody
light.	He’d	struck	me	back	at	the	tavern	as	one	of	the	last	men	on	earth	I’d
want	to	meet	in	a	dark	alley.	Like	Cutter	John	he	had	the	look	of	a	man	who
kept	a	distance	from	the	world,	as	if	viewing	us	all	from	behind	the
confessional	screen.	Such	men	make	good	torturers.

At	Meegan’s	shoulder	stood	a	hard-bitten	warrior	tending	to	grey	with	a
longsword	ready	in	his	hand.	More	men	sent	to	flank	us	probably	approached
along	the	ledge	as	Meegan	and	I	blinked	at	each	other,	me	on	all	fours,	him
leaning	forwards	as	if	in	enquiry.

Whatever	you	do	in	dangerous	situations,	the	main	thing	is	to	do	it
quickly.	I’ve	always	maintained	just	because	it’s	given	to	you	to	be	a	coward
doesn’t	mean	it’s	something	you	can’t	strive	to	do	well.	My	father	used	to
admonish	me	to	excel	in	all	things.	Excellence	in	cowardice	means	being
quick	off	the	mark.	If	you	want	to	run	away	fast,	then	the	first	thing	to	do	is
take	off	in	whatever	direction	you	happen	to	be	facing.

“Ooof”	was	the	only	remark	Meegan	had	an	opportunity	to	make	as	I	ran



through	him,	and	that	utterance	was	chosen	for	him	by	the	fact	a	lot	of	air
needed	to	vacate	his	lungs	in	a	hurry.	I	launched	forwards	off	my	good	ankle
and	put	my	shoulder	into	the	little	bastard.	Being	a	big	bastard	helps	in	these
exchanges.	The	man	behind	him	staggered	back,	tripping.

One	good	thing	about	falling	over	on	a	mountain—good	at	least	when	it’s
other	people—is	that	you’re	pretty	much	guaranteed	to	hit	your	head	on	a
rock.	Meegan	showed	no	signs	of	wanting	to	get	up	again.	The	other	man
managed	to	land	on	his	arse,	though,	and	sprang	back	up	sharpish	with	a
curse.	We	both	found	ourselves	looking	at	the	gleaming	length	of	my	sword
between	us,	held	at	one	end	by	my	hand	on	the	hilt	and	at	the	other	by	the	ribs
he	had	wrapped	around	the	blade.	I	had	no	memory	of	drawing	it,	let	alone
pointing	it	at	him.

“Sorry.”	Don’t	ask	me	why	I	apologized.	In	the	heat	of	the	moment	my
ankle’s	complaints	were	ignored	and	I	hurried	on	past	the	mercenary,	yanking
my	steel	clear	of	his	flesh	with	a	sick-making	wet	tearing	sound	and	the	grate
of	cutting	edge	against	bone.	I	saw	more	figures	negotiating	the	boulder-
strewn	ledge	ahead	of	me	and	executed	a	swift	turn	on	my	good	ankle	before
hobbling	at	speed	back	towards	the	ambush	point	where	I’d	last	seen	Snorri.

I	met	him	coming	in	the	opposite	direction.	Or,	more	accurately,	I	threw
myself	to	the	ground	when	he	came	charging	around	a	corner,	drenched	in
blood,	axe	held	blade	to	ear,	haft	to	chest.	The	silent	purpose	in	him	was
terrifying—and	then	he	roared	his	battle	cry	and	all	of	a	sudden	the	silence	of
his	purpose	would	have	been	fine.	A	moment	later	I	worked	out	that	he	had
been	shouting,	“Behind	you!”

Four	men	had	been	practically	within	stabbing	range	of	my	heels.	Snorri
burst	amongst	them	with	reckless	disregard	for	everyone’s	safety,	including
mine	and	his.	His	axe	head	buried	itself	in	one	man’s	solar	plexus	on	a	rising
arc	that	split	his	sternum.	He	shoulder-charged	another	man,	a	hefty	fellow,
lifting	him	off	his	feet	and	mashing	him	against	a	sharp	corner	of	rock.	A
third	man	thrust	at	Snorri	but	somehow	the	twisting	giant	conspired	not	to	be
in	the	way,	the	mercenary’s	sword	tip	lancing	between	the	Norseman’s	elbow
and	chest.	Snorri’s	continuing	turn	trapped	the	blade	and	wrenched	the
weapon	free	from	his	attacker’s	grasp.	The	last	of	the	four	had	Snorri	cold.
Axe	bedded	in	one	foe,	tangled	with	another,	he	stood	open	to	the	man’s	spear
thrust.

“Snorri!”	Why	I	shouted	a	useless	warning,	I	don’t	know.	Snorri	could	see
the	problem	well	enough.	The	spearman	hesitated	for	a	split	second.	I	don’t
think	my	cry	distracted	him.	Most	likely	he	was	intimidated	by	the	blood-
soaked	giant	before	him,	his	scarlet	battle-mask	divided	by	a	fierce	and	broad
grin.	A	split	second	should	not	have	been	enough,	but	with	a	roar	Snorri
impossibly	powered	his	axe	through	his	victim’s	chest,	splattering	the	varied
insides	of	the	man	in	the	process,	and	cut	away	the	spear’s	head	just	before	it



reached	his	neck.	The	backswing	broke	open	the	spearman’s	face	with	the
blunt	reverse	of	the	blade.	And	I	swear	to	you	the	iron	trailed	darkness	as	it
cut	the	air.	Swirls	of	night	left	in	its	wake,	fading	like	smoke.	The	last	man,
now	swordless,	spun	away	and	ran	for	it.	Snorri	turned	to	me,	eyes	wholly
black,	panting,	snarling,	unseeing.

I	rolled	to	my	feet—well,	foot—sword	hanging	from	my	hand,	and	for	a
moment	we	faced	each	other.	Over	Snorri’s	left	shoulder	the	last	burning
scrap	of	the	sun	fell	behind	the	mountains.

“You’ve	got	a	bit	of	.	.	.”	I	mimed	with	my	hand,	scraping	at	my	chin.
“Um	.	.	.	something	in	your	beard.	Lung,	I	think.”

He	reached	up,	a	slow	movement,	eyes	clearing	as	he	did	so.	“Could	be.”
He	flicked	the	gobbet	of	flesh	away.	A	grin.	Snorri	again.

“There	are	more	coming?”	I	asked.
“There	are	more,”	he	said.	“Whether	they’re	coming	or	not	is	yet	to	be

decided.	I	think	there	are	eight	remaining.”	He	wiped	his	face,	smearing	the
crimson.	Where	clean	skin	showed	he	looked	far	too	pale—even	for	a
Norseman.	The	dark	and	flowing	nature	of	the	gore	beneath	his	ribs	on	the
left	suggested	that	not	all	the	blood	belonged	to	our	enemy.

“Edris?”	I	asked.
Snorri	shook	his	head.	“Him	I	would	remember	putting	down.	He’ll	be

bringing	up	the	rear,	making	sure	none	of	his	stragglers	decide	the	mountain’s
too	steep.”	He	leaned	back	against	the	rock,	axe	dangling	from	his	hand,	flesh
white	beneath	the	scarlet	now,	veins	curiously	dark.

“We	should	give	them	something	to	think	about,”	I	said.	I	knew	the	power
of	fear	better	than	most	men,	and	Snorri	had	left	a	frightful	mess.	I	took	hold
of	the	man	Snorri	had	ripped	his	axe	out	of	to	save	himself	from	the	spear
thrust.	His	left	boot	proved	the	least	slippery	part	of	him	and	I	tugged	him
towards	the	drop	where	our	ledge	fell	away	to	the	next.	I’d	moved	him	about
six	inches	before	discovering	that	while	blind	terror	is	a	great	anaesthetic	in
the	moment,	once	the	immediate	danger	is	passed	the	effect	wears	off	rapidly.
I	fell	back	clutching	my	ankle	and	inventing	new	swear	words	that	might
more	effectively	convey	my	distress.	“Bollockeration.”

“Toss	the	corpses	over?”	Snorri	asked.
“It	might	make	them	think	twice.”	It	would	make	me	think	just	the	once,

and	the	thought	would	be	I’ll	come	back	later.
Snorri	nodded	and,	taking	two	men	by	the	ankle,	threw	them	over	the

edge.	They	landed	with	a	sound	that	was	wet	and	crunchy	at	the	same	time,
and	my	stomach	lurched.	It	would	be	the	path	the	mercenaries’	rear	guard
would	likely	take—the	route	we	had	taken.	Meegan	and	his	companions	had
only	been	inspired	to	the	alternative	and	more	difficult	ascent	by	the	sounds
of	battle.	The	sensible	desire	to	flank	Snorri	rather	than	face	him	one	by	one
in	the	narrow	defence	point	he’d	chosen	had	driven	them	up	a	more



dangerous	path.
Still	sat	on	my	backside,	I	grabbed	another	man	by	the	wrist,	braced	my

good	leg	against	a	ridge	of	rock,	and	started	to	tug	him	by	inches	towards	the
drop.	I	moved	him	about	a	yard	in	the	time	it	took	Snorri	to	toss	all	but	one	of
the	rest	in	the	area.

“This	one’s	still	alive.”	Snorri	leaned	over	Meegan	and	kicked	him	in	the
ribs.	“Out	cold,	though.”	He	looked	over	at	me	with	an	appreciative	grin.
“You	saved	a	small	one	for	questioning	like	you	promised.”

“All	part	of	the	plan,”	I	grunted,	shifting	my	corpse	another	three	inches.
He	was	the	spearman.	Thankfully	he	lay	facedown.	His	passage	across	the
rocks	had	left	a	red	smear	where	I’d	dragged	him.	I	clutched	him	below	the
hand,	not	wanting	to	touch	his	warm	dead	fingers.

“I’ll	sort	out	the	others.”	And	Snorri	headed	off	to	deal	with	any	of	the
fallen	from	his	initial	attack	who	hadn’t	yet	fallen	far	enough.

“No,	I’m	fine.	Don’t	trouble	yourself.”	I	got	no	reply—with	Snorri
already	out	of	earshot	and	the	rest	of	my	audience	dead	or	unconscious,	my
sarcasm	was	wasted.	“Heave!”	and	I	heaved	again.	The	corpse	slid	forwards
another	three	inches.	Dead	fingers	moved	against	my	skin,	a	convulsion	of
them	like	spider	legs	flexing,	stroking	down	the	veins	and	tendons	in	my
wrist.	I	nearly	let	go	fast	enough,	but	the	hand	clasped	me	as	I	unclasped	it,
the	dead	man	lifted	his	head,	and	the	ruin	of	his	face	gaped	a	crimson	grin	at
me,	white	skull	visible	beneath	flapping	flesh.	Fear	lends	a	man	strength,	but
so	too	does	being	dead,	apparently.	I	wrenched	hard	enough	to	drag	the
spearman	a	whole	extra	yard,	but	it	didn’t	win	me	free,	just	brought	him	close
enough	to	reach	for	my	throat.	I	managed	half	a	scream	before	dead	fingers,
still	warm,	cut	it	off	with	an	iron	grip.

It’s	not	until	you’ve	actually	been	throttled	that	you	realize	how	terrible	it
is.	It	doesn’t	take	enormous	strength	to	seal	your	air	off	completely—and	the
dead	man’s	strength	was	enormous.	When	you’re	denied	a	breath,	then	all	of	a
sudden	breathing	is	the	only	thing	you’re	interested	in.	I	clawed	at	the	wrist
beneath	my	chin,	dug	at	the	fingers,	but	if	a	face	can	kiss	Snorri’s	axe	and	still
find	a	smile,	then	fingernails	aren’t	going	to	mean	much.	I	planted	a	foot	on
the	dead	thing’s	shoulder	and	pushed	for	all	I	was	worth.	It	felt	as	though	my
throat	would	be	ripped	from	my	neck,	but	the	grip	wasn’t	released.	Black
spots	began	to	grow	in	my	vision,	joining	at	the	edges	to	make	a	wall	of
darkness.	Blinding	cracks	ran	through	the	black,	my	heart	hammered	behind
its	cage	of	ribs,	and	the	stink	of	burning	flesh	filled	my	nostrils	even	though	I
could	draw	no	air	into	them.

And	then,	as	suddenly	as	the	hand	had	seized	me,	it	was	gone.	Snorri
loomed	over	me,	gripped	under	my	armpits,	and	hauled	me	clear.	If	my	throat
hadn’t	been	so	well	lubricated	with	terror-sweat	I	suspect	I	would	have	seen	it
still	clutched	in	the	dead	man’s	fingers,	red	and	dripping.



Snorri	snatched	up	his	axe	while	I	sucked	air	through	the	straw	that	being
choked	had	left	me	with.	The	dead	man	stood,	still	grinning	amidst	the
butchered	remains	of	his	face,	and	raised	his	hands	towards	us,	the	wrists	and
forearms	curiously	burned,	wisps	of	smoke	still	lifting	from	them.	Snorri
made	to	advance,	but	two	figures	tackled	him	from	the	rear.	He	staggered,
desperate	to	keep	his	footing.	Two	of	his	victims	clung	to	him,	blood	still
oozing	from	the	fatal	wounds	his	axe	had	given	them.

Gasping	and	weak,	I	backed	away	from	the	spearman,	still	on	my	arse,
shuffling	amongst	the	rocks,	retreating	before	his	unhurried	advance.	Snorri
looked	in	trouble	too,	with	one	of	the	things	clinging	to	his	back,	the	other
encircling	his	waist	with	both	arms	and	trying	to	eat	its	way	into	his	stomach.

“Help.”	I	only	managed	to	squeak	it	out	as	a	whisper.	I	don’t	think	Snorri
noticed.	He’d	just	thrown	himself	back	against	the	rock	wall	to	the	next	ledge,
sandwiching	the	corpse	on	his	back	between	the	broadness	of	his	shoulders
and	the	stone.	He	might	not	have	heard	my	cry	for	aid,	but	I	heard	the
resulting	cracking	of	ribs	and	vertebrae	loud	and	clear.

“Mffgl.”	The	dead	spearman	tried	to	speak	just	before	he	fell	upon	me.
Torn	flesh	and	a	broken	jaw	rendered	him	incomprehensible.

“Help!”	I	managed	a	touch	more	volume,	and	this	time,	expecting	to	be
throttled	again,	I	caught	both	the	creature’s	wrists.	The	thing’s	strength	was
shocking,	and	the	burned	flesh	slid	and	tore	beneath	my	grip.

Across	the	way,	just	behind	my	attacker’s	head,	I	saw	Snorri	butcher	the
corpse-man	he’d	crushed,	not	severing	its	head	but	pulverizing	its	neck	with
two	quick	axe	blows.	With	the	second	blow	a	horrifying	change	came	over
my	opponent.	Its	strength	multiplied	and	where	it	had	been	inexorably
pressing	my	arms	back	it	now	brushed	aside	any	attempt	at	defence	and
sealed	both	hands	around	my	bruised	neck	once	more.

The	ruined	face	came	close	to	mine,	dripping,	tongue	writhing	over
shattered	teeth	and	a	hideous	intelligence	in	its	eyes.	Yards	behind,	Snorri
caught	the	head	of	his	last	opponent	in	both	hands	and	with	an	oath	pushed	it
away	from	his	side.	It	took	all	his	strength,	as	if	his	enemy	had	also	grown	in
power,	and	the	scarlet	mouth	he	tore	from	his	hip	trailed	skin	and	strands	of
flesh	from	its	jaws.	Snorri	drove	his	knee	right	into	the	thing’s	face,	booted	it
away,	then	pursued,	raising	a	big	rock	on	high	to	pulp	its	head.

Again,	as	if	some	necromantic	vitality	had	been	shared	amongst	the
corpses	and	now	flowed	from	the	destroyed	corpse	into	the	last	available
vessel,	my	enemy’s	strength	redoubled.	It	stood,	lifting	me	as	if	I	were
nothing.	By	rights	it	should	have	snapped	my	neck,	but	although	the	strength
of	its	arms	had	grown,	the	creature’s	grip	actually	weakened.

I	looked	down	and	where	my	hands	fastened	upon	the	dead	skin,	a
blinding	light	burned.	The	white	heat	of	a	desert	sun	bled	between	my	fingers,
my	bones	just	shadows	in	a	rosy	haze	of	pumping	blood	and	living	flesh.	The



dead	thing	crisped	where	I	touched	it.	Fats	bubbled,	flesh	burned	back,
exposing	sinews	that	smouldered,	then	shrivelled.

I	nearly	let	go	in	shock.
Snorri	came	running,	axe	recovered	and	ready.	He	whirled	it	in	a	blow

towards	the	monstrosity’s	head,	but	somehow	it	took	one	hand	from	my	throat
and	caught	the	weapon	beneath	its	blade.	The	haft	thunked	against	its	palm
with	a	dull	and	wooden	sound.	Snorri	struggled	to	pull	his	axe	free,	but
though	he	dragged	the	dead	man	several	yards,	and	me	too,	still	held	in	its
choking	fingers,	he	couldn’t	defeat	the	thing’s	strength.

The	Norseman	paused,	slipped	his	grip	to	the	end	of	the	axe	haft	and	to
the	head,	and	used	the	weapon	as	a	lever	to	twist	the	spearman’s	wrist.	Bones
snapped	with	loud	retorts,	tendons	gave,	flesh	tore.	Leaving	his	axe	in	the
broken	hand,	Snorri	bore	his	foe	to	the	ground	and	proceeded	to	pulp	the
grinning	face	with	a	large	chunk	of	rock.

Released,	I	rolled	clear,	struggling	for	air.	The	hand	that	had	held	me	now
rested	on	two	blackened	arm	bones	jutting	from	the	dead	man’s	forearm.	Even
now	my	breath	wouldn’t	draw.	I	fell	into	unconsciousness,	reflecting	rather
abstractly	that	I’d	never	even	known	that	there	were	two	bones	in	a	man’s
forearm.



FOURTEEN

“Wake	up.”
I	don’t	want	to.

“Wake	up.”	A	slap	this	time.	Perhaps	there	had	been	one	the	first	time	too.
Not	if	I’m	still	on	that	sodding	mountain.	Someone	had	packed	my	throat

with	brambles	and	my	chest	hurt.
“Now!”
I	opened	one	eye.	The	sky	still	kept	an	echo	of	the	day	though	the	sun	had

set.	Already	the	cold	had	rolled	down	from	the	peaks.	Damn.	Still	on	the
mountain.	“Bugger.”	The	word	came	out	in	thin	slivers.	Snorri	let	my	head
slide	back	onto	my	pack	and	moved	away.

“What	are	you	doing?”	Not	enough	of	the	question	emerged	for	him	to
respond.	I	gave	up	and	let	the	air	wheeze	back	into	my	lungs.	A	charred	hand
rose	before	my	face	and	I	yelped,	flinching	from	it	before	realizing	it	was	my
own.	The	strange	disconnected	feeling	persisted	as	I	edged	into	an	upright
position	and	started	to	pick	pieces	of	blackened	skin	from	my	palm.	Not	my
skin,	but	fragments	from	the	dead	thing	that	had	tried	to	kill	me.	The	pieces	of
skin,	part	crispy,	part	wet,	fell	amongst	the	rocks,	too	heavy	for	the	wind	to
take.	Memories	of	the	attack	were	just	as	broken	and	unwelcome.	Trying	not
to	think	about	it	didn’t	help.	I	kept	seeing	the	light	bleeding	out	from	beneath
my	hand,	blinding	and	without	heat.	How	did	it	burn	without	heat?

“What	are	you	doing?”	Perhaps	Snorri	would	distract	me.	My	voice	came
louder	this	time,	and	he	looked	up.

“Cleaning	the	wound.	Damn	thing	bit	me.”
I	could	see	teeth	marks	in	the	flesh	above	his	hip.	“The	sword	cut	looks

worse.”	A	red	furrow	sliced	through	the	ridged	topography	of	his	abdomen.
“Bites	are	dirty	wounds.	Better	to	be	skewered	through	the	arm	by	a

sword	than	bitten	on	the	hand	by	a	hound.”	Snorri	squeezed	the	damaged
flesh	again,	producing	a	rush	of	blood	that	ran	down	over	his	belt.	He
grimaced	and	reached	for	his	water	flask,	tipping	some	of	our	last	reserves
over	the	injury	site.

“What	the	hell	happened?”	Most	of	me	didn’t	want	to	know,	but
apparently	my	mouth	did.



“Necromancy.”	Snorri	took	a	needle	and	thread	from	his	pack,	something
he	must	have	acquired	at	the	circus.	Both	were	covered	in	an	orange	paste.
Some	heathen	conceit	to	keep	ill	humours	out	of	the	wound,	no	doubt.	“No
unborn	here,”	he	said.	“But	a	powerful	necromancy	to	return	the	dead	so	soon
after	death.”	Another	stitch	placed.	My	stomach	lurched.	“And	for	the
necromancer	to	not	even	be	present!”	He	shook	his	head,	then	nodded	to	a
spot	behind	me.	“I	expect	our	friend	knows	more.”

“Buggeration!”	Twisting	my	neck	to	look	reminded	me	that	someone	had
filled	it	with	broken	glass.	I	edged	my	whole	body	around	by	degrees,
keeping	my	head	facing	front	and	centre.	Finally	Meegan	came	into	view,
pale	eyes	goggling	at	me	over	a	gag	of	knotted	cloth.	Snorri	had	bound	him
hand	and	foot	and	sat	him	with	his	back	to	a	boulder.	Saliva	clung	to	the
stubble	on	his	chin	and	his	arms	trembled,	from	fear	or	the	cold	or	both.

“So	how	are	you	going	to	make	him	talk?”	I	asked.
“Beat	him	about,	I	expect.”	Snorri	glanced	up	from	his	stitching.	The

needle	looked	ridiculously	small	in	the	great	paws	of	his	hands,	and	at	the
same	time	far	larger	and	more	pointy	than	anything	I’d	want	to	have	to	push
through	my	own	flesh.

I	sniffed.	The	place	stank	of	death	and	the	wind	couldn’t	scour	it	clean.
“Edris!”	The	memory	hit	me	like	cold	water.	I	reached	for	my	sword	and
couldn’t	find	it.

“Gone.”	Snorri	sounded	a	touch	disappointed.	“The	bodies	we	threw
down	got	up	again	and	scared	his	lot	off.	I	watched	them	go.”

“Hell!	More	of	those	things?”	I’d	rather	face	Edris	than	another	of	those
grinning	corpses	with	their	refusal	to	play	dead	and	their	penchant	for
throttling	me.

Snorri	nodded,	dipped	to	bite	through	the	thread,	then	spat	it	out.	“Can’t
climb,	though.	They	weren’t	great	at	it	when	they	were	alive.	Now?”	He
shook	his	head.

I	had	no	desire	to	look	over	the	edge	and	see	their	faces	staring	up	at	me,
raw	fingers	clutching	at	the	rocks,	climbing,	sliding	back,	climbing	again.	I
remembered	the	look	in	those	eyes	as	the	thing	choked	me.	Bile	rose	at	the
back	of	my	throat.	Something	different	had	watched	me	from	those	eyes,
something	far	worse	than	whatever	had	looked	out	through	them	for	all	the
years	prior	to	those	last	minutes.

Meegan	might	have	scared	me	back	in	the	tavern,	studying	me	as	if	I	were
an	insect	he	would	enjoy	pulling	legs	off,	but	on	the	mountain	he	proved	one
of	the	least	worrying	things	to	look	at.	“Beating	him’s	apt	to	knock	him
senseless	again.	And	your	idea	of	a	beating	would	probably	kill	an	ox.”

“We	can’t	kill	him,”	Snorri	said.	“Who	knows	what	we’d	get?”
“I	know	that.”	I	set	my	forehead	in	my	hand,	reminding	myself	just	how

much	bigger	Snorri	was	than	me.	“And	now	he	does	too.	Which	isn’t	helping



our	cause.”
“Oh.”	Snorri	placed	another	stitch,	drawing	two	ragged	edges	of	his	belly

together.	“Sorry.”
“I	say	we	take	his	boots	off	and	light	a	small	fire	under	his	feet.	He’ll

know	his	only	chance	of	getting	off	this	mountain	is	to	be	able	to	walk.	And	it
won’t	take	long	to	loosen	his	tongue.”

“Look	around.”	Snorri	gestured	with	the	knife	he	was	using	to	trim	a
bandage.	“No	wood.	No	fire.”	He	frowned.	“That	last	corpse	I	threw	over,
though	.	.	.	the	arms	were	burned.	How	did	you	do	that?”	Narrowed	eyes
focused	in	on	my	hands,	still	blackened.

“It	wasn’t	me.”	It	almost	sounded	true.	It	couldn’t	have	been	me.	“I	don’t
know.”

Snorri	shrugged.	“Calm	down.	I’m	not	one	of	your	Roma	Inquisitors.	Just
thought	it	might	be	useful	with	Goggle	there.”	He	pointed	his	knife	at
Meegan.

I	looked	at	my	hands	and	wondered.	It’s	often	said	that	cowards	make	the
best	torturers.	Cowards	have	good	imaginations,	imaginations	that	torment
them	with	all	the	worst	stuff	of	nightmare,	all	the	horrors	that	could	befall
them.	This	provides	an	excellent	arsenal	when	it	comes	to	inflicting	misery	on
others.	And	their	final	qualification	is	that	they	understand	the	fears	of	their
victim	better	than	the	victim	does	himself.

All	this	might	be	true,	but	I’ve	always	found	myself	too	scared	that
somehow,	some	way,	any	victim	of	mine	might	escape,	turn	the	tables,	and
work	the	same	horrors	on	me.	Basically	the	cowards	who	make	good	torturers
are	less	cowardly	than	me.	Even	so,	Meegan	did	need	some	encouragement
and	I	needed	to	understand	what	had	happened	with	the	corpse-man.	Snorri
had	mentioned	the	Roma	Inquisitors,	without	doubt	the	most	accomplished
torturers	in	the	Broken	Empire.	If	I	wanted	to	avoid	discussing	“my
witchcraft”	with	those	monsters,	then	I	would	be	best	advised	to	understand	it
myself	so	as	to	be	rid	of	it	as	quickly	as	feasible	and	to	be	able	to	hide	it	as
effectively	as	possible.

Meegan	had	an	ugly-looking	cut	on	his	arm,	just	below	the	shoulder.
Some	edge	of	the	rock	had	ripped	through	his	padded	jerkin	and	chewed	on
into	his	flesh.	I	reached	out	towards	it.	Always	start	with	a	weak	point.

“Myltorc!	Myltorcdammu!”	He	chewed	at	the	gag	trying	to	get	the	words
out.

I	have	to	admit	a	small	thrill	at	having	the	upper	hand	after	what	seemed
like	weeks	of	nothing	but	running,	sleeping	in	ditches,	and	being	terrified.
Here	at	last	was	a	foe	I	could	handle.

“Oh,	you’ll	talk	all	right!”	I	used	the	menacing	voice	I	used	to	scare	my
younger	cousins	with	when	they	were	small	enough	to	push	around.	“You’ll
talk.”	And	I	slapped	my	palm	to	his	wound,	willing	him	to	burn!



The	results	were	.	.	.	underwhelming.	At	first	I	felt	nothing	but	the
decidedly	unpleasant	squishiness	of	his	injury	as	he	writhed	and	jerked
beneath	my	touch.	I	had	to	press	hard	to	keep	him	from	twisting	away.	At
least	it	seemed	to	be	hurting	him,	but	that	turned	out	to	be	more	by	way	of
anticipation	than	anything	else,	and	he	quieted	down	soon	enough.	I	tried
harder.	Who	knows	what	working	magic	is	supposed	to	feel	like?	In	the
games	we	used	to	play	in	the	palace,	the	sorcerer—always	Martus,	by	dint	of
being	the	eldest	brother—cast	his	spells	with	a	strained	face,	as	if	constipated,
squeezing	his	reluctant	magic	into	the	world	through	a	small	.	.	.	well,	you	get
the	picture.	Lacking	any	better	instruction,	I	put	into	practice	what	I’d	learned
as	a	child.	I	crouched	there	on	the	mountain,	one	hand	on	my	hopefully
terrified	victim,	my	face	constipated	with	the	awesome	power	I	was	straining
to	release.

When	it	actually	happened,	nobody	there	was	more	surprised	than	me.
My	hand	tingled.	I’m	sure	all	magic	tingles—though	it	may	have	been	pins
and	needles—then	a	peculiar	brittle	feeling	stole	from	each	fingertip,	joining
and	spreading	to	the	wrist.	What	I	first	took	to	be	a	paling	of	the	flesh	became
a	faint	but	unmistakable	glow.	Light	started	to	leak	around	my	fingers	as	if	I
were	concealing	something	brighter	than	the	sun	within	my	grip,	and	a	faint
warmth	rolled	beneath	my	palm.	Meegan	stopped	struggling	and	stared	at	me
in	horror,	straining	at	his	bonds.	I	pushed	harder,	willing	hurt	into	the	little
bastard.	Bright	fracture	lines	started	to	spread	across	the	back	of	my	hand.

The	light	and	the	warmth	seemed	to	draw	on	me,	flow	from	my	core	to
the	single	extremity	where	they	burned.	The	day	grew	colder,	the	rocks
harder,	the	pain	in	my	ankle	and	throat	sharp	and	insistent.	The	spreading
cracks	frightened	me,	too	strong	a	reminder	of	the	fissure	that	had	chased	me
when	I	broke	the	Silent	Sister’s	spell.

“No!”	I	jerked	my	hand	back,	and	the	weight	of	exhaustion	that	settled	on
me	nearly	pressed	me	to	the	rocks.

A	shadow	loomed	across	us.	“Have	you	broken	him	yet?”	Snorri	squatted
beside	me,	wincing.

I	lifted	my	head.	It	weighed	several	times	more	than	it	should.	The	rip	in
Meegan’s	jerkin	showed	pale	and	unbroken	skin	beneath	the	blackening
smears	of	blood,	a	faint	scar	recording	where	his	wound	had	been.	“Shit.”

Snorri	tugged	at	the	man’s	gag.	“Ready	to	talk?”
“I	been	ready	since	I	came	round,”	Meegan	said,	trying	to	roll	back	into	a

sitting	position.	“I	was	trying	to	tell	that	one.	No	need	for	any	rough	stuff.	I’ll
tell	you	everything	I	know.”

“Oh,”	I	said,	vaguely	disappointed,	though	it	was	exactly	what	I	would
have	done	in	his	position.	“And	we’re	supposed	to	let	you	go	after	that,	are
we?”

Meegan	swallowed.	“It’d	be	right	fair	of	you.”	He	had	a	nervous,	sweaty



way	about	him.
“Fair	as	twenty	against	two?”	Snorri	rumbled.	He’d	brought	his	axe	with

him	and	ran	his	thumb	along	its	edge	as	he	spoke.
“Ah,	well.”	Meegan	swallowed	again.	“Weren’t	anything	personal.	That’s

just	how	many	she	paid	for.	Was	just	business	for	Edris.	He	spread	her	coin
around	and	got	together	a	bunch	of	us	local	men,	fellas	who’d	seen	some
trouble,	fellas	who’d	fought	a	battle	or	hired	theirselves	out	for	sharp-work
before,	that	kind	o’	thing.”

“She?”	I	knew	plenty	of	women	who’d	like	to	see	me	take	a	beating,	and
not	a	few	who	might	pay	to	have	it	done,	but	twenty	men	was	excessive,	and
most	of	them	would	probably	not	want	the	castigation	to	be	fatal.

Meegan	nodded,	eager	to	please,	spittle	drying	on	his	chin,	snot	on	his
upper	lip.	“Edris	said	she	were	a	fine-looking	woman.	Didn’t	say	it	all	polite
like	that,	though,	no	sir.”

“You	didn’t	see	her?”	Snorri	leaned	in.
Meegan	shook	his	head.	“Edris	made	the	deal.	He	ain’t	local.	Knows	a	lot

of	bad	folk.	Passes	through	once,	twice	a	year.”
“She’ll	be	the	necromancer.	Did	she	have	a	name?”	Snorri	asked.
“Chella.”	Meegan	licked	his	lips.	“Had	Edris	scared,	she	did.	Never	seen

him	scared	afore.	I	didn’t	want	to	meet	her,	not	after	that.	Don’t	care	how
tasty	she	were	built.”

“And	would	you	know	where	to	find	this	Chella	now?”	Snorri’s	great
hands	closed	around	the	haft	of	his	axe	as	if	imagining	it	the	necromancer’s
throat.

Meegan	shook	his	head,	a	quick	shake	like	a	dog	flinching	off	water.
“Ain’t	from	around	here.	A	northerner,	Edris	said.	Had	a	bottle	of	liquor	off
her,	he	did,	for	us	all	to	toast	the	mission	with.	Some	Gelleth	brew,	I	think
Darab	said	it	was.	Strange	burn	to	it.”	He	smacked	his	lips.	“Passing	strange.
Made	you	want	more	of	it,	though.	Most	like	she’s	from	Gelleth.	Perhaps	she
went	back.	Perhaps	she’s	watching	us	right	now.	Something	stood	the	boys
back	up	after	you	knocked	’em	down.”

“What	should	we	do?”	I	didn’t	like	the	idea	of	some	necromancer	witch
watching	from	the	ridges,	ready	to	send	her	dead	men	after	us.	The	whole
idea	had	sounded	faintly	ridiculous	back	in	Grandmother’s	court.	I’d	been
sure	most	of	it	was	lies,	and	whatever	parts	of	it	might	have	held	truth	didn’t
seem	so	scary.	Mouldy	old	corpses	jerking	witlessly	after	frightened	peasants
seemed	no	threat	to	proper	soldiery.	But	miles	from	civilization—and
Rhonish	civilization	at	that—outnumbered	by	the	dead	on	treacherous
ground,	my	view	of	things	had	suffered	an	about	turn.	“I	mean,	we	should	do
something.”

“With	him?”	Snorri	kicked	Meegan’s	bound	feet.
“About	her,”	I	said.



“My	goal	is	in	the	North.	If	anything	gets	in	my	way,	I’ll	put	a	hole
through	it.	If	not,	I’ll	leave	it	behind.”

“We	pick	up	the	pace,	keep	heading	north.	I	like	it.”	When	a	plan	involves
running	away,	I’m	in.

“And	him?”	None	of	the	solutions	for	Meegan	looked	good.	I	didn’t	want
to	let	him	go,	I	didn’t	want	to	keep	him,	but	whilst	I’ll	do	my	fellow	man
down	at	every	turn,	I’ve	no	murder	in	me.

“Let	him	join	his	friends.”	Snorri	knotted	a	hand	in	the	ropes	around
Meegan’s	wrists	and	hoisted	him	to	his	feet.

“Hey	now,	that	hardly	seems	fair.	He	was	going	to	kill—”
Snorri	took	three	strides,	dragging	Meegan	to	the	edge	where	the	rock	fell

away	in	a	single	steep	step	.	.	.	and	pushed	him	over.	“Those	friends.”
Meegan’s	wail	of	despair	ended	with	a	wet	thunk	and	the	sound	of

something,	or	things,	running	towards	the	place	he	hit.	Snorri	met	my	shocked
gaze.	“I	try	to	be	a	fair	man,	to	live	with	honour,	but	come	against	me	armed
and	looking	to	take	my	life,	and	you	will	not	walk	away	again.”



FIFTEEN

Nights	spent	on	mountains	are	not	to	be	recommended.	Nights	where	the
dark	is	full	of	the	sounds	of	dead	men	trying	to	climb	up	to	where	you’re

shivering	under	thin	blankets,	even	less	so.
In	the	end	the	morning	came.	That’s	what	matters.
“So	you	healed	that	man.”	Snorri	led	the	way	across	the	mountain	face,

looking	for	a	way	down	that	would	not	be	accessible	to	the	corpses	in	our
wake.

“No,	I	didn’t.”	Deny	everything	was	a	policy	I’d	adopted	at	an	early	age.
“Shit!”	I	missed	my	footing	and	set	my	boot	down	harder	than	intended.	The
white-hot	needles	of	pain	lancing	up	from	my	ankle	let	me	know	that	getting
down	off	the	mountain	was	going	to	hurt.

“He	had	a	rip	in	his	arm	deeper	than	the	cut	I’ve	got	on	my	belly.”
“No.	Just	his	jerkin.	Big	hole	in	his	jerkin,	little	scrape	on	his	arm.	He

bled	a	lot.	That’s	probably	what	fooled	you.	I	just	wiped	the	blood	away
some.”	I	could	see	where	this	was	going.	Snorri	wanted	the	same	treatment.
Well,	no.	The	cut	on	Meegan’s	arm	had	sucked	out	too	much	of	my	energy	as
it	was.	A	whole	night	with	the	DeVeer	sisters	might	have	left	me	more	go	in
my	legs.	Snorri’s	injuries	would	leave	me	crawling.	“Sorry	but	I—	Ouch!
Christ	bleeding,	that	hurt!”	A	light	knock	of	ankle	against	boulder.

“Of	course,”	said	Snorri,	“a	man	who	could	erase	a	gash	like	that	would
have	mended	his	own	ankle	by	now.	I	must	have	been	mistaken.”

I	took	three	more	painful	steps	whilst	that	one	sank	in,	then	sat	on	the
nearest	suitable	boulder,	“You	know,	it	does	hurt	quite	a	lot.	I’ll	just	try	to	rub
some	life	back	into	it.”	I	tried	to	be	surreptitious	about	it,	but	he	just	stood
there	watching,	with	his	arms	folded,	like	some	big	suspicious	Norseman.	The
thought	of	walking	down	on	a	sound	ankle	proved	too	much	temptation.	With
teeth	gritted	and	jaw	set,	I	bound	both	hands	around	the	joint	and	strained.
Snorri	raised	a	brow.	I	reached	for	whatever	magic	had	burned	in	me	and
pushed	harder.

“I,	erm,	can	leave	you	to	it	if	you	need	a	quiet	moment.”	The	tight	line	of
his	lips	in	that	black	beard	gave	no	indication	that	he	was	mocking	me.

“You’re	mocking	me,	aren’t	you?”



“Yes.”
I	let	go	and	gave	my	ankle	an	experimental	wiggle.	“Motherf—”	Words

became	an	inarticulate	howl.
“Not	fixed	then?”	Snorri	asked.
I	stood	up	slowly.	It	seemed	that	whatever	I’d	done	to	Meegan	was,	like

tickling,	something	you	can’t	do	to	yourself.	And	all	in	all,	healing	Meegan
had	been	a	complete	waste	of	effort	given	that	Snorri	had	pushed	him	over	the
ledge	a	minute	or	two	later.	Perhaps	it	had	been	a	one-off	thing.	I	hoped	so.

“You	want	some?”	I	held	out	a	hand	towards	Snorri’s	waist.
He	took	a	sharp	step	back.	“Best	not.	Bad	stuff	happens	if	we	touch,	and

I’ve	got	a	feeling	it	would	be	worse	than	last	time.”
I	remembered	reaching	for	his	hand	as	I	slipped	down	the	mountain.	In

retrospect	the	damage	done	to	my	ankle	might	have	been	the	lesser	of	two
evils.	If	I	had	managed	to	grab	hold	we	might	just	have	burned	up	like	the
dead	man.

“What’s	going	on?”	I	held	my	hands	up,	palms	towards	me.	“That	dead
man	fried	where	I	touched	him.	And	you.”	I	looked	back	up	at	Snorri,	angry
now,	scared	and	angry	and	in	that	moment	not	caring	if	he	took	offence.
“You!	There’s	something	wrong	with	you,	Norseman.	I’ve	seen	those	black
eyes.	I	saw	.	.	.	smoke,	hell,	I’ll	call	it	what	it	is,	I	saw	darkness	swirl	around
you	when	you	killed	those	men,	like	your	axe	was	cutting	the	stuff	out	of	the
air.”	I	made	the	connection	then.	I	should	have	seen	it	before.	“And	that’s
what’s	in	you,	isn’t	it?	Dark	eyes,	dark	dreams.	Darkness!”

Snorri	hefted	his	axe,	running	a	speculative	eye	along	its	length.	For	a
moment	I	thought	he	might	strike	me	down,	but	he	shook	his	head	and	offered
a	grim	smile.	“It	took	you	until	now	to	understand?	It’s	the	curse	you	brought
on	me.	On	us.	Your	witch,	the	Silent	Sister.	Her	curse.	That	broken	spell,	that
twin	crack,	running	after	you,	dark	and	light.	I	got	darkness—you	got	light—
both	whispering	to	us,	and	both	of	them	wanting	to	get	out.

“In	the	North	the	wise	women	say	the	world	is	a	cloth,	woven	from	many
strands	and	stretched	across	what	is	real.	The	world	we	see	is	thin.”	He	held
up	a	thumb	and	finger,	almost	touching.	“Where	it	tears,	deeper	truths	escape.
And	we	are	torn,	Jal.	We’re	carrying	wounds	we	can’t	see.	We’re	carrying	it
north	and	the	dead	want	to	stop	us.”

“Look,	we’ll	go	back.	My	grandmother	is	the	Red	Queen,	damn	it.	She
can	have	this	made	right.	We’ll	go	back	and—”

“No.”	Snorri	cut	me	off.	“I	took	the	prince	out	of	the	palace,	but	the
palace	is	still	crammed	firmly	up	the	prince’s	arse.	You	need	to	stop	moaning
about	every	hardship,	stop	chasing	every	woman	you	lay	eyes	on,	and
concentrate	on	surviving.	Out	here—”	He	waved	the	axe	at	the	bleakness	of
the	mountains.	“Out	here	you	need	to	live	in	the	moments.	Watch	the	world.
You’re	a	young	man,	Jal,	a	child	who’s	refused	to	grow	up.	Do	it	now,	or



you’ll	die	a	young	man.	Whatever	is	behind	this	pursuit,	it	all	started	in
Vermillion.	Whatever	war	is	being	fought	there	is	being	lost.	The	Dead	King
is	trying	to	kill	us	because	we’re	taking	the	Sister’s	strength	north.”

I	got	to	my	feet.	“So	we	stop	going	north!	Go	back.	Make	this	right!	It’s
nonsense	anyhow.	It	was	all	an	accident.	Just	ill	fortune.	Nobody	could	have
planned	it.	It’s	all	a	mistake.”

“I	saw	her	too,	Jal.	This	Silent	Sister	of	yours.”	Snorri	set	the	tip	of	his
index	finger	just	above	his	cheekbone.	“She	had	one	white	eye.”

“Half	blind,	yes.”	One	pearly	eye.	I’d	called	her	the	blind-eye	woman	for
years	before	I	knew	any	other	name.

Snorri	nodded.	“She	sees	the	future.	She	looked	too	far	and	it	blinded	her.
But	she	still	has	a	second	eye	to	look	with.	She	looked	through	the	might-
have-beens	and	saw	far	enough	to	know	you	would	escape,	meet	me	and	take
her	power	north.”

“Hell.”	There	didn’t	seem	much	else	to	say.

	•	•	•	

We	found	a	route	down	from	the	mountains	that	did	not	allow	the	dead
men	to	follow	us,	though	it	could	be	argued	that	it	came	closer	to

killing	us	both	than	they	might	have.	I	say	“we,”	but	Snorri	led	the	way.	My
navigational	skills	are	more	suited	to	the	city,	where	I	can	find	a	low	dive
with	unerring	skill.	On	mountains	I’m	more	like	water.	I	head	down,	tumbling
over	rocks	where	necessary.

In	their	haste	the	retreating	mercenaries	hadn’t	collected	all	of	their	fallen
comrades’	mounts,	and	better	still,	we	found	Ron	and	Sleipnir	browsing	on
the	lower	slopes.	Neither	horse	was	anything	to	boast	about,	but	they	were
used	to	us,	and	we	loaded	them	with	the	most	useful	items	we’d	managed	to
steal	off	the	strays	before	driving	them	off.	Sleipnir	continued	her	placid
munching	at	the	saw	grass	while	Snorri	heaped	his	loot	upon	her,	flinching
only	when	he	climbed	aboard.	To	be	fair,	it	looked	as	if	they	should	take	turns
—I	thought	the	Norseman	fully	capable	of	carrying	his	mare	up	the	valley.

“We	should	look	out	for	Edris	and	his	friends,”	I	said.	Not	that	I’d
stopped	doing	exactly	that	at	any	point.	“Oh,	and	that	necromancer	bitch.”
The	idea	of	some	death-sworn	beauty	lurking	out	amongst	the	rocks	was
unsettling.	That	she	could	frighten	Edris	with	just	a	look,	return	the	dead,	and
might	well	slip	into	our	camp	in	the	middle	of	night	was	the	stuff	of
nightmare—not	that	I	planned	to	sleep	again.	Ever.	“And	Maeres	might	yet
have	an	agent	on	our	tail	.	.	.	and	if	those	corpses	know	where	to—”

“How	about	we	just	look	out	for	trouble?”	And	Snorri	led	the	way	north.

	•	•	•	



We	spent	another	night	on	high	ground,	our	beds	as	cold	and	stony	as	the
one	before,	the	shadows	just	as	threatening.	Worse—if	it	could	get

worse—as	the	sun	set	Snorri	grew	distant	and	strange,	his	eyes	drinking	in	the
gloom	and	growing	even	blacker	than	they	had	been	when	slaughtering	his
foe	and	painting	the	slopes	red.	The	way	he	looked	at	me	just	before	the	last
burning	piece	of	the	sun	fell	behind	the	mountain’s	shoulder	made	me
consider	hobbling	away	as	soon	as	he	slept.	Though	minutes	later	he	seemed
returned	to	his	old	self	and	reminded	me	to	aim	downslope	if	nature	called	in
the	night.

With	the	mountains	demoted	to	scenery,	we	followed	the	borderlands,
first	along	the	border	with	Scorron,	which	would	soon	be	the	border	with
Gelleth.	Snorri	kept	his	eyes	always	fixed	on	the	horizon,	hunting	the	north,
mine	always	turned	south,	towards	home,	and	to	look	for	what	dangers	might
be	on	our	heels.	Borderlands	offer	swift	travel	to	those	not	seeking	to	cross
over	as	the	folks	there	are	often	occupied	with	their	neighbours	and	not	so
keen	to	question	travellers,	to	detain	them,	or	to	seek	taxes	from	them.	Such
lands	are,	however,	unhealthy	places	to	linger.	Many	of	my	own	worst
experiences	occurred	on	Red	March’s	border	with	Scorron—all	of	them	in
fact,	until	I	met	Snorri.

In	the	province	of	Aperleon	the	kingdom	of	Rhone	meets	the	duchy	of
Gelleth	and	the	principality	of	Scorron.	Monuments	to	the	dead	of	a	hundred
battles	crowd	the	elevations,	most	in	ruin,	but	the	land	is	lush	and	people
return	to	resettle	it	time	and	again,	as	people	are	wont	to.	Snorri	led	the	way
along	the	approach	to	the	town	of	Compere,	famed	for	its	cider	and	for	the
quality	of	tapestries	woven	there.	Where	he	learned	this	stuff	I	couldn’t	say,
but	the	Norseman	would	always	win	some	new	fact	or	other	from	even	the
shortest	of	exchanges	with	passersby.

The	summer	found	us	at	last	and	we	rode	in	bright	sunshine,	sweating
beneath	our	travel-stained	rags,	throwing	dark	shadows	and	swatting	at	flies.
We	saw	few	people,	then	fewer	still,	all	steering	away	upon	their	own	paths,
drawing	back	as	if	we	might	carry	contagion.

Further	on,	the	land	took	on	a	neglected	air.	Ron	and	Sleipnir	plodded
placidly	between	high	hedgerows,	Snorri’s	white	skin	turned	red	in	the	sun,
and	for	a	moment	I	started	to	feel	at	ease,	lulled	by	the	heat	and	the	arable
peace.	It	didn’t	last.	We	soon	found	fields	untended	and	overgrown,
farmhouses	empty,	their	animals	gone.	In	one	place	churned	earth,	an
abandoned	helm,	a	crow-pecked	hand.	A	chill	returned	to	me,	despite	the
warmth	of	the	day.

The	castle	of	Rewerd’s	Curse—the	ancestral	seat	of	the	House	Wainton—
stands	on	a	high	bluff	of	pale	rock	some	miles	from	Compere	Town.	It
watched	us	with	empty	eyes,	the	walls	black	with	smoke,	the	cliffs	beneath	it



still	stained	a	rusty	colour	as	if	the	blood	of	the	last	defenders	had	poured
from	the	gates	and	overflowed	the	plateau.	The	sun	had	started	to	sink	behind
the	fortification,	making	serrated	silhouettes	of	the	battlements	and	sending	its
shadow	questing	towards	us,	an	accusing	finger,	long	and	dark.

“This	is	fresh.”	Snorri	drew	a	long	breath	through	his	nose.	“You	can
smell	the	char.”

“And	the	rot.”	I	regretted	sniffing	so	deeply.	“Let’s	find	another	path.”
Snorri	shook	his	head.	“You	think	any	path	is	safe?	Whatever	happened

here	has	passed.”	He	pointed	to	a	faint	haze	ahead,	indistinct	trails	of	smoke
rising	to	join	it.	“The	fires	have	all	but	burned	out.	You’ll	find	more	peace	in
ruins	than	in	any	other	place.	The	rest	is	all	waiting	to	be	ruins.	Here	it’s
already	happened.”

And	so	we	rode	on	and	came	by	evening	to	the	desolation	of	Compere.

	•	•	•	

“This	was	vengeance.”	The	walls	had	been	toppled,	standing	nowhere
higher	than	three	stones	atop	each	other.	“Punishment.”	I	stepped	over

the	rubble.	Heat	still	rose	from	the	ground.	Beyond	a	forest	of	blackened	spars
a	carpet	of	cinders	marched	into	the	distance	until	the	drifting	smoke
overwrote	it.

“Murder.”	Snorri	towered	at	my	shoulder,	a	stillness	in	him.
“They	never	meant	to	hold	this	place,”	I	said.	“Whoever	‘they’	were.”	It

could	have	been	Gelleth	troopers,	a	raid	out	of	Scorron,	or	even	a	Rhonish
army	reclaiming	what	had	been	taken.	“I’ve	never	seen	the	like.”	I	knew	the
Hundred’s	squabbles	left	such	damage	in	their	wake,	but	I’d	not	seen	it,	not
like	this.

“I	have.”	Snorri	passed	me	by,	striding	on	into	the	remnants	of	what	had
once	been	Compere.

We	made	camp	in	the	ruins.	Swirls	of	ash	and	cinder	stung	our	eyes	and
made	the	horses	cough,	but	night	was	upon	us	and	Snorri	proved	unwilling	to
press	on.	At	least	we	didn’t	have	to	choose	between	the	risk	of	a	fire	and	a
cold	camp.	Compere	came	with	its	own	fires.	Dying	beds	of	embers	in	the
main,	but	giving	off	a	great	heat.

“I’ve	seen	worse.”	Snorri	repeated	himself,	pushing	aside	the	stew	he’d
prepared.	“At	Eight	Quays	the	Islanders	made	swift	work	and	moved	on.	At
Orlsheim,	farther	up	the	Uulisk,	they	took	their	time.”

And	in	the	ruins	Snorri	once	more	stole	me	away	to	the	North,	winding
his	tale	around	the	night.

	•	•	•	



Snorri	followed	the	raiders’	tracks	through	the	thaw.	Their	ships	had	gone,
perhaps	to	some	secluded	cove	to	shelter	from	both	storm	and	hostile

eyes.	He	knew	they	would	be	planning	a	return	to	collect	the	Drowned	Isles
necromancers,	their	troops,	and	their	captives.	Even	in	the	spring	the	interior
was	an	inhospitable	place	this	far	north.	The	Broke-Oar	would	have	told	them
that.	How	many	of	the	captives	might	be	on	the	ships	and	how	many	with	the
raiders,	Snorri	couldn’t	tell.	The	raiders,	though,	he	could	follow,	and
eventually	they	would	lead	him	to	their	ships.

Orlsheim	lay	three	miles	farther	inland,	on	the	edge	of	the	Uulisk	where
the	fjord	started	to	taper	and	pine	forests	reached	almost	to	the	water	on
gentler	slopes	than	those	at	Eight	Quays.	The	Brettans	had	left	a	broad	trail,
burdened	as	they	were	by	many	captives.	Apart	from	Emy	there	had	been
only	a	handful	of	dead:	three	babes	in	arms,	chewed	and	discarded,	and	Elfred
Ganson,	missing	a	leg	and	left	to	bleed	out.	Snorri	guessed	any	others	killed
in	the	fighting	would	just	have	been	added	to	the	ranks	of	the	necromancers’
servants	and	set	stumbling	ahead	to	Orlsheim.	How	Elfred	came	to	lose	a	leg
Snorri	couldn’t	guess,	but	it	had	at	least	saved	him	the	horror	of	a	living
death.

Where	the	settlement	at	Eight	Quays	had	been	stone-built,	the	houses	of
Orlsheim	were	timber,	some	rude	constructions	of	logs	and	wattle,	others
clinker-built	of	planks	like	the	longboats	themselves,	defying	the	weather
with	the	same	obstinacy	that	the	Vikings’	ships	offered	the	sea.	Smoke	had
signalled	Orlsheim’s	destruction	even	from	the	doorstep	of	Snorri’s	home,	but
not	until	the	last	few	hundred	yards	had	he	imagined	the	fire	to	be	so	all-
consuming.	Even	the	great	mead-hall	of	Braga	Salt	had	left	no	more	than	a
heap	of	embers,	every	roof	beam	consumed,	its	eighteen	pillars	each	thicker
than	a	mast	and	deep	carven	with	saga	tales,	all	devoured	by	the	flames.

Snorri	pressed	on,	leaving	the	Uulisk	shores	when	the	raiders’	tracks
turned	to	skirt	Wodinswood,	a	dense	and	unwelcoming	forest	that	reached	for
fifty	miles	and	more	until	the	foothills	of	the	Jorlsberg	defeated	it.	Men	called
Wodinswood	the	last	forest.	Turn	your	face	north	and	you	would	find	no	more
trees.	The	ice	would	not	admit	them.

And	on	the	margins	of	that	forest,	where	he	had	so	often	come	in	search
of	the	reindeer	who	browse	the	tree	moss,	Snorri	found	his	eldest	son.

	•	•	•	

“Iknew	him	the	moment	I	saw	him,”	Snorri	said.
“What?”	I	shook	my	head,	ridding	myself	of	the	dream	the	Norseman

had	woven.	He	addressed	me	directly	now,	demanding	a	response,	demanding
something—perhaps	just	my	company	in	this	moment	of	rediscovery.



“I	knew	him,	my	son	.	.	.	Karl.	Though	he	lay	far	ahead.	There’s	a	deer
trail	up	alongside	the	Wodinswood	from	the	Uulisk,	broadened	into	mud	by
the	raiders,	and	he	lay	sprawled	beside	it.	I	knew	him	from	his	hair,	white-
blond,	like	his	mother.	Not	Freja,	she	bore	me	Egil	and	Emy.	Karl’s	mother
was	a	girl	I	knew	when	I	wasn’t	much	more	than	a	boy	myself:	Mhaeri,
Olaaf’s	daughter.	We	weren’t	but	children,	but	we	made	a	child.”

“How	old?”	I	asked,	not	really	knowing	if	I	meant	him	or	the	boy.
“We	must	have	been	fourteen	summers.	She	died	bringing	him	into	the

world.	He	died	just	stepping	into	his	fifteenth	year.”	The	wind	changed	and
shrouded	us	in	thicker	smoke.	Snorri	sat	without	motion,	head	bowed	over	his
knees.	When	the	air	cleared,	he	spoke	again.	“I	rushed	to	him.	I	should	have
been	cautious.	A	necromancer	could	have	left	his	corpse	to	waylay	anyone
trailing	them.	But	no	father	has	that	caution	in	him.	And	as	I	came	closer	I
saw	the	arrow	between	his	shoulders.”

“He	escaped,	then?”	I	asked,	to	let	him	take	his	pride	in	that	at	least.
“Broke	free.”	Snorri	nodded.	“A	big	lad,	like	me	in	that,	but	more	of	a

thinker.	People	always	said	he	thought	too	much,	said	I’d	always	be	the	better
Viking	however	strong	he	grew.	I	said	he’d	always	be	the	better	man,	and	that
mattered	more.	Though	I	never	said	it	to	him,	and	I	wish	now	that	I	had.
They’d	had	them	in	iron	shackles,	but	he	broke	free.”

“He	was	alive?	He	told	you?”	I	asked.
“He	had	a	breath	left	in	him.	He	didn’t	use	it	to	tell	me	how	he	escaped,

but	I	could	see	the	iron	marks	on	him	and	his	hands	were	broken.	You	can’t
escape	slave	shackles	without	breaking	bones.	He	only	had	four	words	for
me.	Four	words	and	a	smile.	The	smile	first,	though	I	saw	it	through	tears,
biting	down	on	my	curses	so	I	could	hear	him.	I	could	have	been	there
quicker,	I	could	have	run,	found	him	hours	earlier.	Instead	I’d	gathered	my
belongings,	my	weapons,	as	if	I	were	going	on	a	hunt.	I	should	have	run	them
down	the	moment	the	snowbank	gave	up	its	hold.	I—”	Snorri’s	voice	had
grown	thick	with	emotion	and	now	broke.	He	bit	the	word	off	and	ground	his
jaw,	face	twitching.	He	lowered	his	head,	defeated.

“What	did	Karl	say?”	I	couldn’t	tell	you	where	along	the	way	I’d	started
to	care	about	the	Norseman’s	story.	Caring	was	never	my	strong	suit.	Perhaps
it	was	the	weeks	together	on	the	road	that	had	done	it,	or	more	likely	some
side	effect	of	the	curse	that	chained	us	together,	but	I	found	myself	hurting
with	him,	and	I	didn’t	like	it	one	bit.

“They	want	the	key.”	Spoken	to	the	ground.
“What?”
“That’s	what	he	said.	He	used	his	last	breath	to	tell	me	that.	I	sat	with	him

but	he	hadn’t	any	more	words.	He	lasted	another	hour,	less	than	that	maybe.
He	waited	for	me	and	then	he	died.”

“A	key?	What	key?	That’s	madness—who	would	do	all	that	for	a	key?”



Snorri	shook	his	head	and	held	up	a	hand	as	if	begging	quarter.	“Not
tonight,	Jal.”

I	pursed	my	lips,	looked	at	him	hunched	before	me,	and	swallowed	all	the
questions	bubbling	on	my	tongue.	Snorri	would	tell	me	or	he	wouldn’t.
Perhaps	he	didn’t	even	know.	Either	way,	it	was	of	no	great	consequence	for
me.	The	North	sounded	more	terrible	by	the	minute,	and	whilst	I	was	sorry
for	Snorri’s	losses	I	had	no	intention	of	chasing	dead	men	across	the	snow.
Sven	Broke-Oar	had	taken	Freja	and	Egil	to	the	Bitter	Ice.	And	Snorri	seemed
to	think	his	wife	and	son	were	still	alive	there	now—and	perhaps	they	were.
Either	way,	that	was	a	matter	between	Snorri	and	the	Broke-Oar.	Somewhere
between	us	and	the	northern	ice	would	be	a	means	to	unlock	the	two	of	us,	at
which	point	I’d	be	off	before	the	G	of	Good-bye	had	cleared	the	Norseman’s
beard.

We	sat	in	silence.	Or	almost	silence,	for	it	seemed	as	if	Baraqel’s	voice
spoke	just	beyond	the	edge	of	hearing,	gentle	and	full	of	music.	After	a	time	I
lay	down	and	set	my	head	on	my	pack.	Sleep	took	me	quick	enough,	and	as	it
caught	hold	the	voice	came	more	clearly	so	that	in	the	moments	before
dreaming	washed	over	both	me	and	the	voice,	I	could	almost	make	out	the
words.	Something	about	honour,	about	being	brave,	about	helping	Snorri	find
his	peace	.	.	.

“Bugger	that,”	I	replied.	Words	muttered	half-asleep	over	slack	lips—but
heartfelt	nonetheless.



SIXTEEN

We	came	to	Ancrath	along	the	border	roads	between	Rhone	and	Gelleth.
Snorri	travelled	with	a	native	caution	that	kept	us	safe	on	several

occasions,	holding	us	back	amidst	a	wood	as	battle-ragged	troops	marched
south,	taking	us	into	the	corn	when	brigands	rode	by	in	search	of	wickedness.
I	was	keener	to	avoid	such	encounters	than	Snorri,	but	my	senses	were	better
honed	to	detecting	the	approach	of	trouble	across	a	crowded	feast	hall	or
through	the	smokes	of	an	opium	parlour	than	on	horseback	across	open
country.

In	the	town	of	Oppen,	just	a	few	miles	into	Ancrath,	I	bought	more
serviceable	travelling	clothes.	I	made	sure	to	buy	sufficient	quality	to	mark
me	out	as	a	man	of	distinction,	though	of	course	normally	I’d	not	be	seen
dead	in	sturdy	boots	and	tough-wearing	garments	made	to	withstand	rough
treatment.	I’d	rejected	the	idea	of	letting	a	Rhonishman	fit	me	for	cloak	and
hat	but	decided	I	could	suffer	the	attentions	of	an	Ancrath	tailor.	Snorri
snorted	and	stamped	so	much	during	the	fitting	that	I	had	to	send	him	out	to
find	an	axe	more	suited	to	his	tastes.

The	moment	he’d	gone	I	started	to	feel	an	unease.	Nothing	to	do	with	the
slight	stretching	of	the	magics	that	bound	us,	and	everything	to	do	with	the
certainty	that	the	necromancer	who	had	sought	our	deaths	in	Chamy-Nix
would	still	be	hard	upon	our	trail.	Her	or	that	creature	that	had	watched	me
from	behind	its	mask	at	the	opera.	The	Silent	Sister’s	trap	had	been	set	for
that	one.	I	was	certain	of	it	now.	She’d	been	prepared	to	sacrifice	the	lives	of
two	hundred,	including	some	of	Vermillion’s	finest—including	me,	damn	it—
to	burn	that	one	monster.	I	could	only	pray	the	crack	I’d	put	in	her	spell	whilst
escaping	hadn’t	let	it	free.	And	of	course	other	servants	of	the	Dead	King
might	lurk	around	any	given	corner.	Even	in	a	tailor’s	shop!

In	the	end	I	left	Oppen	with	a	sense	of	relief.	Being	on	the	move	had
become	a	habit,	and	I	wasn’t	sure	I	would	ever	feel	entirely	comfortable
settled	in	one	place	again.

We	skirted	the	Matterack	Mountains,	a	dour	range	with	none	of	the	Aups’
grandeur,	and	found	our	way	in	time	to	the	Roma	Road,	which	I’d	long
argued	we	should	have	followed	the	whole	way.	“It’s	better	paved,	safer,



equipped	with	inns	and	whorehouses	at	regular	intervals,	passes	through	two
dozen	towns	of	note	.	.	.”

“And	is	easily	watched.”	Snorri	guided	Sleipnir	out	onto	the	ancient
flagstones.	She	immediately	started	to	clatter.	I	think	of	that	noise,	horseshoe
on	stone,	as	the	sound	of	civilization.	In	the	countryside	everything’s	mud.
Give	me	a	clatter	over	a	clomp	any	day.

“So	why	are	we	risking	it	now?”
“Speed.”
“Will	it	make—”	I	bit	off	the	words.	Would	it	make	a	difference?	To

Snorri	it	would.	His	wife	and	younger	son	would	have	been	captive	for
months	now,	even	before	he’d	been	dragged	in	chains	to	Vermillion.	And	if
they	had	endured	all	this	time,	labouring	at	some	task	the	Drowned	Isles
necromancers	set	them	to,	the	chances	were	that	a	few	days	either	way
wouldn’t	make	much	difference	to	their	situation.	I	couldn’t	say	that	to	him,
though.	Mostly	because	I’m	fond	of	my	teeth,	but	also	the	angel	that	kept
whispering	to	me	wouldn’t	approve,	and	you	don’t	want	to	piss	off	an	angel
that	lives	under	your	skin.	They’re	the	worst	sort.	“We’ve	been	making	good
time,	pacing	ourselves	for	the	journey.	Why	do	we	need	to	travel	faster	now
all	of	a	sudden?”	I	settled	on	letting	him	say	it	himself.	It’s	harder	to	lie	to
yourself	out	loud	with	an	audience.	Let	him	tell	me	he	still	truly	believed	his
wife	and	child	lived.

“You	know.”	He	gave	me	a	dark	look.
“Tell	me	anyway,”	I	said.
“The	voices.	We	need	to	get	this	over	and	done,	get	that	bitch’s	curse	off

us,	before	the	voice	I’m	hearing	stops	suggesting	and	starts	telling.”
That	left	me	with	my	mouth	open	and	nothing	to	say.	Ron	clip-clopped

his	way	up	another	twenty	yards	of	the	Roma	Road	before	I	found	the
presence	of	mind	to	press	my	lips	together.

“You’re	trying	to	tell	me	you’re	not	hearing	a	voice?”	Snorri	leaned
around	in	the	saddle	to	scowl	at	me.	He	could	manage	the	sort	of	scowl	that
reminded	you	he	named	his	axes.

I	could	hardly	deny	it.	The	voice	that	had	whispered	beyond	the	edge	of
hearing	in	Compere	had	grown	more	distinct	day	by	day,	and	its	directives
more	frequent.	It	grew	loudest	each	dawn.	At	first	I	had	imagined	that	this
was	what	people	like	Cousin	Serah	meant	when	urging	me	to	listen	to	my
conscience.	I	thought	perhaps	that	too	much	fresh	air	and	a	lack	of	alcohol
had	opened	me	up	to	the	nagging	monologue	of	conscience	for	once	in	my
life.	Morning	after	morning	of	pious	lecturing	had	me	doubting	my	theory,
though.	Surely	everyone	couldn’t	go	around	with	some	sickeningly	moral
voyeur	hectoring	them	each	moment	of	their	life?	How	would	they	stay	even
vaguely	sane?	Or	have	fun?

“And	what	does	this	voice	say	to	you?”	I	asked,	still	not	admitting	to



anything.
Snorri	returned	his	gaze	to	the	road	ahead,	showing	me	broad	shoulders.

“I’m	dark-sworn,	Jal.	Cracked	through	with	it.	What	kind	of	secrets	do	you
think	the	night	whispers?”

“Hmm.”	That	didn’t	sound	good,	though	frankly	I	wouldn’t	have	minded
swapping.	Unsavoury	suggestions	bubbled	out	of	the	darkness	at	the	back	of
my	mind	all	the	time.	Most	I	ignored	easily	enough.	Being	upbraided	on	my
own	moral	shortcomings	at	every	turn,	on	the	other	hand,	was	proving	most
annoying.	“Does	your	voice	have	a	name?”

“She’s	called	Aslaug.”
“She?	You	got	a	woman?”	I	couldn’t	keep	the	complaint	from	my	voice.

Nor	did	I	try.
“Loki	lay	with	a	jötnar,	a	beauty	with	a	spider’s	shadow.”	Snorri	sounded

self-conscious,	no	hint	of	the	storyteller	now,	hesitating	as	he	repeated
unfamiliar	details.	“She	birthed	a	hundred	daughters	in	the	dark	places	of	the
world,	and	none	of	them	ever	stepped	out	into	the	light.	Old	Elida	used	to	tell
us	that	tale.	Now	one	of	those	daughters	walks	in	my	shadow.”

“So	you	got	a	beauty	with	a	dirty	mind,	and	I	got	a	pious	killjoy.	Where’s
the	justice	in	that?”

“Called?”	Snorri	glanced	back	at	me.
“Baraqel.	I	expect	my	father	used	to	drone	on	about	him	from	the	pulpit.

Damned	if	I	know	the	name,	though.”	I	was	sure	Baraqel	would	be	eager	to
burden	me	with	his	lineage	if	I	gave	him	the	chance.	He	seemed	to	be	a
disembodied	voice	who	liked	the	sound	of	his	own	pronouncements.
Fortunately	his	visitations	were	limited	to	the	few	minutes	between	the	sun
cresting	the	horizon	and	clearing	it—the	rest	of	the	time	I	could	pretty	much
ignore	him.	And	what	with	me	being	almost	entirely	made	of	sins	that	needed
to	be	vilified,	it	didn’t	leave	much	time	for	other	matters.

“Well,”	said	Snorri.	“It’s	pretty	clear	we	need	to	make	haste,	before
Baraqel	makes	a	decent	man	of	you.	And	before	Aslaug	makes	a	bad	one	of
me.	She’s	not	fond	of	you,	Jal,	you	should	know	that.”

“You	should	hear	what	Baraqel	has	to	say	about	my	choice	of	heathen
travelling	companion.”	Not	a	bad	return	shot,	but	annoyingly	my	angel	held
Snorri	up	as	something	of	a	paragon	during	our	morning	chats,	so	it	was
better	that	the	Norseman	didn’t	hear	after	all.

We	rode	all	day	and	for	once	the	sun	blazed.	It	appeared	that	Ancrath	was
enjoying	the	summer	so	long	denied	to	us	on	our	trail.	Perhaps	the	weather
skewed	my	judgment,	but	I	have	to	say	that	Ancrath	struck	me	as	a	fine
corner	of	the	empire:	free	of	the	Rhonish	taint,	fertile	lands	well	farmed,
pleasingly	humble	peasants,	and	the	merchant	classes	as	servile	as	you	like	in
the	hunt	for	coin.

I	kept	close	watch	on	Snorri	all	that	day	for	any	signs	of	evil,	though	what



I’d	do	about	it	if	I	spotted	any	I	hadn’t	a	clue.	Being	shackled	to	a	battle-
hungry	Viking	on	route	for	a	suicidal	rescue	mission	had	been	harrowing
enough.	Now	I	was	shackled	to	one	who	might	become	a	creature	of	the	night
at	the	drop	of	anyone’s	hat.

The	day	passed	peacefully	enough	and	Snorri	showed	no	inclination
towards	the	traditional	demonic	pursuits,	though	I	did	convince	myself	that
his	shadow	was	rather	darker	than	everyone	else’s	and	found	myself	peering
into	it	every	now	and	again,	searching	for	any	hint	of	his	new	mistress.

My	own	little	blessing	from	the	Silent	Sister	woke	me	at	the	instant	of
sunrise	just	as	the	cocks	were	throat-clearing	for	the	first	crow	of	the	day.

“The	heathen	has	become	a	servant	of	darkness.	You	should	denounce
him	to	some	suitable	member	of	the	church	inquisition.”	Baraqel	spoke	quiet
enough,	but	there’s	something	about	a	voice	behind	your	eardrum	that’s	hard
to	ignore.	Also	he	had	a	very	irritating	tone	about	him.

“Wh—what?”
“Have	him	arrested.”
I	yawned	and	stretched.	Pleased	to	find	myself	in	a	bed	for	once,	albeit

unaccompanied.	“I	thought	Snorri	was	your	golden	boy.	Everything	I	should
strive	to	be?”

“Even	a	heathen	can	embody	character	traits	that	may	be	admired,	and
good	role	models	are	hard	to	come	by	in	the	wilds,	Prince	Jalan.	However,	his
lack	of	true	faith	left	him	open	to	possession	and	he	has	been	tainted	beyond
salvation.	The	rack	and	fire	are	his	last	best	chance	to	lessen	his	sentence	in
hell	now.”

“Hmmm.”	I	scratched	my	balls.	Unfamiliar	fleas	were	a	small	price	to	pay
for	the	comfort	of	a	bed.	“I	doubt	he’d	thank	me	for	the	favour.”

“Snorri’s	wants	are	not	of	importance,	Prince	Jalan.	The	evil	that	has
possessed	him	must	be	burned	out.	She	must	be	cast	into	the	fire	and—”

“She?	So	you	know	Snorri’s	passenger,	do	you?	Old	friend	of	yours?”
“You	endanger	your	soul	each	time	you	mock	me,	Jalan	Kendeth.	I	am

God’s	servant	on	earth,	descended	from	heaven.	Why	wou—”
“Why	would	God	create	fleas?	Did	he	ever	tell	you?	Ah!	Got	one,	you

little	bastard!”	I	cracked	it	between	two	fingernails.	“So,	what’s	coming	up
today,	Baraqel?	Anything	useful	I	should	know?	Let’s	hear	some	of	that
divine	wisdom.”	It	wasn’t	so	much	that	I	didn’t	believe	he	was	an	angel,	and	I
certainly	wasn’t	about	to	dispute	the	existence	of	such—my	neck	still	bore	the
trace	of	bruises	where	a	dead	man	tried	to	throttle	me—it	was	just	that	I	felt
Baraqel	must	be	a	rather	poor	example.	After	all,	angels	should	tower	above
you	in	gold	and	feathers	carrying	flaming	swords	and	speaking	wisdom	in
tongues.	I	didn’t	expect	them	to	hide	away	and	nag	me	to	get	up	each
morning	in	a	voice	suspiciously	like	my	father’s.

Baraqel	remained	silent	for	several	moments,	then	a	cockerel	let	out	a



raucous	hallelujah	to	the	morning	close	by,	and	I	decided	my	angel	had	taken
his	leave.

“Dark	travellers	on	the	road.	Born	of	flame.	A	prince	has	sent	them.	A
prince	of	evil,	of	darkness	and	revenge,	a	prince	of	lightning.	A	thorn	prince.
They	are	his	work.	Messengers	of	the	doom	to	come.”

The	pronouncement	startled	me	awake	again.	“That’s	the	sort	of	nonsense
I	could	have	off	Dr.	Taproot’s	old	fortune-teller	for	half	a	copper.”	More
yawning,	more	scratching.	“What	prince?	What	doom?”

“The	thorn	prince.	He	whose	line	will	spill	heaven	into	hell	and	rip	the
world	asunder.	His	gift	is	the	death	of	angels,	the	death	of	.	.	.”	And	blessedly
he	trailed	off,	the	sun	having	cleared	the	horizon	somewhere	out	beyond	the
musty	confines	of	my	room.

I	stretched,	yawned,	scratched,	contemplated	the	end	of	all	things,	and
went	back	to	sleep.

We	left	the	inn	after	a	breakfast	of	liver	and	fried	potatoes	washed	down
with	small	beer.	So	far	the	famed	cuisine	of	Ancrath	had	proved	the	least
appealing	aspect	of	the	country,	but	riding	a	horse	day	in,	day	out	for	weeks
on	end	gives	a	man	an	appetite	of	the	kind	that’s	ready	to	try	anything.	Even
horse.

Joining	the	Roma	Road	once	more	from	the	dirt	track	to	the	inn,	I	fell	into
my	customary	daydreaming,	the	sort	that’s	apt	to	get	you	killed	in	the	wilds
but	is	the	kind	of	luxury	civilization	affords	us.	I	realized	simultaneously	that
I	had	no	idea	what	a	liver	was	for	and	that	I	also	didn’t	ever	want	to	eat	one
again,	especially	not	for	breakfast	with	garlic.

Snorri	stopped	me	pursuing	that	line	of	thought	any	further	by	drawing	up
in	the	road	directly	ahead	of	me.	A	ragged	group	of	travellers	were	heading
north	towards	Crath	City,	blocking	the	road,	some	pulling	handcarts,	others
labouring	under	their	possessions,	others	still	flapping	along	in	just	the	tatters
they	wore.	And	amongst	them	not	a	clean	limb	showed:	All	were	black	with
filth	of	some	kind.

“Refugees,”	Snorri	said.
Dark	travellers.	An	echo	of	Baraqel’s	prophecy	ran	through	my	mind.
As	we	caught	them	up	I	saw	many	bore	wounds,	still	raw	and	open,	and

each	of	them—man,	woman,	child—was	black	with	soot,	or	with	dried	mud,
or	black	with	both.	Snorri	nudged	Sleipnir	in	amongst	them,	offering
apologies.	I	followed,	trying	not	to	let	any	of	them	touch	me.

“What	happened	here,	friend?”	Snorri	leaned	from	his	saddle	towards	a
tall	fellow,	peasant-thin,	an	ugly	rip	along	the	top	of	his	scalp.

The	man	offered	a	blank-eyed	stare.	“Raiders.”	Little	more	than	a	mutter.
“Where	away?”	Snorri	asked,	but	the	man	had	turned	from	him.
“Norwood.”	A	woman	on	the	other	side,	grey-haired	and	hobbling.	“They

burned	it	down.	There’s	nothing	for	us	now.”



“Baron	Ken’s	troops?	Is	Ancrath	at	war?”	Snorri	frowned.
The	woman	shook	her	head	and	spat.	“Raiders.	Renar	men.	Everywhere’s

burning.	Sometimes	it’s	knights	and	soldiers,	sometimes	just	rabble.	Road
scum.”	She	turned	away,	head	down,	lost	in	her	misery.

“I’m	sorry.”	Snorri	didn’t	try	to	cheer	her	or	claim	her	lot	would	soon
improve—but	he	said	something.	More	than	I	would	know	to	do.	A	shake	of
reins	and	he	moved	on.

We	made	our	passage	through	the	refugees,	thirty	of	them	maybe,	and
picked	up	speed.	It	was	a	relief	to	be	clear	of	the	stink.	I’d	been	poor	for	a	day
or	three	and	hadn’t	liked	it	one	bit.	The	survivors	of	Norwood	had	been	poor
enough	to	start	with,	and	now	they	had	nothing	but	need.

“They’re	hoping	to	throw	themselves	on	the	mercy	of	King	Olidan,”
Snorri	said.	“That’s	the	measure	of	their	desperation.”

It	still	irked	me	just	how	much	the	Norseman	knew	about	lands	that	lay
across	the	sea	from	his.	I’d	heard	of	Olidan,	of	course.	His	reputation	had
reached	even	into	my	cosy	world:	Grandmother	complained	of	his
manoeuvring	more	than	enough	for	that.	But	who	ruled	in	Kennick	and	how
relations	stood	between	Ancrath	and	its	muddy	neighbour	I	had	no	idea.
Snorri	had	upbraided	me	about	my	tenuous	grasp	of	empire	history,	but	I	told
him	history’s	just	old	news,	prophecy	that’s	well	past	its	sell-by	date.	Current
affairs	were	more	my	thing.	Especially	my	current	affairs,	and	Crath	City
could	improve	those	no	end.	There	would	be	wine,	women,	and	song,	all
much	missed	on	our	long	and	miserable	trek	so	far—women	in	particular.	In
addition,	where	better	to	find	some	wise	men	to	strike	off	the	shackles	the
Silent	Sister	had	bound	me	to	Snorri	with?

The	Roma	Road	bore	us	swifter	than	a	river	and	we	came	in	sight	of
Crath	City	as	the	sun	plunged	behind	its	towers,	making	a	black	architecture
of	spires	and	spans.	I’d	heard	Olidan’s	capital	rivalled	Vermillion	for	the
grandness	of	its	buildings	and	the	wealth	spent	there	in	bricks	and	mortar.
Martus	visited	on	an	embassy	two	years	previously	and	described	the	Ancrath
palace	as	the	stump	of	some	Builder-tower,	but	my	brother	was	ever	full	of
lies	and	I’d	be	able	to	make	my	own	judgment	on	that	soon	enough.

“We	should	skirt	around.”	Snorri	had	fallen	behind	and	when	I	turned	all
his	face	lay	in	shadow,	only	the	ridges	of	his	brow	and	cheekbones	catching
the	redness	of	the	sunset.

“Nonsense.	I’m	a	prince	of	the	March.	We	have	agreements	with	the
Ancraths	and	it’s	my	duty	to	call	in	on	the	king.”	Duty	had	nothing	to	do	with
it.	Crath	City	was	my	last	best	chance	to	break	the	Silent	Sister’s	curse.	With
luck	King	Olidan	could	be	persuaded	to	help.	He	would	have	magicians	in	his
service.	And	even	without	his	help	there	were	always	spell-smiths	of	one	kind
or	another	tucked	away	in	such	an	ancient	city.	I’d	never	set	much	store	by
such	things	before.	Smoke,	mirrors,	and	old	bones,	I’d	called	it.	But	even	a



prince	of	Red	March	may	have	to	revise	his	opinion	on	occasion.
“No,”	Snorri	said.	I	couldn’t	see	his	eyes	in	the	half-light,	and	as	the

shadows	stretched	out	across	the	road	I	remembered	that	this	would	be	the
time	she	spoke	to	him.	Aslaug,	his	dark	spirit,	would	be	whispering	her
poison	while	the	sun	fell	from	the	world.

“Rushing	in	unprepared	didn’t	work	so	well	for	you	the	first	time,	did	it?
You	want	to	save	Freya?	Little	Egil?	Cut	Sven	Broke-Oar	into	several	pieces?
It’s	time	to	use	your	head,	to	understand	what	we’re	up	against	and	formulate
a	plan.”	I	had	to	move	him	somehow,	even	if	it	risked	provoking	the	Viking	in
him	and	daring	the	consequences.	“This	is	Crath	City.	How	much	of	the
world’s	lore	came	from	this	very	spot?	Dig	down	far	enough	into	anything	the
wise	say	and	there’s	a	document	from	the	vaults	of	the	Loove	at	the	bottom	of
it.”	I	paused	for	breath,	having	exhausted	everything	I	could	remember	my
tutors	saying	about	Crath	City.	“Wouldn’t	time	here	be	well	spent?	Advice	on
the	nature	of	your	foe?	Maybe	an	antidote	to	ghoul	poison.	Or	even	a	cure	for
the	curse	on	us.	You’re	risking	the	Roma	Road,	rushing	north	at	full	tilt,
hoping	to	make	it	before	the	dark	seduces	you	.	.	.	and	the	solution	might	be
just	behind	those	walls.	The	Silent	Sister’s	not	the	only	witch	in	the	Broken
Empire,	not	by	a	long	shot.	Let’s	find	one	who	can	help	us.”

We	faced	each	other	now,	horses	nose	to	nose,	me	waiting	for	some	reply.
The	silence	stretched.	“You’re	right,”	Snorri	said	at	last,	and	nudged

Sleipnir	into	motion	towards	the	city.	The	sense	of	relief	that	washed	over	me
as	he	passed	by	proved	short-lived.	It	occurred	to	me	that	I	didn’t	know	for
sure	who	he	was	talking	to.	Me	or	his	demon?	I	waited	a	minute,	then
shrugged	and	rode	on	after.	Who	really	cared?	I	got	what	I	wanted.	A	chance.
After	all,	that’s	all	a	man	really	needs:	a	big	city	full	of	sin	and	sleaze,	and	a
chance.

“Aslaug	speaks	of	you,”	Snorri	said	as	I	drew	level	on	the	road.	“Says	the
light	will	turn	you—set	you	in	my	path.”	He	sounded	weary.	“I	doubt	Loki’s
daughter	can	utter	anything	that’s	not	half	a	lie,	but	she	has	a	silver	tongue
and	even	a	half-lie	is	half	true.	So	listen	when	I	say	it	would	be	.	.	.	poor
advice	.	.	.	that	led	you	to	try	to	stop	me.”

“Ha.”	I	slapped	him	on	the	shoulder	and	wished	I	hadn’t,	my	hand
crackling	with	painful	magics.	“Can	you	think	of	anyone	less	likely	than	me
to	listen	to	an	angel,	Snorri?”

	•	•	•	

Crath	City	opened	her	arms	and	invited	us	in.	We	drifted	along	the
riverbank,	enjoying	the	warmth	of	the	night.	Everywhere	along	the	dusty

path,	inns	lit	the	way	from	the	right,	barges	from	the	left,	moored	and	decked
with	lanterns.	The	city	folk	drank	at	tables,	at	barrel	tops,	standing	in	groups,



lying	on	the	sod,	or	on	the	decks	of	the	barges.	They	drank	from	clay	cups,
pewter	mugs,	wooden	trenchers,	from	jugs,	bottles,	kegs,	and	ewers,	the
method	of	delivery	as	varied	as	the	brews	poured	down	so	many	throats.

“A	jolly	lot,	these	Crathians.”	Already	the	place	had	started	to	feel	like
home.	Any	wanderlust	had	wandered	off	the	moment	I	smelled	cheap	wine
and	cheaper	perfume.

A	ruddy-cheeked	peasant	reeled	backwards	across	our	path,	somehow
maintaining	his	pint	mug	at	an	angle	that	spilled	no	ale,	though	he	stumbled
as	if	at	sea	on	a	stormy	night.	Snorri	shot	me	a	grin,	the	black	mood	Aslaug
had	left	him	with	now	lifting.

A	crowd	of	men	on	the	nearest	beer-barge	broke	out	into	the	chorus	of	the
“Farmer’s	Lament,”	a	bawdy	ballad	detailing	in	seventeen	verses	what
amusement	one	can	and	can’t	get	up	to	with	livestock.	I	knew	it	well,	though
in	Red	March	it’s	a	Rhonish	man	who’ll	have	no	peace	till	he	grabs	a	fleece,
not	a	Highlander.

“Must	be	a	festival	day.”	Snorri	breathed	in	deeply;	the	air	came	laden
with	the	smell	of	meat	a-roasting.	That’s	a	scent	that	will	set	your	belly
growling	after	a	long	day’s	travel.	Snorri’s	stomach	practically	roared.	“It
can’t	be	like	this	every	night.”

“The	lost	prince	is	back.	Didn’t	you	know?”	A	woman	in	her	cups,
passing	by	and	reaching	up	to	paw	at	Snorri’s	thigh.	“Everyone	knows	that!”
She	reversed	direction	and	walked	alongside	Sleipnir,	hand	still	exploring
Snorri’s	leg.	“Oh	my!	There’s	a	lot	of	meat	down	here!”

A	husband	or	suitor	managed	to	snag	the	woman’s	hand	and	pull	her
away,	frowning	all	the	while	but	hardly	in	a	position	to	blame	Snorri.	Which
was	probably	for	the	best,	all	things	considered.	I	watched	her	go.	Tempting
as	the	roast	in	her	own	way,	well	fed,	fat	some	might	say,	but	jolly	with	it,	a
twinkle	in	her	eye.	She	even	had	most	of	her	teeth.	I	sighed.	I	had	been
entirely	too	long	on	the	road.

“Lost	prince?”	Hadn’t	Baraqel	said	something	about	a	prince?
Snorri	shrugged.	“You’re	a	lost	prince.	They	always	seem	to	turn	up

again.	Some	prodigal	son	has	returned.	If	it	puts	the	locals	in	a	good	mood,
then	that	makes	life	easier.	We	get	in,	take	what	we	need,	leave.”

“Sounds	good.”	Of	course,	we	weren’t	talking	about	entirely	the	same
things—but	it	did	sound	good.

We	crossed	the	Sane	by	the	Royal	Bridge,	a	fine	broad	construction	sitting
on	great	piles	that	must	have	survived	the	Thousand	Suns.	Crath	City	rose
from	the	docks	on	the	opposite	bank,	sprawling	over	gentle	hills	and	reaching
up	to	the	walls	of	the	Old	City	where	the	money	lived,	looking	out	over	what
it	owned.	The	Tall	Castle	waited	in	the	middle	of	it	all,	high	above	us.	I	let	the
gradient	guide	the	way.	It	took	us	into	an	ill-lit	quarter	where	the	sewers	ran
rank	and	drunks	staggered	narrow	paths	along	the	middle	of	the	alleyways,



not	trusting	the	shadows.
“We’ll	find	a	place	down	here	tonight,”	I	said.	“Somewhere	unsavoury.”

Tomorrow	I’d	be	a	prince	again,	knocking	on	Olidan’s	doors.	Tonight	I
wanted	to	take	full	advantage	of	my	anonymity	and	enjoy	the	benefits	of
civilization	to	the	full.	The	benefits	of	a	decadent	civilization.	If	Baraqel	was
going	to	wake	me	up	at	cockcrow	for	a	lecture	on	morality,	I	might	as	well
make	it	worth	his	while.	Besides,	if	I	found	a	low	enough	dive	and	woke
amidst	as	much	sinning	as	I	hoped	to,	he	might	just	decide	not	to	show.

“There?”	Snorri	pointed	down	a	thoroughfare	broad	enough	to	host
taverns,	the	houses	stacked	three	storeys	high,	each	stage	heavy-beamed	and
overstepping	the	one	below	so	they	crowded	out	into	the	street	as	they	rose.
Snorri’s	thick	finger	directed	me	towards	one	of	several	hanging	signs.

“The	Falling	Angel.	Sounds	about	right.”	I	wondered	what	Baraqel	would
make	of	that.

With	the	horses	given	over	to	an	ostler	and	stabled,	I	followed	Snorri	into
the	bar.	He	had	to	duck	low	to	avoid	the	lanterns	over	the	street	door,	and
when	he	stepped	aside	the	place	lay	revealed	to	me.	A	dive	indeed,	and
populated	by	a	collection	of	the	most	dangerous-looking	men	I’d	laid	eyes	on
outside	a	fighting	pit	.	.	.	and	quite	possibly	inside	one	too.	My	instinct	was	to
execute	a	rapid	reversal	of	direction	on	one	heel	and	find	a	less	intimidating
venue,	but	Snorri	had	already	secured	a	table,	and	having	seen	him	demolish
Edris’s	crew	in	the	mountains	I	felt	it	might	be	safer	to	stick	close	to	him	than
try	my	luck	alone	outside.

The	Angel	had	that	reek	to	it:	sweat,	horses,	stale	beer,	and	fresh	sex.	The
serving	girls	looked	harried,	the	three	barkeeps	nervous;	even	the	whores
were	keeping	to	the	stairs,	peering	down	between	the	railings	as	if	no	longer
sure	of	their	chosen	profession.	It	seemed	as	though	the	bulk	of	the	customers
crowding	the	place	from	front	wall	to	back	weren’t	regulars.	In	fact,	as	I	slid
along	the	bench	to	sit	beside	my	Viking	I	noticed	that	the	night’s	clientele
looked	every	bit	as	far-flung	as	a	Norseman	and	a	native	of	Red	March.	The
Nuban	close	by	the	hearth	had	perhaps	travelled	farthest.	A	powerfully	built
man	with	tribal	scars	and	a	watchful	gravitas	about	him.	He	caught	me	staring
and	flashed	a	grin.

“Mercenaries,”	Snorri	said.
I	noticed	as	he	said	it	that	almost	every	man	in	the	place	carried	a	weapon,

most	of	them	several	weapons,	and	not	the	civilized	man’s	poniard	or	rapier
but	bloody	great	swords,	axes,	cleavers,	knives	for	gutting	bears,	and	the
biggest	crossbow	I’ve	ever	seen	occupied	most	of	the	table	before	the	Nuban.
Several	of	the	men	wore	breastplates,	grimy	and	battered	as	if	from	hard
service;	others	old	chain-mail	shirts	or	quilted	armour	stitched	with	the
occasional	bronze	plate.

“We	could	try	that	place	down	the	street,	the	Red	Dragon,”	I	suggested	as



Snorri	raised	his	arm	for	ale.	“Somewhere	a	bit	less	crowded	and”—I	raised
my	voice	to	compete	with	a	cheer	from	the	next	table—“noisy.”

“I	like	this	place.”	Snorri	raised	his	arm	higher.	“Beer,	woman,	beer!	For
the	love	of	Odin!”

“Hmmm.”	I	saw	cards	and	dice	aplenty,	but	something	told	me	that
winning	money	off	any	of	these	men	might	be	a	short-lived	pleasure.	Beside
Snorri	an	old	and	toothless	man	supped	his	ale	from	a	saucer,	still	managing
to	spill	most	of	it	over	the	grey	stubble	of	his	chin.	A	young	fellow	sat	next	to
the	elder,	this	one	not	quite	old	enough	to	shave,	slim,	slight,	unremarkable
save	for	a	fine	quality	to	his	features	that	might	make	him	handsome	in	the
right	light.	He	shot	me	a	shy	smile,	but	the	truth	of	it	was	I	didn’t	trust	either
of	them	to	be	what	they	seemed.	Keep	the	company	of	brigands	such	as	filled
the	Angel	and	you	had	to	have	some	iron	in	you,	probably	a	whole	parcel	of
wickedness	too.

Our	ale	arrived,	smacked	down	in	earthenware	cups	and	frothing	over	the
sides.	They	were	poorly	fashioned,	made	in	a	hurry	for	the	lowest	cost,	the
sort	of	cups	that	expected	to	get	broken.	I	sipped	from	mine—bitter	stuff—
and	wiped	away	the	white	moustache.	Across	the	room,	through	smoke	and
past	the	to-and-fro	of	bodies,	a	huge	man	was	giving	me	the	evil	eye.	He	had
the	kind	of	blunt	weapon	of	a	face	you	could	imagine	breaking	through	a
door,	and	he	sat	head	and	shoulders	above	the	men	beside	him.	To	the	giant’s
left	a	man	who	seemed	too	fat	to	be	dangerous	but	somehow	managed	to	look
scary	anyway,	with	a	patchy	beard	straggling	down	over	multiple	chins,	piggy
eyes	assessing	the	crowd	whilst	he	chomped	the	meat	off	a	bone.	To	the	right
was	the	only	normal-sized	man	of	the	trio,	looking	somehow	ridiculous	in
their	shadow,	and	yet	I’d	be	giving	him	the	widest	of	berths.	Everything	about
him	said	warrior.	He	ate	and	drank	with	an	intensity	that	unnerved	me,	and	if
a	man	can	unnerve	you	across	a	crowded	room	just	by	cutting	his	beef,	then
you	probably	don’t	want	to	see	him	draw	steel.

“You	know,	I	really	think	we’d	be	better	off	at	the	Red	Dragon	down	the
street,”	I	said,	putting	down	my	cup	half-empty.	“This	is	obviously	a	private
party	.	.	.	I	don’t	think	it’s	safe	here.”

“Of	course	it	isn’t.”	Snorri	gave	me	that	same	worrying	grin	he	had
offered	on	the	mountain.	“That’s	why	I	like	it.”	He	raised	his	cup,	coming
dangerously	near	to	splattering	another	of	the	band	with	foam,	this	one	a
moustachioed	fellow	with	an	unlikely	number	of	knives	bound	about	his
person.	“Meat!	Bread!	And	more	ale!”	I	could	imagine	him	now	in	the	mead-
hall	of	his	jarl	at	a	gathering	of	the	clans,	grasping	a	drinking	horn.	He	looked
more	relaxed	than	I’d	seen	him	since	the	blood	pits	in	Vermillion.

I	caught	sight	of	the	ugly	giant	throwing	me	another	dirty	look.	“I’ll	be
back.”	I	struggled	up	between	bench	and	table	and	went	out	the	front	to
relieve	myself.	If	my	admirer	across	the	tavern	had	stood	and	come	over	to



make	trouble	I	probably	would	have	wet	myself,	so	getting	out	of	his	eyeline
to	answer	nature’s	call	seemed	a	good	move.

The	Falling	Angel	turned	out	not	to	be	entirely	without	class.	They	had	a
decent	purpose-built	wall	to	piss	against	and	a	little	gutter	running	down	into
the	street	gutter	to	carry	away	the	used	beer.	Although	the	fact	that	someone
was	lying	facedown	in	the	street	gutter	and	leaking	blood	into	it	did	detract
somewhat	from	the	otherwise	pleasant	scene	of	life	flowing	through	the	less
salubrious	arteries	of	Crath	City.	Beyond	him,	bravos	and	labourers,
goodwives	with	their	goodhusbands,	vendors	of	food	on	sticks,	all	came	and
went,	glimpsed	in	the	light	of	one	lantern,	lost,	then	seen	again	in	the	light	of
another,	passing	by	the	purveyors	of	affection	on	the	street	corner	and	lost
again	never	to	return.

I	finished	up	and	went	back	in.
“—think	that	but	you’d	be	wrong.”
I’d	been	outside	for	two	minutes,	three	at	the	most,	and	returned	to	find

Snorri	flanked	by	mercenaries	and	swapping	stories	like	old	friends.	“No,”
Snorri	continued,	back	half-turned	to	me.	“I’m	telling	you	he’s	not.	I	mean,
you	might	think	it	to	look	at	him,	granted.	But	I	hauled	him	out	of	this	place,
they	had	him	tied	to	a	table,	wanted	some	information	and	the	knives	were
out.	And	we’re	not	talking	a	gentle	jabbing	here—they	were	about	to	cut	off
the	kind	of	bits	you’d	miss.”	Snorri	drained	off	the	last	of	his	ale.	“Know
what	he	said	to	them?	Roared	at	them	he	did.	I	heard	it	out	in	the	corridor.	‘I
won’t	ever	tell!’	Shouted	it	in	their	faces.	‘Get	the	pincers	out	if	you	like.	Heat
them	in	the	coals.	I	ain’t	talking.’	Now	that’s	the	kind	of	man	who’s	got	fire	in
his	belly.	Might	look	like	there’s	nothing	behind	the	bluster,	but	you	can’t
trust	your	gut	with	this	one.	Brave	man.	Charged	an	unborn	all	by	himself.
Thing	must	have	been	twelve	foot	of	grave-horror,	had	me	disarmed,	and	in
came	Jal	swinging	a	sword—”	Snorri	glanced	my	way.	“Jal!	I	was	just	talking
about	you.”	He	gestured	across	the	table.	“Make	a	hole!”	And	they	did,	two
mean-eyed	thugs	sliding	apart	so	I	could	wedge	in.	“These	fine	fellows	are
Brother	Sim”—he	pointed	out	the	slight	lad—“Brother	Elban,	Brother
Gains	.	.	.”	He	indicated	the	old	man	and	a	tow-haired	bully.	“Well,	they’re	all
brothers.	It’s	like	a	holy	order	of	the	road,	only	without	any	‘holy.’”	He	waved
his	half-gnawed	bone	down	the	line.	“Brothers	Grumlow,	Emmer,	Roddat,
Jobe	.	.	.”	The	knife-man,	a	stern	close-shaved	fellow,	and	two	younger	men,
both	sallow,	one	scar-cheeked,	the	other	pockmarked.	“More	beer!”	And	he
thumped	the	table	hard	enough	to	make	everything	on	it	jump.

Somehow	Snorri’s	loudness	had	broken	the	tension	and	the	Angel	came
alive.	The	staff	relaxed,	the	girls	came	down	off	the	stairs	to	ply	their	trade,
and	laughter	ran	more	freely.	I	may	have	been	the	only	man	there	still
miserable.	It’s	in	my	nature	to	absent	myself	from	danger	whenever	possible,
and	relaxed	or	not,	this	brotherhood	we’d	fallen	in	with	sweated	danger	from



every	pore.	Besides,	Snorri’s	magic	hadn’t	reached	all	corners	of	the	room.	I
could	still	feel	the	giant’s	hostile	gaze	searing	across	the	back	of	my	neck.	I
snatched	up	the	ale	set	before	me	and	knocked	it	back,	hoping	to	deaden	the
sensation.

Relief	came	in	the	instant.	An	inviting	softness	squeezed	against	my	neck
to	replace	the	feeling	of	being	stared	at,	hennaed	curls	flooded	over	my
shoulder,	narrow	hands	massaged	my	upper	arms,	and	the	ridges	of	a	whale-
boned	corset	pressed	the	length	of	my	back.

“Where’s	your	smile,	my	handsome?”	She	leaned	around	me,	bodice
offering	her	goods	for	display.	Pale	hands	ran	down	across	my	chest,	over	the
flatness	of	my	stomach.	I’ll	admit	that	weeks	of	unwanted	exercise	and
privation	had	stripped	me	of	any	padding.	“I’m	sure	I	could	find	it.”	Her
fingers	slid	lower.	Years	of	experience	in	such	situations	kept	my	attention
divided	between	the	twin	distractions	of	breasts	served	up	on	the	bodice	and
the	location	of	my	own	valuables.	She	leaned	in	and	husked	into	my	ear,
“Sally	will	make	it	all	good.”

“My	thanks,	but	no.”	I	surprised	myself.	She	still	had	her	youth,	and	the
good	looks	she’d	been	born	with.	Those	had	yet	to	be	stripped	by	the	bitter
wind	of	experience	that	blows	through	the	backstreets	of	such	places.	But	I’m
not	at	my	best	in	a	cold	sweat,	and	every	coward’s	instinct	I	had	told	me	I
should	be	running.	Under	such	circumstances	my	ardour	grows	softer.

“Truly?”	She	leaned	in,	breasts	swaying,	breathing	the	word	into	my	ear.
“I’ve	no	money,”	I	said,	and	in	an	instant	the	warmth	fell	from	her

expression,	her	eyes	dismissing	me	to	seek	out	other	opportunities.	Snorri
caught	her	attention,	of	course,	but	he	was	well	wedged	into	his	corner	and
attacking	a	slab	of	beef	on	the	bone	with	such	ferocity	that	Sally	perhaps
doubted	she	would	be	able	to	compete.	In	a	swirl	of	skirts	she	was	gone.
Nervous	or	not,	I	still	turned	to	watch	her	retreat	and	found	myself	the	study
of	two	veterans,	grey	heads,	but	lean	and	tough	like	old	leather,	the	same
dispassionate	speculation	in	their	eyes	that	I’d	seen	when	Cutter	John	took	my
measure.	I	turned	back	to	my	plate,	lacking	appetite.	Someone	had	called
those	two	Brothers	Liar	and	Row.	I	had	no	desire	to	find	out	how	they	came
by	their	names.	A	roar	of	laughter	from	Snorri	overwrote	my	fears,	though	I
did	flinch	when	he	slammed	his	axe	down	on	the	table.

“No.	That’s	an	axe.	What	you’ve	got	is	more	by	way	of	a	hatchet.”
As	Snorri	held	forth	about	longboats,	axe	design,	and	the	price	of	salt-

fish,	I	glanced	around	with	as	much	surreptitiousness	as	can	be	achieved	over
the	rim	of	a	beer	mug.	Aside	from	the	trio	of	huge,	fat,	and	deadly	behind	me,
one	other	table	seemed	set	on	matters	more	serious	than	the	emptying	of
barrels.	In	an	alcove	across	the	room,	two	men	debated	over	a	table.	The	few
pieces	of	armour	they	still	wore	were	far	better	quality	than	anything	the
Brothers	had.	Both	were	tall,	both	with	long	dark	hair,	one	straight,	one



curled,	the	elder	maybe	thirty,	a	generous	face	perhaps	not	given	to	its	current
sombre	look,	the	other	young,	very	young,	maybe	not	yet	eighteen,	but
dangerous.	If	the	rest	of	the	Brothers	set	off	my	warning	bells,	this	sharp-
featured	boy	rang	them	off	their	mountings.	He	cast	me	a	look	the	moment	I
found	focus	on	him.	A	thousand-yard	stare	that	told	me	to	turn	away.

Ale	continued	to	flow	and	gradually	my	appetite	returned,	followed	by
my	good	humour.	Ale	has	a	way	of	washing	away	a	man’s	fears.	Sure	enough
he’ll	find	them	the	next	day,	sodden	and	wrapped	around	his	ankles,	with	a
couple	of	new	ones	thrown	into	the	mix	and	a	headache	fit	for	splitting	rocks,
but	in	the	moment	ale	is	a	fine	substitute	for	bravery,	wit,	and	contentment.
Before	very	long	I	was	exchanging	tales	of	wenching	with	the	taciturn
Brother	Emmer	wedged	beside	me.	A	fairly	one-way	exchange,	truth	be	told,
but	I	do	warm	to	the	subject	once	my	tongue’s	been	loosened,	as	do	most
young	men	in	good	health.

By	the	time	the	next	whore	approached	I	was	ready	with	a	quite	different
answer	to	the	one	I’d	given	Sally.	Mary	had	pared	the	corset-and-gown
ensemble	down	to	just	corset,	and	the	combination	of	her	long	dark	hair,
mischievous	eyes,	and	the	ample	portion	of	recklessness	the	ale	had	lent	me
had	me	getting	to	my	feet.	At	which	point	I	noticed	that	the	giant—the
Brothers	called	him	Rike—was	inbound,	his	face	heaped	up	over	raw	bones
into	a	fearsome	scowl.	I	sat	immediately	and	suddenly	found	the	bottom	of
my	cup	to	be	fascinating.

Relief	sighed	out	of	me	as	the	giant’s	shadow	passed	over	us	and	moved
on.	The	man	was	taller	than	Snorri	by	at	least	a	hand’s	width,	his	arms	lacking
the	Norseman’s	well-defined	muscle	but	thicker	than	my	thighs.	Brothers
scattered	out	of	his	way	as	he	closed	on	Snorri:	Young	Sim	literally	slid	under
the	table	to	avoid	being	caught	between	them—slippery	that	one,	as	I
suspected.	Mary	also	vanished	with	commendable	speed.	Snorri	himself
seemed	unconcerned,	placing	his	ale	mug	on	the	next	table	along	and	wiping
the	beard	at	the	corners	of	his	mouth	to	clean	away	any	of	the	larger	detritus
from	his	meal.

Generally,	even	when	a	fight	is	inevitable,	both	parties	take	a	short	while
to	warm	to	the	idea.	A	disparaging	remark	is	aimed,	the	reply	ups	the	stakes,
someone’s	mother	is	a	whore,	and	an	instant	later—whether	the	mother	was	in
fact	a	whore	or	not—there’s	blood	on	the	ground.	Brother	Rike	favoured	a
shorter	path	to	violence.	He	simply	let	out	an	animal	roar	and	closed	the	final
three	paces	at	speed.

At	the	last	moment	Snorri	shifted	his	considerable	weight	and	the	end	of
the	hastily	cleared	bench	shot	up	to	smack	Rike	under	the	chin,	then	jam
against	his	throat.	Even	with	Snorri	sitting	on	it,	the	bench	scraped	several
inches	along	the	floor	before	arresting	Rike’s	advance.	Snorri	stood,	letting
the	bench	fall	as	Rike	reeled	back,	then	in	one	quick	stride	seized	the	man



behind	his	head	with	both	hands	and	rammed	him	face	first	into	the	table.	The
impact	sent	my	ale	vaulting	out	of	its	cup	and	into	my	lap.	Rike	himself	slid
to	the	floor,	trailing	a	long	red	stain	across	the	beer-soaked	boards.

The	killer	stood	behind	his	fallen	companion.	Red	Kent,	they	called	this
one.	His	hand	on	the	hatchet	at	his	side,	a	question	on	his	brow.

“Ha!	Let	him	sleep	it	off.”	Snorri	grinned	at	Kent	and	sat	down.	Brother
Kent	returned	the	smile	and	went	back	to	sit	with	his	fat	companion.

Snorri	returned	to	his	place	and	reached	across	to	retrieve	his	drink	from
the	other	table.

I	felt	much	better	after	that.	Rike’s	sudden	downfall	filled	me	with	no	end
of	good	humour.	I	snatched	another	ale	from	a	passing	serving	girl,	tossing	a
copper	onto	her	tray.

“Well,	Brother	Emmer.”	I	paused	to	quaff—a	style	of	drinking	not
dissimilar	from	swigging	but	which	involves	spilling	rather	more	of	the	brew
down	your	chest.	“I	don’t	know	about	you	but	I’m	in	the	mood	for	some	more
horizontal	entertainment.”	And	as	if	on	cue	sweet	Mary	stood	at	my	side,
smile	in	place.	“Hail	Mary,	full	of	grace,”	I	said,	alcohol	substituting	for	wit.
“My	father’s	a	cardinal,	did	you	know	that?	Let’s	go	upstairs	and	discuss
ecumenical	matters.”	Mary	giggled	dutifully,	and	with	a	hand	on	Brother
Emmer’s	shoulder	I	found	my	feet.	“Lead	on,	dear	lady.”	I	started	a	bow	but
thought	better	of	it,	most	traces	of	balance	having	deserted	me.

I	followed	Mary	to	the	stairs,	veering	from	one	side	to	the	other	but
thankfully	not	managing	to	spill	a	Brother’s	pint	or	otherwise	causing	offence,
and	always	drawn	back	on	course	by	her	tempting	wiggle.	At	the	bottom	of
the	stairs	Mary	took	a	candle	from	the	wall	box,	lit	it,	and	led	on	up.	It
seemed	I’d	started	a	trend	as	someone	else	followed	us	up	the	steps,	boots
thudding.

A	long	passageway	divided	the	second	floor,	doors	to	either	side.	Mary
led	the	way	to	one	of	the	ones	standing	ajar.	She	set	the	candle	in	a	holder	on
the	wall	and	turned.	Her	smile	slipped	away,	eyes	widening.

“Get	lost.”	For	a	moment	I	wondered	why	I’d	said	that,	then	realized	that
the	voice	had	come	from	behind	me.

Mary	dodged	aside	and	pattered	back	down	the	corridor	whilst	I	wrestled
with	the	business	of	turning	around	without	falling	over.	Before	I	could
manage	it,	fingers	knotted	in	the	hair	at	the	back	of	my	head	and	steered	me
into	the	darkened	room.

“Snorri!”	What	had	been	meant	as	a	manly	cry	for	assistance	came	out
more	as	a	squeak.

“We	don’t	need	him.”	The	hand	steered	me	further	in.	Shadows	swung	as
the	candle	moved	behind	me.	“I—”	A	pause	to	deepen	my	voice.	“I	don’t
have	any	money.	Just	a	copper	or	two.	The	Viking	carries	for	me.”

“I	don’t	want	your	money,	boy.”



Even	a	skinful	of	ale	only	allows	so	much	room	for	optimism.	The	edge
of	a	bed	frame	pressed	sharp	against	my	shins.	“Fuck	that!”	I	swung	round,
fist	flailing.	The	flickering	light	allowed	me	a	glimpse	of	Brother	Emmer
before	a	two-handed	shove	sent	me	tumbling	backwards.	My	fist	found	only
air,	and	the	candle	went	out.

“No!”	It	became	a	wail.	The	bedclothes	engulfed	me,	lavender	scented	to
obscure	the	stink	of	old	sweat.	I	lashed	out	again	but	the	blanket	tangled	my
arm.	I	heard	the	door	kicked	shut.	The	weight	of	a	body	covered	me.

“Emmer!	I’m	not	like	that!”	A	shout	now.	“I’m—”	I	remembered	my
knife	and	started	to	hunt	it.

“Oh,	shush.”	Much	softer	tones,	close	to	my	face.	“Just	behave.”
“But—”
“It’s	Emma.”
“What?”
“Emma,	not	Emmer.”	An	iron	grip	encircled	my	wrist	as	my	fingertips

found	the	hilt	of	my	dagger.	The	body	pinning	me	now	stretched	out	on	mine,
hard	with	muscle	but	shorter	than	me,	and	at	such	close	quarters,	quite
possibly	female.	“Emma,”	she	said	again.	“But	let	that	slip	outside	this	room,
pretty	boy,	and	I’ll	cut	your	tongue	out	and	eat	it.”

“But—”
“Just	relax.	I’ve	saved	you	half	a	silver	ducet.”
So	I	did.



SEVENTEEN

“Mired	in	sin!”	The	annoyingly	judgmental	voice	rang	behind	my	ears
and	sent	shards	of	white	pain	into	my	head.	“Deeper	in	deed	than	in

thought!	I	hadn’t	considered	it	possible.”
“Oh	God!”	Someone	had	turned	my	stomach	inside	out	and	filled	it	with

eels.	I	was	sure	of	it.
“How	dare	you	call	upon	him!”	Baraqel’s	anger	carried	a	hint	of	delight,

as	if	nothing	pleased	him	more	than	finding	good	fresh	sin	to	condemn.
“Just	kill	me!”	I	rolled	over.	All	of	me	hurt.	I	must	have	slept	with	my

mouth	open	because	by	the	taste	of	it	the	rats	had	been	using	it	as	a	latrine	all
night.

“How	a	creature	such	as	you	came	to	the	light	.	.	.”	Baraqel’s	imagination
or	eloquence	failed	him.

I	cracked	one	eye	open.	Daylight	streamed	in	like	razors,	slivers	of	it
reaching	through	heavy	shutters	to	illuminate	a	filthy	chamber.	I	ran	a	hand
across	my	chest,	remembering	somebody	pushing	me.	Naked?	My	locket!	I
lurched	up,	my	stomach	lurched	faster,	and	for	a	moment	I	struggled	not	to
decorate	the	headboard.	My	clothes	lay	strewn	over	the	floorboards,	and	an
ill-advised	lunge	placed	my	hand	over	the	comforting	lump	that	the	locket
made	in	the	shirt	that	I’d	been	wearing	since	Oppen.	This	time	my	struggle
was	in	vain	and	I	threw	up	what	appeared	to	be	everything	I’d	eaten	the	night
before,	along	with	a	couple	of	other	people’s	meals	and	a	bag	of	diced	carrots
I’d	no	memory	of	consuming.

“Cover	yourself,	man!	There’s	a	lady	present.”	I	winced	at	the	angel’s
voice,	roaring	like	nails	down	the	chalkboard	of	my	soul.

“Uuuurgod,”	proved	to	be	my	snappiest	response.	I	wiped	my	mouth	and
hauled	myself	up	so	my	head	rose	above	the	edge	of	the	bed.

On	the	far	side,	across	a	wrinkled	sea	of	soiled	linen	and	grey	wool,
Emma	was	pulling	herself	back	into	a	pair	of	worn	leather	trousers.	Even	in
my	delicate	state	I	managed	to	admire	the	hard,	if	grimy,	lines	of	her	body
before	they	were	entirely	hidden	away.	She	turned,	buttoning	her	jerkin	over
tight-wrapped	breasts,	her	expression	a	mix	of	amusement	and	mild	disgust.	I
took	her	to	be	somewhere	in	her	thirties,	towards	the	end	of	them	perhaps.



Even	with	her	short	hair	and	broken	nose,	I	couldn’t	understand	how	I’d	not
seen	her	for	what	she	was	before.

“My	secret.”	She	grabbed	herself	between	the	legs,	all	traces	of
amusement	dropping	from	her	face.	“Speak	of	it	and	I’ll	cut	you	to	look	the
same.”	Suddenly	I	couldn’t	see	any	trace	of	a	woman	in	her	at	all.

“There’s	no	secret,	Brother	Emmer,”	I	said.
“That’s	right.”	She	flipped	a	copper	crown	at	me,	pulled	her	knife	from

where	it	had	been	wedging	the	door	shut,	and	left	the	room.
Alone	in	the	unsavoury	mess,	I	took	a	moment	to	reflect.	“A	helluva

woman!”	I	crawled	back	onto	the	bed.
“Naked	as	the	devil	and	clothed	in	sin!”	Baraqel	howled—or	at	least	it

felt	as	if	he	howled	it.	“Find	a	priest,	Prince	Jalan,	and—”	Somewhere	the	sun
parted	company	with	the	horizon	and	shut	him	up.	The	daylight	lanced	ever
more	pointedly	through	the	shutters	and	I	pulled	the	blanket	over	my
pounding	head.	The	pounding	got	worse.	After	a	few	confused	minutes	of
rolling	about	in	misery,	holding	my	temples,	I	figured	out	that	a	fair	portion	of
the	pounding	was	actually	coming	through	the	wall	as	a	headboard	struck
against	it	repeatedly.	I	buried	my	head	under	my	arms,	then	decided	against	it;
the	mattress	was	a	long	way	from	wholesome,	several	national	boundaries
away	from	it	probably.	Instead	I	just	plugged	my	ears	and	hoped	for	the	world
in	general	to	go	away,	and	for	whoever	was	having	such	a	good	time	in	the
next	room	to	run	out	of	energy.	Or	die.

An	indeterminate	amount	of	time	later	the	stink	of	the	place	drove	me	to
stagger	to	the	door,	still	reeling,	half-drunk	from	the	night	before,	wrapped	in
a	thin	blanket	and	clutching	most	of	my	clothes,	my	boots,	my	sword.	I	took
Emma’s	copper	too.	Waste	not,	want	not.	The	shirt	I	left	as	a	gift	for	the	next
occupant—minus	Mother’s	locket,	of	course.

“—royally	fucked.”	A	man	stood	in	the	doorway	to	the	next	room,	facing
into	it.	From	the	back	he	looked	a	lot	like	the	older	of	the	two	mercenaries	in
the	alcove	last	night.	“So,	are	we	ready	to	go?”	he	asked.

“Tell	them	an	hour.	I’ll	be	ready	in	an	hour.”	A	younger	man,	inside	the
room.

The	other	shrugged	and	turned	to	leave,	pulling	the	door	behind	him.	A
woman	in	the	room	said	something	about	a	prince,	but	the	rest	of	it	was	lost
as	the	door	closed.	The	man—it	was	the	fellow	from	the	alcove—strode	past
me,	a	slight	smile	twitching	on	his	lips.

It	occurred	to	me	that	I	might	wear	my	clothes	rather	than	carry	them.	I
dressed,	somewhat	gingerly,	sore	in	all	manner	of	places,	and	went	down	the
stairs.

The	bar	was	largely	deserted—just	a	handful	of	Brothers	slumbering	at
their	tables	with	heads	on	folded	arms,	and	Snorri	in	the	midst	of	it	all
attacking	a	pewter	plate	mounded	with	bacon	and	eggs.	The	dark-haired	man



from	the	corridor	sat	beside	him.
“Jal!”	Snorri	shouted,	loud	enough	to	split	my	head,	and	waved	me	over.

“You	look	like	hell!	Get	some	food	inside	you.”
Resigning	myself	to	his	good	cheer	I	sat	at	the	table,	as	close	to	his

breakfast	as	my	stomach	would	allow.
“This	is	Makin.”	He	jabbed	a	loaded	fork	at	the	man	beside	him.
“Charmed,”	I	said,	feeling	anything	but.
“Likewise.”	Makin	nodded	politely.	“I	see	they	have	fearsome	bedbugs	in

this	establishment.”	His	gaze	slid	to	where	my	jacket	hung	open,	exposing
chest	and	belly.

“Christ	on	a	bike.”	Something	had	bitten	me	all	right.	Emma’s	tooth
marks	left	me	looking	like	I	had	some	kind	of	giant	pox	all	over.

“One	of	the	women	said	you	had	some	trouble	with	Brother	Emmer	last
night?”	Snorri	shovelled	half	a	sliced	pig	into	his	mouth,	tucking	in	stray	ends
of	bacon	with	a	finger.

“That	Emmer’s	a	tricky	sort,”	Makin	said,	nodding	to	himself.	“Lightning
fast.	Some	smarts	too.”	He	tapped	his	forehead.

“No.”	I	avoided	squeaking	the	denial.	“No	trouble.”
Snorri	pursed	his	lips	around	his	mouthful,	peering	down	at	my	bites.	I

clasped	my	jacket	closed	over	them.	“I’m	not	judging,”	he	said,	one	eyebrow
elevating.

“Man’s	free	to	choose	his	own	path.”	Makin	rubbed	his	chin.
I	shot	to	my	feet,	immediately	wishing	I’d	taken	more	time	over	it.

“Damned	if	I’m	sitting	here	watching	you	stuff	down	pig	like	a	.	.	.	like	.	.	.”
“A	pig?”	Snorri	suggested.	He	lifted	his	plate	and	scraped	several	fried

eggs	towards	his	mouth.
“I’m	getting	some	decent	clothes	and	a	bath,	and	a	meal	at	some	half-

civilized	establishment.”	My	headache	appeared	to	be	trying	to	split	me	down
the	middle	and	I	hated	the	world.	“I’ll	meet	you	at	the	castle	gates	at	noon.”

“It’s	noon	now!”
“Three	hours!”	I	called	it	from	the	doorway	and	staggered	out	into	the

sunshine.

	•	•	•	

The	sun	watched	from	the	west	as	I	climbed	the	long	hill	to	the	outer	gate
of	the	Tall	Castle.	I’d	soaked	off	the	road	stink	at	a	bathhouse,	leaving	the

waters	black;	had	my	hair	cut	and	tamed;	and	calmed	my	head	with	some
powders	the	barber	swore	were	good	for	the	easing	of	pain,	also	beneficial	in
cases	of	plague	and	dropsy.	Finally	I	had	purchased	a	fresh	linen	shirt,
adjusted	to	my	size	with	a	few	well-placed	stitches;	a	cloak	of	brushed	velvet,
trimmed	with	something	claimed	as	ermine	and	probably	squirrel;	and	a



silverish	clasp	mounted	with	a	piece	of	rubyish	glass	to	round	it	off.	Not	quite
princely	garb,	but	enough	to	pass	muster	as	gentry	on	casual	inspection.

Snorri	hadn’t	turned	up.	I	considered	going	on	without	him	but	decided
against	it.	Apart	from	the	show	of	having	a	bodyguard,	I’ve	always	been	in
favour	of	having	one,	for	guarding	my	body.	Especially	a	maniac	over	six	and
a	half	foot	tall,	packed	with	muscle	and	with	a	vested	interest	in	not	letting	me
die.

It	took	perhaps	another	half	hour	before	I	saw	the	Norseman	on	the	broad
street	below.	He	had	Sleipnir	and	Ron	in	tow	but	at	least	hadn’t	managed	to
have	any	of	the	Brothers	tag	along.

“You	should	have	left	the	nags	where	they	were.”	I	knew	better	than	to
upbraid	him	for	being	late.	He	would	just	grin	and	slap	me	on	the	back	as	if	I
were	joking.

“I	thought	only	beggars	arrived	on	foot	in	these	flat	countries.”	Snorri
grinned	and	ran	a	hand	through	Sleipnir’s	mane.	“Besides,	I’ve	grown	fond	of
the	old	girl,	and	she’s	carrying	all	my	stuff.”

“Better	to	let	them	think	I’ve	a	decent	horse	stabled	somewhere	nearby
than	to	march	up	to	the	gates	with	this	mangy	pair	and	suffer	the	pity	of
guardsmen.”

“Well—”
“Look,	never	mind,	just	pretend	they’re	both	yours.”	I	walked	on,	letting

him	follow	at	a	respectful	distance.
I	presented	myself	at	the	appropriately	named	Triple	Gate	to	the	most

senior	of	several	chain-armoured	guards	standing	to	vet	potential	visitors.
There’s	a	certain	arrogance	expected	of	aristocracy,	and	a	life	of	service	had
trained	men	such	as	the	ones	before	me	to	respond	to	it.	My	brother	Martus
had	a	marvellous	way	of	looking	down	his	nose	at	even	the	tallest	of
underlings,	and	I	do	a	decent	job	of	it	myself.	I	summoned	my	reserves	and
radiated	disdain.	Snorri	would	of	course	assert,	and	frequently	did,	that	I’d
never	let	go	of	my	royal	superiority—though	his	turn	of	phrase	would	run
something	along	the	lines	of	“still	got	the	sceptre	up	your	arse”—but	he’d	yet
to	see	me	in	full	flow.

“Prince	Jalan	Kendeth	of	Red	March,	scion	of	the	Red	Queen,	heir
deximal	to	Vermillion	and	all	its	domains.”	I	paused	to	let	the	“prince”	sink
in.	“I’m	travelling	north	and	have	detoured	from	the	Roma	Road	to	pay	a
courtesy	call	on	King	Olidan.	In	addition	to	the	normal	pleasantries,	I	will	be
offering	to	bear	back	to	the	Red	Queen	any	diplomatic	correspondence
subsequent	to	the	recent	visit	of	my	brother,	Prince	Martus.”	For	once	in	my
life	I	had	cause	to	be	thankful	that	Martus	and	I	looked	so	alike.

“Welcome	to	the	Tall	Castle,	Your	Highness.”	The	man,	a	sturdy	fellow
with	steel-grey	hair	escaping	his	helm,	took	a	step	towards	me.	He	ran	his
beady	black	eyes	over	my	attire	and	peered	pointedly	behind	me	as	if	looking



for	my	retinue.
“I’m	travelling	in	haste.	This	man	here	is	my	personal	guard.	We’ve

rooms	down	in	the	Old	Town.”	I	left	hanging	the	suggestion	that	more
retainers	might	be	occupying	those	rooms.

“Of	course,	Prince—”	He	frowned.	“Jalan?”
“Yes.	Jalan.	Now	tell	Olidan	I’m	here	and	be	quick	about	it.”
That	got	his	attention.	There	aren’t	many	who’d	lose	King	Olidan	his	title

when	face	to	face	with	his	guards.	Even	fewer	who	would	want	an	audience
with	the	king	under	false	pretences.	By	all	accounts	King	Olidan	was	not	the
nicest	of	men.

“I’ll	send	a	messenger	immediately,	Your	Majesty.	Perhaps	you	would
like	to	wait	in	my	chamber	in	the	gatehouse.	I	can	have	a	man	stable	your	.	.	.
horses.”

I	considered	waiting	in	the	shade	of	the	wall.	It	promised	to	be	a	nice
night,	but	if	he	kept	us	waiting	too	long	we’d	be	standing	on	our	dignity	to	the
amusement	of	gawkers.	“Lead	on,”	I	said.	It’s	always	better	to	sit	on	your
dignity	in	private	than	to	stand	on	it	in	public.

We	followed	on	beneath	the	gates	to	a	small	door	in	the	thickness	of	the
wall.	The	stairs	behind	led	upwards.	The	Captain	of	the	Triple	Gate	had
himself	a	garret	above	the	entranceway,	tucked	behind	the	fearsome	winding
gear	and	the	recesses	in	which	the	three	portcullises	rested	when	not	keeping
people	out.	It	proved	clean	and	boasted	a	table	and	chairs.	I	doubted	many
foreign	princes	had	been	entertained	there,	but	probably	rather	few	arrived
unannounced	and	all	but	unaccompanied.

Snorri	squeezed	his	knees	in	under	the	table.	“A	beer	wouldn’t	go	amiss.”
The	gate	captain	raised	a	brow	at	that	and	looked	to	me.	I	nodded.	Not

that	I	was	going	to	touch	the	stuff.	I’d	sworn	off	it	for	good	that	morning.	“I’ll
see	what	I	can	do,”	he	said,	and	went	out	the	door.	We	heard	him	bellowing	in
the	stairwell	a	moment	later.

“Seems	to	be	going	all	right.”	Snorri	reached	out	for	the	hunk	of	bread	at
the	table’s	centre	and	started	filling	his	beard	with	crumbs.

“Hmmm.”	He	had	no	worries.	The	risk	would	all	come	my	way.	I	had	to
trust	that	Olidan	would	know	I	wasn’t	important	enough	to	rank	as	a	hostage
and	that	even	a	man	as	cold	and	ruthless	as	the	King	of	Ancrath	was	reputed
to	be	would	think	twice	before	earning	my	grandmother’s	displeasure.
Grandmother	was	my	best	chance.	There	were	plenty	of	stories	about	how	she
had	made	Red	March	feared	amongst	its	neighbours,	and	some	of	them,
whilst	hard	to	believe,	were	the	sort	that	give	a	man	nightmares.	In	any	event,
I	judged	the	risk	of	Ancrath’s	court	worth	the	chance	that	I	might	be	released
from	the	chains	that	bound	me	to	Snorri	and	set	free	to	scuttle	away	south
once	more.

The	beer	arrived	with	a	jug	and	two	pewter	tankards.	I	watched	Snorri



savour	his	while	my	stomach	attempted	various	feats	of	acrobatics.	Despite
the	Norseman’s	easy	way,	I	could	see	the	impatience	banked	behind	his	gaze.
He	ached	to	be	back	on	the	road,	riding	for	the	coast	with	all	haste,	and	I
could	only	delay	him	in	Ancrath	so	long.

The	captain	returned	an	hour	or	so	later	to	say	that	we	were	to	be	given
quarters	in	the	keep	and	most	likely	summoned	to	court	on	the	afternoon	of
the	next	day.	Better	than	I’d	hoped.

We	trailed	down	the	narrow	steps	once	more	to	the	entrance,	where	the
captain	gave	us	into	the	care	of	a	velvet-clad	page	boy,	and	we	finally
emerged	from	the	gate	tunnel	and	went	on	into	the	Tall	Castle.

You	could	tell	at	once	that	the	keep	was	Builder-work;	it	was	ugly,
angular,	and	resilient.	The	Thousand	Suns	had	scorched	the	earth	all	across
the	Broken	Empire.	In	many	places	the	soil	had	burned	to	the	bedrock	and	the
bedrock	had	melted	into	glass.	But	the	Tall	Castle	had	survived.	The	fact	that
the	Ancraths	made	their	home	here	said	a	lot	about	their	character	and
intentions.

The	curtain	wall	set	about	the	compound	and	the	various	outbuildings—
barracks,	a	smithy,	stables,	and	the	like—were	all	three	or	four	centuries	old,
but	the	keep,	that	was	stone	poured	a	thousand	years	ago.	I	recall	from	my
lessons	that	the	Builders	seldom	held	on	to	buildings	long.	They	threw	them
up,	then	tore	them	down	as	if	they	were	no	more	than	tents.	But	for	things	not
intended	to	last	they	did	a	damn	good	job	of	it.

The	page	boy	led	us	on	towards	the	keep	under	the	watchful	eyes	of
various	guards	at	station,	men	patrolling	on	the	walls,	and	passing	knights.	It
was	Snorri	who	drew	their	attention,	of	course:	not	the	blasted	prince	of	Red
March	deigning	to	grace	their	mean	halls,	but	some	freakishly	large
Norseman	with	ten	acres	of	slope	to	his	name.	Something	about	the	braids	in
his	hair,	or	the	arctic	flash	of	his	eyes,	or	perhaps	the	bloody	great	axe	across
his	back,	is	apt	to	make	any	castle	dweller	think	for	a	moment	that	their
defences	have	been	breached.

The	keep	stood	in	clear	ground	with	courtyards	marked	out	for	training	at
horse	and	arms.	It	made	an	alarming	contrast	with	the	palace	at	Vermillion,
and	I	suspect	Grandmother	would	have	swapped	in	a	heartbeat.	This	was	a
place	built	for	war,	not	built	to	look	like	it.	A	castle	that	had	withstood	sieges,
and	fallen	to	at	least	one	of	them,	for	if	Snorri’s	tales	were	to	be	believed,	the
Ancraths	weren’t	the	first	to	reclaim	the	place	after	the	tribes	of	men	spread
back	into	the	poisoned	lands.

“Nice	castle.”	Snorri	gazed	up	at	the	Tall	Castle	while	we	waited	for	the
great	door	of	iron-banded	oak	before	us	to	be	opened.

The	castle	was	tall.	I	couldn’t	complain	about	that.	Though	it	looked
unfinished	or	more	likely	broken	off.	The	thing	didn’t	taper	or	show	any
concession	to	height	at	all	as	a	tower	might	these	days.	It	simply	launched



itself	straight	up	at	the	heavens	and	gave	the	impression	that	before	the
Thousand	Suns	had	cut	short	its	ambition,	nothing	shy	of	hitting	the	clouds
would	stop	it.

“I’ve	seen	better,”	I	lied.
The	door	swung	open	and	one	of	Olidan’s	table-knights,	in	gleaming	half-

plate,	offered	me	a	bow.
“Prince	Jalan,	an	honour	to	meet	you.	I	am	Sir	Gerrant	of	Treen.”	As	he

straightened	I	took	a	half	step	back.	They’d	obviously	noted	Snorri’s	stature
and	decided	to	put	forwards	their	biggest	man	to	receive	us.	Sir	Gerrant	stood
near	as	tall	and	broad	with	it,	a	handsome	face	divided	by	an	ugly	scar.	He
spread	his	arm	out	to	the	side,	inviting	us	in.	The	smile	on	his	scar-split	lips
looked	genuine	enough.	“I’ll	show	you	to	your	rooms.	You	come	too,	Stann.”
He	glanced	back	at	the	page.	“Prince	Jalan	will	need	someone	to	fetch	and
carry	for	him.”

Sir	Gerrant	led	us	up	a	wide	flight	of	steps	and	along	several	corridors.
The	architecture	had	an	alien	quality	to	it,	as	if	those	who	made	it	a	thousand
years	before	were	not	men.	Everywhere	I	saw	the	signs	of	more	recent	work,
of	efforts	made	to	construct	a	more	human	habitation.	Floors	had	been
removed,	rooms	broadened	and	heightened,	curves	introduced	with	carved
timber	supports,	though	nothing	the	Builders	made	needed	any	reinforcement.

“I	had	the	honour	of	meeting	Prince	Martus	during	his	mission	the
summer	before	last.”	Sir	Gerrant	opened	another	set	of	doors	and	held	them
for	us.	“Your	family	resemblance	is	remarkable.”

I	bit	back	a	sharp	reply	and	grimaced.	It’s	true	my	brothers	both	share
something	of	my	looks—which	came	from	Father’s	side	of	the	family,	the
gold	in	our	hair	at	least—the	height	from	Grandmother	and	the	handsome
from	Mother,	our	father	being	a	short	and	unprepossessing	fellow	who	would
look	as	suited	to	being	an	office	clerk	as	he	does	to	wearing	the	cardinal’s	hat.
Martus,	though,	was	shaped	with	a	blunt	hand.	Darin	a	touch	better.	The	artist
had	perfected	the	design	by	the	time	he	got	to	me.

We	passed	through	one	hall	where	ladies	watched	us	from	a	high	gallery.	I
rather	suspected	Sir	Gerrant	had	been	induced	to	parade	us	for	their
inspection.	I	played	the	game	and	affected	not	to	notice.	Snorri,	of	course,
stared	up	openly,	grinning.	I	heard	giggles	and	one	of	their	number	stage-
whispered,	“Not	another	vagabond	prince?”

My	room,	where	we	finally	arrived,	was	well	appointed	and,	whilst	not
quite	as	grand	as	a	visiting	prince	might	expect,	a	hundred	times	better	than
any	accommodation	I’d	seen	since	hastily	exiting	Lisa	DeVeer’s	bedroom
what	seemed	like	a	lifetime	before.

“I’ll	show	your	man	here	to	a	servant’s	chamber,	or	Stann	here	can	do	it
later,”	Sir	Gerrant	said.

“Take	him	away,”	I	said.	“And	don’t	let	any	of	your	men	mess	with	him.



He’s	not	house-trained	and	he’ll	end	up	breaking	them.”	I	shooed	Snorri	back
into	the	corridor	with	fluttering	motions	of	my	fingers.	He	made	no	reply,
only	grinned	infuriatingly	and	set	off	after	Gerrant.

I	slumped	down	in	an	upholstered	chair.	The	first	comfortable	seat	I’d	sat
in	for	an	age.	“Boots.”	I	lifted	a	leg	and	the	page	came	over	to	start	tugging
off	the	first	of	them.	That	was	something	I’d	really	missed	on	the	road.	Being
bone	idle.	Father	was	too	cheap	to	staff	the	hall	properly,	but	when	we	had
important	visitors	he	would	import	a	decent	number	of	servants.	The	ideal
level	is	where	if	you	drop	something	there’s	a	maid	on	hand	to	scoop	it	up
almost	before	it	hits	the	floor,	and	if	you’ve	an	itch	that	might	otherwise
require	a	twist	or	a	stretch,	you	have	only	to	mention	it	before	indentured
fingernails	have	scratched	it	for	you.

The	boot	came	free	with	a	jerk	and	the	child	staggered	away,	then
returned	for	the	next.	“And	then	you	can	bring	me	some	fruit.	Apples	and
some	pears.	Conquence	pears,	mind,	not	those	yellow	Maran	ones;	all	mush
they	are.”

“Yes,	sir.”	The	second	boot	came	free	and	he	took	both	off	to	wait	beside
the	door.	Hopefully	someone	would	give	them	a	good	polish	before	the
morrow,	or	better	still	replace	them	with	a	nicer	pair.	The	boy	opened	the	door
and	stepped	out.	“I’ll	get	the	fruit.”

“Wait	a	moment.”	I	leaned	forwards	in	my	chair,	wiggling	my	toes.
“Stann,	ain’t	it?”	It	occurred	to	me	the	scamp	might	prove	useful.

“Yes,	sir.”
“Fruit,	and	some	bread.	And	find	out	where	this	lost	prince	everyone’s

celebrating	has	got	to.	What’s	his	name,	anyway?”
“Jorg,	sir.	Prince	Jorg.”	And	he	was	off	without	waiting	for	a	dismissal,	or

even	shutting	the	door	behind	him.
“Jorg,	eh?”	It	struck	me	as	odd	now	that	I	thought	about	it.	Last	night

none	of	the	Brothers	had	so	much	as	mentioned	this	lost	prince,	gathered
anew	to	his	father’s	bosom.	The	whole	of	Crath	City	had	seemed	wrapped	in
the	celebration	of	the	prodigal’s	return	and	somehow	we	had	found	the	only
tavern	in	sight	of	the	Tall	Castle	where	nobody	wanted	to	talk	about	it.	Most
odd.

A	shadow	at	the	doorway	caught	my	attention	and	I	let	go	my	musings.
“Yes?”	Had	young	Stann	been	running	from	rather	than	running	to?	The	man
in	the	doorway	didn’t	look	very	frightening,	but	he	must	have	been
approaching	along	the	corridor	when	Stann	broke	and	ran	.	.	.

The	fellow	before	me	would	have	been	the	most	unremarkable	of	men,
giving	even	my	dear	father	some	competition	in	the	“ordinary”	stakes,	if	not
for	the	fact	that	every	inch	of	his	exposed	skin,	which	amounted	to	hands,
neck,	and	head,	was	tattooed	with	foreign	scrawl.	The	letters	even	crawled	up
across	his	face,	crowding	his	cheeks	and	forehead	with	dense	calligraphy.



An	uncomfortable	silence	built	in	the	aftermath	of	his	arrival,	and
certainly	at	home	I	would	have	been	tempted	to	damn	his	eyes	and	demand
that	he	speak	up	or	get	out,	possibly	encouraging	him	to	one	or	the	other	with
the	aid	of	whatever	was	close	enough	at	hand	to	throw.	I’d	spent	too	long	on
the	road,	though,	where	any	given	peasant	might	stab	me	for	looking	at	his
sister	wrong,	and	my	old	instincts	had	rusted	up.

“Yes?”	Even	though	it	was	his	place	to	explain,	not	mine	to	ask.
“My	name	is	Sageous.	I	advise	the	king	on	more	.	.	.	unusual	matters.”
“Hallelujah!”	Perhaps	not	the	thing	to	say	to	someone	with	such	heathen

looks,	but	in	the	joy	of	discovering	a	man	who	might	undo	my	curse,	I	was
prepared	to	overlook	shortcomings	such	as	being	of	distinctly	foreign	origin
and	failing	to	worship	the	right	deity.	Snorri	shared	those	faults,	after	all,	and
despite	my	misgivings	had	proved	to	have	several	redeeming	features.

“People	are	not	always	so	pleased	to	see	me,	Prince	Jalan.”	A	small	smile
on	his	lips.

“Ah,	but	not	everyone	needs	a	miracle.”	I	got	to	my	feet	and	advanced	on
the	man,	pleased	to	find	I	towered	over	him.	I	guessed	him	to	be	about	forty
and	from	my	vantage	point	I	could	read	what	was	written	on	the	top	of	his
head.	Or	at	least	I	could	if	I	knew	the	script.	I	guessed	the	writing	to	be	from
somewhere	east	and	maybe	south	too.	A	long	way	east	and	south.	A	place
where	the	writing	looked	like	spiders	mating.	I’d	seen	the	like	before	in	my
mother’s	chambers.	Sageous	tilted	his	head	to	meet	my	gaze	and	I	forgot	all
about	his	inconvenient	script,	lack	of	stature,	even	the	spice-stink	of	him	that
had	just	reached	my	nostrils.	All	of	a	sudden	those	unremarkable	eyes	of	his
became	everything	that	mattered.	Twin	pools	of	contemplation,	calm,	brown,
ordinary	.	.	.

“Prince	Jalan?”
I	shook	my	head	to	find	the	damnable	little	man	snapping	his	fingers	in

front	of	my	face.	If	I	hadn’t	wanted	something	from	him,	I’d	have	kicked	his
arse	all	the	way	to	the	Triple	Gate.	Well,	if	he	hadn’t	been	a	sorcerer	as	well.
Not	people	to	rub	the	wrong	way.	Rubbed	the	right	way,	though	.	.	.	as	with
Aladdin’s	lamp,	I	might	get	my	wish.	At	least	I	knew	now	that	he	wasn’t	a
charlatan	with	the	mirrors	and	the	smoke	and	the	quick	hands.

“Prince	Jal—”
“I’m	fine.	Came	over	dizzy	for	a	second.	Come	in.	Sit.	I	need	to	ask	you

about	something.”	I	pinched	the	bridge	of	my	nose	and	blinked	a	few	times	to
refocus	as	I	walked	a	less-than-straight	path	back	to	my	chair.	“Sit.”	I	waved
at	another	seat.

Sageous	took	an	elegant	ladder-back	but	stood	behind	it	rather	than
following	my	bidding.	Tan	fingers	ran	over	wood	so	dark	as	to	be	almost
black,	investigating	each	polished	and	gleaming	curve	as	if	seeking	meaning.
“You’re	a	puzzle,	Prince	Jalan.”



I	bit	back	on	my	opinion	and	resisted	damning	him	for	his	impudence.
“A	puzzle	of	two	pieces.”	The	heathen	watched	me	with	those	placid	eyes

of	his.	He	released	the	chair	and	ran	his	fingers	over	his	forehead,	brows,
cheekbones,	cheeks.	Everywhere	his	fingertips	touched	it	seemed	that	for	a
heartbeat	the	tattooed	script	grew	darker,	like	fissures	through	his	flesh	into
some	inner	blackness.	He	cocked	his	head,	then	looked	back	towards	the
corridor.	“And	the	second	piece	is	close	by.”

“I	would	have	expected	no	less	of	someone	from	whom	a	king	such	as
Olidan	seeks	counsel.”	I	flashed	my	best	grin,	the	one	that	says	“amiable	bluff
hero	with	the	common	touch.”	“The	truth	is	I	got	caught	up	in	some	foul	spell
along	with	the	Norseman	I’ve	brought	with	me.	We’re	bound	together	by	the
magics.	If	we	get	too	far	apart,	bad	things	happen	to	us.	And	all	I	want	to	do
is	have	someone	unbind	us	so	we	can	go	our	separate	ways	again.	The	man
who	could	do	that	would	find	me	a	very	generous	prince	indeed!”

Sageous	looked	far	less	surprised	than	I	had	expected.	Almost	as	if	he’d
heard	the	story	already.	“I	can	help	you,	Prince	Jalan.”

“Oh,	thank	God.	I	mean,	thank	any	god.	You	don’t	know	how	hard	it’s
been,	yoked	to	that	brute.	I	thought	I	was	going	to	have	to	trek	all	the	way	to
the	fjords	with	him.	Cold	does	not	agree	with	me	at	all.	My	sinus—”

Sageous	raised	a	hand	and	cut	off	my	babbling.	Unconscionable	that	he
should	interrupt	a	prince,	but	it’s	true	that	the	relief	of	it	all	had	overloosened
my	tongue.

“There	is,	as	in	many	things,	an	easy	way	and	a	hard	way.”
“The	easy	way	sounds	easiest,”	I	said,	leaning	forwards,	for	the	heathen

spoke	very	soft.
“Kill	the	other	man.”
“Kill	Snorri?”	I	jolted	back,	surprised.	“But	I	thought	if	he—”
“On	what	grounds	did	you	think	this,	Prince	Jalan?	A	sensible	man	may

fear	certain	possibilities,	but	don’t	let	fear	turn	possibility	into	certainty.	If
either	of	you	dies,	the	curse	will	die	with	you	and	the	other	may	carry	on
unencumbered.”

“Oh.”	It	did	seem	silly	that	I	had	been	so	sure	of	what	would	happen.
“But	I	can’t	kill	Snorri.”	I	didn’t	want	him	dead.	“I	mean,	it	would	be	very
difficult.	You’ve	not	met	him.	When	you	do,	you’ll	understand.”

Sageous	shrugged,	the	slightest	raising	of	shoulders.	“You	are	in	King
Olidan’s	castle.	If	he	commanded	the	man	dead,	then	the	man	would	die.	I
doubt	he	would	refuse	a	prince’s	request	for	the	life	of	a	commoner.
Especially	a	man	from	the	ice	and	snow,	given	to	the	worship	of	primitive
gods.”

My	early	enthusiasm	escaped	me	in	a	long	sigh.	“Tell	me	the	difficult
way	.	.	.”



EIGHTEEN

Iwoke	in	a	cold	sweat,	the	bed	warm	around	me.	For	a	moment	I	wondered
which	tavern	I	was	in.	I	even	thought	for	one	instant	that	Emma	might	be

lying	beside	me,	but	my	questing	fingers	found	only	linen	sheets.	Fine	linen.
The	castle.	I	remembered	and	sat	up,	blind	night	on	every	side.

Nightmares	had	been	chasing	me,	one	into	the	next,	and	my	heart	still
pounded	from	the	exercise,	but	I	couldn’t	recall	any	details.	Nothing	came	to
me	save	the	memory	of	something	dreadful	stalking	me	through	dark	places,
so	close	I	felt	its	breath	on	my	neck,	felt	it	clutching,	snagging	my	shirt	.	.	.

“Castle,	Jal;	you’re	in	a	castle.”	My	voice	rang	thin	as	if	I	were	in	some
vast	and	empty	space.

The	candle	I’d	left	burning	must	have	blown	out—not	even	a	scent	of	it
remained.	I	had	tinder	and	flint,	but	they	were	in	a	saddlebag	wherever	Ron
had	been	stabled.

“You’re	too	big	a	boy	to	be	scared	of	the	dark.”	The	fear	in	my	voice
convinced	me	I	was	better	off	keeping	silent.	I	listened	for	any	sound	other
than	my	own	breathing,	but	none	reached	me.

I	threw	myself	down	into	the	pillow,	pulled	the	sheets	about	me,	and	to
distract	myself	from	night	terrors	I	concentrated	on	my	last	exchange	with
Sageous.

“The	difficult	way?”	he	had	asked,	as	if	surprised	I	would	consider	it.
“The	difficult	way	would	be	to	complete	the	spell’s	work	for	it.	Each
enchantment	is	an	act	of	will	that	strives	towards	completion.	The	desires	of
the	most	powerful,	when	spoken,	when	enunciated	along	the	paths	that	their
art	has	graven	within	the	fabric	of	what	is,	become	like	living	things.	The
spell	will	twist	and	turn;	it	will	change,	consider,	conspire	until	it	achieves	the
aim	that	formed	it.

“The	spell	is	incomplete	because	the	target	remains.	Destroy	that	target,
and	the	enchantment,	this	curse	that	bends	you	to	its	own	ends,	will	fade
away.”

I	had	thought	of	the	eyes	behind	that	mask.
“Kill	Snorri,	you	say?”	The	easy	way	did	sound	easier.
The	eyes	that	had	glittered	behind	the	slits	in	that	porcelain	work	of



masquerade,	those	same	eyes	had	watched	me	through	my	nightmares.	My
skin	crawled	with	the	possibility	of	that	scrutiny	even	now.	The	linen	sheets	I
held	were	a	child’s	protection,	and	even	steel	armour	would	offer	no	salvation
against	this	horror.	Kill	Snorri?

“A	simple	matter	that	I	can	arrange	for	you,	my	prince.”	Everything	the
heathen	said	sounded	reasonable.

“No,	truly,	I	can’t.	He’s	become	something	of	a	f—”	I	bit	that	off.
“Something	of	a	trusted	retainer.”

Sageous	had	shaken	his	head,	lines	of	text	blurring	before	my	eyes.	“This
is	a	madness	you	have	fallen	into,	my	prince.	The	barbarian	has	taken	you
prisoner—a	hostage	to	his	own	fortunes—and	drags	you	into	terrible	danger.
A	wise	man,	Lord	Stoccolm,	wrote	of	this	many	centuries	ago.	By	degrees	the
prisoner	comes	to	see	his	captor	as	a	friend.	You	have	fallen	into	his	dream,
Prince	Jalan.	Time	to	wake	up.”

And	lying	there	in	the	silent	dark	of	that	room,	with	nothing	but	two
handfuls	of	sheets	for	protection	from	the	conviction	that	the	nameless	horror
from	Vermillion	stood	watching	at	the	foot	of	my	bed,	I	did	try	to	wake.	I
ground	my	teeth	and	tried	either	to	sleep	or	to	wake—but	only	the	memory	of
Sageous’s	voice	offered	any	escape.

“You	merely	need	ask	King	Olidan	for	his	protection—I	will	carry	the
message—and	come	morning	this	Norseman	will	occupy	a	pauper’s	grave
down	by	the	river.	You	will	wake	a	free	man,	ready	to	return	to	the	life	you
were	snatched	from.	Free	to	take	up	your	old	ways	as	if	nothing	had
happened.”

I	had	to	admit	it	had	sounded	very	tempting.	It	still	did.	But	my	tongue
kept	refusing	the	words.	Perhaps	that	too	was	part	of	this	Stoccolm’s	disease.
“But	he’s	.	.	.	well,	a	loyal	retainer.”	And	of	course,	whilst	I	may	be	a	liar	and
a	cheat	and	a	coward,	I	will	never,	ever,	let	down	a	loyal	retainer.	Unless,	of
course,	it	requires	honesty,	fair	play,	or	bravery	to	avoid	doing	so—or	an	act
that	in	some	other	manner	mildly	inconveniences	me.	“I	see	your	point	.	.	.
still,	there	must	be	another	way.	Can’t	you	do	something?	A	man	with	your
skills?”

Again	the	shake	of	the	head,	so	slow	and	slight	that	you	could	almost
believe	the	sorrow.	“Not	without	great	risk,	my	prince,	to	myself	and	to	you.”
He	turned	those	mild	eyes	on	me	and	I	felt	the	draw	of	them	immediately,	as
if	at	any	moment	he	could	pull	me	in	to	drown.	“There	is	a	third	way.	The
blood	of	the	person	who	placed	the	curse	on	you.”

“Oh,	I	couldn’t—”	The	thought	of	that	old	witch	unmanned	me	almost	as
much	as	the	creature	at	the	opera	did.	“The	Silent	Sister	is	too	cunning	and
Grandmother	dotes	on	her.”

Sageous	nodded	as	if	expecting	this.	“She	has	a	twin.	One	whom	fate	may
place	in	your	path.	The	blood	of	the	twin	will	accomplish	the	same	goal.	It



will	quench	the	spell’s	fire.”
“A	twin?”	It	was	hard	to	imagine	two	such	monsters.	The	blind-eye

woman	had	always	seemed	so	singular.
“She	is	named	Skilfar.”
“God	damn	it	all!”	I’d	heard	of	Skilfar.	And	anyone	you’ve	heard	of	is

trouble.	That’s	bankable	wisdom,	that	is.	The	Wicked	Witch	of	the	North—
I’m	sure	I’d	heard	Grandmother	call	her	that,	smiling	as	if	she’d	said
something	clever.	“Damn	it	all.”	Killing	Snorri	would	be	hard.	I’d	been	happy
to	spend	his	life	in	the	blood	pits	against	the	possibility	of	coin.	But	now	I
knew	him	and	it	put	a	different	shine	on	things.	In	fact,	it	soured	the	whole
business	of	the	pits.	All	the	men	there	had	lives,	and	I	wasn’t	sure	I’d	ever	be
able	to	enjoy	the	sport	again	knowing	that.	Life	has	ways	of	getting	under
your	skin,	spoiling	your	fun	with	too	much	information.	Youth	is	truly	the
happiest	time	where	we	roll	in	the	bliss	of	ignorance.

“Your	old	life,	my	prince.	Returned	to	you.”
My	old	life,	the	pleasures	of	the	flesh,	and	of	the	gaming	table,	and

sometimes	the	first	on	the	second.	It	had	been	shallow	and	balanced	on
Maeres’s	knife	edge,	but	sometimes	shallow	is	more	than	enough.	You	can
drown	in	deep.	“I’ll	sleep	on	it,”	I	had	said.

Except	that	I	couldn’t	sleep.	Instead	I	lay	in	the	cold	sweat	that	fear	had
wrapped	me	in	and	stared	at	the	night.	Snorri’s	death,	the	monster’s
destruction,	the	blood	of	the	Silent	Sister	or	her	northern	twin.	None	of	them
easy.	Each	hard	in	its	separate	way.

“Ask	the	king	for	the	Norseman’s	head,”	Sageous	had	told	me.	“It’s	the
easiest	way.”	Aren’t	you	good	at	easy?	That’s	what	the	writing	seemed	to	say
—offered	up	on	his	palms.	Aren’t	you	good	at	leaving?

If	I	were	good	at	leaving	I	would	know	where	the	blasted	door	was.	I
normally	kept	good	tabs	on	such	things,	plotted	my	escape	routes,	got	the	lay
of	the	land.	But	when	the	heathen	left	the	room,	a	great	weariness	wrapped
itself	around	me	and	I	fell	into	the	bed	like	a	stone	into	the	deepest	pool.

“Kill	the	Norseman.”	It	sounded	more	reasonable	each	time	he	said	it.
After	all,	it	would	save	Snorri	the	discovery	that	his	family	were	dead.	All	he
had	before	him	was	a	long	trip	to	the	worst	news	in	the	world.	Didn’t	he	greet
battle	like	an	old	friend,	eager	to	meet	his	end?	“Kill	the	Norseman.”	I
couldn’t	tell	if	I’d	said	it	or	Sageous.

I	had	sat	in	the	softness	of	the	great	chair,	facing	the	heathen,	listening	to
his	truths.	Had	sat?	Was	sitting?	I	sat	opposite	him	now	as	he	stood	behind	the
ladder-back	chair,	fingers	running	over	its	rungs	as	if	they	were	a	harp	on
which	a	melody	could	be	played.	“So	you’ll	ask	for	his	head.”	Not	a	question.
Those	mild	eyes	fatherly	now.	A	father	and	friend.	Though	lord	knows,	not
my	father;	he	always	seemed	embarrassed	by	the	whole	business	of	father	and
son.



Yes.	Sageous	was	right.	I	started	to	say	the	words.	“I’ll	ask	for	his—”
The	point	of	a	sword	emerged	from	Sageous’s	narrow	chest,	and	not	your

common	or	garden	sword	either	but	one	as	brilliant	as	the	dawn,	bright	as
steel	drawn	from	the	white	heat	of	the	furnace.	Sageous	looked	down	at	the
point,	astonished,	and	it	advanced	until	a	foot	of	gleaming	blade	stood	from
his	chest.

“What?”	Blood	ran	from	the	corners	of	his	mouth.
“This	is	not	your	place,	heathen.”	Wings	unfurled	behind	the	man	as	if

they	were	his	own.	White	wings.	White	like	summer	clouds,	eagle-feathered,
broad	enough	to	bear	a	man	skyward.

“How?”	Sageous	gargled	blood	now,	spilling	it	down	his	chin	with	the
word.

The	sword	withdrew	and	a	head	unbowed,	rising	above	the	heathen,	a
face	as	proud	and	inhuman	as	those	wrought	in	marble	upon	statues	of	Greek
gods	or	Roman	emperors.	“He	is	of	the	light.”	And	in	a	flash	the	blade	took
the	heathen’s	head,	shearing	through	his	neck	as	a	scythe	takes	grass.

“Wake	up.”	Not	a	voice	from	the	angel	that	loomed	above	Sageous’s
corpse.	A	voice	that	came	from	outside	the	castle,	huger	than	sound	should
be,	loud	enough	to	break	stone.	“Wake.”

It	made	no	sense.	“What—”
“Wake	up.”
I	blinked.	Blinked	again.	Opened	my	eyes.	Instead	of	blackness,	postdawn

grey.	I	sat	up,	sheets	still	clinging	to	my	sweat-soaked	limbs.	Behind	the	pale
ghosts	of	lace	curtains,	the	sky	lightening	in	the	east.

“Baraqel?”
“A	lowly	dream-smith	thinking	he	could	sully	one	of	the	light-sworn!”

Baraqel	sounded	smug.	Then	in	a	more	serious	tone,	“I	see	a	hand	behind
him,	though.	With	a	more	deadly	touch	.	.	.	blue	fingered.	The	L—”

“T-that	was	you?	But,	you’re	so	.	.	.	well	.	.	.	such	a	pain.”	I	slid	from	the
bed,	each	part	of	me	aching	as	if	I’d	spent	the	night	wrestling	a	Barbary	ape.
The	room	lay	bare,	the	angel	confined	to	my	head	again.

“I	speak	in	the	voice	you	give	me,	Jalan.	I’m	limited	by	your	imagination,
shaped	by	your	conceits.	Each	of	your	failings	diminishes	me,	and	they	are
many.	I—”

The	last	burning	edge	of	the	sun	broke	the	horizon,	turning	a	whole	forest
to	gold.	And	the	silence	was	golden.	Baraqel	had	had	his	moment.	I	returned
to	the	comfortable	chair,	pulling	on	my	trews,	but	found	I	didn’t	want	to	sit	in
it.	I	looked	at	the	ladder-back	and	imagined	Sageous	there	as	he’d	been	in	my
dream,	head	severed	and	just	starting	to	drop.	He	wanted	me	to	have	Snorri
killed.	His	arguments	had	seemed	sound	enough,	but	although	I	lost	more
money	at	the	card	table	than	I	won,	I’d	spent	enough	time	there	to	know	when
I	was	being	played.



	•	•	•	

By	the	time	I’d	washed	and	dressed,	the	day	had	entered	stage	east,	cocks
crowed,	people	with	jobs	to	do	bustled	about	them,	and	below	the	Tall

Castle	Crath	City	shook	itself	awake.	A	timid	tapping	turned	me	from	my
contemplation	at	the	window.

“What?”
“It’s	S-Stann,	Your	Majesty.”	A	pause.	“Did	you	need	a	dresser	or	should

I—”
“Go	get	my	Viking	and	bring	him	here.	We’ll	take	breakfast	where	they

serve	the	best	stuff.”
He	scampered	away,	the	sounds	of	his	retreat	fading.	I	sat	on	the	bed	and

pulled	out	my	locket.	A	patchwork	thing	now,	each	gem	I’d	sold	leaving	an
empty	socket	to	stare	at	me	in	blind	accusation.	It	seemed	fitting.	Justice	is
blind.	Love	is	blind.	Another	gem	would	buy	me	back	to	Vermillion	in	the
comfort	of	a	fine	carriage.	One	more	would	buy	wine	and	company	at	every
stop.	Two	more	sockets	to	watch	my	passage,	to	watch	me	leave	a	friend	in	a
pauper’s	grave	and	return	to	the	shallows.	I	wondered	if	Baraqel	saw	my	soul
when	he	looked	at	me.	Did	it	look	like	this?	Bartered	away,	a	little	each	day,
buying	a	coward’s	path	through	the	margins	of	life?

“Still,”	I	told	myself.	“Better	a	long	ignoble	life	of	shallow	pleasures	than
a	short	stab	at	heroism,	ending	with	a	short	stab.	And	just	because	one	man
plays	another	doesn’t	always	mean	that	it’s	not	the	right	direction	for	both	of
them.”	I	thought	of	the	cold	North,	and	the	horror-laden	stories	Snorri	told	of
it,	and	shivered.

“Jal!”	Snorri	filled	the	doorway	and	his	grin	filled	his	face.	“You	look
worse	after	a	night	alone	in	silk	sheets	than	after	a	night	at	the	Angel
wrestling	with	your	friend	who	likes	to	bite.”	Behind	him	Stann	hovered	in
the	corridor,	trying	to	find	a	way	past.

I	stood	up.	“Come	on.	We’ll	let	the	boy	find	us	some	breakfast.”
The	two	of	us	trailed	Stann,	matching	his	jog	with	an	easy	stride.	“Food

can	be	brought	to	your	rooms,	my	lords.”	He	said	it	over	his	shoulder,
catching	his	breath.

“I	like	to	mingle,”	I	said.	“And	I’m	a	royal	highness	to	you,	boy.	He’s
a	.	.	.	hauldr.	The	correct	address	for	one	of	that	station	is	‘Oi	you.’”

“Yes,	Your	Royal	Highness.”
“Better.”
Another	corridor,	another	turn,	and	we	came	through	an	arch	into	a

sizable	hall	boasting	three	long	tables.	Men	ate	at	two	of	the	tables,	guests	by
the	look	of	them,	or	figures	of	some	rank	within	the	castle.	None	of	them
royalty	but	not	common	folk.	Stann	indicated	the	unoccupied	table.	“Your
Royal	Highness.”	He	eyed	Snorri	up,	biting	his	lip,	hopping	from	one	foot	to



the	other	in	his	indecision,	doubting	now	that	the	Norseman’s	rank	warranted
a	place	at	any	of	the	tables.

“Snorri	will	eat	with	me,”	I	said.	“Special	dispensation.”
Stann	breathed	a	sigh	of	relief	and	showed	us	to	our	chairs.
“I’ll	have	eggs,	scrambled	with	a	pinch	of	salt,	a	pinch	of	black	pepper,

and	then	a	fish.	Kipper,	mackerel,	something	smoked.	The	Viking	will
probably	have	a	pig,	lightly	killed.”

“Bacon.”	Snorri	nodded.	“And	bread.	The	blacker	the	better.	And	beer.”
The	boy	ran	off,	repeating	his	orders	as	fast	as	he	could.
Snorri	leaned	back	in	his	chair	and	yawned	mightily.
“How	did	you	sleep?”	I	asked.
He	grinned	and	gave	me	an	appraising	look.	“I	had	strange	dreams.”
“How	strange?”
“I	dream	of	Loki’s	daughter	each	night.	If	a	dream	makes	Aslaug’s

appearances	seem	ordinary,	then	you	can	imagine	it	to	be	very	strange.”
“Try	me.”
“A	small	man	covered	in	scribble	spent	the	night	trying	to	convince	me	to

kill	you	this	morning.	At	least	most	of	the	night	.	.	.	until	Aslaug	ate	him.”
“Ah.”
We	sat	in	silence	for	a	minute,	until	a	serving	man	arrived	with	two

flagons	of	small	beer	and	a	loaf	of	bread.
“So?”	I	asked,	more	than	a	little	tense.	A	long	knife	lay	between	us,	next

to	the	bread.
“I	decided	against	it.”	Snorri	reached	out	and	broke	the	loaf	in	half.
“Good.”	I	relaxed	with	a	sigh.
“Better	to	wait	until	we’re	out	of	the	castle,	then	do	it.”	He	chomped

down	on	the	bread	to	hide	his	grin.	“And	you?	How’d	you	sleep?”
“About	the	same,”	I	said,	but	Snorri	had	lost	interest,	his	gaze	drawn	to

the	doorway.
I	turned	to	see	a	young	woman	approaching:	tall,	slender	but	not	weak,

not	a	conventional	beauty	but	she	had	something	about	her	that	filled	me	with
unconventional	thoughts.	I	watched	her	advance	with	sure	steps.	High
cheekbones,	expressive	lips,	dark	red	curls	frothing	down	around	her
shoulders.	I	stood,	ready	with	my	bow.	Snorri	kept	his	seat.

“My	lady.”	I	held	her	gaze.	Extraordinary	eyes,	green	but	giving	back
more	light	than	they	took	in.	“Prince	Jalan	Kendeth	at	your	service.”	I	waved
a	hand	at	the	table.	“My	man	Snorri.”	Her	dress	was	a	simple	thing	but	made
with	a	care	and	understated	quality	that	said	she	came	from	money.

“Katherine	ap	Scorron.”	She	looked	from	me	to	Snorri,	back	again.	Her
accent	confirmed	Teuton	origins.	“My	sister,	Sareth,	would	like	the	pleasure
of	your	company	for	a	light	lunch.”

A	grin	spread	across	my	face.	“I’d	be	delighted,	Katherine.”



“Well	and	good,	then.”	She	ran	an	eye	over	the	length	of	me.	“I	wish	you
a	good	stay	and	safe	travels	onward	then,	prince.”	And	she	turned	with	a
swish	of	skirts,	making	for	the	corridor.	Nothing	in	her	tone	or	pale	face	had
suggested	she	thought	my	company	might	be	a	pleasure	for	her	sister.	In	fact,
a	redness	around	her	eyes	made	me	wonder	if	she	had	been	crying.

I	leaned	down	to	Snorri.	“I	sense	sisterly	conflict!	Big	sister	got	to	dine
with	the	prince	and	little	sister’s	pretty	nose	is	out	of	joint	about	it.”	My
instincts	in	these	matters	are	seldom	wrong.	The	dynamics	of	sisterly	rivalry
are	well	known	to	me.	Snorri	frowned—a	touch	of	the	green-eyed	monster
himself,	no	doubt.	“Don’t	wait	up	for	me!”	And	I	made	to	follow	the	girl.

A	big	hand	caught	at	my	wrist,	snatched	back	at	the	sharp	crackle	between
us.	Enough	to	stop	me,	though.	“I	don’t	think	that	was	an	invitation	of	that
sort.”

“Nonsense.	A	highborn	lady	doesn’t	deliver	messages.	She	would	have
sent	a	page.	There’s	more	than	one	message	here!”	I	could	forgive	the
barbarian	for	his	ignorance	of	court	subtleties.

Katherine	reached	the	doorway.	It’s	true	that	her	retreat	lacked	the
swaying	come-on	one	sees	in	places	like	the	Falling	Angel.	I	found	it
tempting	even	so.	“Trust	me.	I	know	castle	life.	This	is	my	game.”	And	I
hurried	after	her.

“But	her	arm—”	Snorri	called	after	me.	Something	about	an	armband.
I	had	to	smirk	at	the	thought	of	a	hut-born	Norseman	trying	to	instruct	me

in	the	ways	of	castle	women.	She’d	come	without	chaperone	or	champion,
bolder	than	brass,	taking	a	good	look	at	all	the	prince	on	offer.

“Katherine.”	I	caught	her	in	the	corridor,	yards	from	the	hall.	“Don’t	run
away	now.”	Lowering	my	voice	into	a	seductive	growl.	I	took	hold	of	her
backside	in	my	cupped	hand	through	the	layers	of	taffeta.	Smooth	and	firm.

She	turned	more	swiftly	than	I	thought	possible	in	such	a	garment	and—
Well,	the	next	eternity	or	so	I	spent	in	a	blind	white	place	full	of	pain.

I’ve	always	felt	that	the	placement	of	a	man’s	testicles	is	an	eloquent
argument	against	intelligent	design.	The	fact	that	a	slight	young	woman	can
with	a	well-placed	knee	reduce	the	hero	of	the	Aral	Pass	to	a	helpless	creature
too	full	of	agony	to	do	anything	but	roll	on	the	floor	hoping	to	squeeze	the
occasional	breath	past	his	pain—well,	that’s	just	poor	planning	on	God’s	part.
Surely?

“Jal?”	A	shadow	against	the	white	agony.	“Jal?”
“Go.	Away.”	Past	clenched	teeth.	“And.	Let.	Me.	Die.”
“It’s	just,	you’re	blocking	the	corridor,	Jal.	I’d	pick	you	up,	but	.	.	.	you

know.	Stann,	get	a	guardsman	to	help	you	haul	the	prince	back	to	his	room,
will	you?”

Some	dim	awareness	of	motion	penetrated	my	misery.	I	knew	my	heels
were	dragging	over	stone	floors,	and	somewhere	behind	them	Snorri	was



trailing	along,	engaging	in	cheerful	banter	with	the	people	towing	me.
“A	misunderstanding,	I	expect.”	And	he	chuckled.	Chuckled!	It’s	in	the

code—when	one	man	is	wounded	so	ignominiously,	all	men	must	wince	and
show	sympathy,	not	chuckle.	“They	probably	do	things	differently	down
south	.	.	.”

“Losing	my	touch.”	I	managed	to	gasp	the	words.
“I	think	you	probably	touched	too	much,	knowing	you,	Jal!	Didn’t	you

see	the	black	armband?	The	girl’s	in	mourning!”	Another	chuckle.	“Might
have	given	him	a	proper	beating	if	she	hadn’t	been!	She’s	got	spirit,	that	one.
Saw	it	the	moment	she	arrived.	Norse	blood	probably.”

I	just	groaned	and	let	them	haul	me	to	my	chamber.
“Damned	if	I’m	going	to	see	the	sister.	She’ll	be	a	monster.”	They	lifted

me	onto	my	bed.
“Gently,	lads,”	Snorri	said.	“Gently!”	Though	he	still	sounded	far	too

good-humoured	about	the	whole	thing.
“Damnable	Scorron	bitch.	Ahh!”	Another	wave	of	pain	shut	me	off.

“Countries	have	gone	to	war	for	less!”
“Technically	you	are	at	war,	aren’t	you?”	The	chair	creaked	as	Snorri

lowered	himself	into	it.	“I	mean,	those	men	you	heroed	over	at	this	Aral	Pass,
they	were	Scorrons,	weren’t	they?”

He	had	me	there.	“I	wish	I’d	killed	fifty	more	of	them!”
“Anyway,	the	sister’s	even	prettier.”
“How	the	hell	would	you	know?”	I	tried	to	roll	over	and	gave	up.
“Saw	them	both	on	a	balcony	yesterday.”
“Yes?”	I	managed	to	roll.	It	didn’t	help.	“Well,	she	can	go	hang.”	I	gave

him	the	dirtiest	look	that	would	fit	through	my	squint.
Snorri	shrugged	and	bit	into	the	pear	he’d	stolen	off	my	side	table.

“Dangerous	way	to	talk	about	the	queen	if	you	ask	me.”	All	through	a	full
mouth.

“Queen?”	I	rolled	back	to	face	the	wall.	“Ah	shit.”



NINETEEN

Ihobbled	behind	Stann	as	he	led	the	way	to	Queen	Sareth’s	personal
chambers.	I	wondered	that	the	meeting	had	been	arranged	for	her	rooms	but

didn’t	doubt	that	her	virtue	would	be	well	guarded.
It	struck	me	as	peculiar	that	our	path	led	through	the	underbelly	of	the

castle,	down	steps	and	into	a	long	corridor	where	kitchen	stores	lay	stacked
ceiling-high	in	stockrooms	right	and	left,	but	I	had	told	Stann	to	lead	me	by
the	shortest	route	owing	to	the	delicacy	with	which	I	needed	to	walk.	We
ascended	by	a	narrow	stair,	surely	a	servants’	passage	for	the	delivery	of
meals	to	the	royal	quarters.

“The	queen	asks	that	you	be	discreet	if	questioned	about	any	visits,”
Stann	said,	holding	the	lantern	high	in	a	long	windowless	passage.

“Do	you	know	what	discreet	means,	boy?”
“No,	sir.”
I	harrumphed	at	that,	not	certain	whether	he	was	displaying	ignorance	or

discretion.
Stann	tapped	at	a	narrow	door,	a	key	turned	in	a	heavy	lock,	and	we

entered.	It	took	a	moment	to	realize	that	the	queen	herself	had	unlocked	the
door.	I	thought	at	first	it	must	be	a	lady-in-waiting,	but	when	she	turned	back
to	watch	me	emerge	there	could	be	no	mistaking	her.	A	lady-in-waiting	would
never	have	worn	so	fine	a	gown,	and	Sareth	shared	too	many	of	Katherine’s
looks	to	be	anyone	but	her	sister.	I	judged	her	to	be	in	the	midst	of	her
twenties,	a	touch	shorter	than	her	sister,	her	face	softer	and	more	classically
beautiful:	full	lips,	waves	of	deepest	red	hair.	She	had	green	eyes	too	but
without	the	peculiar	inner	light	of	her	sister’s.

The	other	thing	to	notice	about	Queen	Sareth,	a	fact	that	no	gown	short	of
a	pavilion	would	be	able	to	disguise,	was	that	she	had	either	recently
swallowed	a	piglet,	or	she	was	quite	pregnant.

“You	may	show	Prince	Jalan	to	his	chair	and	pour	his	wine,	Stann,	then
scuttle	off.”	She	made	a	shooing	action	with	her	hands.

The	lad	plumped	a	cushion	for	me	in	a	large	chair	acceptably	far	from	the
queen’s,	which	is	to	say	in	the	opposite	corner.	In	truth	a	properly	acceptable
distance	would	be	one	that	put	me	out	in	the	corridor,	for	no	queen	should	be



alone	with	a	strange	man	in	her	private	chambers,	especially	if	that	strange
man	is	me.

I	walked	carefully	to	the	chair,	moved	the	cushion,	and	lowered	myself
onto	it.

“Are	you	well,	Prince	Jalan?”	A	look	of	genuine	concern	furrowed	the
smoothness	of	her	brow.

“Ah,	just	.	.	.”	I	settled.	“Just	an	old	war	wound,	my	queen.	It	plays	up
from	time	to	time.	Especially	if	I’ve	been	too	long	without	a	good	fight.”

Beside	me	Stann	pressed	his	lips	tight	together	and	filled	the	silver	goblet
on	the	service	table	from	a	tall	ewer	of	wine.	His	job	done,	he	retreated
through	the	servant	door	and	the	patter	of	his	feet	diminished	into	the
distance.	It	occurred	to	me	that	if	I	were	found	here,	unattended,	then	my	life
might	well	depend	upon	whatever	story	the	queen	decided	to	tell.	It	seemed
unlikely	that	she	would	admit	to	extending	an	invitation,	and	I’m	sure	her
vicious	younger	sister	would	paint	an	unflattering	picture	of	my	earlier
advances	if	the	whole	matter	were	brought	before	Olidan.	I	resolved	to
extricate	myself	from	the	situation	at	the	first	opportunity.

“And	how	are	you	enjoying	Ancrath,	Prince	Jalan?”	Sareth’s	accent	kept
more	of	the	Teuton	edge	than	her	sister’s	and	recalled	to	mind	the	cries	of	the
Scorron	patrolmen	who	had	tried	to	ride	me	down	in	the	Aral	Pass.	It	did	little
to	calm	my	nerves.

“It’s	a	lovely	country,”	I	said.	“And	Crath	City	is	very	impressive.
Celebrations	were	in	full	swing	when	we	arrived.”

She	frowned	at	that,	pursing	her	lips.	Evidently,	I’d	struck	a	sour	note.
Pregnant	or	not,	she	was	very	pretty.	“Scorron	is	a	more	beautiful	land,	and
the	Eisenschloss	a	finer	fortress.”	She	didn’t	seem	aware	that	we	men	of	Red
March	counted	the	Scorrons	as	our	mortal	enemies.	No	matter—I’ve	long
been	a	proponent	of	love,	not	war,	though	they	often	make	close	bedfellows.
“But	you	are	right,	Prince	Jalan,	Ancrath	has	much	to	recommend	it.”

“Indeed.	I	fear	though,	my	queen,	that	I’m	somewhat	at	a	loss	here.	I
think	perhaps	it	would	be	more	seemly	if	we	discussed	these	matters	this
afternoon	at	court?	Your	beauty	is	talked	of	far	and	wide,	and	people	might
mistake	my	intentions	if	it	were	known	that	.	.	.”	Normally	I	would	be	happy
to	cuckold	any	man	foolish	enough	to	leave	a	woman	like	Sareth	wanting
more	.	.	.	but	Olidan	Ancrath?	No.	And	besides,	her	pregnancy	and	my
present	invalid	status	both	helped	to	lessen	my	interest	in	the	opportunity.

Sareth’s	face	crumpled	in	dismay,	her	bottom	lip	wobbled,	and,	hefting
herself	from	her	chair,	she	hastened	across	to	kneel	beside	mine.	“Forgive	me,
Prince	Jalan!”	She	took	my	dark	and	callused	hands	in	her	slim	white	ones.
“It’s	just—just—we’ve	all	had	such	a	shock	what	with	the	arrival	of	this
dreadful	boy.”

“Boy?”	I’d	had	very	little	sleep	for	two	nights	now	and	none	of	this	was



making	sense.
“Jorg,	Olidan’s	son.”
“Ah,	the	lost	prince,”	I	said,	enjoying	her	hands	around	mine.
“Better	he	had	stayed	lost.”	And	I	glimpsed	some	steel	behind	her	tear-

stained	prettiness.
Suddenly	even	my	sleep-deprived	mind	couldn’t	refuse	to	see	the	problem

any	longer.	This	returned	prince	couldn’t	be	Sareth’s	son,	she	wasn’t	old
enough	for	that	.	.	.	A	second	wife,	then,	busy	producing	what	she	had	thought
would	be	an	heir	of	her	own?

“Ah.”	I	leaned	forwards,	my	glance	falling	to	her	belly.	“I	can	see	his
return	might	be	a	problem	for	you.”	Her	face	contorted	in	misery	again.
“There,	there,	don’t	cry,	my	queen.”	And	I	pawed	her	a	bit,	the	bluff	hero
comforting	a	damsel	in	distress,	and	perhaps	running	his	hands	through	that
wonderful	hair.

“Why	couldn’t	the	boy	stay	lost	and	wandering?”	She	turned	those	wet-
lashed	eyes	on	me.

“Boy,	you	say?”	I’d	thought	the	prince	a	grown	man	for	some	reason.
“Just	how	old	is—”

“A	child!	A	week	ago	he	was	thirteen	and	forgotten.	Past	all	care.	Now
he’s	reached	majority	and	.	.	.”	Another	flood	of	tears,	her	face	buried	against
my	shoulder.	“Oh,	the	trouble	he’s	caused.	The	chaos	in	the	throne	room.”

“It’s	a	difficult	age.”	I	nodded	wisely	and	drew	her	closer.	It’s	an	instinct.
I	can’t	help	it.	She	smelled	gorgeous,	of	lilac	and	honeysuckle,	and	pregnancy
hadn’t	just	filled	her	womb—her	bodice	overflowed	with	nature’s	gifts	too.

“In	my	homeland	they	call	you	the	Devil	of	the	Aral,”	she	said.	“The	Red
Prince.”

“They	do?”	I	tried	the	words	again,	removing	the	surprise	from	my	voice.
“They	do.”

A	nod	against	my	shoulder.	“Sir	Karlan	survived	the	battle	in	which	you
fought,	and	escaped	to	the	North.	At	court	he	told	us	how	you	battled	without
fear—like	a	madman,	striking	down	man	after	man.	Sir	Gort	amongst	them.
Sir	Gort	was	the	son	of	my	father’s	cousin.	A	warrior	of	some	renown.”

“Well	.	.	.”	I	guessed	some	tales	grew	in	the	telling	and	that	too	much	fear
might	sometimes	look	like	no	fear	at	all.	Either	way,	the	queen	had	given	me
a	gift	and	it	was	beholden	to	me	to	milk	it.	“My	people	do	call	me	the	hero	of
the	pass.	I	suppose	it’s	fitting	that	the	Scorrons	call	me	the	devil.	I	will	wear
the	name	with	pride.”

“A	hero.”	Sareth	sniffed,	wiped	at	her	eyes,	one	slim	hand	on	my	chest.
“You	could	help.”	Soft	words,	almost	a	whisper,	and	close	enough	to	my	ear
to	make	me	shiver	deliciously.

“Of	course,	of	course,	dear	lady.”	I	caught	myself	before	I	promised	too
much.	“How?”



“He’s	a	bully,	this	Jorg.	He	needs	putting	in	his	place.	Of	course,	he’s	too
highborn	for	just	anyone	to	deliver	the	lessons	he	deserves.	But	a	prince	could
challenge	him.	He’d	have	to	accept	a	challenge	from	a	prince.”

“Well	.	.	.”	I	breathed	in	her	scent	and	covered	the	hand	on	my	chest	with
my	own.	Visions	of	chasing	those	damnable	bucket-boys	through	the	back
corridors	of	the	opera	house	floated	before	me.	I’d	kicked	a	few	backsides
that	day!	A	ragged	thirteen-year-old	princeling,	returned	cap-in-hand	after	a
month	starving	by	the	waysides	before	hunger	defeated	his	pride	and	he	came
home	to	Daddy	.	.	.	I	could	see	myself	delivering	a	sharp	lesson	to	such	a	lad.
Especially	if	it	won	favour	with	his	lovely	stepmother.

Sareth	nuzzled	closer,	lips	very	near	to	my	neck,	her	overfull	breasts
squashing	against	me.	“Say	you	will,	my	prince.”

“But	Olidan	.	.	.”
“He’s	an	old	man,	and	cold.	He	barely	sees	me	now	he’s	done	his	duty.”

Her	lips	touched	my	throat,	hand	sliding	to	my	stomach.	“Say	you’ll	help	me,
Jalan.”

“Of	course,	lady.”	I	closed	my	eyes,	surrendering	to	her	ministrations.
Kicking	an	arrogant	little	boy-prince	around	the	court	would	be	fun,	and	by
the	time	I	came	to	tell	the	tale	in	Vermillion,	Prince	Jorg	would	be	older	and
my	audience	would	forget	that	he’d	been	a	child	when	I	taught	him	his	lesson.

“I	don’t	mind	if	you	hurt	him.”	She	walked	her	hand	two-fingered	across
my	shirt,	scratching	at	the	buttons,	playful.

“Accidents	do	happen,”	I	murmured.
That	proved	somewhat	prophetic	as	the	words	inspired	Sareth	to	explore

rather	more	robustly	and	her	hand	plunged	down	into	my	trousers.
As	any	man	wounded	in	the	line	of	duty	can	tell	you,	a	knee	to	the	groin

takes	a	while	to	recover	from,	and	it	may	be	several	days	before	a	prince’s
crown	jewels	are	ready	for	inspection	once	more.	Sareth’s	overhasty
“cupping”	reignited	the	earlier	agonies,	and	I	must	admit	that	my	cry	of	pain
could	be	described	as	somewhat	high-pitched.	Possibly	even	.	.	.	girly.	Which
would	explain	why	the	queen’s	door	guard	took	it	upon	themselves	to	crash	in
through	her	bolted	door	to	rescue	their	charge	from	whatever	fiend	assaulted
her.

Fear	can	be	an	excellent	anaesthetic.	Certainly	the	sudden	appearance	of
two	mean-faced	men	in	Ancrath	livery	with	bare	steel	in	their	hands	gets	rid
of	ball-ache	double	quick.	A	catapult	could	have	ejected	me	from	that	chair
no	faster	and	I	was	clattering	down	the	servant	stair	before	you	could	say
“adultery,”	door	slamming	behind	me.

I	reached	my	room,	panting	and	still	in	panic.	Snorri	had	abandoned	the
chair	I’d	placed	him	in	and	now	lay	sprawled	on	the	bed.	“That	was	quick.”
He	raised	his	head.

“We	should	probably	leave,”	I	said,	realizing	as	I	looked	about	for	my



belongings	that	I	didn’t	actually	have	any.
“Why?”	Snorri	swung	his	legs	over	the	side	of	the	bed	and	sat	up,	the

structure	creaking	alarmingly	beneath	him.
“Uh	.	.	.”	I	leaned	back	out	into	the	corridor,	looking	for	the	approach	of

guardsmen.	“I	may	have	.	.	.”
“Not	the	queen?”	Snorri	stood	and	I	became	acutely	aware	once	more	of

just	how	much	he	towered	over	me.	“Who	saw	you?”	Anger	in	his	voice	now.
“Two	guards.”
“Her	guards?”
“Yes.”
“She’ll	buy	them	off.	It	will	all	be	buried.”
“I’m	just	not	wanting	to	get	buried	with	it.”
“It’ll	be	fine.”	I	could	see	him	thinking	about	that	meeting	with	King

Olidan,	about	all	the	lines	I	had	sold	him	regarding	knowing	his	enemy	and
getting	the	curse	taken	off	us.

“You	think?”
“Yes.”	He	nodded.	“Idiot.”
“We	could	leave	anyway.	I	mean.	I	spoke	to	the	king’s	magician	last	night

and	he	wasn’t	that	helpful—”
“Hah!”	Snorri	sat	down	again	with	a	thump.	“That	old	dream-witch!

We’ll	have	to	look	elsewhere	for	help,	Jal.	His	power’s	broken.	The	boy
smashed	Sageous’s	totem	a	couple	of	days	back.	Some	kind	of	glass	tree.	Jorg
pushed	it	over	in	the	throne	room.	Pieces	of	it	everywhere!”

“Where—where	do	you	get	all	this	stuff?”
“I	talk	to	people,	Jal.	While	the	queen’s	sticking	her	tongue	in	your	ear

I’m	busy	listening	instead.	Prince	Jorg	undid	Sageous’s	power,	and	boldly.
There	must	be	some	other	sorcerer	or	wise	woman	who	can	help	us.	Sageous
can’t	be	the	only	one	in	the	whole	country.	We	need	King	Olidan	to	advise	us
if	we	want	this	curse	taken	off.”

“Ah	.	.	.”
“Ah?”
“I	made	a	promise	to	rough	up	this	boy-prince	for	Sareth.	I’m	hoping	that

won’t	sour	things	with	King	Olidan.	If	he	dotes	on	the	child	it	could	cause
problems.”

“Why?”	Snorri	looked	up	at	me,	spreading	his	broad	hands.	“Why	would
you	do	that?”	His	axe	lay	by	the	bed	and	I	toed	it	underneath,	out	of	sight,	just
in	case.

“You	did	see	her,	the	queen?”	I	asked.	“How	could	I	say	no?”
Snorri	shook	his	head.	“I’ve	never	seen	a	man	who	understands	so	little

about	women	and	yet	is	so	led	about	by	them.”
“So,	this	boy.	Will	it	cause	problems	if	I	knock	him	around	a	bit?”	I

asked.	“Since	you	seem	to	know	all	there	is	to	know	about	the	Ancraths.”



“Well.	The	father	doesn’t	love	the	son.	I	know	that	much,”	Snorri	said.
“That’s	a	relief.”	I	relaxed	enough	to	sink	into	the	chair.
“And	I	know	you’re	a	brave	man,	Jal,	and	a	hero	from	the	war	.	.	.”
“Yes	.	.	.”
“But	I	wouldn’t	be	so	sure	about	knocking	this	Prince	Jorg	around.	You

did	see	him	at	the	Angel	the	other	night?”
“The	Angel?	What	are	you	talking	about?”
“The	Falling	Angel.	I	know	you	had	other	things	on	your	mind,	but	you

might	have	noticed	the	place	was	packed	with	his	band.	The	Brothers.”
“What?”	The	chair	contrived	to	trap	me	in	its	clutches	as	I	tried	to	stand

again.
“The	prince	was	there,	you	know?	In	the	corner	with	Sir	Makin.”
“Oh	God.”	I	remembered	his	eyes.
“And	banging	Sally	in	the	room	next	to	yours,	I	hear.	Nice	girl.	From

Totten	just	south	of	the	Lure.”
“Dear	God.”	I’d	thought	Makin’s	young	companion	to	be	eighteen	at	the

least.	He	couldn’t	have	been	less	than	six	foot.
“And	of	course	you	know	what	prompted	him	to	take	another	trip	so	soon

after	his	return	to	the	Tall	Castle?”
“Remind	me.”	I	would	have	thought	making	a	mortal	enemy	of	a	dream-

witch	would	be	enough	to	get	most	men	planning	a	long	journey.
“He	killed	the	king’s	champion,	the	Captain	of	the	Guard,	Sir	Galen.

That’s	who	Sareth’s	sister	was	in	mourning	for.”
“You’re	going	to	tell	me	it	wasn’t	by	poisoning	his	mead?”
“Single	combat.”
“We’re	leaving.”	I	called	it	from	the	corridor.



TWENTY

Nobody	had	orders	to	stop	a	visiting	prince	taking	a	ride	around	the	city
before	his	appointment	at	court.	We	collected	Ron	and	Sleipnir	and

clattered	down	into	Crath	City.	And	kept	on	going.	Riding	proved	a	misery
and	I	shifted	constantly	in	my	saddle,	seeking	more	comfortable	positions	and
cursing	all	Scorrons,	their	damned	women	most	of	all.

“Both	of	them	had	their	eyes	too	close	together	too	.	.	.	I	never	liked
ginger	hair	in	any	case,	and	I’m	sure	that	younger	one	had—”

“She	had	something	about	her,	that	Katherine,”	Snorri	interrupted.	“I
could	imagine	her	going	places—doing	great	things.	She	had	the	look.”

“If	you	liked	her	so	much	you	should	have	made	your	move.”	Pain	made
me	goad	him,	seeking	distraction.	“Perhaps	she	was	looking	for	a	bit	of
rough.”

Snorri	shrugged,	rolling	in	his	saddle	as	we	followed	the	Roma	Road.
“She’s	a	child	yet.	And	I’m	a	married	man.”

“She	was	seventeen	if	she	was	a	day.	And	I	thought	you	Vikings	operated
under	ship	rules?”

“Ship	rules?”	Snorri	raised	a	brow.	Crath	City	was	nothing	more	than	a
stain	in	the	air	behind	us	now.

“If	you	get	there	by	ship	there	are	no	rules,”	I	said.
“Ha.”	He	narrowed	his	eyes	a	touch.	“We’re	men	as	any	other.	Some

good.	Some	bad.	Most	in	between.”
I	blew	through	my	lips.	“How	old	are	you	anyway,	Snorri?”
“Thirty.	I	think.”
“Thirty!	When	I’m	thirty	I	want	to	still	be	having	fun.”
Again	the	shrug,	a	small	smile.	Snorri	didn’t	take	offence	at	much.	Which

was	a	good	thing	all	told.	“Where	we’re	going,	living	to	thirty	is	hard	work.”
“Is	there	anything	good	about	the	North?	Anything	at	all?	Any	single

thing	that	I	can’t	better	find	somewhere	warm?”
“Snow.”
“Snow’s	not	good.	It’s	just	cold	water	gone	wrong.”
“Mountains.	The	mountains	are	beautiful.”
“Mountains	are	inconvenient	lumps	of	rock	that	get	in	people’s	way.



Besides,	if	it’s	mountains	I	want,	I	have	the	Aups	on	my	doorstep.”
We	clomped	along	in	silence	for	a	minute.	The	traffic	on	the	Roma	Road

had	thinned,	but	on	its	long	straight	sections	you	could	still	see	carts	and
horsemen,	even	travellers	afoot,	stretching	off	into	the	distance.

“My	family,”	he	said.
And	though	I	laid	no	claim	to	wisdom,	I	was	wise	enough	to	say	nothing

to	that.

	•	•	•	

The	summer	that	had	welcomed	us	belatedly	in	Ancrath	wore	thin	as	we
progressed	north.	At	the	town	of	Hoff,	amidst	fields	ripe	for	harvest	and

on	a	cold	day	with	more	of	autumn	in	it	than	any	other	season,	Snorri	led	us
east	from	the	Roma	Road.

“We	could	take	ship	from	a	Conaught	port,”	I	said.
“Men	of	the	true	North	are	not	loved	in	Conaught,”	Snorri	replied.	“We

have	visited	too	often.”	He	urged	Sleipnir	onto	the	unkempt	and	rutted	track
that	pointed	east	towards	the	mountains	of	northern	Gelleth.

“And	the	Thurtans	will	be	better?”
“Well,	the	Thurtans	will	be	bad	too,”	he	admitted.	“But	in	Maladon	a

warmer	welcome	awaits.”
“Fewer	visits?”
“There	we	stayed.	We’ll	take	ship	in	Maladon.	I	have	cousins	there.”
“We’d	better,	because	I’m	not	going	any	farther	east.”	East	of	Maladon

was	Osheim,	and	nobody	went	to	Osheim.	Osheim	was	where	the	Builders
built	the	Wheel,	and	every	fairy	tale	that	ever	launched	a	nightmare	starts,
“Once	upon	a	time,	not	far	from	the	Wheel	of	Osheim.”

Snorri	nodded,	solemn.	“Maladon.	We’ll	take	ship	in	Maladon.”
The	mountains	thrust	us	up	through	autumn	and	into	winter.	Those	were

bad	days,	despite	warm	clothing	and	good	provisions	bought	in	Hoff.	I’d	paid
the	coin	out	with	more	than	the	usual	measure	of	begrudging,	knowing	that
the	pieces	of	silver	could	have	been	paving	my	way	back	to	the	heat	of
Vermillion.

Amidst	the	high	places	of	Gelleth	I	came	to	miss	the	small	taste	of	luxury
our	night	in	the	Tall	Castle	had	afforded	us.	Even	the	stinking	cots	of	the
Falling	Angel	would	have	been	heaven	compared	to	bedding	amongst	rocks
in	the	teeth	of	a	gale	halfway	up	some	nameless	mountain.	I	suggested	to
Snorri	that	we	take	the	longer	but	less	arduous	path	via	the	Castle	Red.	Merl
Gellethar,	the	duke	who	kept	that	seat,	was	Grandmother’s	nephew	and	would
have	some	family	duty	to	help	us	on	our	way.

“No.”
“Why	the	hell	not?”



“It’s	too	long	a	detour.”	Snorri	muttered	the	words,	ill	tempered—an
unusual	thing	for	him.

“That’s	not	the	reason.”	He	always	grew	cross	when	lying.
“No.”
I	waited.
“Aslaug	cautioned	against	it,”	he	growled.
“Aslaug?	Isn’t	Loki	the	Father	of	Lies?	And	she’s	his	daughter	.	.	.”	I

paused	for	him	to	deny	it.	“So	that	would	make	her	.	.	.	a	lie?”
“I	believe	her	this	time,”	he	said.
“Hmmm.”	I	didn’t	like	the	sound	of	that.	When	your	sole	travelling

companion	is	a	seven-foot	maniac	with	an	axe,	it	can	be	unsettling	to	hear	that
he’s	starting	to	believe	the	devil	that	whispers	in	his	ear	when	the	sun	sets.
Even	so,	I	didn’t	argue	the	point.	Baraqel	had	told	me	the	same	thing	that
morning.	Perhaps	when	an	angel	whispered	to	me	at	sunrise,	I	should	start
believing	what	he	said.

I	dreamed	of	Sageous	that	night,	smiling	a	calm	smile	to	himself	as	he
watched	the	board	across	which	I	was	pushed,	from	black	square	to	white,
white	to	black,	dark	to	light	.	.	.	Snorri	beside	me,	matching	my	moves,	and
all	about	us,	shadowed	pieces,	orchestrated	to	some	complex	design.	A	grey
hand	pushed	its	pawns	forwards—I	felt	the	Silent	Sister’s	touch	and	stepped
forwards,	black	to	white.	Behind	her	loomed	another,	more	huge,	deepest
crimson,	the	Red	Queen	playing	the	longest	game.	A	dead	black	hand	reached
across	the	board,	high	above	it	a	larger	hand,	midnight	blue,	guiding.	I	could
almost	see	the	strings.	Together	the	Lady	Blue	and	the	Dead	King	advanced	a
knight	and	without	warning	the	unborn	stood	before	me,	only	a	plain
porcelain	mask	to	preserve	my	sanity	from	its	horror.	I	woke	screaming	and
waited	for	dawn	without	sleeping.

	•	•	•	

In	the	Thurtans	we	kept	to	ourselves,	avoiding	inns	and	towns,	sleeping	inhedges,	drinking	from	the	rivers,	of	which	there	are	too	many,	dividing	the
country	into	innumerable	strips.

On	the	border	between	East	and	West	Thurtan	there	lies	a	great	forest
known	as	Gowfaugh,	a	vast	expanse	of	pine,	dark	and	threatening	evil.

“We	could	just	take	the	road,”	I	said.
“Better	to	cross	the	border	without	notice.”	Snorri	eyed	the	forest

margins.	“Thurtan	guards	are	like	as	not	to	give	us	a	month	inside	one	of	their
cells	and	take	any	valuables	as	payment	for	the	privilege.”

I	looked	back	along	the	trail	we’d	taken	down	from	the	hills,	a	faint	line
across	a	dour	moorland.	The	Gowfaugh	had	nothing	inviting	about	it,	but	the
threat	behind	worried	me	more.	I	felt	it	daily,	nipping	at	our	heels.	I	had	been



expecting	trouble	since	we	left	Crath	City,	and	not	from	King	Olidan	worried
that	I’d	sullied	his	queen’s	honour.	The	Dead	King	had	moved	twice	to	stop
us	and	the	third	time	could	be	the	charm.

“Forwards,	Jal,	that’s	the	place	to	keep	your	attention.	You	southerners	are
always	looking	back.”

“That’s	because	we’re	no	fools,”	I	said.	“You’ve	forgotten	the	unborn	at
the	circus?	Edris	and	his	hired	men,	and	what	they	became	when	you	killed
them?”

“Someone	is	seeding	our	path	to	stop	us,	but	they’re	not	chasing	us.”
“But	the	thing	in	Vermillion—it	escaped,	Sageous	said	we	would	meet	it,

he—”
“He	told	me	the	same	thing.”	Snorri	nodded.	“You	don’t	want	to	believe

much	that	man	says,	but	I	think	he’s	right.	It	did	escape.	I	suspect	the	creature
you	saw	in	the	opera	house	was	an	unborn,	one	grown	old	in	its	power,	the
target	of	the	Silent	Sister’s	spell.	Probably	an	important	lieutenant	to	the	Dead
King.	A	captain	of	his	armies	maybe.”

“But	it’s	not	following	us?”	It	was	following	us.	I	knew	it.
“Did	you	not	listen	to	the	dream-witch,	Jal?”
“He	said	a	lot	of	things	.	.	.	Mostly	about	killing	you—and	how	I	could	go

home	if	I	did.”
“The	curse,	the	Silent	Sister’s	spell?	Why’s	it	still	on	us?”
That	did	ring	a	bell.	“Because	the	unborn	wasn’t	destroyed.	The

enchantment	is	an	act	of	will.	It	needs	to	complete	its	purpose.”	I	crossed	my
arms,	pleased	with	myself.

“That’s	right.	And	we’re	heading	north	and	the	spell	is	giving	us	no
problems.”

“Yes.”	I	frowned.	This	was	going	somewhere	bad.
“The	unborn	isn’t	chasing	us,	Jal.	We’re	chasing	it.	The	thing’s	gone

north.”
“Hell.”	I	tried	to	calm	myself.	“But	.	.	.	but,	come	on,	what	are	the	odds?

We’re	headed	for	the	same	place?”
“The	Silent	Sister	sees	the	future.”	Snorri	touched	a	finger	to	his	eye.

“Her	magic	is	aimed	towards	tomorrow.	The	spell	sought	out	a	way	to	reach
the	unborn—it	followed	the	path	that	would	see	it	carried	by	someone,	some
somebodies,	who	would	end	up	in	the	same	place	as	its	target.”

“Hell.”	I	hadn’t	any	more	to	say	this	time.
“Yup.”
We	skirted	the	Gowfaugh	until	we	found	a	trail,	too	wide	for	a	deer	path,

too	narrow	for	a	woodsman’s	track.	On	reflection,	as	we	pushed	our	way
along	it,	leading	the	horses	and	trying	to	avoid	getting	a	branch	in	the	eye,	the
Gowfaugh	wasn’t	the	kind	of	forest	you’d	hope	to	find	deer	in.	Or	woodsmen.

“Forests.”	Snorri	rubbed	at	three	parallel	scratches	on	his	bicep	and	shook



his	head.	“I’ll	be	glad	to	be	free	of	this	one.”
“Woods	where	a	man	can	hunt	stag	and	boar,	that’s	what	we	have	in	Red

March,	with	proper	trees,	not	all	this	pine,	with	charcoal	burners,	timber
cutters,	the	occasional	bear	or	wolf.	But	in	the	North	.	.	.”	I	waved	at	the
close-packed	trunks,	branches	interlaced	so	a	man	would	have	to	cut	his	path
every	yard	of	the	way.	“Dead	places.	Just	trees	and	trees	and	more	trees.
Listen!	Not	even	a	bird.”

Snorri	shouldered	his	way	ahead.	“Jal—this	one	point	I’ll	cede	you.	The
south	has	better	forests.”

We	crumped	along,	following	convoluted	paths,	footsteps	muffled	by	the
thick	blanket	of	old	dry	needles.	It	didn’t	take	long	to	become	lost.	Even	the
sun	offered	few	clues	as	to	direction,	its	light	coming	diffuse	from	louring
clouds.

“I	do	not	want	to	spend	a	night	in	here.”	The	darkness	would	be	utter.
“Eventually	we’ll	find	a	stream	and	follow	it	out.”	Snorri	snapped	a

branch	from	his	path.	Needles	fell	with	a	faint	patter.	“Shouldn’t	take	long.
These	are	the	Thurtans.	You	can’t	take	three	steps	without	finding	yourself
ankle-deep	in	a	river.”

I	made	no	reply	but	followed	him.	It	sounded	like	sense,	but	the
Gowfaugh	lay	tinder-dry	and	I	imagined	the	woven	roots	drinking	up	any
stream	before	it	penetrated	half	a	mile.

The	forest	seemed	to	press	closer	on	every	side.	The	slow	lives	of	trees
overwhelming	all	else,	insensate	and	implacable.	The	light	started	to	fail	early
and	we	pressed	on	through	a	forest	twilight,	though	far	above	us	the	sun	still
scraped	across	the	treetops.

“I’d	swap	a	gold	coin	for	a	clearing.”	I	would	have	paid	that	much	for
room	to	stretch	my	arms.	Ron	and	Sleipnir	followed	behind,	heads	down,
brushed	on	both	sides,	miserable	in	the	way	that	only	horses	can	be.

Somewhere	the	sun	had	started	to	sink.	The	temperature	dropped	with	it,
and	in	the	half-light	we	struggled	against	unyielding	walls	of	dead	branches	in
the	airless	gloom.	The	noise	when	it	came	was	startling,	shattering	the
arboreal	silence	through	which	we	had	laboured	so	long.

“Deer?”	More	in	hope	than	belief.	Something	big	and	less	subtle	than	a
deer,	snapping	branches	as	it	moved.

“More	than	one.”	Snorri	nodded	to	the	other	side.	The	sound	of	dry	wood
breaking	grew	louder	from	that	direction	too.

Soon	they	were	flanking	us	on	both	sides.	Pale	somethings.	Tall
somethings.

“They	had	to	wait	until	it	got	dark.”	I	spat	out	dry	needles	and	drew	my
sword	with	difficulty.	I’d	have	no	hope	of	swinging	it.

Snorri	stopped	and	turned.	In	the	gloom	I	couldn’t	see	his	eyes,	but
something	in	the	stillness	of	the	man	told	me	they	would	be	black,	without



feature	or	soul.
“They	would	have	been	wiser	to	come	in	the	light.”	His	mouth	moved,

but	it	didn’t	sound	like	him.
All	of	a	sudden	I	wasn’t	sure	whether	the	path	might	not	be	the	least	safe

place	for	me	in	the	whole	of	Gowfaugh.	One	of	the	creatures	flanking	us	drew
momentarily	closer	and	I	saw	a	flash	of	pale	arms,	a	man’s	legs	but	naked	and
whitish-green.	A	glimpse	of	a	white	face,	gums	and	teeth	exposed	in	a	snarl,	a
glittering	eye	fixed	for	a	heartbeat	on	mine,	betraying	an	awful	hunger.

“Dead	men!”	I	may	have	shrieked	it.
“Almost.”	And	Snorri	swung	his	axe	in	a	great	loop,	shearing	off

branches	in	scores.	I	would	have	bet	against	even	a	blade	of	razor-honed
Builder-steel	carving	through	like	that.	Again,	another	huge	loop.	I	lunged
away,	stopped	only	by	Ron’s	blunt	head,	blocking	the	path	we’d	forged.
Snorri	sang	now,	a	wordless	song,	or	perhaps	a	language	lay	behind	it,	but	not
of	men,	and	he	carved	a	space,	ever	more	wide,	until	he	strode	from	one	side
to	hack	deeper	and	then	four	paces	to	the	other,	five	paces,	six.	The	stumps	of
trees,	some	thicker	than	my	arm,	studded	the	space,	poking	up	knee-high
through	drifts	of	fallen	timber.	In	the	clearing,	despite	open	sky	above,
twilight-blue	and	cradling	the	evening	star,	it	was	darker	than	the	forest.	And
the	darkness	trailed	his	axe.

“Wh—what?”	Snorri	came	to	a	halt,	panting.	The	twilight	had	taken	on	a
new	quality.	The	sun	had	set.	Aslaug	confined	once	more	to	whatever	hell	she
inhabited.	He	looked	down	at	his	weapon.	“It’s	not	a	wood-axe!	Gods	damn
it!”

I	stepped	closer,	smartish,	worried	that	corpse-white	arms	might	reach	for
me	from	the	darker	shadows.

“Make	a	light,	Jal.	Quick.”
So	with	Snorri	standing	over	me	and	the	horses	nervous,	wedged	along

the	trail,	I	fumbled	in	my	pack,	whilst	all	around	us	branches	broke	and	pale
men	moved	between	the	trees.

“Come	out.	I’ll	bet	you	cut	easier	than	wood,”	Snorri	called	to	them,
though	I	detected	an	edge	of	fear	in	his	voice—something	I’d	never	heard
before.	I	think	the	forest	unnerved	him	more	than	the	enemy	within	it.	I	found
tinder	and	then	flint,	managing	to	drop	both	in	the	darkness,	finding	them
again	with	trembling	fingers.	The	scent	of	pine	sap	grew	around	us,	strong
and	sickly,	almost	overpowering.

I	struck	spark	to	tinder	as	Snorri	swung	at	the	first	of	the	men	to	rush	from
the	trees.	Branches	snapped	on	all	sides,	more	of	them	pushing	through.	An
ill-advised	glance	upwards	showed	them	lean	and	naked,	pale	greenish-white
ghosts	in	the	dimness.	The	passage	of	Snorri’s	axe	carved	a	great	furrow
through	the	creature	from	left	hip	to	right	nipple,	slicing	through	gut,	ribs,
sternum,	and	lungs.	Evidently	the	axe	retained	some	edge	despite	being	used



to	cut	timber.	Still	the	pine-man	came	on,	the	stink	of	sap	overwhelming	as
the	stuff	oozed	from	his	bloodless	wound.	At	the	last	he	tripped	on	a	stump,
crashed	down,	and	became	snarled	in	a	mess	of	loose	entrails	and	stray
branches.	By	then	Snorri	had	plenty	of	other	problems	to	worry	about.

Success!	Spark	became	glow	became	smoke	became	flame.	A	month
earlier	it	would	have	taken	me	half	an	hour	to	get	the	same	result.	Crouched
close	to	the	ground	and	with	Snorri	swinging	and	grunting	above	me,	and	the
scream	of	terrified	horses,	I	managed	to	transfer	the	fire	to	one	of	the	pitch
torches	I’d	bought	back	in	Crath	City,	offered	there	for	exploring	the
extensive	municipal	catacombs.

“Burn	it!”	A	pale,	twitching	limb	landed	beside	my	foot.
“What?”
“Burn	it!”	Another	grunt	and	a	head	dropped	close	by.	A	pine-man	leapt

onto	Snorri’s	back.
“Burn	what?”	I	shouted.
“Everything.”	He	fell	backwards,	impaling	his	passenger	on	several

stumps.
“That’s	madness!”	We’d	burn	up	too.
Snorri’s	move,	whilst	genius	in	the	short	term,	left	me	exposed,	and	at

least	four	pine-men	were	pulling	free	of	the	trees	to	enter	the	clearing,	more
behind	them.	The	look	in	their	eyes	frightened	me	more	than	the	fire.	I	shoved
the	pitch	brand	into	the	mass	of	broken	branches	before	me.

Flames	rose	up	almost	immediately.	The	pine-men	took	two	or	three	more
steps	before	halting,	each	with	their	face	to	the	fire.	Behind	me	Snorri	tore
free	of	his	opponent	and	rose	with	a	groan.	“Follow	the	horses!”

Already	the	flames	were	spreading,	a	fierce	crackling	building	as	needles
popped	in	the	heat	and	the	fire	raced	along	desiccated	branches,	quickened	by
pine-men’s	blood.	Terrified	out	of	whatever	wits	horses	possess,	Sleipnir	and
Ron	bolted,	stampeding	across	the	small	clearing	Snorri	had	carved,
scattering	both	pine-men	and	fire.	I	managed	to	follow	Snorri’s	example	and
roll	clear,	very	nearly	impaling	myself	on	a	couple	of	inch-thick	stumps.

The	two	horses	punched	their	own	passage	through	the	trees.	I	hoped
they’d	avoid	being	blinded,	but	it	seemed	a	damn	sight	better	than	being
barbecued.	Snorri	gave	chase	and	I	stumbled	along	in	their	wake.	Behind	me
the	fire	roared	like	a	living	thing	and	the	pine-men	answered	it	with	thin	cries
of	their	own	agony.

For	a	brief	while	we	left	the	fire	behind	us,	plunging	unseeing	along	the
horses’	path.	As	my	breath	grew	short	I	paused	for	a	moment	and,	glancing
back,	saw	the	whole	forest	lit	from	within	by	an	orange	glow,	countless	trunks
and	branches	in	black	silhouette.	“Run!”	I	shouted	uselessly,	thereafter	saving
my	breath	to	better	follow	my	own	order.

The	inferno	leapt	through	the	trees	with	spectacular	speed.	It	jumped



between	treetops	faster	than	it	moved	on	the	ground,	and	several	times	we
found	ourselves	beneath	a	roof	of	flame	whilst	the	beast	roared	behind	us.
Trees	exploded	within	moments	of	the	inferno	wrapping	them.	Literally
blown	apart,	great	swirls	of	orange	embers	rising	above	them.	The	flame
rushed	through	the	needled	branches	like	a	wind,	consuming	everything.	A
burning	hand	pressed	against	my	back,	driving	me	to	greater	exertions.	Ron’s
path	split	from	Sleipnir’s;	I	chose	the	one	to	the	left.	A	hundred	yards	on	I
saw	my	horse	through	the	trees	to	the	side,	snared	on	something,	hook-briar
most	like,	screaming.	It	takes	a	lot	to	snare	a	horse,	and	Ron	was	a	strong	one,
fuelled	with	terror	of	the	flame.	But	he	hung	there	and	I	raced	on,	cursing.	At
least	the	fire	put	a	quick	end	to	him.	The	gelding	would	have	been	molten	fat
and	charring	bones	before	he	knew	the	firestorm	had	him.

I	saw	Snorri	up	ahead,	fire-lit.	Sleipnir’s	strength	failing	her,	both	of	them
toiling	up	a	steep	slope.

“Run.”	A	gasp,	little	louder	than	my	rasping	breath.
We	made	the	ridge	before	the	flames,	save	those	dancing	high	above	us	in

the	treetops.	“Hel	be	praised.”	Snorri	leaned	against	a	trunk,	gasping.	The
slope	ran	away	from	us,	just	as	steep	on	the	way	down	as	it	was	on	the	rise,
trees	thinning	yard	by	yard	and	where	the	ground	grew	level,	stretching	out
before	us,	mile	upon	mile	of	moonlit	grassland.



TWENTY-ONE

Aman	can	drown	in	the	grass	seas	of	Thurtan.	In	the	swaying	green,	wind-
rippled,	with	twenty	miles	and	more	of	cold	bog	and	saw	grass	on	every

side,	it	can	seem	that	you’ve	been	set	adrift	in	an	ocean	without	end.
The	fire	at	our	back	at	least	provided	a	reference	point,	an	idea	of	distance

and	measure.	These	are	things	easily	lost	in	the	grass.	As	we	walked,	Snorri
had	told	me	the	men	of	the	pines	had	haunted	forests	like	Gowfaugh	for
generations.	The	stories	differed	on	the	source	of	the	original	evil	but	now
they	perpetuated	themselves,	letting	out	the	blood	of	their	victims	and
replacing	it	with	the	sap	of	the	oldest	trees.	The	creatures	kept	some	measure
of	intelligence,	but	if	they	served	any	master	other	than	their	own	hunger	it
wasn’t	spoken	of.	It	seemed	hard	to	credit,	though,	that	the	Dead	King	hadn’t
steered	them	into	our	path.

“No	more	forests,”	I	said.
Snorri	wiped	the	soot	from	his	eyes	and	nodded.
We	trekked	a	mile,	another	mile,	and	collapsed	on	the	side	of	a	gentle	rise,

looking	back	to	watch	the	smoke	and	flame	swirl	above	the	burning	forest.	It
seemed	inconceivable	that	such	an	inferno,	lofting	embers	into	the	heavens
and	scorching	the	clouds	themselves,	could	have	started	with	the	tiny	spark
struck	from	my	flint	and	nursed	by	my	breath.	Still,	perhaps	that’s	all	lives
are,	all	the	world	is,	a	collision	of	vast	conflagrations,	each	sparked	from
nothing.	It	might	be	said	that	the	whole	course	of	my	own	adventure	sprang
from	a	die	that	should	have	rolled	a	five	or	a	two,	landing	instead	with	a
single	snake	eye	pointing	at	me,	a	pitiless	eye	watching	me	plunge	further
into	Maeres	Allus’s	debt.

“That,”	I	said,	“was	close.”
“Yes.”	Snorri	sat	knees	to	chest,	watching	the	fire.	He	pulled	a	stick	loose,

tangled	in	his	hair.
“We	can’t	go	on	like	this.	The	next	time	we	won’t	be	so	lucky.”	He	had	to

see	sense.	Two	men	couldn’t	carry	on	against	such	opposition.	I’d	gambled	on
long	odds	before—not	my	life,	but	my	fortune—but	never	on	so	hopeless	a
bet	as	Snorri	offered.	Without	prize	or	purpose.

“I	would	have	given	Karl	such	a	pyre.”	Snorri	waved	a	hand	at	the



burning	horizon.	“I	built	his	beside	the	Wodinswood	from	deadfall.	The	trees
were	too	heavy	with	the	winter’s	snow	for	the	fire	to	spread,	but	I	would	have
burned	them	all.

“He	should	have	had	a	ship,	my	Karl.	A	longship.	I	would	have	laid	him
before	the	mast	with	my	father’s	axe	and	such	armour	as	would	serve	him	in
Valhalla.	But	there	was	no	time	and	I	couldn’t	leave	him	for	the	dead	to	find
and	use.	Better	wolves	have	him	than	that.”

“He	told	you	about	a	key?”	I	said.	Snorri	had	spoken	of	it	back	in	the
ruins	of	Compere	but	fallen	silent.	Perhaps	now,	with	mile	upon	mile	of
blazing	forest	burning	as	Compere	had	burned,	he	would	speak	again.	His
eldest	boy	broke	bones	to	escape	his	shackles	and	his	last	words	to	Snorri	had
been	of	a	key.

And	in	the	darkness	of	the	grassland,	with	Gowfaugh	burning	red	behind
us,	Snorri	told	me	a	story.

	•	•	•	

“My	father	told	me	the	tale	of	Olaaf	Rikeson	and	his	march	to	the
Bitter	Ice.	I	heard	it	by	the	hearth	many	times.	Father	would	spin	it

out	on	the	deepest	nights	of	winter	when	the	ice	on	the	Uulisk	made	sharp
complaint	against	the	cold.

“It	takes	more	than	a	warrior	or	a	general	to	lead	ten	thousand	men	into
the	Bitter	Ice.	Ten	thousand	who	were	not	Viking	would	die	before	they
reached	the	true	ice.	Ten	thousand	who	knew	enough	to	survive	would	know
enough	not	to	go.	There	is	nothing	there	for	men.	Even	the	Inowen	keep	to	the
shore	and	the	sea	ice.	Whale,	seal,	and	fish	is	all	that	will	sustain	men	in	such
places.

“It	might	be	that	no	jarl	ever	had	more	longboats	at	his	command	than
Olaaf	Rikeson,	or	had	brought	more	treasure	across	the	North	Sea,	won	with
axe	and	fire	from	weaker	men.	Even	so,	it	took	more	than	his	word	to	gather
ten	thousand	from	the	bleak	shores	of	the	fjords	where	a	hundred	men	were
counted	an	army,	and	to	march	them	into	the	Bitter	Ice.

“Olaaf	Rikeson	had	a	vision.	He	had	the	gods	at	his	side.	The	wise	echoed
what	he	said.	The	rune	stones	spoke	for	him.	And	more	than	this.	He	had	a
key.	Even	now	the	völvas	argue	over	how	he	came	to	own	it,	but	in	the	tale
Snorri’s	father	told,	Loki	had	given	it	to	Olaaf	after	he	burned	the	cathedral	of
the	White	Christ	at	York	and	slaughtered	twice	a	hundred	monks	there.	What
Olaaf	had	to	promise	in	return	was	never	told.

“The	fact	that	the	god’s	gift	had	been	a	key	had	always	disappointed
Snorri,	but	then	Loki	was	the	god	of	disappointment,	amongst	other	things,
things	such	as	lies	and	trickery.	Snorri	would	have	preferred	a	battle	ram.	A
warrior	destroys	the	door—he	doesn’t	unlock	it.	But	his	father	told	him	that



Olaaf’s	key	was	a	talisman.	It	opened	any	lock,	any	door,	and	more	than	that
—it	opened	men’s	hearts.

“The	oldest	legends	have	it	that	Olaaf	marched	to	open	the	gates	of
Niflheim	and	beard	the	frost	giants	in	their	lair,	to	shame	the	gods	and	their
false	Ragnarok	of	many	suns,	and	to	bring	about	the	true	end	of	all	things	in	a
last	battle.	Snorri’s	father	never	denied	the	tale	but	spoke	of	how	one	thing
might	hide	another,	like	a	feint	in	combat.	Men,	he	said,	were	more	often
moved	by	more	basic	wants—hunger,	greed,	and	lust.	Stories	grew	from	seed
and	spread	like	weeds.	Perhaps	the	gods	touched	Rikeson,	or	perhaps	a
bloody-handed	reaver	took	a	few	hundred	men	north	to	raid	the	Inowen	and
from	his	failure	sprang	a	song	that	bards	wove	into	a	saga	and	placed	amongst
the	treasured	memories	of	the	North.	Whatever	truth	there	was,	years	have
stolen	it	from	us.”

	•	•	•	

Snorri	left	his	son’s	pyre,	the	last	logs	still	blazing,	the	snow	on	all	sides
retreating	to	expose	the	black	earth	of	the	Wodinswood.	Behind	him

embers	swirled	skyward	amidst	dark	smoke.	He	trekked	the	hills	of	the
hinterland,	leaving	the	Uulisk	far	behind,	tracking	Sven	Broke-Oar	and	the
men	of	the	Drowned	Isles	across	the	boulder	fields	of	Törn,	where	vicious
winds	shape	the	rocks	themselves.	Above	Törn	the	Jarlson	Uplands,	and
beyond	those,	the	Bitter	Ice.

What	he	would	do	when	he	reached	his	enemy,	Snorri	had	no	idea,	other
than	to	die	well.	Grief	and	guilt	and	rage	consumed	him.	Perhaps	any	of	these
on	its	own	would	have	destroyed	him,	but	in	conflict,	each	with	the	next,	they
achieved	a	balance	within	him	and	he	carried	on.

The	pace	the	raiders	set	was	fierce	and	Snorri	couldn’t	think	it	one	that
Freja	or	Egil,	with	just	ten	years	to	his	name,	could	match.	In	grim	visions	he
saw	them	dead,	marching	with	the	tireless	corpses	that	had	come	ashore	at
Eight	Quays.	But	Karl	had	been	alive;	they	had	shackled	prisoners—it	made
no	sense	to	be	taking	them	inland,	but	the	necromancers	had	wanted	live
prisoners,	that	much	was	clear.

Only	night	stopped	him.	The	light	fled	early,	still	new	to	the	world	after
the	winter	darkness	that	had	held	the	ice	for	months.	Without	sight	a	man
can’t	follow	a	trail.	All	he’ll	find	in	the	dark	is	a	broken	leg,	for	the
hinterlands	are	treacherous,	the	rocky	ground	ice-clad	and	fissured.

The	night	had	lasted	forever,	a	misery	of	cold,	haunted	by	visions	of	the
slaughter	at	Eight	Quays.	Of	Karl,	broken	and	dying	by	the	Wodinswood,	of
Emy	.	.	.	Her	screaming	had	followed	Snorri	into	the	wilderness	and	the	wind
spoke	it	all	through	the	long	wait	for	dawn.

And	when	the	light	came,	snow	came	also,	falling	heavy	from	leaden



skies,	though	Snorri	had	thought	it	too	cold	for	snow.	He’d	roared	at	it.	Lofted
his	axe	at	the	clouds	and	threatened	every	god	he	could	name.	But	still	the
snow	fell,	careless,	dropping	into	his	open	mouth	as	he	shouted,	filling	his
eyes.

Snorri	carried	on	without	a	trail	to	follow,	lost	in	the	trackless	white.	What
else	was	there	for	him?	He	took	the	direction	his	quarry	had	taken	and	struck
out	into	the	empty	wastes.

He	found	the	dead	man	hours	later.	One	of	the	Islanders	who	had	been
dead	on	the	deck	of	his	ship	as	it	sailed	the	North	Sea	bound	for	the	mouth	of
the	Uulisk.	No	less	dead	now	and	no	less	hungry.	The	man	struggled
uselessly,	bound	chest-deep	in	a	drift	whose	soft	snow	had	accepted	his	dead
flesh,	then	locked	about	it	as	his	efforts	to	escape	compressed	the	walls	of	his
prison	into	something	hard	as	rock.	He	reached	for	Snorri,	his	fingers	black
with	the	freezing	blood	locked	inside.	A	sword	blow	had	opened	his	face	from
eye	to	chin,	exposing	a	jawbone	wrapped	in	freeze-dried	muscle,	shattered
teeth,	frost-darkened	and	bloodless	flesh.	The	remaining	eye	fixed	Snorri	with
inhuman	intensity.

“You	should	be	solid.”	He	had	found	men	dead	in	the	snow	before,	their
limbs	frozen	hard	as	ice.	He	stared	a	moment	longer.	“You’re	no	part	of	what
is	right,”	Snorri	told	it.	“This	is	Hel.”	He	lifted	his	axe,	knuckles	white	on	the
haft.	“But	you	didn’t	come	from	there,	and	this	won’t	send	you	to	the	river	of
swords.”

The	dead	man	only	watched	him,	straining	at	the	snow,	tearing	at	it,
without	the	wit	to	dig.

“Even	the	frost	giants	would	want	no	part	of	you.”	Snorri	struck	the	man’s
head	from	his	shoulders	and	watched	it	roll	away,	spattering	the	clean	snow
with	rotten	blood,	sluggish	and	half	frozen.	The	air	held	a	strange	chemical
scent,	like	lamp	oil,	but	different.

Snorri	wiped	Hel’s	blades	in	the	snow	until	all	trace	of	the	creature	had
gone,	then	walked	on,	leaving	the	body	still	twitching	in	the	drift.

	•	•	•	

By	the	time	a	man	reaches	the	Bitter	Ice	he	will	have	seen	nothing	but	a
world	in	shades	of	white	for	day	upon	day.	He	will	have	walked	upon	ice

sheets	and	seen	no	tree	or	blade	of	grass,	no	rock	or	stone,	heard	no	sound	but
that	of	his	own	loneliness	and	the	mockery	of	the	wind.	He	will	believe	there
is	in	all	the	world	no	place	more	cruel,	no	place	less	suited	to	the	business	of
living.	And	then	he	will	see	the	Bitter	Ice.

In	places	the	Bitter	Ice	may	be	gained	by	snow-clad	slopes	as	one	might
scale	a	mountain.	In	other	places	the	ice	shelf	towers	in	a	series	of	vast	cliff
faces,	some	frost-white,	some	glacial	blue	and	offering	clear	depths.	When	the



midnight	sun	shines	on	such	faces,	it	reaches	in	and	hints	of	shapes	are
revealed	as	if	the	ice	has	swallowed	and	held	great	ocean	whales,	and
leviathans	that	dwarf	even	these,	all	trapped	for	eternity	beneath	a	mile	and
more	of	glacier.	For	the	Bitter	Ice	is	just	that,	one	huge	glacier,	spread	across
a	continent,	always	advancing	or	retreating	at	a	pace	that	makes	men’s	lives
seem	brief	as	mayflies.

Snorri	couldn’t	believe	the	Broke-Oar	would	allow	himself	to	be	led	up
onto	the	high	ice,	whatever	madness	might	infect	the	Islanders	with	their	dead
men.	Greed	drove	Sven	Broke-Oar;	he	would	accept	risk,	but	never	suicidal
risk.	Armed	with	this	assessment	of	the	man,	Snorri	trekked	along	the
margins	of	the	ice	cliffs,	low	on	food,	as	numb	with	the	cold	as	he	had	been
with	the	ghouls’	poisons.

When	Snorri	first	saw	the	black	spot	he	thought	it	part	of	dying,	his	vision
failing	as	the	wilderness	claimed	him.	But	the	spot	persisted,	kept	its	place,
grew	as	he	staggered	on.	And	in	time	it	became	the	Black	Fort.

	•	•	•	

“Black	Fort?”	I	asked.
“An	ancient	stronghold	built	at	the	farthest	reach	of	the	Bitter	Ice.

Miles	from	it	now.	Built	in	days	when	that	land	was	green.”
“And	what—	Who	holds	it?	Was	your	wife	there?”
“Not	tonight,	Jal.	I	can’t	speak	of	it.	Not	tonight.”
Snorri	turned	his	face	to	the	blaze	in	the	west.	He	sat,	lit	with	the	fire

glow,	and	I	saw	the	memories	take	him,	back	to	the	Wodinswood	once	again,
where	he	had	burned	his	son.



TWENTY-TWO

Maladon	is	Norse-land.	Crossing	from	East	Thurtan	you	see	it	almost
immediately.	In	the	use	of	the	land,	the	monuments,	rough-hewn	works

of	stone,	carrying	a	power	and	a	beauty	not	seen	in	the	roadside	chapels	of	the
Thurtans.	Many	of	the	houses	are	roofed	with	turf,	and	the	roof	beams	sport
curving	prows	to	remember	the	longboats	that	bore	their	ancestors	to	these
shores.	Perhaps	some	are	even	those	same	timbers,	taken	from	ships	beached
on	once-hostile	shores.

“These	are	Vikings,	then?”	I	asked	on	passing	our	first	Maladon	peasants
at	work	gathering	in	their	harvest.

“Fit-firar.	Land	men.	Good	stock,	brave,	but	the	sea	spat	them	out.	A	true
Viking	knows	the	oceans	like	a	lover.”

“Says	the	man	who	has	ridden	a	thousand	miles	rather	than	go	by	ship.”
Snorri	harrumphed	at	that.	I	didn’t	mention	that	now	he	wasn’t	even

riding	but	walking.	Although	technically	both	the	horses	were	mine	since	I
paid	for	them,	I	felt	I	was	riding	Sleipnir	on	sufferance	and	that	any	mention
of	it	might	get	me	turfed	off,	or	at	the	very	least	mocked	for	being	such	a
footsore	southerner.

The	mare	bore	deep	scratches	all	along	her	neck,	chest,	and	shoulders
from	our	escape	the	night	before.	I’d	spent	much	of	the	morning	digging	out
splinters	and	cleaning	the	wounds.	Both	her	eyes	were	scratched	and	thick
with	rheum.	I	did	what	I	could	with	them	but	thought	she	might	lose	the	left
in	time.	Later	I	dug	a	good	number	of	splinters	from	my	own	arms	and	two
particularly	painful	ones	from	under	my	fingernails.	I	may	not	be	much	of	a
man	but	I	count	myself	an	excellent	horseman,	and	a	horseman	takes	care	of
his	mount	before	himself.	I’m	not	given	to	praying,	but	I	said	a	prayer	for	Ron
out	on	the	grass	and	I’m	not	ashamed	to	say	so.

In	the	distance	the	sky	held	an	ominous	yellow	cast.	“Some	city?”	I
asked.	Crath	City	stained	the	skies	with	the	smoke	of	ten	thousand	chimneys,
and	that	had	been	in	summer,	just	cook-fires	and	industry.	I	hadn’t	thought	the
North	held	such	cities,	though.

“The	Heimrift.”
“Oh.”



“You	don’t	know	what	that	is,	do	you?”
“I’ll	have	you	know	I	was	educated	by	the	finest	scholars,	including

Harram	Lodt,	the	famed	geographer	who	made	the	world	map	that	hangs	in
the	pope’s	own	library.”

“Do	you?”
“No.”
“It’s	a	set	of	volcanoes.”
“Fire	mountains.”	I	was	pretty	certain	that’s	what	a	volcano	was.
“Yes.”
“Finest	scholars.	Very	clever	men.”

	•	•	•	

Amile	or	two	along	the	track	we	passed	a	hammer-stone,	a	crude
representation	of	Thor’s	hammer	hacked	from	a	piece	of	rock	about	five

foot	high	and	set	by	the	road.	Snorri	seemed	more	interested	in	the	pebbles
lying	around	it.	He	bent	to	investigate,	and	I	had	to	rein	Sleipnir	in	or	leave
him	crouched	by	the	verge.	Pride	kept	me	there,	waiting	in	the	middle	of	the
track	rather	than	go	back	to	see	what	the	hauldr	had	found.

“Interesting	rocks?”	I	asked	when	he	finally	deigned	to	join	me.
“Rune	stones.	Wise	men	and	völvas	leave	them.	It’s	a	kind	of	message

system.”
“And	you	can	read	it?”
“No.”	Snorri	admitted	it	with	a	grin.	“But	these	ones	were	pretty	clear.”
“And?”
“And	our	friendly	dream-witch	seems	to	have	been	right.	The	stones	say

Skilfar	is	at	her	Maladon	seat.	It’s	been	many	years	since	that	one	came
south.”

“If	she’s	the	Silent	Sister’s	twin,	we	should	stay	well	away.	She’s	nobody
we	should	have	dealings	with.”

“Even	if	her	blood	could	break	this	curse?”	He	reached	up	for	me	with	his
palm	open	and	I	shrank	back.

“You	don’t	believe	that?”	I	said.	Sageous	had	no	reason	to	tell	the	truth,
and	some	men’s	tongues	are	burned	by	truths	in	any	case.	They	tend	to	leave
mine	a	little	sore,	I’ve	found.

“Believe	she’s	the	twin	.	.	.	and	her	blood	might	help	us.	Believe	she’s	not
the	twin	and	your	reasons	for	fearing	her	go	away.	Both	ways	mean	we	should
see	her.	Even	if	every	word	Sageous	spoke	was	false,	Skilfar	is	a	völva	of	vast
renown.	I	know	of	none	more	famed.	If	she	can’t	break	this	curse,	then	no	one
can.	And	even	if	she	can’t	break	the	spell,	she	will	know	about	the
necromancers	and	their	doings	at	the	Bitter	Ice.”	Snorri	ran	a	finger	along	the
blade	of	his	axe.	“Charging	in	didn’t	serve	me	so	well	last	time.	Knowledge	is



power,	they	say,	and	I	may	need	a	better	edge	than	this.”
I	spat	into	the	road.	“Damn	your	barbarian	logic.”	It	was	all	the

counterargument	I	could	muster.
“So	it’s	settled,	then.	We’ll	go.”	Snorri	smiled	and	walked	on	up	the	track.
I	nudged	Sleipnir	after	him.	“Surely	if	she’s	so	all-powerful	she	won’t	just

see	the	likes	of	anyone.”
“We’re	not	just	anyone,	Jal,”	Snorri	called	over	his	shoulder.	“I’m	a

hauldr	of	the	Uuliskind.	You	and	I	bear	unusual	magics,	and	Sleipnir	is
possibly	the	descendant	of	a	horse	of	legend.”	Ten	more	paces	and	then,	“And
you’re	a	prince	of	somewhere.”

Damned	if	I	ever	wanted	to	see	another	witch	long	as	I	lived—I	hadn’t
even	wanted	to	see	the	first	one—but	options	were	running	short	if	I	didn’t
want	to	find	myself	on	a	boat	sailing	heathen	seas	in	search	of	an	unborn
captain	of	the	Dead	King’s	army.

I	drew	level	with	the	Norseman.	“So	how	do	we	find	her?”
“That’s	the	easy	part,”	Snorri	said.	“We	catch	a	train.”

	•	•	•	

What	a	train	might	be	I	had	no	idea,	but	I	wasn’t	going	to	let	the	Viking
taunt	me	with	my	ignorance	again,	so	I	followed	without	complaint.

We	passed	a	few	farmsteads,	locals	carting	the	harvest	to	be	sold	and
stored	against	the	winter.	All	of	them	remarked	us,	Snorri	in	particular,	and
whilst	it	still	irked	that	a	commoner,	and	Norseman	at	that,	upstaged	a	full-
blooded	prince	of	Red	March,	it	was	pleasing	to	see	he	was	as	much	a	rarity
in	his	stature	in	the	North	as	in	the	South.	Part	of	me	had	secretly	worried	that
all	men	might	be	built	along	Snorri’s	lines	up	amongst	the	fjords	and	I	might
find	myself	a	dwarf	amidst	giants.

Some	amongst	the	fit-firar	tried	to	speak	to	Snorri	in	the	old	tongue	of	the
North,	but	he	answered	them	in	the	Empire	Tongue	with	good	humour,
thanking	them	for	their	courtesy.	Each	person	we	encountered	told	the	same
story	about	Skilfar.	The	völva	had	arrived	without	warning	a	month	earlier,
and	none	had	seen	her	save	those	foolhardy	enough	to	seek	her	out.	Snorri
asked	for	the	nearest	station,	and	armed	with	directions	we	abandoned	the
road	north	and	headed	out	across	open	country.

The	station	turned	out	to	be	nothing	more	than	a	broad	and	grassy	ditch	in
the	ground,	overhung	on	one	side	by	some	kind	of	stone	lip.	We	reached	it
under	grey	skies	and	a	chill	drizzle.

“She	lives	in	a	ditch?”	I’d	heard	of	trolls	living	under	bridges	and	witches
in	caves	.	.	.

“Now	we	follow	the	tracks,”	Snorri	said,	and	headed	off	along	the	side	of
the	ditch,	bound	north	and	east.



In	time	the	ditch	became	shallow,	then	invisible,	but	we	carried	on
through	moor	and	meadow,	finding	the	line	again,	now	as	a	ridge,	raised	a
yard	above	the	surrounding	terrain.	Not	until	we	reached	the	uplands	did	I
first	get	an	impression	of	what	a	fearsome	creature	the	train	must	have	been	to
leave	such	tracks.	Where	a	man	might	go	around,	or	weave	a	path	of	least
resistance	up	a	slope,	the	train	had	just	ploughed	on.	We	walked	in	one	place
along	a	rock-walled	ravine	thirty	yards	deep	where	the	train	had	scored	its
path	through	the	bedrock.

Finally	the	land	rose	in	a	series	of	more	substantial	hills	and	still	the	train
had	kept	its	course.	Ahead	of	us	a	circular	hole	waited,	punched	into	the
hillside,	ten	yards	in	diameter	and	blacker	than	sin.	The	rain	strengthened,
trickling	down	my	neck	and	carrying	its	own	cold	and	peculiar	misery	with	it.

“Yeah	.	.	.	I’m	not	going	in	there,	Snorri.”	Sir	George	might	have	followed
his	dragon	into	the	cave,	but	damned	if	I	was	hunting	train	down	in	the
bowels	of	the	earth.

“Ha!”	Snorri	punched	me	on	the	shoulder	as	if	I’d	made	a	joke.	It	really
hurt,	and	I	reminded	myself	not	to	make	any	actual	jokes	with	him	in	arm’s
reach.

“Seriously.	I’ll	wait	here.	You	let	me	know	how	it	went	when	you	come
back.”

“There	are	no	trains,	Jal.	They’re	long	gone.	Not	so	much	as	a	bone	left
behind.”	He	looked	back	across	the	rough	country	behind	us.	“You	can	stay
here	alone,	though,	if	you	like,	while	I	go	in	to	see	Skilfar.”	He	pursed	his
lips.

Something	in	the	word	alone,	spoken	in	empty	country,	made	me	change
my	mind.	Suddenly	I	didn’t	want	to	be	left	standing	out	in	the	rain.	Besides,	I
needed	to	hear	what	this	witch	had	to	say	about	the	curse,	rather	than
whatever	Snorri	might	remember	of	her	words	or	choose	to	share.	So	together
we	went	in,	Snorri	taking	the	lead	and	me	guiding	Sleipnir	behind.

Within	a	hundred	yards	the	circle	of	light	to	our	rear	did	little	but	offer	a
reminder	that	once	upon	a	time	we	could	see.

“I’ve	still	got	two	torches.”	I	reached	for	my	pack.
“Better	to	keep	them,”	Snorri	said.	“There’s	only	one	way	to	go.”
Horrors	stalked	us	in	the	dark,	of	course.	Well,	they	stalked	me.	I

imagined	the	pale	men	from	the	forest	padding	behind	me	on	quiet	feet,	or
waiting	silent	to	either	side	as	we	marched	past.

We	walked	for	miles.	Snorri	trailed	a	stick	along	the	wall	so	he	wouldn’t
lose	contact	with	it,	and	I	followed	the	sound	of	scraping.	Sleipnir	clip-
clopped	along	behind.	In	places	the	roof	dripped	or	slime	hung	in	long	ropes.
Every	five	hundred	yards	or	so	a	shaft	led	up,	no	thicker	than	a	man	and
offering	a	pale	glimpse	of	sky.	Strange	plants	clustered	around	these
openings,	reaching	for	the	light	with	many-fingered	leaves.	In	other	places



partial	collapses	saw	us	clambering	up	mounds	of	loose	rubble,	Sleipnir’s
hooves	dislodging	small	avalanches	of	broken	rock.	In	one	section	some	huge
piece	of	Builder-rock	blocked	all	but	a	narrow	gap	to	one	side	and	we	had	to
edge	through.	Snorri	allowed	me	to	light	the	torch	for	that	transit	but	had	me
quench	it	in	a	standing	pool	thereafter.	I	didn’t	argue—both	torches	would
most	likely	have	been	burned	out	along	the	path	we’d	taken	so	far,	and	what
the	light	revealed	looked	boring	enough,	with	no	monsters	on	show,	not	even
a	discarded	skull	or	shattered	bone.

When	stiff	arms	enfolded	me	without	warning,	I	screamed	loud	enough	to
collapse	the	roof	and	went	down	swinging	wildly.	My	fist	made	contact	with
something	hard,	and	the	pain	only	amplified	my	distress.	A	hollow	clattering
went	up	on	all	sides.

“Jal!”
“Get	off!	Get	the	fuck	off!”
“Jal!”	Snorri,	louder	this	time,	tense	but	calm	enough.
“Oh	you	fucker!”	Something	hard	jabbed	me	in	the	eye	as	my	assailant

fell	away,	clattering.
“Now	would	be	the	time	for	that	torch,	Jal.”
Silence,	except	for	my	panting	and	the	nervous	stamp	of	Sleipnir’s

hooves.
“Fuckers!”	I	got	my	knife	in	hand	and	slashed	the	air	a	couple	of	times	for

good	measure.
“Torch.”
“I’ve	got—	It’s	somewhere.”	A	minute	or	two	of	fumbling	straps	and

digging	through	my	pack	and	I’d	set	flame	to	tinder.	The	torch	took	the	fire
and	spread	its	glow.	“Christ	Jesu!”

Ahead	of	us	pale	figures	filled	the	tunnel,	rank	upon	rank	upon	rank	of
them.	Statues	all	of	them,	men	and	women,	most	of	regular	height,	all	naked
and	without	genitalia.	On	every	side	of	me	lay	toppled	examples,	my	most
recent	foe	reaching	for	the	ceiling	with	a	straight	arm.

“Hemrod’s	army,”	Snorri	said.
“What?”	Some	of	the	statues	had	eyes	painted	into	their	sockets,	some

hair,	also	painted,	but	most	were	bald,	eyeless,	many	lacking	definition,	some
to	the	degree	that	their	fingers	were	fused,	faces	blank.	Many	struck	oddly
nonchalant	poses,	looking	more	like	idle	nobility	than	marching	warriors.
There	was	space	to	walk	between	each	rank	and	somehow	Snorri	had	ended
up	doing	so,	leaving	me	to	crash	into	the	first	line.

“Hemrod,”	Snorri	said.
“Hemroids	to	you.	I’ve	never	heard	of	him.”	I	took	hold	of	the

outstretched	arm	before	me	and	pulled	the	figure	to	its	feet.	The	thing	had
almost	no	weight	to	it.	Whatever	it	had	been	fashioned	from	was	far	lighter
than	wood.	I	tapped	it.	“Hollow?”



“These	are	Builder	things.	Statues,	I	guess.	Hemrod	held	sway	in	this
region	before	the	empire	grew	across	his	lands.	When	they	buried	him	down
here,	they	set	an	army	of	these	plasteek	warriors	to	guard	him	and	to	serve
him	in	the	life	beyond.	Perhaps	they	wait	for	Ragnarok	with	him	in	Valhalla.”

“Pah.”	I	stood	and	dusted	myself	down.	“I’d	want	better	soldiers.	Look:	I
felled	seven	of	them	while	fighting	blind.”

Snorri	nodded.	“Though	to	be	fair	you	did	have	a	screaming	girl	to	help
you.”	He	glanced	back	down	the	tunnel.	“I	wonder	where	she	ran	off	to.”

“Eat	dung,	Norseman.”	I	started	off	between	the	rows.

	•	•	•	

“Someone	must	keep	standing	them	up,	you	know.”	Snorri	spoke	from
behind	me.

I	paused	and	swapped	the	torch	from	one	hand	to	the	other.	My	arm	hurt
from	holding	it	overhead	and	dribbles	of	hot	pitch	kept	escaping	to	burn	my
fingers.

“Why?”
“It	stands	to	reason.	They’ve	stood	here	five	hundred	years	and	more.	You

can’t	be	the	first	to	fetch	up	against	one.”
“I	mean,	why	bother?”
“Magic.”	Snorri	puffed	a	breath	through	his	lips.	“It’s	an	old	charm,	a

defence.	They	say	old	magic	runs	deepest.	Skilfar	makes	her	home	here	for	a
reason	when	she	comes	south.”

“Well,	I	ain’t	going	back	to	stand	them	up	again.”	I	lifted	the	torch	higher.
“Some	kind	of	chamber	up	ahead	.	.	.”

As	we	drew	closer	I	saw	that	the	space	might	better	be	called	a	cavern,
not	for	the	nature	of	it—men	had	built	this—but	for	the	size	of	the	place.
Cavernous	would	be	the	word	to	use.	The	blackness	within	swallowed	the
light	of	my	torch.	A	rust-covered	floor	stretched	away	and	Builder	statues
filled	the	portion	of	the	chamber	I	could	see,	all	pointing	outward	from	some
hidden	centre.	To	either	side,	tunnel	mouths	opened,	statues	marching	away
into	the	darkness.	If	the	spacing	held	constant	I	guessed	maybe	eight	or	ten
tunnels	met	here.	Truly	it	must	once	have	been	a	den	of	trains,	coiling	about
each	other	like	great	serpents.

Snorri	nudged	me	on	and	I	advanced	with	caution	between	the	ranks.
Some	prurient	part	of	me	that	is	always	on	duty	noted	that	the	vast	majority	of
the	statues	here	were	of	women,	all	in	the	same	kinds	of	stiff	and	awkward
poses,	my	torchlight	flickering	across	hundreds	if	not	thousands	of	ancient	but
perky	plasteek	breasts.

“Getting	colder.”	Snorri	at	my	shoulder.
“Yes.”	I	stopped,	handed	him	the	torch,	and	circled	around	a	nude



plasteek	woman	to	stand	behind	him.	“After	you.	She’s	your	Wicked	Witch	of
the	North	after	all.”	Somehow	the	“wicked	witch”	part	contrived	to	echo
about	the	chamber,	taking	a	damnably	long	time	to	die	away.

Snorri	shrugged	and	went	ahead.	“Leave	the	horse.”
The	radial	aisles	of	statues	created	a	steady	narrowing	as	we	approached

the	centre,	and	soon	Sleipnir	would	be	knocking	them	over	left	and	right.	I	let
go	her	reins.	“Stay.”	She	blinked	one	gunked-up	eye	at	me,	the	other	glued
tight	with	secretions,	and	lowered	her	head.

The	temperature	fell	by	the	yard	now	and	frost	glittered	on	plasteek	arms
to	every	side.	I	hugged	myself	and	let	my	breath	plume	before	me.

In	the	middle	of	the	chamber	a	circular	platform	rose	in	four	steps	and	in
the	centre	of	that,	in	an	ice-clad	chair,	sat	Skilfar:	tall,	angular,	white	skin
stretched	tight	across	sharp	bones,	draped	in	the	skins	of	several	arctic	foxes
and	with	a	white	mist	running	from	her	limbs	as	if	they	might	be	cold	enough
to	shatter	steel.	Eyes	like	frozen	seawater	fixed	upon	Snorri’s	torch	and	out	it
went,	the	firelight	replaced	instead	by	a	star-glow	that	rose	from	the	frost-
wrapped	limbs	of	her	ancient	guardians.

“Visitors.”	She	rolled	her	neck,	and	ice	crunched.
“Hail	Skilfar.”	Snorri	bowed.	Behind	him	I	wondered	just	what	it	was	this

witch	did	sitting	here	in	the	dark	when	she	didn’t	have	us	to	talk	to.
“Warrior.”	She	inclined	her	head.	“Prince.”	Cold	eyes	found	me	again.

“Two	of	you,	bound	by	the	Sister,	how	droll.	She	does	enjoy	her	little	jokes.”
Little	jokes?	Anger	rose,	elbowing	aside	a	measure	of	my	sensible	fear.

“Your	sister,	madam?”	I	wondered	how	cold	her	blood	was.
“She	would	tell	you	she	was	everybody’s	sister.	If	she	ever	spoke.”	Skilfar

rose	from	her	chair,	the	freezing	air	flowing	from	her	skin	like	milk,	pouring
to	the	floor.	“A	stench	of	ill	dreaming	hangs	around	you	both.”	She	wrinkled
her	nose.	“Whose	taint	is	this?	It	was	not	well	done.”

“Are	you	twin	to	the	Silent	Sister?”	Snorri,	through	gritted	teeth,	his	axe
moving.

“She	has	a	twin,	certainly.”	Skilfar	advanced	to	the	front	of	the	platform,
just	yards	from	us.	My	face	ached	with	the	cold.	“You	don’t	want	to	strike
me,	Snorri	ver	Snagason.”	She	pointed	one	long	white	finger	at	his	axe,	the
blades	now	level	with	his	shoulder.

“No,”	he	agreed,	but	his	body	remained	coiled	for	the	blow.
I	found	myself	advancing,	sword	raised,	though	I’d	no	recollection	of

drawing	it	or	desire	to	get	any	closer	than	I	was.	Everything	held	a	dreamlike
quality.	My	eyes	filled	with	visions	of	the	witch	dying	on	the	blade	before	me.

Skilfar	wafted	the	air	towards	her	face,	inhaling	deeply	through	a	sharp
nose.	“Sageous	has	touched	your	minds.	You	particularly,	prince.	But	crude
work.	He	normally	has	a	more	subtle	hand.”

“Do	it!”	The	words	burst	from	me.	“Do	it	now,	Snorri!”	I	clapped	a	hand



to	my	mouth	before	I	could	damn	myself	further.
Two	bounds	had	him	on	the	step	below	Skilfar,	his	axe	high	above	her,	the

huge	muscles	of	his	arms	ready	to	haul	it	down	through	her	narrow	body.	And
yet	he	held	the	blow.

“Ask	the	right	question,	child.”	Skilfar	glanced	away	from	Snorri,
meeting	my	gaze	across	the	sea	of	statues.	“Better	that	you	shrug	Sageous	off
for	yourself.	Safer	than	if	I	do	it.”

“I—”	I	remembered	Sageous’s	mild	eyes,	his	suggestions	that	had	turned
into	truths	as	I’d	considered	them.	“Who—who	is	the	Sister’s	twin?”

“Pah.”	Skilfar	snorted	out	a	breath	that	wrapped	white	and	serpentine
around	her	thin	torso.	“I	thought	she	would	choose	better.”	She	extended	a
hand	towards	me,	clawed,	talons	of	ice	springing	from	her	nails.

“Wait!”	A	shout.	For	some	reason	I	saw	my	locket.	Whole,	its	gems	in
place.	“I—	Who—	Garyus!	Who	is	Garyus?”

“Better.”	The	hand	relaxed.	Still	no	smile	though.	“Garyus	is	the	Sister’s
brother.”

I	saw	him,	my	great-uncle,	twisted	and	ancient	in	his	tower	room,	the
locket	in	his	hand.	“I	had	a	twin,”	he	had	told	me	once.	“They	broke	us	apart.
But	we	didn’t	break	evenly.”

On	the	step	below	Skilfar	Snorri	lowered	his	axe,	blinking	as	if	shaking
off	the	dregs	of	sleep.

“And	his	blood	could	break	this	curse?”	The	question	billowed	white
before	me.

“His	sister’s	spell	would	be	broken.”	Skilfar	nodded.
“How	else	can	it	be	broken?”	I	asked.
“You	know	the	ways.”
“Can’t	you	do	it?”	I	tried	a	hopeful	smile,	but	my	frozen	face	wouldn’t

cooperate.
“I	don’t	wish	to.”	Skilfar	returned	to	her	chair.	“The	unborn	have	no	place

amongst	us.	The	Dead	King	plays	a	dangerous	game.	I	would	see	his	ambition
broken.	Many	hidden	hands	are	turned	against	him.	Perhaps	every	hand	but
that	of	the	Lady	Blue,	and	her	game	is	more	dangerous	still.	So	no,	Prince
Jalan,	you	carry	the	Silent	Sister’s	purpose	and	the	magics	with	which	she
sought	to	destroy	the	greatest	of	the	Dead	King’s	servants.	I’ve	no	interest	in
taking	it	from	you.	The	Dead	King	needs	his	claws	trimmed.	His	strength	is
like	a	forest	fire.”	I	wondered	at	her	choice	of	words.	“But	like	such
conflagrations	it	will	burn	itself	out,	and	the	forest	will	prevail.	Unless	of
course	it	burns	the	very	bedrock	itself.	Destroy	the	unborn;	that	will	complete
the	spell’s	purpose	and	it	will	fade	from	you.	There	are	no	other	choices	for
you,	Prince	Jalan,	and	when	there	are	no	choices	all	men	are	equally	brave.”

“How?”	I	asked,	without	really	wanting	to	know.	“Destroy	the	unborn?
How?”



“How	do	the	living	ever	defeat	the	dead?”	She	smiled	a	small	cold	smile.
“With	every	beat	of	your	heart,	every	hot	drop	of	your	blood.	The	truth	of	the
Sister’s	spell	is	hidden	from	me,	but	carry	it	where	it	leads	you	and	pray	it
proves	sufficient.	These	are	the	ends	you	serve.”

Snorri	came	down	the	steps,	dropping	from	one	to	the	next,	and	stood	at
my	side.	“I	have	my	own	ends,	Skilfar.	Men	do	not	serve	the	völvas.”	He
covered	the	blades	of	his	axe	with	the	leather	protectors	he	had	stripped	off	a
minute	before.

“Everything	serves	everything	else,	Snorri	ver	Snagason.”	No	heat	in	the
witch’s	voice.	If	anything	it	felt	colder	than	ever.

To	distract	the	pair	of	them	from	further	disagreements,	I	raised	my	voice
in	a	question.	“Pray	it	proves	sufficient?	Praying’s	all	well	and	good,	but	I
never	set	much	faith	by	it.	The	Silent	Sister	had	to	take	her	enemies	unaware.
She	had	to	paint	her	runes	and	slowly	draw	her	net	around	them.	Even	then
the	unborn	escaped	when	I	broke	just	one	rune	.	.	.	so	say	we	do	find	some
way	to	release	this	spell	.	.	.	how	can	it	defeat	even	one	unborn,	let	alone
several?”

Skilfar	raised	her	brows	a	fraction	as	if	wondering	herself.	“They	say
some	wines	improve	with	age	when	bottled.”

“Wine?”	I	glanced	up	at	Snorri	to	see	if	he	understood.
“These	magics	couldn’t	be	carried	by	just	any	two	men,”	Skilfar	said.

“Magic	requires	the	right	receptacles.	Something	about	this	spell,	about	you
two,	just	fits	together.	You’re	her	blood,	Prince	Jalan,	and	Snorri	has
something	to	him,	something	that	suits	him	to	this	task.	Pray	or	don’t	pray,
but	the	only	hope	you	have	is	that	the	spell	strengthens	within	you,	because	of
who	and	what	you	are,	because	of	your	journey,	and	that	when	the	time	comes
it	will	be	stronger	rather	than	weaker	than	it	was.”

“I’m	not	going	north	as	a	witch’s	lapdog,”	Snorri	growled.	“I’m	bound
there	on	my	own	purpose	and	I’ll—”

“Why	is	she	silent?”	I	elbowed	the	Norseman	to	shut	him	up,	offering	the
question	up	to	distract	them	both	from	the	quarrel	brewing	on	his	lips.	“Why
does	the	Sister	never	speak?”

“It’s	the	price	she	pays	for	knowing	the	future.”	Skilfar	looked	away	from
Snorri.	“She	may	not	speak	of	it.	She	says	nothing	so	that	the	bargain	will
remain	unbroken	by	any	accident	or	slip	of	tongue.”

I	pursed	my	lips,	nodding	with	interest.	“Well.	That’s	.	.	.	that	sounds
reasonable.	In	any	event,	we	really	must	be	going.”	I	reached	out	and	tugged
at	Snorri’s	belt.	“She’s	not	going	to	help	us,”	I	hissed.

Snorri,	though,	obstinate	as	ever,	would	not	be	pulled	away.	“We	met	a
man	named	Taproot.	He	also	spoke	of	hidden	hands.	A	grey	one	behind	us,	a
black	one	blocking	our	path.”

“Yes,	yes.”	Skilfar	waved	the	question	away.	“The	Sister	set	you	on	your



path,	the	Dead	King	seeks	to	stop	you.	A	reasonable	ambition	considering
you’ve	been	sent	to	stop	him	gathering	an	army	of	dead	men	from	the	ice.”

“No	one	sent	us!”	Snorri	said,	louder	than	is	advisable	in	front	of	an	ice-
witch.	“I	escaped!	I’m	bound	north	to	save	my—”

“Yes,	yes,	your	family.	If	you	say	so.”	Skilfar	met	his	gaze,	and	it	was
Snorri	who	looked	aside.	“Men	who’ve	made	choices	always	feel	they	own
their	destiny.	Few	ever	think	to	ask	who	shaped	and	offered	up	those	choices.
Who	dangles	the	carrot	they	think	they’ve	chosen	to	follow.”

Now	that	Snorri	had	mentioned	Taproot’s	whitterings	and	Skilfar	lent
them	a	measure	of	importance	with	her	interpretation,	I	remembered
something	else	he’d	said.

“A	blue	hand	behind	the	black,	a	red	behind	the	grey.”	The	words	tripped
off	my	tongue.

Those	eyes	turned	my	way	and	I	felt	the	winter	settle	cold	upon	me.
“Elias	Taproot	said	that?”

“Uh	.	.	.	yes.”
“Well	now,	that	man	has	been	paying	closer	attention	than	I	gave	him

credit	for.”	She	steepled	white	fingers	beneath	the	angularity	of	her	chin.	“The
Red	and	the	Blue.	There	you	have	the	battle	of	our	age,	Prince	Jalan.	Lady
Blue	and	the	Red	Queen.	Your	grandmother	wants	an	emperor,	prince.	Did
you	know	that?	She	wants	to	make	the	Broken	Empire	whole	again	.	.	.	seal
all	the	cracks,	seen	and	unseen.	She	wants	an	emperor	because	such	a	man	.	.	.
well,	he	could	turn	the	wheel	back.	She	wants	this	and	the	Lady	Blue	does
not.”

“And	you,	völva?”	Snorri	asked.	“What	wheel?”	I	would	have	asked.
“Ah.	Both	courses	require	a	terrible	price	be	paid,	and	both	are	fraught

with	risk.”
“And	there’s	no	third	way?”
Skilfar	shook	her	head.	“I	have	cast	the	runes	until	they	broke	from

falling.	I	see	nothing	but	the	red	and	the	blue.”
Snorri	shrugged.	“Emperor	or	no	emperor,	it	makes	no	difference	to	me.

My	wife	and	son,	Freja	and	Egil,	that’s	what	calls	me	to	the	ice.	I’ll	see	Sven
Broke-Oar	die	and	have	my	justice.	Can	you	tell	me	if	he	still	bides	at	the
Black	Fort?”

“Still	fixed	upon	your	carrot,	Snorri	ver	Snagason?	Look	past	it.	Look
ahead.	When	the	Uuliskind	sail,	do	they	navigate	by	staring	at	the	water
beneath	their	prow?	You	should	ask	why	it	might	be	that	he	is	there	at	all.	Do
they	dig	beneath	the	ice	just	for	more	corpses?	And	if	not,	what	else	do	they
seek	and	to	what	purpose?”

Something	like	a	growl,	but	worse,	rose	in	Snorri’s	throat.	“The	Broke-
Oar—”

“Let’s	go!”	I	yanked	harder	at	Snorri’s	belt	before	his	temper	buried	both



of	us.
Snorri	hunched	his	massive	shoulders	and	made	a	stiff	bow.	“Gods	keep

you,	Skilfar.”
I	let	him	pass	and	made	my	own	much	deeper	bow.	Social	standing	is	one

thing,	but	I	always	feel	a	scary	hell-born	witch	deserves	as	much	bowing	and
scraping	as	it	takes	to	avoid	being	made	into	a	toad.	“My	thanks,	madam.	I’ll
take	my	leave	and	pray	your	army	keeps	you	safe.”	With	an	instinctive
sideways	glance	at	a	particularly	well-formed	young	plasteek	woman,	I	turned
to	go.

“Step	carefully	on	the	ice.”	Skilfar	called	after	us	as	if	she	had	an
audience.	“Two	heroes,	one	led	willy-nilly	by	his	cock,	the	other	northward
by	his	heart.	Neither	bringing	their	brain	into	any	decision	of	import.	Let	us
not	judge	them	harshly,	my	soldiers,	for	nothing	is	truly	deep,	nothing	holds
consequence.	It’s	from	the	shallows	that	emotions	born	of	simple	wanting
arise	to	steer	us	as	they	have	always	steered	man,	steered	the	Builders,	steered
the	gods	themselves,	towards	true	Ragnarok,	an	end	to	all	things.	A	peace.”
She	couldn’t	resist	a	commentary.	I	guess	it’s	hard	for	even	the	wisest	not	to
show	off	that	they	are	wise.

Her	words	followed	us	from	the	chamber.	I	halted	a	short	way	into	the
tunnel	to	relight	my	torch.	“Ragnarok.	Is	that	all	the	North	ever	thinks	about?
Is	that	what	you	want,	Snorri?	Some	great	battle	and	the	world	ruined	and
dead?”	I	couldn’t	blame	him	if	he	did.	Not	with	what	had	befallen	him	this
past	year,	but	I	would	be	disturbed	to	know	he	had	always	lusted	after	such	an
end,	even	on	the	night	before	the	black	ships	came	to	Eight	Quays.

The	light	kindling	on	my	torch	caught	him	in	midshrug.	“Do	you	want	the
paradise	your	priests	paint	for	you	on	cathedral	ceilings?”

“Good	point.”
We	left	without	further	theological	discussion.	When	my	brand	started	to

gutter	and	flare,	I	lit	the	last	of	our	torches	from	the	old,	tired	of	being	slapped
in	the	face	by	slime	ropes,	tripped	by	stray	plasteek	legs,	soaking	my	feet	in
cold	pools,	and	stubbing	my	toe	on	blocks	fallen	from	the	ceiling.	Also	the
possibility	of	ghosts	disturbed	me.	For	all	my	bravado	in	the	witch’s	chamber
the	long	night	of	the	tunnels	had	shattered	my	nerves.	Her	guardians	looked
more	ominous	by	the	minute;	in	the	dancing	shadows	their	limbs	seemed	to
move.	At	the	corner	of	my	eye	I	kept	seeing	motion	but	when	I	swung	round
their	ranks	remained	unbroken.

I’ve	never	been	one	for	wandering	in	the	dark.	It	seemed,	though,	that	our
light	couldn’t	last	the	journey.	I	held	the	torch	high	and	prayed	that	before	it
failed	we’d	see	a	circle	of	daylight	far	ahead.

“Come	on.	Come	on.”	Muttered	in	short	breaths	as	we	walked.	The
plasteek	soldiers	had	been	left	far	behind,	but	for	all	I	knew	they	stalked	us
just	beyond	the	range	of	the	torch’s	illumination.	“Come	on.”



Somehow	the	torch	kept	going.
“Thank	God!”	I	pointed	up	ahead	to	the	long-awaited	spot	of	daytime.	“I

didn’t	think	it	would	last.”
“Jal.”	Snorri	tapped	my	shoulder.	I	looked	round,	my	gaze	following	his

to	my	hand,	raised	above	my	head.	“Holy	sh—”	The	torch	was	a	blackened
stump,	no	longer	even	smoking.	The	fingers	gripping	it	were,	however,
another	matter,	glowing	fiercely	with	an	inner	light.	At	least	they	were	until
Snorri	drew	them	to	my	attention.	At	that	point	they	blinked	out,	plunging	us
into	darkness,	and	I	did	what	any	sensible	man	would.	I	ran	hell	for	leather	for
the	outside.

A	storm	waited	for	us.



TWENTY-THREE

The	port	of	Den	Hagen	sits	where	the	River	Oout	washes	into	the
Karlswater,	that	stretch	of	brine	the	Norse	call	the	Devouring	Sea.	A

collection	of	fine	homes	huddle	on	the	rising	slopes	to	the	east—well,	fine	for
the	North	where	every	building	crouches	low,	granite-built	to	withstand	the
weather	that	sweeps	in	from	the	frozen	wastes.	Log	cabins,	round	houses,
inns,	ale-halls,	and	fish	markets	reach	down	to	huge	warehouses	that	fringe
the	docks	like	receiving	mouths.	Greater	ships	sit	at	anchor	in	the	quiet	waters
of	the	bay;	other	vessels	crowd	the	quays,	masts	rising	in	a	profusion	of	spars
and	rigging.	Seagulls	circle	overhead,	ever	mournful,	and	men	fill	the	air	with
their	own	cries,	voices	raised	to	call	out	prices,	summon	fresh	hands	to	load
or	unload,	issue	challenge,	share	jokes,	curse	or	praise	the	many	gods	of
Asgard,	or	to	bring	the	followers	of	Christ	to	the	small	and	salt-rimed	church
at	the	water’s	edge.

“What	a	hole.”	The	stink	of	old	fish	reached	me	even	on	the	cliff	tops
where	the	coast	road	snaked	in	from	the	west.

Snorri,	walking	ahead	of	me,	growled	but	said	nothing.	I	leaned	forwards
and	patted	Sleipnir’s	neck.	“Time	for	us	to	part	soon,	old	one-eye.”

I	would	miss	the	horse.	I’ve	never	liked	walking.	If	God	had	meant	man
to	walk	he	wouldn’t	have	given	us	horses.	Wonderful	animals.	I	think	of	them
as	the	word	escape,	covered	in	hair	and	with	a	leg	at	each	corner.

We	wound	down	into	Den	Hagen,	the	road	lined	with	shacks	that	looked
as	though	the	first	winds	of	winter	would	clear	them	from	the	slopes.	On	a
high	corner	overlooking	the	sea,	seven	troll-stones	watched	the	waves.	They
looked	like	stones	to	me,	but	Snorri	claimed	to	see	a	troll	in	each	of	them.	He
pulled	open	his	weather	jacket	and	jerked	up	the	layers	of	his	shirts	to	reveal	a
fearsome	scar	across	the	hard-packed	muscles	of	his	stomach.	“Troll.”	With	a
finger	he	implied	a	series	of	additional	scars	from	hip	to	shoulder.	“I	was
lucky.”

In	a	world	where	dead	men	walked,	unborn	rose	from	fresh	graves,	and
the	people	of	the	pines	haunted	forests,	I	could	hardly	dispute	his	claim.

On	the	final	stretch	of	the	road	we	passed	three	or	four	hammer-stones	set
on	the	verges	to	honour	the	thunder	god.	Snorri	checked	for	rune	stones



around	each	but	found	only	a	stray	black	pebble,	river-smoothed	and	wide
enough	to	cover	his	palm,	bearing	a	single	rune.	Perhaps	local	children	made
off	with	the	rest.

“Thuriaz.”	He	let	it	fall.
“Hmmm?”
“Thorns.”	He	shrugged.	“It	means	nothing.”

	•	•	•	

The	town	boasted	no	wall,	and	nobody	save	a	handful	of	sorry-looking
merchants	watched	the	entrance—not	that	there	was	an	entrance,	just	an

increase	in	the	crowding	of	houses.	After	weeks	of	rough	living	and	hard
travelling,	even	a	place	such	as	Den	Hagen	has	its	appeal.	Every	piece	of
clothing	on	me	still	held	its	measure	of	rain	from	the	storm	that	had	lashed	us
for	two	days	across	the	moorland	fastness	surrounding	Skilfar’s	seat.	A	man
could	have	slaked	his	thirst	on	what	he	could	squeeze	from	my	trews.	He’d
have	to	be	damnable	dry	to	risk	it,	though.

“We	could	pop	in	there	and	see	if	the	ale	tastes	any	better	here?”	I	pointed
to	a	tavern	just	ahead,	barrels	placed	in	the	street	before	it	for	men	to	rest	their
tankards	on,	a	painted	wooden	swordfish	hanging	above	the	door.

“Maladon	beer	is	fine.”	Snorri	walked	on	past	the	entrance.
“It	would	be	if	they	forgot	to	salt	it.”	Foul	stuff,	but	sometimes	foul	will

do.	I’d	asked	for	wine	back	in	the	town	of	Goaten	and	they’d	looked	at	me	as
if	I’d	asked	them	to	roast	a	small	child	for	my	meal.

“Come	on.”	Snorri	turned	towards	the	sea,	waving	away	a	man	trying	to
sell	him	dried	fish.	“We’ll	check	the	harbour	first.”	A	tension	had	built	in	him
as	we	approached	the	coast,	and	when	we	first	saw	the	sea	from	a	high	ridge
he	had	sunk	to	his	knees	and	muttered	heathen	prayers.	Since	the	troll-stones
he’d	been	walking	with	such	purpose	I	had	to	nudge	Sleipnir	along	to	keep
up.

Several	boats	were	tied	at	mooring	points	along	the	dock	front,	amongst
them	one	that	required	neither	loading	nor	unloading.

“A	longboat,”	I	said,	spotting	at	last	the	classic	lines	that	Snorri	must	have
recognized	from	the	coast	road.	I	slipped	from	Sleipnir’s	back	as	Snorri	strode
towards	the	vessel,	breaking	into	a	run	over	the	last	fifty	yards.	Even	a
landlubber	like	myself	could	see	that	the	ship	had	been	through	rough	times,
the	mast	broken	some	yards	short	of	its	proper	height,	the	sail	ragged.

Without	slowing	Snorri	reached	the	harbour’s	edge	and	dropped	from
sight,	presumably	onto	the	unseen	deck	of	the	longboat.	Cries	and	shouts
went	up.	I	prepared	myself	for	the	sight	of	carnage.

Making	a	slow	advance	and	peering	over	the	side,	with	the	caution	of	a
man	not	wanting	a	spear	in	the	forehead,	I	expected	to	be	met	with	a	boat	full



of	blood	and	body	parts.	Instead	Snorri	stood	amidst	the	rowing	benches
grinning	like	a	loon	with	six	or	seven	pale	and	hairy	men	crowding	around
him,	exchanging	welcome	punches.	And	all	of	them	trying	to	talk	at	once	in
some	godforsaken	language	that	sounded	like	it	needed	to	be	retched	up	from
the	depths	of	a	man’s	belly.

“Jal!”	He	glanced	up	and	waved.	“Get	down	here!”
I	debated	the	matter,	but	there	seemed	no	escape.	I	slung	Sleipnir’s	reins

over	one	of	the	ship	lines	and	went	off	to	find	a	means	of	descent	that	didn’t
involve	breaking	both	ankles	on	arrival.

Disentangling	myself	from	a	rickety	ladder	of	salty	rope	and	rotting
planks,	I	turned	to	find	myself	an	object	of	study	for	eight	Vikings.	The	most
immediate	thing	to	strike	me	was	not	the	traditional	Norse	“fist	of	welcome”
but	the	fact	that	most	of	them	were	identical.

“Quins	now,	is	it?”	I	counted	them	off.
Snorri	slung	an	arm	about	two	of	the	five,	white-blond	types	with	ice-chip

eyes	and	beards	far	more	close-cut	than	the	usual	“big-enough-to-lose-a-baby-
in”	style	of	the	North.	“Sore	point,	Jal.	These	are	Jarl	Torsteff’s	octuplets.
Atta	sits	at	Odin’s	table	now,	in	Valhalla,	with	Sex	and	Sjau.”	He	cast	me	a
stern	look	and	I	kept	my	face	a	mask.	“These	are	Ein,	Tveir,	Thrir,	Fjórir,	and
Fimm.”

My	guess	was	that	I’d	just	had	a	lesson	in	counting	to	eight	in	Norse,	and
simultaneously	a	look	at	the	meagre	state	of	Jarl	Torsteff’s	imagination.	I
decided	to	call	them	the	quins	in	any	event.	Less	morbid.

“Also	Tuttugu.”	Snorri	reached	out	to	pummel	the	shoulder	of	a	short	fat
man.	A	ginger	beard	fluffed	out	from	both	sides	of	the	man’s	head	with	great
enthusiasm	but	failed	to	quite	meet	across	his	chins.	Older	this	one,
midthirties,	a	decade	over	the	quins.	“And	Arne	Dead-Eye,	our	greatest	shot!”
This	last	the	oldest	of	them,	tall,	thin,	melancholy,	bad	teeth,	balding,	grey	in
the	black	of	his	beard.	If	I’d	seen	him	bent	over	weeds	in	a	field	I’d	have
thought	him	a	common	peasant.

“Ah,”	I	said,	hoping	we	wouldn’t	have	to	mix	blood	or	spit	in	each	other’s
hands.	“Delighted	to	make	your	acquaintance.”

Seven	Vikings	looked	at	me	as	if	I	might	be	some	kind	of	hitherto	unseen
fish	they’d	just	landed.	“Run	into	trouble?”	I	pointed	at	the	broken	mast,	but
unless	the	thirty	or	so	additional	men	required	to	fill	the	rowing	benches	were
up	at	the	Swordfish	enjoying	tankards	of	salt-beer,	then	the	trouble	had
entailed	much	more	than	a	shortening	of	the	mast	and	some	ripped	sailcloth.

“Drowned	Isles	trouble!”	A	quin,	possibly	Ein.
“We	don’t	have	a	settlement	on	Umbra	any	more.”	This	another	quin,

directed	at	Snorri.
“Call	them	the	Dead	Isles	now.”	Tuttugu,	jowls	wobbling	as	he	shook	his

head.



“Necromancers	chased	us	onto	our	ships.	Storms	chased	us	south.”	Arne
Dead-Eye,	looking	at	the	calluses	on	his	hand.

“Got	wrecked	on	Brit.	Took	months	to	repair.	And	the	locals?”	A	quin
spat	over	the	side	and	a	remarkably	long	way	out	to	sea.

“Been	hopping	along	the	coast	ever	since,	trying	to	get	home.”	Arne
shook	his	head.	“Dodging	Normardy’s	navy,	patrol	boats	off	Arrow,	Conaught
pirates	.	.	.	And	Aegir	hates	us.	Sent	storm	after	storm	to	beat	us	back.”

“I	was	expecting	sea	serpents	next;	a	leviathan,	why	not?”	Tuttugu	rolled
his	eyes.	“But	we’re	here.	Friendly	waters.	Few	more	repairs	and	we	can
cross	the	Karlswater!”	He	slapped	a	random	quin	across	the	shoulders.

“You	don’t	know?”	I	asked.
Snorri’s	brow	furrowed	and	he	moved	to	the	side	of	the	boat,	leaning	out

to	stare	north	across	the	open	water.
“Know	what?”	From	many	mouths,	all	eyes	on	me.
I	realized	my	mistake.	Don’t	board	a	man’s	ship	bearing	bad	news.	You’re

likely	to	leave	again	swiftly	and	by	the	wet	side.
“We	know	there’s	no	word	of	the	Undoreth	in	Den	Hagen.”	One	of	the

quins,	Ein	with	the	scar	at	the	corner	of	his	eye.	“No	longships	docking.	Tales
come	from	the	Hardanger	ports	of	raids	along	the	Uulisk,	but	no	detail.	We’ve
been	here	four	days	and	that’s	all	we’ve	discovered.	You	know	more?”

“Snorri’s	the	one	to	tell	it,”	I	said.	“My	stories	are	all	from	him	and	I’d
not	trust	myself	to	remember	them	right.”	And	that	turned	all	those	pointed
stares	Snorri’s	way.

He	stood,	towering	above	us	all,	grim,	a	hand	on	his	axe.	“It’s	a	thing	that
must	be	told	where	we	can	toast	the	dead,	brothers.”	And	he	walked	to	the
harbour	wall,	climbing	quickly	up	a	series	of	jutting	stones	that	I’d	missed	on
my	way	down.

	•	•	•	

Snorri	led	us	to	a	dockside	tavern	where	the	drinking	tables	would	afford	a
view	of	the	longship.	I	didn’t	judge	it	worth	stealing,	but	perhaps	he	was

wise	not	to	put	that	to	the	test.	After	all,	a	place	like	Den	Hagen	would	make
anyone	frantic	to	leave	after	a	short	while,	so	there	might	have	been	men	there
desperate	enough	to	sail	off	in	any	untended	vessel,	even	a	leaking	tub	like
the	one	that	brought	the	Norsemen	to	harbour.

I	walked	along	at	the	rear	of	the	group	with	Tuttugu.	“I	thought	longships
would	be,	you	know,	longer.”

“It’s	a	snekkja.”
“Oh.”
“The	smallest	type.”	Tuttugu	managed	a	grin	at	my	ignorance,	though	his

mind	must	have	been	on	what	Snorri	would	tell.	“Twenty	benches.	Skei	carry



twice	as	many.	Ours	is	called	Ikea,	after	the	dragon,	you	know?”
“Yes.”	I	didn’t,	but	lying	is	easier	than	listening	to	explanations.	I	wasn’t

even	that	interested	in	their	boat,	but	it	looked	as	though	I	might	be	trusting
myself	to	it,	and	sooner	than	I	wanted	to.	Twice	the	size	of	their	snekkja	still
didn’t	sound	like	a	big	ship—but	the	strength	of	the	North	had	always	been	in
swift	boats,	and	many	of	them.	I	had	to	pray	that	with	all	that	practice	the
damn	things	were	at	least	seaworthy.

We	drew	up	stools	around	a	long	bench,	several	locals	wisely	deciding	to
relocate	to	other	tables.	Snorri	called	for	ale	and	sat	at	the	head	of	the	table,
looking	out	across	the	length	of	it	at	the	snekkja’s	sails	flapping	above	the
harbour	wall.	The	sky	behind	them	held	a	complex	mix	of	dark	and	moody
clouds,	some	trailing	rain,	but	all	lit	by	the	slanting	rays	of	the	afternoon	sun.

“Valhalla!”	Snorri	swiped	the	first	foaming	tankard	off	the	tray	as	the
serving	women	brought	them	out.

“Valhalla!”	A	pounding	of	the	table.
“A	warrior	fears	the	battle	he	missed.	More	than	any	fight	he	can	make

his	own,	he	fears	the	fight	that’s	gone,	that	ended	without	him,	that	no	feat	of
arms	can	change.”	Snorri	had	their	attention.	He	paused	to	drink	deep	and
long.	“I	didn’t	fight	at	Einhaur,	but	I	heard	the	tale	of	it	from	Sven	Broke-Oar,
if	any	straight	word	can	come	from	his	crooked	tongue.”

The	crew	of	the	Ikea	exchanged	glances	at	that,	muttering	amongst
themselves.	The	tone	of	the	snatches	I	caught	made	it	clear	they	shared	a	low
opinion	of	the	Broke-Oar.

“The	battle	at	Eight	Quays	I	fought	in.	A	massacre	more	than	a	battle.	My
survival	shames	me	every	day.”	He	drank	again,	and	told	the	story.

The	sun	dropped,	shadows	stretched,	the	world	went	by,	but	unnoticed.
Snorri	held	us	under	the	spell	of	his	voice	and	I	listened,	sipping	my	ale
without	tasting	it,	even	though	I	had	heard	it	all	before.	All	of	it	until	he
reached	the	Black	Fort.

	•	•	•	

When	Snorri	first	saw	the	black	spot	he	thought	it	part	of	dying,	his
vision	failing	as	the	wilderness	claimed	him.	But	the	spot	persisted,

kept	its	place,	grew	as	he	staggered	on.	And	in	time	it	became	the	Black	Fort.
Built	of	huge	blocks	carved	from	the	ancient	basalt	fields	beneath	the

snows,	the	Black	Fort	sat	in	squat	defiance	of	the	Bitter	Ice,	dwarfed	by	the
vast	and	rising	cliffs	of	the	ice	sheet	just	five	miles	to	the	north.	In	all	the	long
years	of	the	fort’s	existence	the	ice	had	advanced,	retreated,	advanced	again,
but	never	quite	reached	those	black	walls,	as	if	the	fort	stood	as	man’s	final
guardian	against	the	dominion	of	the	frost	giants.

Strengthened	by	the	sight,	Snorri	journeyed	closer,	drawing	his	sealskin



cloak	all	about	him,	white	with	snow.	An	east	wind	picked	up,	scouring
across	the	ice,	picking	up	fine	dry	snow	and	driving	it	in	eddies	and	streams.
Snorri	leaned	into	the	teeth	of	the	gale,	the	last	scraps	of	warmth	stolen	away
from	him,	each	step	threatening	to	end	in	a	huddle	from	which	there	would	be
no	rising.

When	the	fort’s	bulk	blocked	the	wind,	Snorri	almost	toppled,	as	if	his
support	had	been	snatched	away.	He	hadn’t	seen	that	he	was	so	close,	or	truly
believed	that	he	would	ever	reach	his	goal.	Nobody	watched	from	the
battlements.	Each	narrow	window	stood	shuttered	and	snow-clad.	No	guard
waited	on	duty	at	the	great	gates.	Numb	of	hand	and	brain,	Snorri	stood,
uncertain.	He	had	carried	no	plan	with	him,	just	the	desire	to	finish	what	had
started	in	Eight	Quays	and	what	should	have	ended	there.	He	had	outlived
two	children.	He	had	no	desire	to	outlive	Egil	or	Freja,	only	to	battle	to	save
them.

Feeble	as	he	was,	Snorri	knew	that	he	would	only	grow	weaker	waiting	in
the	snow.	He	could	no	more	scale	the	walls	of	the	fort	than	he	could	climb	the
cliffs	of	the	Bitter	Ice.	He	took	Hel	in	both	hands	and	with	his	father’s	axe	he
beat	upon	the	doors	of	the	Black	Fort.

After	an	age	a	shutter	high	above	broke	open,	scattering	ice	and	snow
upon	Snorri’s	head.	By	the	time	he	looked	up	the	shutters	had	closed	once
more.	He	pounded	the	door	again,	knowing	his	mind	clouded	with	the
slowness	and	stupidity	that	cold	brings,	but	unable	to	think	of	an	alternative.

“You!”	A	voice	from	on	high.	“Who	are	you?”
Snorri	looked	up	and	there	in	wolf	furs,	leaning	out	for	a	better	look,	Sven

Broke-Oar,	face	unreadable	in	the	red-gold	swirl	of	his	hair.
“Snorri	.	.	.”	For	a	moment	Snorri	couldn’t	summon	his	full	name	to	numb

lips.
“Snorri	ver	Snagason?”	the	Broke-Oar	boomed	in	amazement.	“You

vanished!	Fled	the	battle,	men	said.	Oh,	this	is	most	fine.	I’ll	be	down	to	open
the	doors	myself.	Wait	there.	Don’t	run	away	again.”

So	Snorri	stood,	white	hands	tight	around	his	axe,	trying	to	let	his	anger
warm	him.	But	the	cold	had	wrapped	around	his	bones,	sapping	strength,
sapping	will	and	even	memory.	Cold	has	its	own	taste.	It	tastes	of	a	bitten
tongue.	It	coils	around	you,	a	living	thing,	a	beast	that	means	to	kill	you,	not
with	wrath,	not	with	tooth	nor	claw,	but	with	the	mercy	of	surrender,	with	the
kindness	of	letting	you	go	gentle	into	the	long	night	after	such	a	burden	of
pain	and	misery.

The	scraping	of	the	doors	shook	him	from	his	reverie.	He	startled
backwards.	The	grunting	of	men	at	labour	as	the	two	great	slabs	of	timber
juddered	back	over	icy	stone.	If	they	had	simply	left	him	waiting	he	might
never	have	moved	again.

Ten	yards	back,	beyond	the	thickness	of	the	walls,	standing	in	the	open



courtyard,	Sven	Broke-Oar	waited,	axe	in	one	gloved	hand,	his	small	iron
buckler	across	the	other.

“I	could	have	finished	you	with	a	spear	from	the	walls,	or	let	the	snows
have	you,	but	the	champion	of	the	Iron	Fields	deserves	a	better	end	than	that
now.”

Snorri	wanted	to	say	that	a	man	concerned	with	honour,	or	with	the	rights
and	wrongs	of	how	a	warrior	dies,	should	have	come	to	Eight	Quays	in	the
daylight,	sounding	his	horn	across	the	fjord.	He	wanted	to	say	a	lot	of	things.
He	wanted	to	talk	of	Emy	and	of	Karl,	but	ice	had	sealed	his	lips	and
whatever	strength	remained	he	would	use	to	kill	the	man	before	him.

“Come	then.”	The	Broke-Oar	beckoned	him	in.	“You’ve	come	this	far.	It
would	be	a	shame	for	fear	to	keep	you	from	the	last	few	paces	of	the	journey.”

Snorri	made	a	shambling	run,	his	feet	too	frozen	for	speed.	Sven	Broke-
Oar’s	laugh—that	was	the	last	thing	he	remembered	before	the	club	struck	the
back	of	his	head.	The	men	who	had	drawn	open	the	doors	simply	waited
behind	them	and	brought	him	down	once	he’d	passed	by.

A	blazing	heat	woke	him.	Heat	in	his	arms,	stretched	above	him.	Heat	in
his	extremities,	as	if	they	burned.	Heat	across	his	face.	And	pain.	Pain
everywhere.

“Wh—”
The	breath	that	broke	from	him	plumed	the	air.	Fragments	of	ice	still

clung	to	his	beard,	water	dripping	to	his	chest.	Neither	so	hot	as	it	felt	then,
nor	so	cold	as	it	had	been.

Raising	his	head	brought	the	wound	at	the	back	of	his	skull	against	the
rough	stone	wall,	and	half	an	oath	burst	from	his	cracked	lips.	The	hall	before
him	housed	a	dozen	men,	crowded	before	a	small	fire	in	a	cavernous	hearth
around	the	far	end	of	a	long	stone	table.	Broke-Oar’s	men,	Red	Vikings	from
the	Hardanger,	even	less	at	home	so	close	to	the	Bitter	Ice	than	the	Undoreth,
who	kept	to	the	Uulisk	shores.

Snorri	roared	at	his	captors,	bellowed	his	rage,	uttered	dire	curses,
shouted	until	his	throat	grew	raw	and	his	voice	weak.	They	ignored	him,
sparing	hardly	a	glance,	and	at	last	sense	prevailed	over	his	anger.	No	hope
remained	to	him,	but	he	realized	what	a	pathetic	figure	he	cut,	tied	there	on
the	wall	and	issuing	threats.	He	had	had	his	chance	to	act.	Twice.	He	had
failed	both	times.

The	Broke-Oar	entered	the	hall	from	a	doorway	close	by	the	fire	and
warmed	his	hands	there,	exchanging	words	with	his	men	before	walking	the
length	of	the	table	to	inspect	his	prisoner.

“Well,	that	was	foolish.”	He	rubbed	his	chin	between	thumb	and
forefinger.	Even	close	up	his	age	proved	elusive.	Forty?	Fifty?	Scarred,
weathered,	raw-boned,	huger	even	than	Snorri,	his	mane	of	red-gold	hair	still
thick,	crow’s	feet	at	the	corner	of	each	dark	eye,	a	shrewdness	in	his	gaze	as



he	weighed	his	man.
Snorri	made	no	reply.	He	had	been	foolish.
“I	expected	more	from	a	man	trailing	so	many	mead-hall	tales.”
“Where	is	my	wife?	My	son?”	Snorri	made	no	threats.	The	Broke-Oar

would	laugh	at	them.
“Tell	me	why	you	ran.	Snorri	ver	Snagason	has	been	shown	to	be	stupid

and	I’m	not	greatly	surprised.	Though	I	expected	more.	But	a	coward?”
“Your	creatures’	poison	brought	me	down.	I	fell	and	snow	covered	me.

Where	is	my	son?”	He	couldn’t	speak	of	Freja	before	these	men.
“Ah.”	Broke-Oar	glanced	back	at	his	men,	all	of	them	listening.	There

could	be	scant	entertainment	in	the	Black	Fort.	Even	the	coals	they	burned
must	have	been	hauled	in	by	sled	at	great	effort.	“Well,	he’s	safe	enough,	as
long	as	you	carry	on	being	no	threat.”

“I	didn’t	tell	you	his	name.”	Snorri	tugged	at	his	ropes.
The	Broke-Oar	merely	raised	a	brow.	“You	think	the	son	of	the	great

Snorri	ver	Snagason	hasn’t	been	telling	anyone	who’ll	listen	how	his	father
will	storm	our	gates	with	an	army	to	rescue	him?	Apparently	you’ll	take	all
our	heads	with	an	axe	and	roll	them	across	the	fjord.”

“Why	do	you	have	them?”	Snorri	met	the	man’s	gaze.	His	pain	helped
distract	him	from	thoughts	of	Egil’s	trust	in	a	failed	father.

“Ah,	well.”	Sven	Broke-Oar	pulled	over	a	chair	and	sat	with	his	axe
across	his	knees.	“Out	at	sea	a	man’s	a	small	thing,	his	ship	not	much	bigger,
and	we	go	where	the	weather	wills.	We	run	before	the	storm.	We	rise	and	fall
with	the	waves.	Skinny	fisherman	off	the	Afrique	coast,	big	Viking	with	a
hundred	kills	to	his	name	out	on	the	Devouring	Sea,	it’s	all	the	same—we’re
driven	by	the	wind.

“Here’s	the	thing,	Snorri	ver	Snagason.	The	wind	has	changed.	It	blows
from	the	Isles	now	and	there’s	a	new	god	making	the	weather.	Not	a	good
god,	not	a	clean	one,	but	that’s	not	ours	to	change.	We’re	at	sea	and	we	bow
our	heads	to	our	tasks	and	hope	to	stay	afloat.

“The	Dead	King	holds	the	Isles	now.	He	broke	Jarl	Torsteff’s	strength
there,	and	that	of	the	Iron	Jarl,	of	the	Red	Jarls	of	Hardanger.	All	driven	back
to	their	ports.

“Now	he	comes	for	us,	with	dead	men,	our	dead	amongst	them,	and
monsters	from	beyond	death.”

“You	should	fight	them!”	Snorri	found	himself	straining,	useless	against
the	ropes’	strength.

“How	is	that	working	out	for	you,	Snorri?”	A	hardness	around	his	eyes,
something	bitter	and	difficult	to	read.	“Fight	the	sea	and	you	drown.”	He
hefted	the	axe	on	his	lap,	finding	comfort	in	its	weight.	“The	Dead	King	is
persuasive.	If	I	brought	this	wife	and	son	of	yours	here,	to	this	room,	held	a
hot	iron	to	their	faces	.	.	.	you	might	find	me	persuasive,	no?”



“Vikings	don’t	make	war	on	children.”	Snorri	knew	defeat.	Better	to	have
let	the	ice	claim	him	than	come	here	to	fail	his	family.

“The	Undoreth	leave	orphans	and	widows	untouched	when	they	raid?”	A
snort	of	derision	at	that	from	the	men	around	the	hearth.	“Snorri	Red-Axe	has
adopted	the	sons	and	daughters	of	the	many	men	he’s	sent	on	their	final
voyage?”

Snorri	had	no	answers.	“Why	are	they	here?	Why	take	captives?	Why
here?”

The	Broke-Oar	only	shook	his	head,	looking	older	now,	closer	to	fifty
than	to	forty.	“You’ll	sleep	better	not	knowing.”

	•	•	•	

“The	dreams	I’ve	had.”	Snorri	raised	his	head	at	the	end	of	the	tavern
table.	Aslaug	looked	out	at	us	from	his	eyes,	now	beads	of	jet

glimmering	and	bloody	with	the	last	light	of	the	setting	sun.	You	could
imagine	them	watching	from	the	web	and	believe	for	a	moment	the	tale	of
Loki,	the	god	of	lies,	cleaving	to	a	jötnar	beauty	with	nothing	but	a	spider’s
shadow	to	betray	her	true	nature.	“Such	dreams.”	That	gaze	fell	cold	upon
me.	“Hard	to	imagine	them	darker	still.”

I	felt	Baraqel	move	beneath	my	skin	and	half-expected	that	glow	to	start,
ready	for	light	to	fracture	through	the	scars	I	still	bore	from	the	Gowfaugh,	for
radiance	to	bleed	from	beneath	my	nails.	Across	the	length	of	the	table,	that
crackling	force	we	knew	from	brief	contacts	began	to	build.	I	knew	it	now	for
the	energy	between	Aslaug	and	Baraqel,	between	avatars	of	darkness	and
light,	ready	for	war.

I	wanted	to	ask	why,	to	echo	Snorri’s	demand	of	the	Broke-Oar:	Why?	I
wanted	to	know	how	he	came	to	be	sold	and	to	what	end.	Most	of	all,	though,
I	wanted	Aslaug	to	look	away,	and	so	I	lowered	my	gaze	and	held	my	peace.
The	others	around	the	table	saw	or	sensed	the	strangeness	that	had	come	over
their	countryman	and	kept	silent	also—though	perhaps	their	quiet	held	a
touch	of	mourning	in	it	for	the	Undoreth.

“Einhaur	was	sacked	too?”	A	quin,	breaking	the	moment.
“Before	they	came	to	Eight	Quays?”	Another.
“What	of	Dark	Falls?”	Tuttugu.
“It	must	be	all	of	them.”	Arne	Dead-Eye	kept	his	gaze	on	the	table.	“Or

we	would	have	heard	the	tale	a	dozen	times	by	now.”
Every	man	at	the	table,	save	Snorri,	took	their	ale	and	drank	until	they	had

no	more.
“The	enemy	is	there,	past	the	Black	Fort,”	Snorri	said.	The	night	pooled

around	him,	darker	than	it	should	be	while	the	sun	still	sank	in	the	west,	not
yet	swallowed	by	the	sea.	“We	will	go	there.	Kill	everyone.	Raze	their	works.



Show	them	a	horror	darker	than	death.”
The	northmen	lowered	their	tankards,	watching	Snorri	with	uneasy

fascination.	I	looked	out	to	sea	once	more,	west,	along	the	coast	to	where	the
burning	rim	of	the	sun	still	beaded	the	horizon	with	red	jewels.	Fewer,	fewer,
gone.

“I	said,	Undoreth,	we	will	paint	the	snows	with	Hardanger	blood!”	Snorri
surged	to	his	feet,	freed	by	the	sunset,	eyes	clear,	the	table	scraping	back
across	the	stones.	“We	will	take	back	what	we	love	and	show	these	Red
Vikings	how	to	bleed.”	He	raised	his	axe	above	his	head.	“We	are	of	the
Undoreth,	the	Children	of	the	Hammer.	The	blood	of	Odin	runs	in	our	veins.
Storm-born	we!”

And	where	Aslaug	left	the	northmen	unmoved	with	her	dark	threats,
Snorri	ver	Snagason	had	them	on	their	feet	in	a	moment,	roaring	their
defiance	at	the	evening	sky,	pounding	the	table	until	the	wood	splintered	and
the	tankards	leapt.

“More	ale!”	Snorri	sat	at	last,	thumping	the	table	one	more	time.	“We
drink	for	the	dead.”

“Will	you	come	with	us,	Prince	Jalan?”	Tuttugu	asked,	taking	a	tall	flagon
from	the	server,	the	head	of	foam	as	white	as	the	quins.	“Snorri	says	they	call
you	a	hero	in	your	homeland,	and	your	foes	named	you	‘Devil.’”

“Duty	compels	me	to	see	Snorri	to	his	homeland.”	I	nodded.	When	a
course	of	action	is	forced	upon	you	it’s	best	to	accept	it	with	grace	and	milk	it
for	whatever	you	can	get,	right	up	to	the	moment	the	first	opportunity	to
weasel	out	of	the	deal	presents	itself.	“We’ll	see	what	these	Hardanger
scavengers	make	of	a	man	of	the	Red	March.”	Hopefully	I’d	find	a	way	for	it
not	to	be	a	corpse.

“What	makes	us	think	we’ll	fare	any	better	with	nine	than	Snorri	did	with
one?”	Arne	Dead-Eye	wiped	ale	foam	from	his	moustache,	his	voice	morose
rather	than	fearful.	“The	Broke-Oar	had	enough	men	to	lay	waste	to	Einhaur
and	every	village	along	the	Uulisk.”

“Fair	question.”	Snorri	reached	out	to	point	at	Arne.	“First	understand	that
there	were	very	few	men	at	the	Black	Fort,	and	it’s	not	a	place	that	could	ever
be	garrisoned	to	its	capacity.	Every	meal	eaten	there	must	be	hauled	across
the	ice.	Every	log	or	sack	of	coal	must	be	carried	there.	And	what	is	there	to
defend	against?	Slaves	labouring	beneath	the	Bitter	Ice,	digging	tunnels	in
search	of	a	myth?

“Second,	we	will	go	better	prepared,	not	dressed	in	what	could	be
scavenged	from	ruins	in	the	moment.	We	will	go	with	clear	heads,	the	murder
in	our	hearts	locked	away	until	it	is	needed.

“Third	and	finally.	What	else	are	we	to	do?	We	are	the	last	of	the	free
Undoreth.	Anything	that	survives	of	our	people	is	there,	on	the	ice,	in	the
hands	of	other	men.”	He	paused	and	set	his	broad	hands	upon	the	table,



staring	at	the	spread	of	his	fingers.	“My	wife.	My	son.	All	my	life.	Each	good
thing	I	have	done.”	Something	twitched	at	his	mouth	and	became	a	snarl	as	he
stood,	voice	growing	towards	a	roar	once	more.

“So	I’m	not	offering	you	victory,	or	a	return	to	your	old	lives,	or	the
promise	that	we	will	build	again.	Just	pain,	and	blood,	and	red	axes,	and	the
chance	to	make	war	upon	our	enemies	together,	this	last	time.	What	do	you
say?”

And	of	course	the	maniacs	roared	their	approval,	and	I	banged	my	fist
halfheartedly	against	the	table	and	wondered	how	I	could	get	the	hell	out	of
this	mess.	If	Sageous	hadn’t	been	lying,	or	wrong,	then	perhaps	if	Snorri	fell
in	the	assault	and	I	lurked	near	the	back	I	could	run	off	once	the	spell	had
broken.	Of	course,	with	nine	men	there	aren’t	exactly	a	lot	of	ranks	to	hide
behind,	and	this	Black	Fort	sounded	inconveniently	far	from	any	safe	haven
that	a	man	might	run	to.

I	decided	the	best	policy	for	the	now	would	be	to	drink	myself	insensible
and	hope	the	morrow	had	better	to	offer.

“The	most	important	message	here,”	I	said	into	a	gap	where	the
Norsemen	were	all	momentarily	silenced	by	their	tankards,	“is	not	to	act	too
hastily.	Planning	is	the	key.	Strategy.	Equipment.	All	those	things	that	Snorri
missed	out	on	the	first	time	in	his	impatience.”

The	longer	we	delayed,	the	more	chance	there	was	that	this	curse	might
wear	off	or	some	opportunity	for	escape	would	happen	along.	The	important
thing	was	for	the	Ikea	not	to	sail	before	I’d	exhausted	all	opportunities	for	me
not	to	be	onboard	when	it	did.	With	a	shrug	I	drained	my	ale	and	signalled	for
another.



TWENTY-FOUR

Some	hangovers	are	so	horrific	that	it	seems	the	whole	world	rocks	and
sways	around	you,	the	very	walls	creaking	with	the	motion.	Others	are

relatively	mild	and	it	just	turns	out	that	in	your	drunkenness	a	collection	of
Vikings	have	thrown	you	onto	a	heap	of	coiled	ropes	in	their	longship	and	set
to	sea.

“Oh,	you	bastards.”	I	cracked	open	an	eye	to	see	a	broad	sail	flapping
overhead	and	gulls	wheeling	far	above	me	beneath	a	mackerel	sky.

I	sat	up,	threw	up,	stood	up,	tripped	up,	threw	up,	crawled	to	the	side	of
the	boat,	vomited	copiously,	crawled	to	the	other	side	and	groaned	at	the	thin
dark	line	on	the	horizon,	the	only	hint	at	the	world	I	knew	and	might	never
see	again.

“Not	a	sailor,	then?”	Arne	Dead-Eye,	watching	me	from	a	bench,	his	oar
locked	before	him,	a	pipe	in	his	hand.

“Vikings	smoke?”	It	just	looked	wrong,	as	if	his	beard	might	catch	light.
“This	one	does.	You	don’t	get	handed	a	book	of	rules,	you	know.”
“I	suppose	not.”	I	wiped	my	mouth	and	hung	there	on	the	boat’s	side.	The

quins	were	doing	complicated	things	with	sail	and	rope.	Tuttugu	watched	the
waves	from	the	prow	and	Snorri	held	the	tiller	at	the	stern.	After	a	while	I	felt
strong	enough	to	lurch	over	and	collapse	on	the	bench	beside	Arne.
Thankfully	the	wind	carried	his	smoke	the	other	way	or	we	would	have	had	a
chance	to	see	whether	any	of	last	week’s	meals	might	reappear	if	I	tried	really
hard.

“What	other	rules	in	this	handbook	that	you	don’t	get	have	you	broken?”	I
needed	distraction	from	the	heave	and	swell.	We	appeared	to	be	weathering
some	kind	of	storm,	despite	the	clearing	skies	and	moderate	winds.

“Well.”	Arne	puffed	on	his	pipe.	“I’m	not	really	one	for	the	mead-hall	and
the	singing	of	all	those	songs.	I’d	rather	be	out	on	the	ice	doing	a	spot	of
fishing.”

“You’d	think	a	man	of	your	talents	would	want	to	be	stalking	prey	that	he
could	bring	down	with	a	shot	rather	than	hook	out	of	the	water	through	a
small	hole	in	the	ice.”	I’d	placed	a	fair	measure	of	my	hope	for	survival	in
Arne	Dead-Eye.	The	great	thing	about	a	man	who	is	deadly	with	a	bow	is	that



not	much	gets	close	enough	to	trouble	him.	Those	are	the	sort	of	men	I	like	to
stand	next	to	in	a	battle	if	events	conspire	to	keep	me	from	galloping	off	into
the	distance.	“Hell!	Where’s	my	damn	horse?”

“Bits	of	it	are	probably	all	over	the	lower	slopes	of	Den	Hagen.”	Arne
mimed	chewing.	“Stew,	sausages,	horse-bacon,	roast	horse,	tongue	soup,	liver
with	onions,	fried	horse,	mwah.	All	good.”

“What?	I—”	My	stomach	had	the	last	word	of	that	sentence.	A	long	word
full	of	vowels	and	spoken	mostly	over	the	side	at	the	rolling	sea.

“Snorri	took	her	up	to	the	stockyard	this	morning	and	sold	her,”	Arne
called	at	my	back.	“Got	more	for	the	saddle	than	the	mare.”

“Hell.”	I	wiped	more	drool	from	my	chin	before	the	wind	had	a	chance	to
decorate	the	rest	of	me	with	it.	Back	on	the	bench	I	rested	a	moment,	head	in
hands.	It	seemed	we	were	coming	full	circle.	This	nightmare	had	started	with
me	being	bundled	into	a	boat	full	of	Viking,	and	now	here	we	were	again.	A
bigger	boat,	more	water,	more	Vikings,	and	the	same	number	of	horses.

“Dead-Eye,	heh?”	I	hoped	to	cheer	myself	with	the	idea	that	Arne	might
keep	me	safe.	“How’d	you	earn	that	title?”

Arne	puffed	out	a	cloud	of	vile	smoke,	which	was	quickly	stripped	away
by	the	wind.	“There’s	two	ways	to	hit	a	small	target	that’s	a	long	way	off.
Skill	or	luck.	Now	I’m	not	a	bad	shot—I’m	not	saying	that.	Better’n	average
for	sure.	Especially	now	with	all	the	practice	I	get.	It’s	‘Let	the	Dead-Eye	take
the	shot.’	‘Give	Arne	the	bow.’	But	that	day	at	Jarl	Torsteff’s	wedding
celebrations	.	.	.”	Arne	shrugged.	“Had	men	from	all	over	come	to	take	part	in
the	contests.	Axe-throwing.	Rock-lifting.	Wrestling.	All	that.	Archery,	well,
it’s	never	been	our	strong	point,	but	there	were	plenty	willing.	The	jarl	set	up
this	coin,	far	too	far	out,	and	nobody	could	hit	the	damn	thing.	It	was	getting
dark	before	they	let	me	have	a	go.	Took	it	down	first	try.	Never	heard	the	last
of	it.	And	that’s	how	it	is	in	this	world,	boy.	Start	a	tale,	just	a	little	tale	that
should	fade	and	die—take	your	eye	off	it	for	just	a	moment	and	when	you
turn	back	it’s	grown	big	enough	to	grab	you	up	in	its	teeth	and	shake	you.
That’s	how	it	is.	All	our	lives	are	tales.	Some	spread,	and	grow	in	the	telling.
Others	are	just	told	between	us	and	the	gods,	muttered	back	and	forth	behind
our	days,	but	those	tales	grow	too	and	shake	us	just	as	fierce.”

I	groaned	and	lay	back	across	the	bench,	trying	to	find	some	angle	that
brought	it	past	the	halfway	mark	on	the	line	dividing	“torture	device”	and
“bed.”	I	would	have	just	lain	down	between	the	benches,	but	each	lunge	of
the	boat	brought	foul-smelling	bilgewater	sloshing	along	the	aisle	in
miniature	imitation	of	the	vast	waves	on	which	we	tossed.

“Wake	me	when	the	storm’s	passed.”
“Storm?”	A	shadow	fell	across	me.
“You’re	going	to	tell	me	that	it’s	always	like	this,	aren’t	you?”	I	squinted

up	at	the	figure,	dark	against	the	bright	sky,	sunlight	fracturing	around	him	to



sting	my	eyes.	A	tall	man,	annoyingly	athletic.	One	of	the	quins.
“Oh	no.”	He	sat	on	the	bench	opposite,	his	good	cheer	like	acid	on	my

hangover.	“It’s	rarely	as	good	as	this.”
“Urrrg.”	Actual	words	seemed	insufficient	to	express	my	feelings	on	the

matter.	I	wondered	if	Skilfar	had	seen	that	I	was	destined	to	fill	a	longship
with	vomit	and	drown	in	the	resulting	mess.

“Snorri	says	you’re	good	with	wounds.”	He	started	tugging	up	his	sleeve
without	invitation.	“I’m	Fjórir,	by	the	way—we	can	be	hard	to	tell	apart.”

“Jesus!”	I	winced	as	Fjórir	unwrapped	the	soiled	linen	from	around	his
forearm.	The	jagged	tear	went	right	down	into	the	meat	of	him,	with	every
shade	from	black	to	puce	on	show	in	the	puffy	flesh	to	either	side.	The	stink
of	it	told	the	story.	When	a	man’s	wound	starts	to	smell	wrong,	you	know	he’s
on	a	slow	walk	to	the	cemetery.	Perhaps	losing	the	arm	might	save	him—I
didn’t	really	know.	Beyond	adjusting	the	odds	when	betting	on	pit	fights,	my
experience	didn’t	really	concern	such	things.	True,	there	had	been	similar
unpleasantness	on	the	Scorron	borders,	but	I’d	successfully	discarded	those
memories.	Or	at	least	I	had	until	a	whiff	of	a	Norseman’s	putrid	arm	brought
them	all	back	in	a	flood.	At	least	this	time	I	made	it	to	the	side	before	retching
into	the	dark	swell	of	the	waves.	I	spent	a	long	time	hanging	there,	holding	a
loud	but	wordless	conversation	with	the	sea.

Fjórir	was	still	sitting	where	I	left	him	when	I	came	back	empty-
stomached	and	trembling.	The	whole	boat	continued	to	threaten	to	capsize	at
each	surge	of	the	waves,	but	nobody	else	seemed	concerned.

“That’s	.	.	.	That’s	a	hell	of	a	cut	you’ve	got	there,”	I	said.
“Ripped	it	on	a	loose	spear	in	a	storm	off	the	Thurtans.”	Fjórir	nodded.

“Nasty,	though.	Gives	me	no	peace.”
“I’m	sorry.”	And	I	was.	I	liked	the	quins.	They	were	that	sort.	And	soon

they’d	be	quads.
“Snorri	says	you’re	good	with	wounds.”	Fjórir	returned	to	his	theme.	He

seemed	unaccountably	cheerful	about	the	whole	business,	though	I	wouldn’t
bet	on	him	lasting	the	week.

“Well,	I’m	not.”	I	peered	at	the	mess	with	morbid	fascination.	“You	seem
less	worried	about	it	than	I	am.”

“The	gods	are	taking	us	in	order.	Youngest	first.”	Again	that	grin.	“Atta
fell	to	ghouls	in	Ullaswater.	Then	a	dead	man	pulled	Sjau	into	the	bog	at
Fenmire.	Sex	took	an	arrow	from	a	Conaught	bowman.	So	Fimm’s	next,	not
me.”

And	all	of	a	sudden	I	found	myself	scared	as	hell.	Snorri	I	understood.	I
didn’t	share	his	passions	or	bravery,	but	I	could	feel	them	as	greater	or	lesser
versions	of	my	own	emotions	or	thinking.	The	man	before	me	looked	like	one
of	us	on	the	outside,	but	inside?	The	gods	had	put	the	Torsteff	octuplets
together	differently	from	other	men.	Or	at	least	this	one.	Perhaps	the	parts	he



was	missing	were	present	twofold	in	one	of	his	brothers.	Or	maybe	when	the
eight	started	dying,	each	death	left	the	survivors	more	broken.	Fjórir	still	had
the	amiability,	the	immediate	sense	of	dependability,	but	I	couldn’t	know
what	else	might	be	missing	behind	that	too-easy	grin	and	those	wide,	ice-blue
eyes.

“I	don’t	know	why	Snorri	said	that—I’m	no	doctor.	I	don’t	even—”
“He	said	you’d	try	to	weasel	out	of	it.	He	said	for	you	to	do	what	you	did

in	the	mountains.”	Fjórir	held	his	arm	out	for	me,	no	hint	of	trepidation	on	his
face.

“Go	on!”	Snorri	shouted	from	the	back	of	the	boat.	“Do	it,	Jal!”
Pressing	my	lips	tight	against	revulsion,	I	extended	a	hand	without

enthusiasm,	holding	it	several	inches	above	the	injury.	Almost	immediately	a
warmth	built	in	my	palm.	I	snatched	the	hand	back.	My	plan	of	faking	it
seemed	unlikely	to	succeed	now—the	reaction	had	been	far	stronger	and	more
immediate	than	with	Meegan’s	wound	back	in	the	Aups.

“The	last	person	I	did	this	to,	Snorri	threw	off	a	cliff	a	moment	later.”
“No	cliffs	at	sea.	That	felt	good.	Do	it	again.”	Fjórir	had	no	guile	in	his

eyes,	like	a	child.
“Ah,	hell.”	I	stuck	my	hand	back	out,	as	close	to	the	rotting	flesh	as	I

could	without	risk	of	being	slimed.	Within	seconds	I	could	see	the	glow	from
my	hand,	as	if	it	were	a	white	handprint	through	that	blustery	northern	day
into	the	desert	blaze	of	the	Indus.	My	bones	buzzed	with	whatever	ran
through	them	and	the	heat	built.	The	wind	grew	icy	around	me;	the	weakness
from	my	vomiting	became	enfeeblement	to	the	point	that	even	holding	my
hand	up	was	a	labour	of	Hercules.	And	suddenly	I	wasn’t	holding	anything
up.	The	boat	revolved	around	me	and	I	pitched	into	darkness.

A	bucket	of	cold	and	salty	water	hauled	me	back	into	the	waking	world.
“Jal?	Jal?”
“Is	he	going	to	be	all	right?”
A	reply	in	their	heathen	tongue.
“.	.	.	soft,	these	southerners	.	.	.”
“.	.	.	bury	at	sea—”
More	nonsense	words	in	northern	gibberish.
Another	bucket.	“Jal?	Talk	to	me.”
“If	I	do,	will	you	stop	pouring	seawater	over	me?”	I	kept	my	eyes	shut.

All	I	wanted	to	do	was	lie	very	still.	Even	moving	my	lips	seemed	too	much
effort.

“Thank	the	gods.”	Snorri	paused.	I	heard	a	heavy	bucket	being	put	down.
They	left	me	alone	to	dry	after	that.	I	sprawled	on	the	bench	until	a

particularly	big	wave	rolled	me	off.	Then	I	lay	against	the	hull.	Occasionally	I
called	on	Jesu.	It	didn’t	help	much.

The	light	was	failing	by	the	time	I	found	the	strength	to	haul	myself	up



and	sit	on	the	spot	where	I’d	fallen	from.	Fjórir	brought	me	over	some	dry
fish	and	cornmeal	cake,	but	I	couldn’t	do	much	more	than	glance	at	it.	My
stomach	still	rolled	with	each	wave	and	made	no	promise	to	keep	anything	I
gave	it.

“My	arm’s	better!”	Fjórir	held	it	out	by	way	of	proof.	The	wound	still
looked	ugly	but	free	of	infection	now,	and	healing.	“My	thanks,	Jal.”

“Don’t	mention	it.”	A	weak	murmur.	I	guessed	he	really	was	invulnerable
until	poor	Fimm	took	his	place	in	line.	Hopefully	he’d	pay	me	back	by	putting
his	invulnerable	self	between	me	and	harm’s	way.

	•	•	•	

The	sun	set	and	Snorri	spent	that	time	in	the	Ikea’s	prow,	staring	north,	his
black	eyes	no	doubt	hunting	the	Norsheim	coast.	My	strength	made	no

return;	if	anything,	I	grew	weaker	as	the	night	fell.	I	tried	some	dry	bread	and
water,	donated	them	to	the	sea,	and	dropped	into	a	dreamless	slumber.

Dreamless	at	least	until	I	started	dreaming	of	angels.
I	stood	in	the	predawn,	on	the	hills	just	beyond	Vermillion’s	farmlands,

looking	down	at	the	Seleen	snaking	westward	towards	the	distant	sea.	Baraqel
stood	above	me,	on	the	hilltop,	statued	against	the	sky,	unmoving	until	the
rays	of	the	rising	sun	lit	his	shoulders.

“Hear	me,	Jalan	Kendeth,	son	of—”
“I	know	who	I’m	son	of.”
The	angel	had	far	more	gravitas	about	him	now	than	he	had	in	his	early

visits.	As	if	he	spoke	more	with	his	own	voice	than	the	one	I’d	fashioned	for
him	back	when	he	was	nine	parts	imagination.

“The	time	will	soon	come	when	you	will	need	to	remember	where	you
sprang	from.	You	sail	into	the	land	of	sagas—a	place	where	heroes	are
needed,	and	made.	You	will	need	your	courage.”

“I	don’t	think	remembering	my	father	will	help	there.	The	good	cardinal
would	turn	and	run	if	a	goat	blocked	his	path.	It	wouldn’t	have	to	be	a	big	one
either.”

“It’s	in	the	nature	of	children	to	see	past	the	strengths	of	their	parents.
Time	to	grow	up,	Jalan	Kendeth.”	He	lifted	his	face	to	me,	golden-eyed,
glowing	with	the	dawn.

“And	what’s	so	great	about	being	brave?	Skilfar	had	the	right	of	it.	We’re
all	running	around	each	according	to	our	nature,	some	cunning,	some	honest,
some	sly,	some	brave—but	what	of	it?”

Baraqel	flexed	his	wings.	“Your	grandmother	spoke	to	her	sister	of	you.
‘Has	he	the	mettle?	Has	he	the	courage	required?’	An	‘idle,	shallow	boy,	full
of	bluster	but	ringing	hollow,’	she	called	you,	Jalan.	‘A	mind	blunted	by	sloth,
blinkered	by	a	dry	wit,’	she	said,	‘but	whet	it	and	that	mind	could	take	an



edge.	Had	we	but	world	enough	and	time	what	we	might	make	of	the
child	.	.	.	but	we	have	neither	world	nor	time.	Our	cause	is	narrowing	to	a
point	not	so	many	miles	distant,	a	second	not	so	many	years	hence	and	in	that
spot,	in	that	moment,	will	come	a	test	on	which	the	world	will	turn.’	These	are
the	words	she	drew	you	with.”

“I’d	be	surprised	if	she	knew	which	one	I	was.	And	I’m	sharp	enough
when	I	need	to	be.	Bravery	is	just	a	different	kind	of	broken.	The	quins	are
missing	whatever	it	is	a	man	needs	in	order	to	feel	fear.	Snorri’s	scared	of
being	a	coward.	There’s	a	wyrm	like	that	in	their	heathen	stories,	Oroborus,
eating	its	own	tail.	Scared	of	being	a	coward,	is	that	what	bravery	is?	Am	I
brave	because	I	don’t	fear	being	afraid?	You’re	of	the	light;	the	light	reveals.
Shine	a	bright	enough	light	on	any	kind	of	bravery	and	isn’t	it	just	a	more
complex	form	of	cowardice?”

I	stood	a	moment,	the	heels	of	my	palms	pressed	to	my	forehead,	hunting
the	words.

“Humanity	can	be	divided	into	madmen	and	cowards.	My	personal
tragedy	is	in	being	born	into	a	world	where	sanity	is	held	to	be	a	character
flaw.”	I	ran	out	of	words	under	his	gaze.

“Cleverness	builds	ever	more	elaborate	structures	of	self-justification,”	he
said,	judgment	spilling	from	his	mouth.	“But	in	the	end	you	know	what	is	and
what	is	not	right.	All	men	do,	though	they	may	spend	their	years	trying	to
bury	that	knowing,	burying	it	beneath	words,	hatreds,	lusts,	sorrow,	or	any	of
the	other	bricks	from	which	they	build	their	lives.	You	know	what	is	right,
Jalan.	When	the	time	comes,	you’ll	know.	But	knowing	is	never	enough.”

They	told	me	I	spent	the	best	part	of	a	week	insensible.	Sleeping	twenty-
two	hours	in	twenty-four,	half-waking	to	let	Tuttugu	spoon	warm	gruel	down
my	throat—some	of	it	down	the	inside,	some	down	the	outside.	A	quin	had	to
hold	each	arm	when	nature	called	me	on	infrequent	trips	to	the	side,	or	I’d
have	pitched	in	and	not	have	been	seen	again.	We	crossed	the	open	sea,	then
followed	the	Norsheim	coast	day	upon	day,	heading	north.

“Wake	up.”	The	angel’s	only	instruction	this	sunrise.
I	opened	my	eyes.	Grey	dawn,	flapping	sailcloth,	the	cry	of	gulls.	Baraqel

silenced.	The	angel	spoke	true.	I	always	know	what	is	right.	I	just	don’t	do	it.
“Are	we	nearly	there	yet?”	I	felt	better.	Almost	good.

“Not	far.”	Tuttugu	sitting	close	by.	Others	moved	about	the	longship	in
the	dimness.

“Oh.”	From	behind	closed	eyelids	I	tried	to	imagine	terra	firma,	hoping	to
stave	off	a	prebreakfast	vomit.

“Snorri	says	you’re	good	with	wounds,”	Tuttugu	said.
“Christ.	This	voyage	is	going	to	kill	me.”	I	tried	to	sit	and	fell	off	the

bench,	still	weak.	“I	thought	it	would	be	the	undead	horrors	and	mad	axe-men
out	on	the	ice.	But	no.	I’m	going	to	die	at	sea.”



“Probably	for	the	best.”	Tuttugu	offered	a	hand	to	help	me	up.	“Good
clean	death.”

I	almost	took	his	hand,	then	snatched	mine	back.	“Oh	no.	Not	falling	for
that	one.”	It	wouldn’t	be	long	before	I	couldn’t	beat	a	leper	out	of	my	way
without	curing	the	bastard.	“You	don’t	look	injured.”

Tuttugu	buried	his	fingers	in	the	ginger	bush	of	his	beard	and	scratched
furiously,	muttering	something.

“What?”	I	asked.
“Brothel	rash,”	he	said.
“Whore	pox?”	That	at	least	made	me	smile.	“Ha!”
“Snorri	said—”
“I	ain’t	laying	on	hands	down	there!	I’m	a	prince	of	Red	March,	for	God’s

sake!	Not	some	travelling	apothecary-cum-faith-healer!”
The	fat	man’s	face	fell.
“Look,”	I	said,	knowing	I’d	need	all	the	friends	I	could	make	once	we	hit

dry	land.	“I	might	not	know	much	about	wounds,	but	whore	pox	I	know	far
more	about	than	any	man	ever	should.	Do	you	have	mustard	seed	aboard?”

“We	might.”	Tuttugu	furrowed	his	brow.
“Rock	salt?	Some	black	treacle,	tanners’	acid,	turpentine,	string,	two

needles,	very	sharp	ones,	and	some	ginger	.	.	.	well,	that’s	optional,	but	it
helps.”

A	slow	shake	of	the	head.
“Ah,	well,	we’ll	pick	it	up	in	port.	I	can	cook	it	up	to	an	old	family	recipe.

Apply	as	a	topical	paste	to	the	affected	regions	and	you’ll	be	a	new	man
within	six	days.	Seven	tops.”

Tuttugu	grinned,	which	was	good,	and	gave	me	the	Norse	punch	of
friendship,	which	hurt	a	lot	more	than	the	traditional	manly	shoulder	punch
down	south,	and	that	was	that.	At	least	until	he	frowned	and	asked,	“And	the
needles?”

“Well,	when	I	said	‘apply’	what	I	really	meant	was	‘smear	on	a	needle	and
jab	in.’	You’ll	need	more	than	one	as	the	mixture	corrodes	them.”

“Oh.”	Little	remained	of	Tuttugu’s	grin.	“And	the	string’s	to	hang	myself
with?”

“To	tie	the	bag	on	.	.	.	Look,	I’ll	explain	the	gory	details	when	you’ve	got
the	stuff.”

“Land	ho!”	One	of	the	quins	from	the	prow,	providing	a	welcome
distraction.

My	nightmare	at	sea	was	all	but	done.



TWENTY-FIVE

Mist	shrouded	Norsheim,	offering	me	only	glimpses	of	wet	black	cliffs
and	menacing	reefs	of	rock	as	we	closed	the	last	mile	or	so	to	reach	the

shore.	We	came	in	past	other	Norse	vessels	plying	their	trade.	Fatter-bodied
boats	in	the	main,	trailing	nets	or	laden	with	cargo,	but	all	with	northern	lines
to	their	construction.	We	saw	other	longships	too,	most	of	the	dozen	or	so	at
anchor,	one	heading	out	to	open	sea,	red	sails	already	too	small	to	make	out
the	device	set	upon	them.

Coming	in	closer	still,	we	saw	the	port	of	Trond	rising	from	a	shoreline	of
black	stone	to	crowd	the	lower	slopes	of	mountains	that	stepped	wet-footed
from	the	sea.	I	had	thought	Den	Hagen	looked	dour	and	uninviting,	but
compared	to	Trond	the	port	of	Den	Hagen	was	a	paradise,	practically	open-
legged	with	welcome.	The	northmen	built	their	homes	of	slate	and	heavy
timber,	turf-roofed,	windows	mere	slits	to	defy	the	slim	fingers	of	the	wind
that	already	had	filched	most	of	my	warmth.	Rain	started	to	fall,	lacing	the
wind	and	stinging	like	ice	where	it	hit	my	cheeks.

“And	this	is	summer?	How	can	you	tell?”
“Glorious	summer!”	Snorri	spread	his	arms	beside	me.
“You	can	tell	because	in	the	winter	there	are	no	midges,”	said	Arne

behind	me.	“Also,	the	snow	is	six	foot	deep.”
“And	you	could	walk	to	the	port	from	here,”	Snorri	said.
“I	didn’t	even	know	the	sea	could	freeze	.	.	.”	I	went	to	the	side	to

consider	the	matter	and	leaned	out	between	two	of	the	shields	the	men	had
fixed	there	in	preparation	for	our	arrival.	“At	least	it	would	stop	it	bobbing
about	all	the	time.”

We	rowed	in	the	last	quarter	mile,	sail	down.	I	say	“we.”	I	provided	moral
support.

“How	is	it	the	Broke-Oar	got	his	name?”	I	asked,	seeing	them	all	bending
to	their	task.

“The	first	time	he	went	to	row	a	longship.”	Quin	Ein.
“He	must	have	been	fourteen,	or	fifteen.”	Quin	Tveir,	probably.
“Hauled	on	the	oar	so	hard	he	broke	it.”	Quin	Thrir,	possibly.
“Didn’t	know	his	own	strength,	even	then.”	Fjórir,	his	arm	still	scarred.



“Never	seen	anyone	pull	an	oar	that	hard.”	Fimm,	by	process	of
elimination.

“Is	he	stronger	than	you,	Snorri?”	I	found	the	thought	unsettling.
Snorri	pulled	back	on	his	oar,	keeping	rhythm	with	the	others.	“Who	can

say?”	Another	stroke.	“The	Broke-Oar	doesn’t	know	his	own	strength.”
Another	stroke.	“But	I	know	mine.”	And	the	look	he	gave	me,	all	ice	and	fire,
made	me	very	glad	not	to	be	his	enemy.

	•	•	•	

At	the	dockside	I	was	pleasantly	surprised	to	find	the	North	wasn’t	all
hairy	men	in	animal	skins.	There	were	also	hairy	women	in	animal

skins.	And,	to	be	fair,	also	some	townsfolk	in	cloaks	woven	from	wool,	with
tweed	or	linen	jackets,	trews	cross-bound	from	ankle	to	thigh	as	is	the	fashion
in	the	Thurtans.

We	disembarked	and	I	staggered	at	the	unfamiliar	feeling	of	something
solid	and	unmoving	beneath	my	feet.	I	could	have	kissed	it,	but	didn’t.
Instead	I	followed	on,	burdened	by	my	pack,	now	adorned	with	tightly
bundled	winter	gear,	more	to	be	added	soon.	Snorri	knew	the	port	well	and
led	us	up	towards	a	tavern	that	he	held	a	good	opinion	of.

Trond,	unlike	many	of	the	smaller	towns	and	villages	along	the	coast	and
fjords,	wasn’t	the	fiefdom	of	some	jarl,	dominated	by	his	mead-hall	and	with
every	arrival	noted,	taxed,	and	subject	to	his	approval.	Trade	ruled	in	Trond.
The	port’s	external	security	balanced	upon	a	number	of	well-financed
alliances,	and	its	internal	security	depended	on	a	militia	paid	in	Empire	coin
by	the	collective	of	merchant	lords	who	governed	the	place.	As	such	it
presented	an	ideal	landing	spot	and	place	to	resupply.	Snorri	planned	to	travel
overland	to	the	Uulisk,	a	journey	of	two	days	or	so	across	mountainous
terrain.	To	limp	up	the	fjord	on	a	badly	undermanned	snekkja	would	lose	the
only	advantages	a	small	band	possesses,	namely	agility,	speed,	and	surprise.	It
sounded	a	sensible	plan	given	that	we	were	determined	foolishly	to	head	into
trouble,	and	Snorri	even	credited	me	with	helping	to	formulate	it	during	my
more	lucid	moments	on	the	long	voyage,	though	I	had	no	memory	of	it.

As	we’d	pulled	into	harbour	I’d	made	out	storm	clouds	louring	across	the
ranges	to	the	north,	lightning	deep	inside	them	as	if	Thor	himself	were
present.	Somewhere	out	there	beyond	those	peaks,	Sven	Broke-Oar	waited	for
us	in	the	Black	Fort,	and	beyond	him	the	Bitter	Ice	with	its	frozen	dead,
necromancers,	and	the	unborn.	My	chances	to	escape	had	all	but	slipped
away,	and	our	long	journey	was	at	last	closing	on	what	would	likely	prove	to
be	a	short	sharp	end.

	•	•	•	



The	tavern	of	Snorri’s	choosing	bore	three	rusting	axes,	stapled	to	the	wall
high	above	the	doorway.	The	Norsemen	installed	me	at	a	table,	then

ordered	most	of	a	pig	to	be	roasted	and	brought	out	along	with	copious	ale,
maintaining	that	both	were	excellent	cures	for	a	man	in	weakened	health.

The	rest	of	the	clientele	were	a	rough	lot,	but	none	of	them	appeared	to	be
looking	for	trouble.	You	develop	an	instinct	for	such	things	if	you	frequent	as
many	low	dives	as	I	have.	Additionally,	the	fact	that	I	had	eight	Undoreth
warriors	in	my	corner	would	not	have	gone	unnoticed.

“We’ll	meet	up	here	come	nightfall.”	Snorri	sniffed	the	air	with	a	certain
longing.	The	smell	of	roasting	dominated	over	all	the	usual	tavern	stink	of
smoke	and	sweat	and	ale.	And	with	a	sigh	he	led	his	men	off	into	the	town,
Tuttugu	armed	with	my	pox	recipe.	I	assumed	that	Jarl	Torsteff’s	men	must
have	escaped	with	at	least	some	of	the	proceeds	of	their	looting	on	the
Drowned	Isles	because	for	once	Snorri	hadn’t	asked	me	for	funds,	and	he	had
plenty	he	needed	to	buy—warm	gear	and	provisions	for	nine	not	the	least	of
it.	I	patted	for	my	locket,	just	to	be	sure.

A	lean	southerner	walked	in	as	the	last	of	my	Vikings	departed,	wrapped
in	a	motley	cape,	dulled	by	age,	and	with	a	mandolin	under	his	arm.	He
settled	by	the	fireplace,	raising	an	arm	for	beer.	Another	man	opened	the
street	door,	half-lowered	his	hood,	thought	better	of	it,	then	left.	Not	a	music
lover,	perhaps,	or	finding	the	place	too	packed.	Something	about	him	struck
me	as	familiar,	but	my	meal	arrived	and	my	stomach	demanded	my	full
attention.

“There	you	go,	my	lovely.”	A	perky,	fair-haired	tavern	girl	set	down	my
roast	pork,	a	heel	of	bread,	a	steaming	jug	of	gravy,	and	a	tankard	of	ale.
“Enjoy.”	I	watched	her	leave	and	started	to	feel	twenty-two	again	rather	than
ninety-two.	Good	food,	ale,	and	a	floor	beneath	me	that	had	the	manners	to
stay	where	it	was	put	.	.	.	the	world	had	started	looking	up.	All	I	needed	was	a
plausible	excuse	for	staying	in	Trond	until	the	nastiness	up	north	had	been
dealt	with	and	I	could	look	upon	this	whole	sorry	affair	as	a	vacation	gone
tragically	astray.

I	noticed	a	blond	woman	watching	me	from	beside	her	companion,	young
and	really	quite	striking	once	you	looked	past	the	homespun	and	dirt.	Another
pretty	young	thing,	white-blond	and	pale,	slanted	glances	my	way	from	beside
an	older	man.	None	of	them	dressed	like	professional	company,	even
accounting	for	the	summer	chill.	It	seemed	as	though	taking	your	sister	or
daughter	to	the	tavern	might	just	be	the	done	thing	in	Trond.	Another	woman
walked	in	through	the	street	door,	this	one	solid	and	dour,	and	pushed	a	path
to	the	bar	to	order	black	ale.	I	chewed	over	that	one	with	my	meat.	Things
appeared	to	run	very	differently	in	the	North.	Still,	I	had	no	objections.	I
might	complain	about	Cousin	Serah	and	my	grandmother’s	plan	to



circumvent	the	rightful	chain	of	succession,	but	in	general	I	found	the	women
with	the	most	freedom	to	act	were	by	far	the	most	fun	to	be	around.	After	all,
it’s	hard	for	the	old	Jalan	charm	to	get	to	work	if	there’s	a	chaperone	or
inconvenient	brother	like	Alain	DeVeer	in	the	way.

I	sat	for	a	moment,	letting	the	conversations	flow	across	me.	Many	of	the
locals	spoke	in	the	Empire	Tongue.	Arne	told	me	it	was	common	enough	in
the	larger	port	towns.	In	the	villages	along	the	fjords	a	man	could	go	for
weeks	without	hearing	a	word	not	spoken	in	the	old	speech.

Across	the	room	the	troubadour	began	to	pick	at	his	mandolin,	scattering
a	few	notes	over	the	crowd.	I	wiped	pork	fat	from	my	mouth	and	swigged	my
ale.	The	older	blonde	kept	watching	me	and	I	gave	her	the	Jalan	smile,	the
one	the	hero	of	Aral	Pass	offers	to	the	masses.	The	man	beside	her	seemed	to
have	no	interest	in	our	exchange,	a	slightly	built	fellow	with	a	drooping
moustache	and	twitchy	eye.	Still,	any	peasant	can	stick	a	knife	in	you,	so	I
curbed	my	instinct	to	barge	over	there	and	introduce	myself.	Instead	I	decided
to	put	my	goods	on	show	and	let	the	bees	come	to	the	honey.

“Do	you	know	‘The	Red	March’?”	I	called	across	to	the	mandolin	player.
Most	bards	do,	and	he	looked	well	travelled	in	any	case.

By	way	of	answer,	fingers	flickered	across	strings	and	the	first	few	bars
rolled	out.	I	stood,	bowed	to	the	various	ladies,	and	crossed	to	the	fireplace.
“Prince	Jalan	of	Red	March	at	your	service	one	and	all.	A	guest	to	your	shores
and	pleased	to	be	here	amongst	such	fierce	warriors	and	fair	maids.”	I	nodded
to	my	new	friend	and	he	started	to	play.	I’ve	got	a	decent	baritone	and	the
princes	of	Red	March	are	trained	in	all	the	arts:	We	declaim	poetry,	we	dance,
we	sing.	Mostly	we’re	trained	in	the	arts	of	war,	but	wordcraft	and	painting
are	not	neglected.	Add	to	this	that	“The	Red	March”	is	a	rousing	military
chorus	that	forgives	a	singer’s	weaknesses	and	encourages	others	to	join	in
and	you	have	the	ideal	icebreaker.	Even	the	frozen	seas	of	the	North	couldn’t
withstand	my	charm!	I	hoisted	my	tankard	and	gave	full	voice	with	the
troubadour	filling	in	the	gaps	with	his	own	mellow	tones.

I’ll	say	this	for	Norsemen,	they	like	to	sing.	Before	I’d	finished	either	my
ale	or	song	almost	everyone	under	that	roof	was	roaring	out	“The	Red
March,”	ignorance	of	the	words	proving	no	obstacle.	Better	still,	my	delicious
blonde	had	detached	herself	from	Droopy	Moustache	to	stand	at	my	side,
showing	herself	during	her	approach	to	have	been	blessed	in	all	the	right
places	by	the	gods	of	Asgard.	The	pretty	pale	waif	had	also	ditched	her	father
to	keep	me	company	on	the	other	side.

“So	you’re	a	prince?”	As	the	din	of	the	last	verse	subsided.	The	blond
beauty,	more	attractive	by	the	moment,	leaned	in.	“I’m	Astrid.”

“I’m	Edda.”	The	pale	girl,	hair	flowing	like	milk,	very	fine-featured.
“Who	was	that	warrior	with	you?	You	know,	the	big	one.”

I	did	my	best	to	keep	the	irritation	from	my	face.	“You	don’t	want	to



worry	about	him,	Edda.	He’s	tall,	yes,	but	women	report	that	he’s	very
unsatisfactory	in	the	furs.	Used	all	his	growing	getting	too	high	off	the	ground
and	didn’t	save	enough	for	the	important	things.	It’s	a	sad	story.	His	mother
and	father	.	.	.	well,	brother	and	sister—”

“No?”	Her	lips	made	a	circle.
“Yes.”	I	shook	my	head	sadly.	“And	you	know	how	it	goes	with	those

sorts	of	children.	They	never	grow	up	properly.	I	do	my	best	to	look	out	for
him.”

“So	generous	of	you,”	Astrid	purred,	steering	my	attention	away	from
sweet	Edda.

“My	dear	lady,	it’s	the	moral	duty	of	nobility	to—”
Someone	crashed	in	through	the	street	door,	cutting	me	off.	“A	brandy	if

you	please!”
A	commotion	as	the	crowd	parted.	A	young	man,	a	touch	taller	than	me,	a

touch	older,	walked	forwards	grasping	the	wrist	of	his	right	hand,	blood
dripping	on	the	floor.

“Oh	my—	What	happened?”	Edda	clutched	her	hands	below	her	breasts.
“Just	a	dog.”	The	fellow	was	golden-haired,	not	white-blond	like	her,	and

handsome	with	it.	“The	baby’s	fine,	though.”
“Baby?”	Astrid,	coming	over	all	motherly.
The	man	reached	the	bar	and	a	hairy	warrior	signalled	he’d	get	the	drink

for	him.	“Snatched	him	from	his	mother’s	arms,”	the	man	said.	Someone
passed	him	a	cloth	and	he	started	wrapping	it	around	his	hand.

“Oh,	let	me	help!”	And	Edda	fled	my	side,	Astrid	in	hot	pursuit.
“Well,	I	chased	it.	The	cur	didn’t	want	to	give	up	his	prize.	We	disagreed

and	I	got	the	baby,	and	this.”	He	held	up	his	bandaged	hand.
“Isn’t	that	marvellous,	Prince	Jalan?”	Edda	glanced	back	over	her

shoulder	at	me.	She	looked	even	more	tempting	at	a	distance.
“Marvellous.”	I	managed	a	mutter.
“Prince?”	The	fellow	bowed.	“Delighted	to	meet	you.”
Now	I’m	a	good-looking	fellow.	No	doubts	about	that.	Good	thick	hair,

honest	smile,	face	in	order,	but	this	interloper	could	have	stepped	from	some
frieze	of	the	sagas,	chiselled	to	perfection.	I	hated	him	with	a	rare	and	instant
passion.

“And	you	are?”	I	aimed	for	a	level	of	disdain	with	enough	edge	to	cut	but
not	to	make	me	look	bad	whilst	doing	it.

“Hakon	of	Maladon.	Duke	Alaric	is	my	uncle.	Perhaps	you	know	him?
My	longships	are	the	green-sailed	ones	in	the	harbour.”	He	knocked	back	the
brandy.	“Ah,	a	mandolin!”	He	spied	the	troubadour.	“May	I?”

Hakon	took	the	instrument,	strumming	with	his	injured	hand,	and
immediately	music	began	to	flow	like	liquid	gold.	“I’m	better	on	the	harp,	but
I’ve	tried	these	a	few	times.”



“Oh,	would	you	sing	for	us?”	Astrid,	pressing	her	gifts	against	him.
And	that	was	that.	I	slunk	back	to	my	table	while	Golden	Boy	held	the

tavern	spellbound	with	a	gloriously	rich	tenor,	running	through	all	their
favourite	songs.	I	chewed	my	lukewarm	roast	and	found	it	hard	to	swallow,
my	ale	sour	rather	than	salt.	I	glowered	through	narrowed	eyes	as	Hakon
stood	bracketed	by	Edda,	Astrid,	and	various	other	wenches	drawn	from	the
shadows	by	his	cheap	show.

At	last	I	could	take	it	no	longer	and	got	up	to	go	out	back	for	a	piss.	A
final	resentful	glance	at	Hakon	saw	him	disentangling	from	Astrid	to	follow
me	out.	I	pretended	not	to	notice.	Once	in	the	blustery	yard,	rather	than
making	immediately	for	the	latrine	I	waited,	leaving	the	door	ajar	and
listening	for	his	approach.

The	wind	had	picked	up	something	fierce	and	put	me	in	mind	to	play	a
trick	I’d	used	a	time	or	two	back	in	Red	March.	On	hearing	him	take	the
handle	I	gave	the	door	a	hearty	kick,	slamming	it	shut.	A	meaty	thud	and	an
oath	rewarded	me.	I	counted	to	three	and	hauled	the	door	open.

“Hell!	Are	you	all	right,	man?”	He	was	on	his	backside,	clutching	his
face.	“The	wind	must	have	caught	the	door.	Terrible	thing.”

“.	.	.	be	okay.”	Both	hands	still	clasped	over	his	nose,	the	injured	one	atop
the	good.

I	crouched	beside	him.	“Best	have	a	look.”	And	pulled	back	his	bad	hand.
Immediately	that	familiar	warmth	built,	and	with	it	came	an	idea	both
despicable	and	delicious	in	equal	parts.	I	gripped	his	bitten	hand	tight.	The
day	went	dim	around	me.

“Ow!	What	the—”	Hakon	pulled	away.
“You’re	fine.”	I	hauled	him	to	his	feet.	Fortunately	he	helped,	because	I

could	barely	lift	myself.
“But	what—”
“You’re	just	a	bit	dazed.”	I	steered	him	back	into	the	tavern	room.	“You

got	hit	by	a	door.”
Astrid	and	Edda	converged	on	Golden	Boy	and	I	stepped	away,	letting

them	at	their	prey.	As	I	left	I	tugged	the	loose	end	of	the	bloodstained	cloth
about	his	hand	and	pulled	it	away	with	me.

“What—”	Hakon	lifted	his	uncovered	hand.
“How	many	babies	did	you	save?”	I	said	it	quiet	enough	over	my

shoulder	as	I	returned	to	my	table,	but	too	loud	to	miss.
“There’s	no	bite	there!”	Astrid	exclaimed.
“Not	even	a	scratch.”	Edda	stepped	back	as	if	Hakon’s	lies	might	be

contagious.
“But	I—”	Hakon	stared	at	his	hand,	holding	it	up	even	higher,	turning	it

this	way	and	that	in	astonishment.
“He	can	pay	for	his	own	damn	brandy!”	The	warrior	at	the	bar.



“A	cheap	trick.”	The	thickset	woman,	slamming	down	her	tankard	of	ale.
“He’s	no	kin	of	Alaric!”	Anger	starting	to	colour	the	complaints.
“I	doubt	he’s	spoke	a	true	word	since	he	came	in.”
“Liar!”
“Thief!”
“Wife-beater!”	That	last	one	was	me.
The	crowd	folded	about	poor	Hakon,	their	shouts	drowning	him	out,

punches	flying.	Somehow	he	made	it	through	them,	half-running	through	the
street	door,	half-thrown.	He	sprawled	in	the	mud,	slipped,	fell,	scrambled	up,
and	was	gone,	the	door	slamming	behind	him.

I	leaned	back	in	my	chair	and	took	the	last	chunk	of	pork	off	my	knife.	It
tasted	sweet.	I	can’t	say	I	was	entirely	proud	about	using	the	healing	gift	of
angels	to	screw	over	the	better	man	just	for	being	more	handsome,	taller,	and
more	talented	than	me,	but	then	again	I	couldn’t	bring	myself	to	feel	too	bad
about	it	either.	I	looked	out	over	the	crowd	and	wondered	which	of	the	girls	to
reel	back	in.

“You,	boy.”	A	stout	ginger-haired	man	blocked	my	view	of	Astrid.
“I’m—”
“I	don’t	care	who	you	are,	you’re	in	my	seat.”	The	fellow	had	the	kind	of

aggressive	red	face	that	makes	you	want	to	slap	it,	his	bulk	girded	in	thick
leathers	set	with	black	iron	studs,	knife	and	hatchet	at	his	hips.

I	stood	up—not	without	effort,	for	healing	Hakon’s	bite	wound	had	taken
a	lot	out	of	me.	I	towered	over	the	man,	which	is	always	unfortunate	if	you
want	an	excuse	to	duck	out	of	a	fight.	In	any	event,	standing	was	a	necessary
part	of	the	process	since	I	intended	to	vacate	the	chair	rather	than	get	cut	into
chunks	over	the	issue.	I	puffed	out	my	cheeks	even	so	and	blustered	a	piece—
you	can’t	let	the	weakness	show	or	you’re	dead.

“Men	of	my	standing	don’t	cross	the	seas	to	brawl	in	taverns.	Damned	if	I
care	which	chair	I’m	in.”	The	weight	of	my	sword	tugged	at	me	and	I	wished
Snorri	hadn’t	forced	the	thing	on	me.	It’s	always	easier	to	back	out	of	such
confrontations	if	you	can	claim	to	have	left	your	sharp	iron	at	home.

“Dirty	bastard,	aren’t	you?”	The	Norseman	looked	up	at	me	with	a	sneer.
“I	hope	you’ve	not	left	any	of	that	stain	on	my	chair.”	He	frowned	in
pantomime.	“Or	doesn’t	that	stain	come	off	however	you	scrub?”

To	be	fair	we	were	probably	equally	dirty,	with	his	grime	smeared	over
skin	so	fish-belly	white	you	could	see	the	veins	snaking	blue	paths
underneath,	and	mine	the	proud	olive	hue	that	a	man	of	Red	March	retains
however	long	it’s	been	since	he	saw	the	sun,	darkened	still	further	with
Mother’s	heritage	from	the	Indus.

“Your	chair.”	I	stepped	aside,	indicating	the	free	seat.	My	whole	attention
focused	on	the	man,	every	muscle	I	owned	ready	for	action.

The	tavern	held	quiet	now,	anticipating	violence	and	waiting	for	the	show.



Sometimes	such	things	can’t	be	avoided—unless	you’re	a	true	professional.
Most,	for	example,	wouldn’t	think	to	just	run	like	hell.

“It	is	dirty!”	The	Viking	pointed	to	the	chair,	as	filthy	as	any	other	in	the
place.	“Suppose	you	get	down	there	and	clean	it.	Right	now.”	More	men
pressed	through	the	street	door,	not	that	he	needed	the	backup.

“I’m	sure	a	cleaner	chair	can	be	found	for	you.”	I	puffed	up,	pretending	I
thought	he	was	joking	and	hoping	the	size	of	me	would	intimidate	the	man.

Just	as	cowards	often	have	an	instinct	for	trouble,	many	bullies	have	a
nose	for	fear.	Some	small	clue	hidden	in	the	way	I	carried	myself	told	him	I
wouldn’t	be	a	problem.	“I	said,	you	do	it,	foreigner.”	He	raised	a	fist	to
menace	me.

Snorri	loomed	behind	the	man,	caught	his	wrist,	broke	it,	and	tossed	him
into	the	corner.	“We’ve	no	time	for	games,	Jal.	There’s	three	boatloads	of
Maladon	sailors	headed	up	here—something	about	Lord	Hakon	being	set
upon	.	.	.	anyway,	we	don’t	want	to	get	caught	up	in	it.”

And	with	that	he	bundled	me	through	the	room,	with	Arne,	Tuttugu,	and
the	quins	in	tow,	and	out	the	back	door.

“We’ll	make	camp	in	the	hills,”	he	said,	hefting	open	a	gate	in	the	wall	of
the	enclosed	yard.

And	like	that	my	dreams	of	a	warm	bed	and	warmer	company	blew	away
in	a	cold	wind.



TWENTY-SIX

Itrailed	along	at	the	back	of	the	party,	bent	double	under	my	pack.	It	felt	as
though	Snorri	had	decided	it	was	important	we	each	took	several	large	rocks

with	us	to	the	Bitter	Ice.	Tuttugu	laboured	along	beside	me,	short	of	breath
and	walking	awkwardly.

“You	‘applied’	the	paste,	then?”
He	nodded,	striding	on	with	the	gait	of	a	man	who	didn’t	make	it	to	the

dunghole	in	time.	“It	really	stings.”
“That’ll	be	the	mustard	seed.”	On	reflection	it	had	probably	been	fennel

seed	the	recipe	called	for,	but	I	decided	not	to	mention	it	now.
I	shifted	my	pack	to	what	turned	out	to	be	a	less	comfortable	position.

“So,	Tuttugu,	looking	forwards	to	wetting	your	axe	in	the	blood	of	your
enemies?”	I	needed	some	insight	into	the	Viking	mind-set.	My	only	escape
route	lay	through	understanding	what	made	these	men	tick.

“Honestly?”	Tuttugu	glanced	ahead	at	the	others,	the	first	pair	of	quins
some	twenty	yards	farther	up	the	slope.

“Let’s	try	honesty	first	and	move	on	to	lies	if	it	proves	too	upsetting.”
“Honestly	.	.	.	I’d	much	rather	be	back	in	Trond	with	a	big	plate	of	liver

and	onions.	I	could	settle	there,	do	a	spot	of	fishing,	find	a	wife.”
“And	the	axe-wetting?”
“Scares	me	shitless.	The	only	thing	that	stops	me	from	running	away	in

battle	is	knowing	everyone	else	is	faster	than	me	and	I’d	get	cut	down	from
behind.	The	best	chance	lies	in	facing	the	enemy	head-on.	If	the	gods	had
given	me	longer	legs	.	.	.	well,	I’d	be	gone.”

“Hmmm.”	I	shifted	the	pack	to	the	least	comfortable	position	so	far.	The
thing	was	already	making	my	lungs	ache.	“So	why	are	you	trekking	up	this
mountain?”

Tuttugu	shrugged.	“I’m	not	brave	like	you.	But	I’ve	got	nothing	else.
These	are	my	people.	I	can’t	leave	them.	And	if	the	Undoreth	really	have	all
been	slaughtered	.	.	.	someone	has	to	pay.	Even	if	I	don’t	want	to	be	the	one	to
make	them—someone	has	to	pay.”

	•	•	•	



Toiling	across	the	mountainside	gave	fresh	impetus	to	the	finding	of
reasons	not	to	go.	With	gritted	teeth	I	put	in	the	effort	needed	to	catch	up

to	Snorri	at	the	head	of	our	trek.
“This	Broke-Oar	of	yours.	He’s	a	war	leader,	important	amongst	his

people?”
“He	has	a	reputation.	His	over-clan	is	the	Hardassa.”	Snorri	nodded.

“Many	followers,	but	he	doesn’t	rule	in	Hardanger.	He’s	feared	more	than
loved.	He	has	a	way	about	him.	When	he	focuses	on	a	man,	many	find	it	hard
to	resist	him—they’re	swept	along	with	his	energy—but	when	he	turns	away,
often	that	man	will	remember	reasons	to	hate	him	again.”

“Even	so.”	I	paused	to	recover	my	breath.	“Even	so.	He’s	not	going	to
spend	year	after	year	sitting	in	this	little	fort	in	an	icy	wasteland?	Not	a	man
like	that?	You	can’t	expect	to	find	him	where	you	left	him?”

“We	weren’t	just	buying	furs	in	Trond,	Jal.”	Snorri	glanced	back	at	the
stragglers.	Well,	straggler.	Tuttugu.	“There’s	no	other	place	in	the	North	like
Trond	for	finding	out	what’s	going	on.	Tales	come	in	on	the	ships.	Sven
Broke-Oar	has	been	raiding	up	and	down	the	coast.	The	Waylander	and
Crassis	clans	in	Otins	Fjord,	the	Ice	Jarls	in	Myänar	Fjord,	and	the	Hørost	on
the	Grey	Coast.	All	of	them	have	been	hit,	and	hard.	Many	captives,	many
slaughtered.	And	last	reports	have	him	entering	the	Uulisk.	There’s	nothing
there	for	him	except	the	trek	to	the	fort.	He’s	set	to	winter	there.	Ice	locks	up
all	the	high	North	in	the	long	night.	Everyone	draws	in,	holds	fast,	waits	for
spring.	The	Broke-Oar	reckons	himself	secure	at	the	Black	Fort.	We’ll	teach
him	a	different	lesson.”

I	had	no	answer	to	that,	other	than	that	I	was	a	worse	teacher	of	lessons
than	I	was	a	pupil,	and	I	was	a	terrible	pupil.

	•	•	•	

We	trudged	on,	mile	after	mile,	up	unforgiving	slopes	of	bedrock
shelving	skyward	from	the	sea	and	angled	towards	daunting	heights.

Weariness	took	me	into	dark	places.	I	grumbled	about	the	weight	of	my	pack
until	I	hadn’t	even	the	energy	for	that.	Several	times	I	thought	about	ditching
my	sword	just	to	be	free	of	the	weight.	At	last	I	fell	into	a	kind	of	reverie,
plodding	on	whilst	replaying	the	highlights	of	my	afternoon,	Astrid	and
Edda’s	highlights	in	particular.	All	of	a	sudden	it	hit	me.	The	man	who	had
stepped	in,	lowered	his	hood	a	fraction,	then	ducked	out	.	.	.	a	band	of	raven-
dark	hair,	greying	to	the	sides.

“Edris!”	I	stopped	in	my	tracks.	“Snorri!	That	fucker	Edris	Dean	was
there.	In	town!”

Up	ahead	Snorri	turned,	raising	a	hand	to	stop	the	quins.	“I	saw	him	too,”



he	called	back.	“With	a	dozen	men	of	the	Hardanger.	Another	reason	we	left
in	a	hurry.	The	Red	Vikings	are	a	significant	force	in	Trond.”

They	waited	until	Tuttugu	and	I	caught	up.	“We’ll	camp	here,”	Snorri
said.	“And	keep	a	watch	for	anyone	following	up	the	slopes.”

Sleeping	on	mountains	is	a	miserable	business,	but	I	have	to	admit	that
it’s	less	miserable	in	a	thick	fur-lined	sleep-sack	with	a	canvas	and	leather
awning	to	divert	the	worst	of	the	wind	around	you.	Snorri	and	the	others	had
spent	their	money	well	and	we	had	an	untroubled	night.

Come	morning	we	broke	fast	on	black	bread,	cold	chicken,	apples,	and
other	perishables	from	Trond.	Before	long	we’d	be	back	on	hardtack	and
dried	meat,	but	for	the	now	we	ate	like	kings.	At	least	like	impoverished	kings
who	happen	to	be	stuck	on	a	mountainside.

“Why	the	hell	is	Edris	in	Trond?”	I	asked	the	question	I’d	been	too	bone-
tired	to	voice	the	previous	evening.

“The	thing	we’re	chasing—being	dragged	after—it	seeded	its	trail	with
trouble	for	us.”	Snorri	chewed	off	another	piece	of	bread,	attacking	it	like
meat	on	the	bone.	“The	Dead	King	lies	behind	all	this,	and	he	collects	men,
living	ones	as	well	as	the	dead.	The	right	kind	of	man	he’ll	draw	to	him.	Men
like	the	Broke-Oar	and	this	Edris.”

“Edris	will	be	chasing	us	now?”	I	hoped	not.	The	man	scared	me,	and
more	than	trouble	did	in	general.	Something	about	him	gnawed	at	me.
Whatever	quality	ran	through	individuals	like	Maeres	Allus,	Edris	had	his
measure	of	it	too.	An	understated	menace—the	kind	you	know	that	when	it
does	speak	will	be	worse	than	any	threat	or	posture	from	men	capable	only	of
common	cruelty.

“Trying	to	get	ahead	of	us,	most	like.”	Snorri	swallowed	and	stood,
stretching	until	his	bones	creaked.	“He’ll	aim	for	the	Black	Fort,	or	maybe	the
mining	at	the	Ice	first.	If	they’re	warned	we	don’t	stand	much	chance.”

We	didn’t	stand	a	chance	in	any	event.	I	kept	that	opinion	to	myself.
Perhaps	if	Edris	did	warn	them,	the	others	would	see	it	was	hopeless	and
abandon	the	effort.

“All	right,	but	.	.	.”	I	got	up	too,	lugging	my	pack	up	onto	my	shoulder.
“Explain	to	me	again	why	a	horror	from	Red	March	runs	a	thousand	miles
and	more	to	some	godforsaken	hole	in	the	ice?”

“I	don’t	know	it	all,	Jal.	Sageous	told	me	some	of	it,	though	that	may	be
lies.	Skilfar	had	more	to	say—”

“What?	When?”	I	didn’t	remember	any	of	that.
“She	didn’t	speak	to	you?”	Snorri	raised	his	brows.
“Of	course	she	did.	You	heard	her.	Some	nonsense	about	my	Great-Uncle

Garyus	and	being	led	by	my	cock.	Dreadful	old	crone,	mad	as	a	brush.”
“I	meant	.	.	.	without	words.”	He	frowned.	“She	spoke	in	my	head,	the

whole	time.”



“Hmmm.”	I	wondered	how	much	faith	to	place	in	words	spoken	in	Snorri
ver	Snagason’s	head.	It	seemed	quite	crowded	in	there	and	who	knew	how
many	voices	Aslaug	might	use?	Or	perhaps	Baraqel	might	be	responsible	for
Skilfar’s	words	not	reaching	me—though	whether	he	would	be	acting	in	my
best	interests	with	such	selective	deafness,	I	didn’t	know.	“Remind	me.”

“The	unborn	are	hard	to	summon.	Very	hard.	Only	a	few	come	through,
where	the	conditions	are	right,	where	the	timing,	the	place,	the	circumstances
all	align.”

“Well,	anyone	knows	that!”	All	new	to	me.
“And	so	they	are	scattered.”
“Yes.”
“But	what	the	Dead	King	has	ordered	in	the	Bitter	Ice,	the	work	his

minions	are	accomplishing	there	.	.	.	is	drawing	the	unborn,	from	all	corners
of	the	earth.	To	one	place.	Perhaps	when	your	friend	at	the	opera	found
himself	targeted	and	escaped	he	abandoned	whatever	mission	called	him	there
and	ran	for	the	gathering	in	the	North.	Or	maybe	he	was	always	bound	there
after	whatever	business	drew	him	into	Vermillion.”

“Ah.”	Oh	hell.	“But	your	wife	is	in	the	Black	Fort,	right?	And	the	unborn
are	beneath	the	Bitter	Ice?	Yes?	So	we	never	have	to	meet	them	.	.	.	right?”

Snorri	didn’t	answer	immediately,	only	started	walking.
“Yes?”	At	his	back.
“We’re	taking	the	Black	Fort.”
I	tried	to	remember	Snorri’s	tale	from	the	tavern	in	Den	Hagen.	The

Broke-Oar	had	told	him	his	son	was	safe.	That’s	all	he	said.	He’d	also	talked
Snorri	into	getting	clubbed	around	the	back	of	the	head.	All	about	me	the
Norsemen	were	hefting	packs,	moving	on.	Already	I	could	feel	the	faintest
tug	as	the	curse	binding	me	to	their	leader	began	to	stretch	out	across	the
slope.	“Crap	on	it.”	And	I	followed	in	his	footsteps.

The	True	North	is	much	as	Snorri	described	it	from	experience	and	much
as	I	described	it	from	ignorance.	All	of	it	appears	to	be	sloping	up	to	start
with,	though	later	it	slopes	both	up	and	down	as	if	in	a	great	hurry	to	get
somewhere.	The	air	is	thin,	cold,	and	full	of	winged	insects	that	want	to	suck
your	blood.	Drawing	your	breath	through	your	teeth	helps	strain	the	buggers
out	and	keep	your	lungs	clear.	Also	they	die	away	as	you	gain	height.

Much	of	the	place	is	bare	rock.	As	soon	as	you	gain	any	altitude	it’s	bare
rock	covered	with	last	winter’s	snow.	From	the	heights	you	can	see
mountains,	mountains,	and	more	mountains,	with	lakes	and	pine	forests
huddling	in	the	dents	between	them.	I	took	Tuttugu’s	advice	early	on	and
bound	about	my	boots	the	rabbit	furs	and	sealskin	overguards	from	my	pack.
With	this	and	my	feet	in	thick	woollen	socks	the	snows	didn’t	freeze	my	toes.
It	would	only	get	worse	as	we	headed	north,	though,	into	the	Jarlson	Uplands,
where	the	wind	off	the	interior	came	armed	with	knives.



We	paused	in	the	lee	of	one	high	ridge	whilst	Snorri	and	Arne	discussed
our	route.

“Ein,	is	it?”	The	scar	by	his	eye	gave	it	away.
“Yes.”	The	quin	with	the	longest	life	expectancy	flashed	me	a	smile.
“How	is	it	that	Snorri’s	in	charge	here?”	I	asked.	“You’re	Jarl	Torsteff’s

heir,	aren’t	you?”	I	didn’t	plan	to	undermine	Snorri’s	authority,	unless	it
turned	out	Ein	could	order	him	to	give	up	his	quest—which	seemed	unlikely
whatever	the	chain	of	command	should	be—but	as	a	prince	it	did	strike	me	as
odd	that	a	man	whose	only	birthright	was	a	few	acres	of	sloping	rock	fields
should	be	ordering	the	North’s	aristocracy	about.

“Actually	I	have	seven	older	brothers.	Two	sets	of	triplets	and	a	singleton,
Agar,	Father’s	heir.	It	might	be	that	they’re	all	dead	now,	I	suppose.”	He
pursed	his	lips	at	that,	as	if	seeing	how	the	idea	tasted.	“But	Snorri	is	a
champion	of	the	Undoreth.	There	are	songs	about	his	deeds	in	battle.	If
Einhaur	and	my	father’s	halls	are	burned—then	my	authority	stands	on
nothing	but	ash.	Better	to	let	a	man	who	truly	knows	war	to	lead	us	on	our	last
raid.”

I	nodded.	If	we	were	bound	to	our	course,	then	Snorri	was	the	man	to	take
us	to	the	bitter	end.	Even	so,	I	didn’t	like	the	concept	of	a	man’s	rank	being
something	that	could	so	easily	be	set	aside.	It	might	be	true	for	a	jarl’s	son
here	amidst	the	snows,	but	in	the	warmth	of	Red	March	a	prince	would	be	a
prince	no	matter	what	came.	I	took	a	measure	of	comfort	in	that,	and	in	the
fact	that	dawn	had	long	since	passed	so	Baraqel	couldn’t	sour	my	mood	with
his	own	judgment	on	the	matter	of	princes.

	•	•	•	

Towards	evening	of	that	second	day	we	reached	a	great	work	and	wonder
of	the	Builders,	high	amongst	the	peaks.	A	huge	dam	wall	had	been

constructed,	spanning	a	valley,	taller	than	any	tower,	thick	enough	at	the	top
for	four	wagons	to	drive	along	it	side	by	side,	and	wider	still	at	the	bottom.	A
vast	lake	must	once	have	been	held	behind	it,	though	to	what	purpose	I
couldn’t	say.

“Wait!”	I	needed	a	rest	and	the	ruins	provided	the	perfect	excuse.
Snorri	came	back	along	the	slope,	frowning,	but	he	allowed	that	we	might

stop	for	a	few	minutes	whilst	I	satisfied	my	aristocratic	curiosity.	I	satisfied	it
from	a	sitting	position,	letting	my	gaze	roam	along	the	valley	sides.	Enormous
stone	pipes	ran	out	through	the	bedrock	beneath	the	dam,	obviously	to	control
the	flow	of	water,	but	why	I	couldn’t	guess.	The	whole	place	was	built	on	the
scale	of	the	mountains,	each	structure	huge	enough	to	make	ants	of	men.	Even
the	pipes	would	accommodate	several	elephants	walking	side	by	side,	with
headroom	for	riders.	In	such	a	place	you	could	believe	the	Norse	stories	of



frost	giants	who	shaped	the	world	and	cared	nothing	for	humanity.
I	sat	on	my	pack	beside	Tuttugu,	staring	out	across	the	valley,	both	of	us

munching	on	apples	he’d	dug	from	his	pack,	wizened	but	still	sweet	with	the
taste	of	summer.

“So	every	Viking	name	seems	to	mean	something	.	.	.	Snorri	means
‘attack,’	Arne	is	‘eagle,’	the	quins	came	out	numbered	.	.	.”	I	broke	off	to	let
Tuttugu	supply	the	explanation	of	his	own,	something	heroic	probably.	If	they
applied	names	with	any	accuracy,	Tuttugu	would	mean	“timid	fatty”	and
Jalan	would	mean	“runs	away	screaming.”

“Twenty,”	he	said.
“What?”
“Twenty.”
I	glanced	towards	the	huddle	of	quins.	“Good	God!	Your	poor	mother!”
Tuttugu	grinned	at	that.	“No,	it’s	not	my	birth	name,	just	what	people	call

me.	There	was	a	contest	at	Jarl	Torsteff’s	feast	after	the	victory	over	Hoddof
of	Iron	Tors,	and	I	won.”

“A	contest?”	I	frowned,	trying	to	puzzle	how	Tuttugu	won	anything.
“An	eating	contest.”	He	patted	his	belly.
“You	ate	twenty	.	.	.”	I	tried	to	think	of	something	a	person	might

reasonably	eat	twenty	of.	“Eggs?”
“Close.”	He	rubbed	his	chins,	short	fingers	buried	in	ginger	fuzz.

“Chickens.”

	•	•	•	

It	took	four	days	rather	than	the	promised	two	before	we	looked	down	uponthe	sparkling	length	of	the	Uulisk	from	a	high	ridge,	endless	miles	of
mountain	trekking	to	our	rear.	Snorri	pointed	out	a	dark	spot	along	the
shoreline.

“Einhaur.”	I	could	tell	nothing	of	its	fate	from	our	remove,	save	there
were	no	fishing	boats	at	its	quays.

“Look.”	Arne	pointed	out	along	the	fjord,	further	seaward.	A	longship,
tiny	from	where	we	stood,	a	child’s	toy	out	on	the	flat	waters	of	the	Uulisk.
Near	the	prow	a	red	dot	.	.	.	a	painted	eye?

“Edris	and	his	Hardanger	friends,	I’m	guessing,”	Snorri	said.	“Best	press
on.”



TWENTY-SEVEN

The	trek	to	the	Black	Fort	proved	much	as	Snorri	had	described	it.	Only	a
lot	worse.	Although	Edris	might	have	followed	us,	or	have	been	ahead	in

the	race	to	the	fort,	in	such	a	huge	and	empty	expanse	it’s	impossible	to	think
of	yourself	as	chased	or	chasing.	You	are	either	alone,	or	not	alone.	We	were
alone,	and	our	enemy	pressed	us	on	every	side.	The	wind	and	the	cold	of	the
Uplands	are	things	that	must	be	experienced;	words	will	not	tame	them	into
something	that	can	be	given	over.	We	left	behind	trees,	then	bushes,	then	even
the	hardiest	of	grasses	until	the	world	was	nothing	but	rock	and	snow.	The
snow	patches	joined	each	to	the	next	to	become	unbroken.	The	days	grew
shorter	with	frightening	speed,	and	each	morning	Baraqel	would	no	longer
harangue	me	but	merely	unfold	his	wings,	golden	with	the	dawn,	and	bid	me
be	worthy	of	my	line.	Snorri	would	sit	apart	from	us	when	the	sun	fell,
plunging	from	the	sky	and	drawing	the	long	night	behind	it.	In	those
moments,	as	ice	devoured	sun,	I	could	see	her	walk	about	him:	Aslaug,	a	lean
beauty	fashioned	from	the	gloom,	her	spider	form	scurrying	in	her	footsteps,
black	across	the	snow.

Each	hour	became	a	process	of	taking	a	dull	future	and	squeezing	it	into	a
dull	past	through	the	narrow	slot	of	the	moment—a	moment,	like	each	other,
crowded	with	pain	and	exhaustion,	and	with	a	cold	that	crept	around	you	like
a	lover	carrying	murder	in	her	heart.	I	tried	to	keep	myself	warm	with
thoughts	of	better	times,	most	of	them	in	someone	else’s	bed.	Strange	to	say,
and	surely	a	sign	of	my	brain’s	slow	freeze,	although	I	could	summon	to	mind
countless	moments	of	coitus,	long	limbs,	smooth	curves,	waves	of	hair,	the
only	face	that	would	appear	was	Lisa	DeVeer’s,	showing—as	it	always	did—
part	amusement,	part	exasperation,	part	affection.	In	fact,	as	the	cold	North
sucked	the	life	out	of	me	I	found	myself	remembering	times	outside	her	bed
more	than	within	it—conversations,	the	way	she	ran	her	fingers	through	her
hair	when	puzzling,	the	cleverness	of	her	replies.	I	blamed	it	on	snow	fever.

We	camped	in	the	lee	of	any	outcrop	we	could	find	and	burned	charcoal
from	our	packs	to	put	a	little	warmth	into	our	food.	The	snows	south	of	the
Bitter	Ice	would	thaw	occasionally.	Maybe	two	years	would	pass,	maybe	five,
but	eventually	a	particularly	high	summer	would	melt	them	back	to	bare	rock



in	all	but	the	deep	places,	and	so	the	ice	we	walked	on	was	never	thick
enough	to	cover	every	rise	and	fold	of	the	land.	The	Bitter	Ice	itself,	however,
that	glacial	sheet	never	melted,	though	it	might	retreat	a	mile	or	three	over	the
course	of	lifetimes.	And	the	land	beneath	it	hadn’t	seen	the	sun	in	centuries,
maybe	since	Christ	walked	the	world.	Maybe	never.

On	the	long	march	through	an	icy	waste,	no	one	talks.	You	keep	your
mouth	closed	to	seal	the	heat	in	your	body.	You	cover	your	face	and	watch	a
white	world	through	the	slit	that	remains.	You	put	one	foot	before	the	next
and	hope	that	it’s	a	straight	line	you’re	plotting—letting	the	rise	and	fall	of	the
sun	guide	your	progress.	And	while	you	try	to	force	your	body	along	the
straightest	path,	the	paths	your	mind	follows	become	increasingly	twisted.
Your	thoughts	wander.	Old	friends	revisit.	Old	times	catch	you	up	once	more.
You	dream.	With	your	eyes	open,	and	with	the	plod	and	plod	of	numb	feet	to
punctuate	each	minute,	you	dream.

I	dreamed	of	Great-Uncle	Garyus,	lying	broken	in	his	high	tower,	older
than	sin	and	smelling	only	slightly	better.	His	nurses	cleaned	him,	carried
him,	fed	him,	took	away	a	measure	of	his	dignity	every	day,	though	he	never
seemed	to	lack	for	more.

Garyus	probably	would	have	thanked	any	god	that	could	give	him	even	a
day	of	walking,	even	in	a	place	like	this.	And	even	at	the	end	of	a	day	of	such
labour,	bone-cold,	bone-tired,	hunched	within	my	misery,	I	wouldn’t	have
swapped	with	him.

My	great-uncle	had	lain	there	year	upon	year,	placed	by	age	and	infirmity
on	death’s	doorstep.	The	Red	Queen	had	told	us	that	there	really	was	a	door
into	death,	and	it	seemed	that	Garyus	had	been	knocking	on	it	since	the	day
he’d	come	broken	into	the	world.

In	my	dreams	I	returned	to	that	day	with	the	sun	slanting	in	past	his
shutters,	when	Garyus	had	folded	my	hands	around	that	locket	in	his	own,
large-knuckled,	liver-spotted,	and	tremulous.	“Your	mother’s	likeness,”	he
had	said.	“Keep	it	safe.”	And	safe	meant	secret.	I	knew	that,	even	at	six.

I’d	sat	and	watched	that	old	and	broken	man.	Listened	to	his	stories,
laughed	at	them	as	children	do,	sat	silent	and	round-eyed	when	the	tales
turned	dark.	Most	of	that	time	I	never	knew	him	as	my	great-uncle.	And	none
of	that	time	did	I	know	him	as	brother	to	the	Silent	Sister—though	of	course	it
seemed	only	right	the	Sister	should	be	someone’s	sister.

I	wondered	if	Garyus	were	scared	of	his	twin,	the	blind-eye	woman,	his
silent	sister.	Could	a	person	be	scared	of	their	twin?	Would	that	be	like	being
scared	of	yourself?	I	knew	that	many	men	were	scared	of	themselves,
frightened	that	they	would	let	themselves	down,	that	they	would	run	rather
than	fight,	choose	the	dishonourable	path,	the	easy	path	rather	than	the	hard.
Me,	I	trusted	myself	always	to	do	what	was	right—for	Jalan	Kendeth.	The
only	times	I	scared	myself	were	the	rare	occasions	I	was	tempted	to	stand	and



fight,	those	few	times	when	anger	had	gotten	the	better	of	me	and	almost
stepped	me	into	danger.

How	much	did	Garyus,	there	in	his	tower	with	his	stories	and	gifts	for
children,	know	of	his	sisters’	battles?	I	looked	at	those	memories	now	as	a
puzzle.	Was	there	another	way	to	see	them?	Like	those	trick	drawings	where
everything	is	obvious	until	someone	tells	you	“the	lump	is	a	dent”	and
suddenly	you	see	it—what	was	a	bump	is	now	a	hollow,	pushed	in,	not
standing	out—they	all	are,	every	rise	and	hollow	reversed,	the	image	has
changed,	its	meaning	flipped	around,	and	try	as	you	like	you	can’t	see	it	as
before:	solid,	unambiguous,	worthy	of	your	trust.

Did	Garyus	know	his	younger	sister	thought	she	knew	where	death’s	door
lay?

“Jal.”	A	tired	voice.	“Jal.”
I	thought	of	Garyus,	the	Red	Queen’s	brother,	eyes	aglitter	in	that	narrow

bed.	Older	than	her,	surely?	Had	he	known	her	plans?	How	much	of	all	this
had	that	crippled	old	man	set	in	motion?

“Jal!”
Shouldn’t	he	have	been	king?	Wouldn’t	he	have	been	King	of	the	Red

March	if	he	weren’t	broken	so?
“JAL!”
“What?”	I	stumbled,	almost	fell.
“We’re	stopping.”	Snorri,	bowed	and	tired,	the	ice	wastes	making	mock

of	his	strength	just	as	it	did	of	all	men’s	strength.	He	raised	a	hand,	pointing
within	his	glove.	I	followed	his	direction.	Ahead	of	us	the	walls	of	the	Bitter
Ice	rose	without	preamble:	sheer,	beautiful,	taller	than	my	imagination.

	•	•	•	

We	ate	despite	the	effort	it	took,	fumbling	with	dead	fingers	to	make	a
spark,	using	the	last	of	our	kindling,	lighting	the	charcoal	to	heat	a	pot

and	knowing	there	would	be	no	heat	but	what	our	bodies	made	from	then	on.
That	night	for	the	longest	time	I	didn’t	sleep.	The	skies	grew	clear

overhead	and	stars	dazzled	down	upon	us	as	the	temperature	fell	away.	Each
breath	hurt,	drawing	frozen	razors	of	air	into	my	chest.	Death	seemed	both
near	and	inviting.	I	shivered	despite	the	furs,	despite	layers	and	more	layers.
And	when	at	last	dreams	took	me	down	I	held	no	surety	of	ever	waking.

In	some	dead	hour	past	midnight	the	silence	woke	me.	The	unrelenting
wind	had	for	once	relented,	dropping	away	to	nothing.	I	cracked	open	an	eye
and	stared	into	the	darkness.	The	miracle	came	suddenly	and	without
warning.	In	one	moment	the	sky	lit	with	shifting	veils	of	light,	rolling	through
the	colours,	first	red,	then	an	eerie	green,	next	a	blue	I’d	not	seen	before.	And
always	shifting,	from	one	serpentlike	form	to	the	next.	The	silence	and	the



scale	of	it	kept	the	breath	in	my	chest.	The	whole	sky	overwritten,	a	hundred
miles	and	more	of	the	heavens	dancing	with	glory	to	some	tune	that	only
angels	hear.

I	know	now	that	it	must	have	been	a	dream,	but	in	that	moment	I	believed
it	with	all	my	heart,	and	it	filled	me	with	wonder	and	with	fear.	Nothing
before	or	since	has	made	me	feel	so	small,	and	yet	that	great	and	dancing
mystery	of	light,	huger	than	mountains,	played	out	above	an	empty	wasteland
to	no	audience	but	me	.	.	.	it	made	me	feel,	just	for	the	briefest	time	.	.	.
significant.

In	the	morning	Fimm	did	not	rise.
“Now	it	is	my	turn.”	Fjórir	sewed	his	brother	into	his	sleeping	sack	with	a

long	bone	needle	and	gut	thread.
“Will	he	rise?”	I	eyed	the	sack,	half-expecting	it	to	move.
Snorri	shook	his	head,	solemn.	Behind	him	Tuttugu	rubbed	his	eyes.	Of

all	of	us	the	quins,	now	quads,	seemed	least	moved.
“He’s	frozen,”	Snorri	said.
“But.”	My	face	felt	too	solid	for	frowning.	“But	you	found	a	dead	man

struggling	after	a	day	or	more	in	a	snowbank.”
“The	necromancers	inject	them	with	an	elixir.	Something	of	oils	and	salts,

the	Broke-Oar	said.	It	keeps	them	from	locking	solid.”	Snorri	had	told	me	this
before,	but	the	cold	had	frozen	my	memory.

“This	army	beneath	the	ice	.	.	.	Olaaf	Rikeson’s	troops—the	Dead	King’s
men—will	need	to	thaw	them	and	treat	them	in	this	manner.	Unless	they	have
some	new	magics	it	doesn’t	seem	possible.	The	effort	involved	to	drag	them
frozen	to	the	south,	or	to	bear	sufficient	fuel	north	.	.	.”	I	thought	of	the	other
part	to	the	tale	Snorri	had	told.	The	key	that	would	open	the	frost	giants’	gates
—Loki’s	gift.	The	key	that	would	open	anything.	“Perhaps	all	they	ever
wanted	was	Rikeson’s	key.	That	one	thing.”	And	for	some	reason	that	thought
worried	me	more	than	an	army	of	corpses	rising	from	the	ice.

	•	•	•	

Snorri	had	aimed	west	of	the	fort	so	that	the	line	of	the	Bitter	Ice	could
lead	us	east	towards	it.	If	he	had	steered	us	wrong,	then	we	were	walking

away	from	the	fort	into	the	ice-bound	wastelands	of	the	interior,	where	we
would	all	die	without	the	least	inconvenience	to	anyone.	Death	seemed
certain	either	way,	and	if	turning	back	alone	offered	even	the	slightest	hope	of
survival,	then	I	would	have	been	off	without	delay.	Unfortunately,	as	Tuttugu
had	discovered	in	battle,	running	away	is	sometimes	the	least	safe	option,	and
whilst	dying	was	the	last	thing	I	wanted	to	do,	dying	by	myself	seemed
somehow	worse.

I	staggered	on,	across	the	unending	whiteness,	wondering	if	the	Silent



Sister	had	already	watched	my	suffering	when	she	looked	beyond	tomorrow.	I
crunched	the	ice,	feet	numb,	the	wind’s	keening	filling	my	head.	Had	she
counted	out	each	frozen	step	or	just	seen	the	great	white	shape	of	our	trek
across	the	snows?	How	many	possibilities	had	lain	strewn	across	the	future
for	her?	And	how	many	of	them	saw	us	dead?	Foot	before	foot,	too	cold	for
shivering,	dying	by	degrees.	Perhaps	in	some	futures	the	crack	that	chased	me
had	caught	and	destroyed	me	before	I	even	reached	Snorri;	in	others	he	may
have	killed	me	as	I	ran	into	him.	Did	she	know	for	certain	that	her	spell	would
find	a	home	in	us,	be	carried	north	to	the	very	edge	of	the	Bitter	Ice?	Did	she
know	whether	her	magics	would	wither	inside	us	or	take	root	and	grow	into
more	than	they	had	been?	Was	she	certain,	or	was	she	maybe,	like	her	great-
nephew,	a	gambler	always	ready	to	roll	those	dice	one	time	too	many?	I	saw
her	narrow	smile	in	my	mind’s	eye,	and	it	did	little	to	warm	me.	Foot	before
foot.	Endlessly	on.

	•	•	•	

Just	as	Snorri	had	described,	the	Black	Fort	took	me	by	surprise.	The
landscape	offered	no	clues,	no	buildup,	no	growing	promise	of	journey’s

end.	One	moment	it	was	a	featureless	white	wasteland,	bounded	on	one	side
by	the	Bitter	Ice;	the	next	moment	it	was	the	same	featureless	wasteland,
except	there	was	a	feature,	a	black	dot.

The	trek	had	worn	us	to	our	final	strength—Fimm	it	had	worn	past	even
that—but	we	were	none	of	us	the	shambling,	frostbitten	wreck	that	Snorri	had
been	when	he	had	last	stumbled	to	the	gates.	We	came	with	at	least	some
measure	of	fight	in	us,	some	final	reserve	to	draw	upon.	And,	as	little	as	I
wanted	to	battle	anyone,	I	knew	for	sure	that	without	the	chance	to	rest	and
restock	in	the	shelter	offered	by	the	Black	Fort,	I	for	one	would	not	survive	a
return	journey.

Snorri	led	us	closer.	Urging	swiftness.	He	wanted	to	be	inside	before	the
sun	set—wanted	Aslaug’s	strength	in	the	fight	to	come.	The	terrain	offered	no
cover	and	we	relied	only	on	being	white	upon	a	white	background	to	hide	us,
and	also	on	the	hope	that	nobody	would	be	looking	out	for	us.	This	latter
proved	an	unfounded	hope.

“Wait.”	Ein,	raising	a	gloved	hand.	“Man	in	the	south	tower.”
However	well	we	blended	against	the	snow,	with	the	sun	sinking	behind

us	our	shadow	might	yet	announce	our	approach	if	the	man	were	paying	close
enough	attention.

The	Black	Fort	is	a	squat,	square	construction	with	a	crenellated	tower	at
each	corner.	A	central	keep,	barely	taller	than	the	outer	walls,	sits	amidst	a
large	courtyard.	Snorri	believed	the	keep	unmanned	and	that	the	small
garrison	kept	to	chambers	within	the	thickness	of	the	walls	around	the	main



gates.
“The	Dead-Eye	will	shoot	him,”	Snorri	said.	“Then	we	climb.”
Arne	rubbed	gloved	fingers	across	his	face	guard,	the	soft	hide	frozen	stiff

and	hanging	with	miniature	icicles.	The	wind	swirled	around	us,	full	of
razors.	“It’s	a	long	shot.”

“Not	for	the	Dead-Eye!”	A	quad	slapped	him	on	the	shoulder.
“And	the	light’s	failing.”	A	shake	of	the	head.
“Easy!”	Another	quad.
A	slump	of	shoulders.	“I’ll	get	my	bow	ready,”	Arne	said.	“Then	we	move

closer.”
It	took	a	damned	long	time,	extracting	and	unwrapping	the	bow,	finding

the	string,	waxing	that,	flexing	this,	warming	fingers,	hooking	one	thing	to
another.	They’d	taught	me	archery	back	in	Vermillion,	of	course.	Every	prince
had	to	know	the	art.	Rather	than	having	us	become	crack	shots,	Grandmother
was,	apparently,	more	interested	that	we	know	and	understand	the
possibilities	and	limitations	of	the	weapon	so	that	we	could	better	utilize	it	en
masse	upon	the	battlefield.	Even	so,	we	still	had	to	hit	the	bull’s-eye.

If	all	those	long	hours	of	much-resented	archery	practice	had	taught	me
anything,	it	was	that	wind	will	make	a	fool	of	even	the	best	archer,	a	swirling,
gusty	wind	especially	so.

At	last	Arne	had	equipped	himself	and	we	crept	forwards	across	the	snow,
crouching	low	now,	as	if	that	might	make	a	difference.	The	figure	in	the	tower
moved	several	times,	facing	our	way	for	a	heart-stopping	moment,	but
showed	no	signs	of	interest.

“Do	it	here.”	Snorri	caught	Arne’s	shoulder.	I	think	the	Dead-Eye	would
have	closed	to	fifty	yards	if	they’d	let	him.

“Odin,	guide	my	arrow.”	Arne	removed	a	glove	and	set	a	shaft	to	his	bow.
On	a	still	day	with	warm	hands	and	no	pressure	on	the	outcome,	it	was	a

shot	I	might	hope	to	make	four	times	in	five.	Arne	loosed	his	shaft	and	it
hissed	away,	invisible	against	the	sky.

“Miss.”	I	stated	the	obvious	to	break	the	still	moment	that	held	us	all.	The
shot	had	gone	so	wide	the	man	in	the	tower	hadn’t	even	noticed	it.

Arne	tried	again,	taking	deep	breaths	to	steady	himself.	Fingers	white	on
the	bowstring.	He	loosed.

“Miss.”	I	hadn’t	meant	to	say	anything,	the	word	just	spoke	itself	into	the
expectant	hush.

Arne	pulled	away	his	face	guard	and	gave	me	a	sour	look.	He	ran	his
tongue	over	an	array	of	teeth,	most	brown,	one	black,	one	grey,	one	white,
two	missing.	He	took	another	arrow,	one	of	maybe	a	dozen	remaining,	and
returned	his	attention	to	the	tower.	Three	breaths,	hauled	in,	released	slowly,
and	he	took	the	shot.

To	be	fair	I	waited	several	seconds.	It	was	lucky	all	three	shots	had	gone



high	rather	than	striking	the	stonework.	The	man	on	the	tower	hadn’t	so	much
as	flinched.	“Miss,”	I	said.

“You	fucking	do	it!”	Arne	shoved	the	bow	at	me.
Safe	in	the	knowledge	I	couldn’t	do	much	worse,	I	stripped	off	a	glove

and	strung	an	arrow.	The	wind	made	an	agony	of	my	fingers	within	moments.
Those	moments	would	be	all	I	had	before	the	wind	stopped	them	hurting	and
made	them	useless.	I	lined	up	on	the	man,	guessed	at	compensation	for	the
wind,	and	shifted	my	aim	yards	to	the	right.	The	lack	of	time	helped.	It
stopped	me	thinking	about	what	I	intended	to	do.	I’m	told	that	I	killed	men	in
the	Aral	Pass,	but	I’ve	no	clear	memory	of	it.	On	the	mountain	with	Snorri	a
man	had	pretty	much	impaled	himself	on	my	sword—and	I’d	apologized	to
him	for	the	accident	before	I	knew	what	I	was	saying.	That	had	all	been	in	hot
blood.	But	here	I	crouched,	arms	trembling,	blood	as	cold	as	it	had	ever	been,
ready	to	punch	an	arrow	through	a	man’s	chest,	to	take	his	life	without
warning,	without	seeing	his	face.	A	different	matter	entirely.

“Miss.”	I	whispered	it	as	I	let	fly.
Two	heartbeats	passed	and	I	was	sure	I’d	done	no	better	than	Arne.
“Yes!”	The	man	spun	around	as	if	from	a	sudden	impact.	“Yes!”	Snorri

shouted.
“Shit!”	That	from	Tuttugu	as	the	guardsman	remained	standing,	advanced

to	the	wall,	unsteady	and	clutching	his	arm,	then	turned	to	flee.
“Hel!	Shoot	him	again!”	Snorri	shouted.
The	man	had	descended	by	steps	to	the	main	wall	and	was	running	hell

for	leather	towards	the	far	tower	where	presumably	his	companions	were
housed.	Why	he	wasn’t	watching	from	that	tower,	I	couldn’t	tell	you.

“We’re	done.”	I	gestured	at	the	distant	wall.	The	man	could	be	glimpsed
every	half	second	or	so	as	a	dark	streak	through	the	crenels	notched	down	into
the	battlements.

Arne	snatched	his	bow	back,	strung	an	arrow,	and	loosed	it	at	the	sky.	“A
pox	on	all	the	gods.”	He	spat	and	his	phlegm	froze	before	it	landed.

“Why	waste	another	arrow?”	I	watched	the	walls,	wondering	if	they
would	come	out	to	kill	us	or	leave	us	to	freeze.

The	man	fell	with	a	thin	cry,	nailed	as	he	and	Arne’s	arrow	arrived
together	at	the	third	crenel	before	the	tower	door,	six	yards	short	of	his
sanctuary.

“Dead-Eye!”	A	quad	punched	Arne	in	the	shoulder.
“Dead	arm	if	you’re	not	careful.”	But	he	sounded	pleased.
Snorri	had	already	hurried	away	from	us,	towards	the	walls.	We	gave

chase.	It	seemed	to	take	forever	to	cross	the	hundred-yard	gap.	He	had	out	a
long	coil	of	rope,	knotted	for	climbing	and	stored	away	from	the	ice	for	this
moment.	At	one	end	a	grapple	hook	that	looked	suspiciously	like	the	anchor
from	a	small	fishing	boat.	He	threw	it	over	the	wall	and	it	caught	first	time.



Snorri	had	already	reached	the	top	as	I	made	it	to	the	base	of	the	wall.	A	quad
went	up	next,	then	Arne,	then	me,	slipping	and	cursing	now	the	knots	were
slippery	with	ice	from	the	others’	boots.	The	body	of	the	man	Arne	shot
plummeted	past	me	as	I	reached	the	halfway	point.	I	bit	off	another	complaint
and	kept	my	mouth	shut	after	that.

	•	•	•	

With	only	Tuttugu	yet	to	climb,	we	pulled	our	packs	up	on	a	rope	and
then	hauled	Tuttugu	after	them.	That	effort	at	last	got	a	little	warmth

into	my	blood.	I	helped	him	to	his	feet	after	his	rather	undignified	struggle
between	the	battlements	to	reach	the	walkway.

“Thanks.”	He	grinned,	a	nervous	thing,	quick	then	gone,	and	unslung	his
axe	from	across	his	back.	An	unusual	weapon,	closer	to	the	armour-piercing
wedge	design	favoured	down	south.

On	the	gritted	ice	beneath	my	feet,	spatters	of	the	tower	guard’s	blood—
shocking	colour	after	what	seemed	an	eternity	of	white.	The	droplets	captured
my	gaze.	All	the	talk,	all	the	travel,	had	come	to	this	moment,	these	crimson
splashes.	From	abstract	to	real—too	real.

“Are	we	ready?”	Snorri	from	before	the	door	our	man	had	been	running
for.	The	word	no	fought	to	get	past	my	lips.	“Good.”	Snorri	held	his	axe	in	a
double	grip,	Arne	a	broadsword,	the	brothers	each	with	a	double-headed
broadaxe,	short-handled,	a	knife	in	the	off	hand.	I	drew	my	longsword,	last	of
all	of	them.	Satisfied,	Snorri	nodded	and	set	his	hand	to	the	iron	door	handle.
The	plan	did	not	have	to	be	reiterated.	It	was,	as	plans	go,	a	simple	one.	Kill
everyone.

The	door	opened	with	a	squeal	of	hinges,	shedding	ice,	and	we	were
through,	crowding	onto	the	steps	beyond.	Snorri	closed	it	behind	us	and	I	shut
my	eyes,	taking	a	moment	to	enjoy	the	simple	ecstasy	of	being	out	of	that
wind.	No	winter	night	of	Red	March	had	ever	been	as	cold	as	it	was	there	in
that	corridor	within	the	Black	Fort,	but	without	the	wind	it	was	a	paradise
compared	to	the	outside.	We	all	took	a	moment,	several	moments,	stamping	a
touch	of	life	back	into	our	feet,	swinging	our	arms	to	recover	a	little	of	that
lost	flexibility.

Snorri	led	on,	down	the	steps	and	into	a	long	corridor.	We	expected	to
find	most	of	Sven	Broke-Oar’s	men	in	one	spot.	It’s	what	men	do	in	cold
places.	They	huddle	by	the	hearth,	shoulder	to	shoulder,	for	as	long	as	they
can	stand	each	other’s	company.	With	fuel	so	hard	to	come	by,	they	would	not
light	many	fires.

Although	in	many	places	the	interior	walls	were	ice-clad,	it	felt	hot	in	the
Black	Fort.	My	skin	burned	with	it,	life	creeping	back	into	my	hands	and	even
threatening	to	invade	my	fingers.



Arne	lit	a	small	lantern,	the	oil	carefully	hoarded	during	our	long	trip	for
just	this	purpose.	Perhaps	with	its	warmth	Fimm	would	not	have	died	in	the
night.	The	guard	had	carried	no	source	of	light,	knowing	his	path	through	the
dark.

At	each	door	we	paused	and	Snorri	tried	the	handle.	None	of	them	were
locked,	though	some	were	jammed	and	opening	them	quietly	tested	even
Snorri’s	strength.	The	first	two	proved	empty:	long,	narrow	chambers	with	no
hint	of	their	purpose	save	a	lack	of	fireplaces	that	told	us	they	had	never	been
intended	for	habitation.	A	third	chamber	stood	stacked	high	with	blocks	of	the
same	basalt	that	formed	the	walls	themselves.	Materials	for	repair.	A	fourth
had	been	used	as	a	latrine,	though	not	recently;	the	mounds	of	frozen	dung
gave	not	the	slightest	scent.

The	fifth	door	yielded	after	a	silent	struggle,	one	loud	scrape	echoing
along	the	corridor	as	it	gave.	We	held	still,	waiting	for	the	challenge,	but	none
came.	The	horror	of	my	situation	had	started	to	settle	on	me	as	my	body
began	to	recover.	I	grew	warm	enough	to	shiver	at	about	the	same	time	that	I
grew	scared	enough	to	shake.

“Hel.”	Snorri	drew	back	from	the	part-open	door,	his	face	thrown	into
eerie	relief	by	the	lantern	held	beneath	it.

“Is	it	safe?”	Tuttugu,	unwilling	to	lower	his	axe.
Snorri	nodded.	“Take	a	look.”	He	beckoned	me,	raising	the	lantern

overhead.
The	scene	reminded	me	of	Skilfar’s	lair.	Figures,	row	upon	row,	so	close

they	leaned	one	upon	the	next,	unable	to	fall.	Men,	shrouded	in	ice,	bearded
with	frost,	caught	in	every	pose	from	curled	in	sleep	to	contorted	in	agony,
but	most	just	head	down,	captured	in	that	plodding	motion	I	knew	so	well
from	the	past	few	days.

“Olaaf	Rikeson’s	men?”
“Must	be	.	.	.”	Snorri	pulled	the	door	closed.
The	next	five	halls	all	held	frozen	corpses,	all	warriors.	Hundreds	of	them

in	total.	Dead	for	centuries	but	ice-locked	against	the	years.	I	wondered	if
whatever	spirit	a	necromancer	might	return	to	them	would	be	all	the	darker
for	those	lifetimes	spent	with	the	devil.

The	quads	huddled	together	and	the	momentary	joy	we’d	all	known	at
escaping	the	wind	faded	swiftly	in	that	grim	place,	surrounded	on	all	sides	by
the	ancient	dead.

The	corridor	passed	two	sets	of	spiral	stairs,	coiling	up	and	down	in	their
narrow	shafts.	Snorri	passed	them	by.	This	section	seemed	more	often	used,
the	walls	free	of	ice,	grit	on	the	floor	to	make	for	surer	footing.

There	was	no	missing	or	mistaking	our	target.	The	air	grew	warm,	thick
with	the	smell	of	smoke	and	cooking,	something	meaty	stewing	in	a	pot	if	I
were	any	judge.	My	mouth	began	to	water	immediately.	Just	the	scent	of	that



hot	food	had	me	ready	to	kill	for	my	supper.	The	door	at	the	end	of	the
corridor	stood	taller	than	the	side	doors,	studded	with	black	iron,	muffled
sounds	emerging.

We	looked,	one	to	the	other,	preparing	to	organize	for	an	entry.	As	often
happens	in	life,	the	decision	was	taken	from	us.	A	heavyset	Viking	emerged
without	warning,	calling	some	insult	back	over	his	shoulder.

Arne’s	arm	flickered	and	the	hatchet	he’d	carried	so	long	at	his	hip	now
sprouted	from	the	dark	red	curls	of	the	man’s	beard.	It	didn’t	look	quite	real.
Snorri	and	the	others	surged	forwards	without	a	sound	save	for	boots	on
stone.	The	man	scrabbled	at	the	hatchet,	blood	pouring	down	his	neck,	and
fell	beneath	them.

I	found	myself	standing	with	only	Tuttugu	at	my	side.	He	gave	an
embarrassed	grin	and	jogged	off	after	the	others.	That	left	me	alone	in	a
corridor	with	frozen	dead	men	packed	into	all	the	rooms	to	either	side.	The
first	battle	cry	rang	out,	Snorri’s	roar	of	joyous	violence	as	the	others	barged
through	the	big	door	behind	him.	I	screwed	up	whatever	courage	I	could	find
and	set	off	after	Tuttugu,	sword	at	the	ready.

The	sight	beyond	the	door	proved	arresting.	So	arresting	that	even	with	all
his	momentum	Tuttugu	had	come	to	a	dead	halt	and	I	ran	into	his	back,
sandwiching	my	blade	between	us.	A	score	or	more	Red	Vikings	had	been
crowded	into	the	far	end	of	the	hall	before	the	large	fireplace.	Stone	tables	ran
nearly	the	length	of	the	hall,	and	I	could	only	think	this	was	where	Snorri	had
been	brought	and	hung	upon	the	wall.

The	Hardanger	men,	Red	Vikings	as	they’re	known,	hailed	from	a	tribe
darker	in	colouring	than	the	Undoreth,	more	red	heads	amongst	them,	more
dark-haired	men,	a	tough	breed,	broad	in	the	chest	and	blunt-featured.	They
weren’t	armoured	or	armed	for	war,	but	Norse	warriors	are	seldom	beyond
reach	of	their	axes	and	will	always	wear	a	knife	or	hatchet.

Snorri	had	leapt	onto	the	table	to	the	left	and	run	its	length,	taking	the
head	from	one	man	sitting	at	it,	close	to	the	door,	and	carving	a	furrow
through	the	face	of	another	sitting	on	the	opposite	side,	farther	along,	closer	to
the	fire.	He’d	dropped	amongst	the	crowd	by	the	hearth,	swinging	in	great	red
arcs.	Hardanger	men	scattered	away	into	the	length	of	the	hall,	grabbing	their
weapons,	putting	space	between	themselves	and	Snorri,	only	to	be	engaged	by
the	quads,	broadaxes	flashing	firelight	as	they	ploughed	flesh.

A	quad	went	down,	a	backhand	swing	by	a	black-haired	Viking	burying
an	axe	in	his	neck.	The	man	was	fearsomely	fast,	tall,	lean,	muscles	like	knots
in	rope	along	dirt-stained	arms.	Tuttugu	ran	forwards,	screaming	as	if	gripped
by	the	worst	kind	of	terror,	and	hammered	his	axe	into	the	black-haired	man’s
chest	before	he	could	wrench	his	own	axe	from	the	quad’s	vertebrae.	I	saw
Hardanger	men	hurrying	along	either	wall	of	the	hall,	weapons	drawn.	A	path
that	would	see	them	converge	on	the	doorway	where	I	stood.	In	response	I



chased	after	Tuttugu,	between	the	tables.	Sometimes	advance	is	the	best	form
of	retreat.	Inadvertently	I	kicked	the	severed	head	of	the	first	man	to	die	and
sent	it	rolling	away	towards	the	melee.

Crimson	arcs	decorated	the	far	end	of	the	hall.	The	fire	smoked	with
spattered	blood	and	a	hand	sizzled	there,	forearm	still	attached.	Men
staggered	back	from	Snorri’s	blizzard	of	sharp	iron,	some	with	gaping
wounds,	guts	vomiting	from	slits	running	groin	to	shoulder,	others	screaming,
blood	jetting	from	sliced	limbs	with	sufficient	pressure	to	stain	the	ceiling	five
yards	above	us.	Others	still	hurled	themselves	at	Snorri	and	the	Undoreth	with
deadly	intent,	axes	swinging.

The	noise	of	it,	the	stink,	the	colour.	The	room	revolved	around	me,	the
din	fading	in	and	out,	time	seeming	to	slow.	Tuttugu	hauled	his	narrow	axe
from	his	enemy’s	sternum.	I	heard	the	crack	of	bone,	saw	the	blood	gush,	the
man	fall	away,	arms	reaching,	face	dark	with	fury,	not	understanding	that	he’d
died.	A	big	red-haired	man	with	a	two-handed	sword	rushed	at	Tuttugu.
Behind	me	three	men	vaulted	the	tables,	two	from	the	left,	one	from	the	right,
eager	to	wet	their	blades.	The	door	to	the	left	of	the	great	fireplace	burst	open,
disgorging	more	Vikings,	the	first	with	an	iron	helm,	studded	all	over,	a
crosspiece	noseguard	beneath.	The	man	behind	him	raised	a	wide	round
shield,	a	spike	on	its	central	boss.	More	men	crowded	behind.

A	spear	sprung	from	a	quad’s	chest	as	he	rushed	the	doorway.	The	force
of	it	took	him	backwards,	white	hair	flying.	Blood	sprayed	across	me	from
closer	at	hand,	filling	my	eyes,	filling	my	mouth	with	salt	and	copper.	I	heard
screaming	and	knew	it	was	mine.	The	Red	Vikings	closed	on	me	from	both
sides	and	I	watched	them	from	behind	a	crimson	veil.	My	sword	flickered	out
—

	•	•	•	

“Jal?”	Faint	beneath	the	pounding	in	my	ears,	the	thunder	in	my	chest,	the
harshness	of	each	drawn	breath.	“Jal?”

I	could	see	the	flagstones,	awash	with	blood,	black	points	of	my	fringe
hanging	before	my	eyes,	dripping.

“Jal?”	Snorri’s	voice.
I	was	standing.	My	hand	still	held	my	sword.	A	table	to	either	side.

Corpses	leaking—some	under	the	tables,	some	sprawled	across	them.
“Jal?”	Tuttugu,	nervous.
“Is	he	safe?”	A	twin.	Or	perhaps	just	Ein	now.
I	looked	up.	Three	Undoreth	watched	me	at	a	safe	distance,	Snorri

glancing	towards	the	doorway	through	which	the	reinforcements	had	come.
“Baresarker!”	Ein	smacked	his	fist	to	his	chest.
Snorri	spared	me	a	grin.	“I’m	starting	to	understand	the	hero	and	devil	of



Aral	Pass!”	His	sealskins	were	ripped	wide	across	his	hip,	exposing	an	ugly
wound.	Another	deep	cut	on	the	muscle	mounded	around	the	join	of	shoulder
and	neck	bled	copiously.

My	free	hand	started	to	shake	uncontrollably.	I	looked	around	the	room.
The	dead	lay	strewn.	Around	the	hearth	they	lay	in	heaps.	Arne	sat	on	the
table	behind	me,	deathly	pale,	his	cheek	ripped	so	badly	I	could	see	through
to	the	rotten	teeth,	half	of	them	smashed	out	of	his	jawbone.	The	spreading
pool	of	crimson	around	him	told	me	that	dentistry	was	the	last	of	his	worries.
A	wound	to	his	thigh	had	cut	the	artery	deep	in	the	meat	of	him.

“Jal.”	Arne	offered	me	a	broken	grin,	his	words	blurred	by	the	face
wound.	He	slumped	down,	almost	graceful.	“It	was	a	great	shot,	though,
wasn’t	it	.	.	.	Jal?”

“I—”	My	voice	cracked.	“A	great	shot,	Arne.	The	best.”	But	the	Dead-
Eye	was	past	hearing.	Past	everything	now.

“Snorri	ver	Snagason!”	A	roar	issuing	from	the	doorway	beyond	the
hearth.

“Sven	Broke-Oar!”	Snorri	shouted	in	return.	He	hefted	his	axe	and
approached	the	fire.	“You	must	have	known	I’d	be	back.	For	my	wife,	my
boy,	my	vengeance.	Why	would	you	even	sell	me?”

“Oh,	I	knew.”	The	Broke-Oar	even	sounded	pleased	about	it,	which,	now
that	the	strange	sense	of	dissociation	was	fading,	brought	all	my	fears	back
from	whatever	corners	of	my	mind	the	battle	madness	had	driven	them	into.
“It	was	hardly	fair	to	rob	you	of	your	fight	now,	was	it?	And	we	of	the
Hardanger	do	love	our	gold.	And	of	course	my	new	masters	have	expenses.
The	elixir	they	need	for	the	dead	in	these	cold	climes	requires	oils	from
Araby,	and	those	are	hard	to	find.	A	man	must	trade	good	coin	for	such
exotics.”

Even	dazed	I	recognized	the	taunt.	Telling	Snorri	he’d	financed	this
horror	with	his	own	flesh	and	failure.	Whatever	was	said	of	the	Broke-Oar,
none	called	him	stupid.

Ein,	Tuttugu,	and	I	went	to	stand	at	Snorri’s	side.	Another	chamber	lay
beyond	the	doorway,	most	of	it	out	of	our	line	of	sight.	A	Red	Viking	lay	half
in	one	room,	half	in	the	other,	his	head	split	wide.	Ein	tugged	the	spear	from
his	brother—Thrir	if	the	order	had	held	true.

“There’s	more	to	it	than	that,	Broke-Oar.	You	could	have	killed	me	and
still	had	nine-tenths	and	more	of	your	blood	gold.”	Snorri	paused	as	if
struggling	to	voice	his	question.	“Where’s	my	wife?	My	boy?	If	you’ve
harmed—”	He	snapped	his	jaw	shut	on	the	words,	the	muscles	in	his	cheeks
working.

Tuttugu	hastened	to	bind	Snorri’s	side	with	strips	from	a	cloak,	Ein
holding	Snorri	back	as	the	warrior	made	to	advance.	Snorri	relented	and	let
them—the	shoulder	wound	would	bleed	the	strength	from	him	soon	if	not



staunched.
“There’s	more	to	it	than	that,”	Snorri	repeated.
“It’s	true,	Snorri.”	A	touch	of	sadness	in	the	Broke-Oar’s	voice.	Despite

his	reputation	the	man	sounded	.	.	.	regal,	a	king	declaiming	from	his	throne.
Sven	Broke-Oar	had	the	voice	of	a	hero	and	a	sage,	and	he	wound	it	around
us	like	a	spell.	“I’ve	fallen.	You	know	it.	I	know	it.	I	bent	in	the	wind.	But
Snorri?	Snorri	ver	Snagason	still	stands	tall,	pure	as	autumn	snow,	as	if	he
stepped	from	the	sagas	to	save	us	all.	And	whatever	else	I	might	be,	Snorri,	I
am	a	Viking	first.	The	sagas	must	be	told,	the	hero	must	have	his	chance	to
stand	against	the	long	winter.	Vikings	we—born	to	hold	against	trolls,	frost
giants,	even	the	sea.	Even	the	gods	themselves.

“Come,	Snorri.	Let’s	make	an	end	of	this.	Just	you	and	me.	Let	your
friends	bear	witness.	I	stand	ready.”

Snorri	started	forwards.
“No!”	I	grabbed	hold	of	his	arm	and	heaved	back	with	whatever	strength	I

had	left.	The	curse	flared	between	us,	the	resulting	blast	shredding	his	sleeve
and	throwing	me	back	across	the	table,	afterimages	of	ink	and	sunlight
overwriting	my	vision.	The	scent	of	burned	air	filled	my	nostrils,	a	sharp
astringency	that	took	me	back	to	that	street	in	Vermillion,	running	as	if	all
Satan’s	devils	were	at	my	heels,	the	cobbles	cracking	open	behind	me.

“What	in	Hel?”	Snorri	spun	in	my	direction.
“I	know—”	Only	a	whisper	came.	I	coughed	and	spoke	again.	“I	know

bastards.”
Ein	bent	and	picked	up	the	discarded	shield.	Tuttugu	took	another	two

from	a	display	on	the	wall.
“These	are	your	last	moments,	Broke-Oar!”	Snorri	shouted,	and,	bearing

the	shields	high	and	low,	Tuttugu	and	Ein	stepped	towards	the	doorway.
Crossbow	bolts	hammered	into	the	shields	in	the	instant	Snorri’s

guardians	crossed	the	archers’	line	of	sight.	Snorri	unleashed	a	wordless	roar
and,	pushing	between	his	companions,	launched	himself	into	the	next	room.

I	followed,	still	a	touch	dazed.	If	I’d	had	my	wits	about	me	I	would	have
sat	down	with	Arne	and	played	dead.

Sven	Broke-Oar	stood	at	the	far	side	of	a	chamber	smaller	than	the	one
we’d	come	from,	dwarfing	the	three	crossbow-men	beside	him.	I	won’t	say	he
made	Snorri	look	small,	but	he	sure	as	hell	stopped	him	looking	biggest.	The
man’s	mother	must	have	slept	with	trolls.	Handsome	trolls,	though.	With	his
great	red-gold	beard	plaited	across	his	chest	and	his	hair	flowing	free,	the
Broke-Oar	looked	every	inch	a	Viking	king,	down	to	the	gold	chasing	at	the
edges	of	the	scarred	iron	breastplate	he	had	on.	He	held	a	fine	axe	in	one
hand,	the	iron	buckler	on	his	other	about	the	size	of	a	dinner	plate,	smooth
and	thick.

Ein	veered	towards	the	two	men	on	the	left;	Tuttugu	charged	the	one	to



the	right.	Sven	Broke-Oar	advanced	to	meet	Snorri.
There’s	not	much	you	can	do	about	an	axe	swinging	your	way	with	a

man’s	strength	behind	it.	Killing	the	axe’s	owner	before	he	completes	his
blow	is	your	best	option.	With	a	sword	you	can	impale	your	foe.	But	if	like
your	foe	you’re	armed	with	an	axe,	then	“swing	faster	and	hope”	seems	to	be
the	best	advice	on	offer.	And	of	course	to	swing	at	your	man	you	need	to	be	a
certain	distance	off—exactly	the	same	distance	he	needs	you	to	be	at	in	order
to	swing	at	you.

Snorri	had	a	different	solution.	He	reached	out	before	him,	axe	extended,
running	faster	than	is	possible	for	any	man	building	for	a	swing.	The	turn	of
speed	spoiled	the	Broke-Oar’s	timing,	his	cutting	edge	arriving	a	split	second
too	late,	the	haft	of	his	axe	just	below	the	blade	hammered	into	Snorri’s	raised
shoulder,	while	Snorri’s	axe	smashed	into	the	Broke-Oar’s	neck,	not	with	the
cutting	edge	but	bracketing	the	man’s	throat	with	the	horns	of	the	blade.

That	should	have	been	an	end	to	it.	A	narrow	piece	of	metal	driven
against	a	throat	by	a	powerful	man.	Somehow,	though,	the	Broke-Oar
slammed	his	buckler	into	the	side	of	Snorri’s	head	and	fell	back,	clasping	his
neck.	Both	men	should	have	been	down,	but	instead	they	reeled,	unsteady	on
their	feet,	then	came	together	like	bears,	grappling.

Ein	had	killed	one	of	his	two	opponents	and	now	wrestled	the	second,
both	men	clutching	knives,	trying	to	drive	them	into	each	other’s	faces	whilst
stopping	the	other	man	doing	the	same.	Tuttugu	had	killed	his	foe,	but	the
Red	Viking	had	loosed	his	dagger	before	Tuttugu	split	his	head.	I	couldn’t	see
how	bad	the	wound	was,	but	the	speed	with	which	the	blood	spilled	over	the
fat	man’s	hands	where	he	clutched	his	belly	said	it	couldn’t	be	good.

The	two	giants	stood,	fingers	interlocked,	straining	one	against	the	other.
Purple	in	the	face	and	spraying	crimson	with	each	explosive	exhalation,	the
Broke-Oar	forced	Snorri	down,	inch	by	inch.	Muscle	heaped,	veins	bulged	fit
to	burst,	both	men	groaned	and	laboured	for	breath.	It	seemed	bones	must
give—that	in	a	sudden	snap	the	immense	forces	would	shatter	limbs—but	all
that	happened	was	that	by	degrees,	pumping	blood	past	the	bindings	on
shoulder	and	side,	Snorri	gave,	until	with	a	swift	release	he	was	on	his	knees,
the	Broke-Oar	still	pressing	down	upon	him.

Tuttugu	took	one	dripping	hand	from	his	belly	and	bent	with	agonizing
slowness	to	retrieve	his	axe.	The	Broke-Oar,	without	even	seeming	to	have
looked,	kicked	behind	him	and	broke	the	Undoreth’s	knee,	sending	Tuttugu
sprawling	with	a	scream	of	pain.	Snorri	tried	to	surge	up	and	got	a	leg	beneath
him,	but	with	a	roar	the	Broke-Oar	drove	him	back	down.

Ein	and	the	Hardanger	man	were	still	rolling	on	the	floor,	both	cut	now.	I
looked	at	my	sword,	already	scarlet	from	tip	to	pommel.	That’s	Snorri	there.	I
had	to	say	it	to	myself.	Companion	through	innumerable	miles,	through
weeks	of	hardship,	dangers	.	.	.	The	Broke-Oar	pressed	him	lower,	both	men



howling	animal	threats.	A	sudden	twist	and	Sven	Broke-Oar	had	Snorri’s
throat	in	his	huge	right	paw,	their	other	hands	still	locked,	Snorri’s
unburdened	hand	trying	to	tear	the	fingers	from	his	neck.

The	Broke-Oar	was	exposed.	Head	bowed.	“Christ,	Jalan,	just	do	it!”	I
had	to	shout	the	words	at	myself.	And,	reluctant	at	first,	picking	up	speed,	I
ran	towards	them,	sword	overhead.	I’d	not	wanted	to	hit	the	man	in	the	tower,
not	even	with	an	arrow	from	a	hundred	yards	off.	Sven	Broke-Oar	I	wanted	to
die,	right	then,	right	there,	and	if	it	had	to	be	me	to	do	it	.	.	.

I	brought	both	arms	down,	scything	my	blade	through	the	air,	and
somehow	in	that	instant	the	Broke-Oar	tore	his	off	hand	from	Snorri’s	grasp
and	interposed	his	buckler.	The	shock	of	it	rang	through	my	sword	as	if	I’d	hit
stone,	shaking	it	from	my	grip.	One	swift	lunge,	pushing	Snorri	over
backwards	with	the	hand	still	locked	to	his	throat,	and	the	giant	punched	me
just	below	the	heart,	a	combined	impact	of	broad	knuckles	and	the	edge	of	his
buckler.	The	breath	left	me	in	a	wordless	whoosh,	ribs	snapped,	and	I	fell	as	if
hamstrung.

From	the	floor	I	saw	the	Broke-Oar	flick	off	the	buckler	and	lock	his
second	hand	around	Snorri’s	throat.	I	managed	to	draw	the	breath	that	Snorri
couldn’t.	The	air	wheezed	into	me	like	acid	poured	into	my	lungs,	ribs	grating
around	their	fractures.

Sven	Broke-Oar	started	to	shake	Snorri,	slowly	at	first,	then	more	fiercely
as	the	younger	man’s	face	darkened	with	the	strangulation.	“You	should	have
stayed	gone,	Snagason.	The	North	has	nothing	else	like	me.	It	takes	more	than
a	boy	to	bring	me	down.”

I	could	see	the	life	leaving	Snorri,	arms	falling	away	limp,	and	still	all	I
could	manage	was	the	next	breath.	Ein	had	fallen	away	from	his	enemy,	both
of	them	lying	spent.	Tuttugu	lay	in	a	spreading	pool	of	his	own	blood,
watching	but	beyond	helping.

“Time	to	die,	Snorri.”	And	the	muscles	bunched	in	the	Broke-Oar’s
forearms,	tightening	a	grip	that	could	snap	an	oar.

Somewhere,	unseen,	the	sun	set.
Snorri	lifted	his	arms.	His	hands	closed	on	Sven	Broke-Oar’s	wrists,	and

where	they	touched	the	Hardanger	man’s	flesh	it	turned	black.	A	snarl	twisted
the	Broke-Oar’s	lips	as	Snorri	raised	his	head	and	pulled	the	fingers	from	his
neck.	A	sudden,	vicious	downward	yank	and	both	the	Broke-Oar’s	forearms
snapped,	the	bone	jutting	from	crimson	gore.	A	backhanded	blow	and	he	fell,
sprawling	beside	Tuttugu.

“You?”	Snorri’s	voice	blending	with	Aslaug’s	as	he	stood.	“It’s	me	the
North	should	walk	in	fear	of.”	He	held	the	discarded	buckler	now,	nothing	but
darkness	in	his	eyes.

“Better.”	From	his	place	on	the	ground	Sven	Broke-Oar	managed	a	laugh.
“Better.	You	might	even	stand	a	chance.	Make	a	ruin	of	them,	Snorri,	send



them	howling	back	to	Hel!”
Snorri	knelt	beside	Sven	Broke-Oar,	leaning	in.
“They	put	a	fear	in	me,	Snorri,	gods	damn	them.	Gods	damn	them	all.”
“Where’s	Freja?”	Snorri	took	Broke-Oar	around	the	neck,	pounding	his

head	against	the	floor.	“My	son?	Where	is	he?”	Each	question	roared	into	the
man’s	face.

“You	know!”	Broke-Oar	spat	out	a	bloody	answer.
“You’ll	tell	me!”	Snorri	set	his	thumbs	against	the	Broke-Oar’s	eyes.
I	fainted	at	that	point,	just	as	Snorri	started	to	press	and	Broke-Oar	let	out

a	scream	that	was	half	laughter.
Those	dark	and	insensible	moments	were	the	only	period	of	comfort	I	had

in	that	black	fort.	Washed	away	too	soon	by	the	passage	of	what	could	only
have	been	seconds.

“Time	to	die,	Broke-Oar.”	Snorri	bent	low	over	the	fallen	giant,	hands
crimson.

A	wet	red	splutter,	then,	“Burn	the	dead—”
Sven	Broke-Oar	had	time	for	no	more.	Snorri	crushed	his	skull	with	a

sharp	blow	of	the	heavy	buckler.
“Snorri.”	I	couldn’t	manage	above	a	whisper,	but	he	looked	up,	the

darkness	fading	from	his	eyes,	leaving	them	clear	and	ice-blue.
“Jal!”	Despite	his	wounds	he	was	at	my	side	in	a	moment,	seizing	the

hood	of	my	winter	coat,	deaf	to	my	protests.	For	one	moment	I	thought	he
was	going	to	help	me,	but	instead	he	dragged	me	across	to	lie	beside	Ein.

The	Red	Viking	next	to	Ein	looked	dead	enough,	but	Snorri	took	the	knife
from	the	man’s	hand	and	cut	his	throat	with	it	just	to	be	sure.	“Alive?”	He
turned	to	Ein	and	slapped	him.	Ein	groaned	and	opened	his	eyes.	“Good.
What	can	you	do	for	him,	Jal?”

“Me?”	I	lifted	an	arm.	I	don’t	know	why—perhaps	to	ward	off	the
suggestion—and	found	that	I’d	been	stabbed,	high	in	the	bicep.	“Hell!”
Rolling	over	was	an	agony,	but	it	let	me	confirm	another	flash	of	memory
from	the	red	haze	of	my	battle—I’d	been	cut	on	the	thigh	too.	“I’m	worse
than	Ein	is.”	With	the	injuries	I’d	taken	without	knowing	or	remembering
them,	it	was	almost	true.	But	Ein	had	a	stab	wound	in	his	chest.	One	that
bubbled	and	sucked	with	each	breath	out	and	in.	The	killing	kind.

“He’s	worse,	Jal.	And	you	can’t	heal	yourself.	We	know	that.”
“I	can’t	heal	anyone	without	half-dying	myself.	It’d	kill	me.”	Though

dying	would	at	least	stop	each	breath	being	a	torture.	My	side	had	been	filled
with	broken	glass,	I	was	sure	of	it.

“The	magic	is	stronger	here,	Jal;	you	must	feel	it	trying	to	break	out?	I
can	almost	see	it	glowing	in	you.”	An	edge	of	pleading	in	his	voice.	Not	for
himself,	never	that,	but	for	the	last	of	his	countrymen.

“Jesus!	You	people	will	be	the	death	of	me.”	And	I	slapped	my	palm	to



Ein’s	stab	wound—harder	than	necessary.
In	an	instant	my	hand	flared,	too	bright	to	look	at,	and	every	ache	I	had

became	an	agony,	my	ribs	something	beyond	comprehension.	I	snatched	my
hand	back	almost	immediately,	panting	and	cursing,	blood	and	drool	dripping
from	my	mouth.

“Good.	Now	Tuttugu!”	And	I	felt	myself	dragged.	I	watched	through	one
eye	as	Ein	struggled	to	sit	up,	poking	at	the	unbroken	but	bloodstained	skin
where	the	knife	had	slid	beneath	his	ribs.

Snorri	set	me	beside	Tuttugu	and	we	met	each	other’s	gaze,	both	of	us	too
weak	for	talking.	The	Viking,	who	had	been	pale	to	start	with,	now	lay	as
white	as	frost.	Snorri	pulled	Tuttugu	around,	moving	him	without	effort
despite	his	girth.	He	tugged	Tuttugu’s	hand	clear	of	the	stomach	wound	and
drew	in	an	involuntary	breath.

“It’s	bad.	You’ve	got	to	heal	this,	Jal.	The	rest	can	wait,	but	this	will	sour.
The	guts	are	cut	inside.”

“I	can’t	do	it.”	I’d	more	easily	stab	a	knife	through	my	hand	or	put	a	hot
coal	in	my	mouth.	“You	don’t	understand	.	.	.”

“He’ll	die!	I	know	Arne	was	too	far	gone,	but	this,	this	is	a	slow	death—
you	can	stop	it.”	Snorri	kept	talking.	It	washed	over	me.	Tuttugu	said	nothing,
only	watched	me	as	I	watched	him,	both	of	us	lying	on	the	cold	stone	floor,
too	weak	to	move.	I	remembered	him	on	the	mountainside	overlooking
Trond,	telling	me	he	would	run	from	every	battle	if	only	his	legs	were	longer.
A	kindred	soul,	almost	as	deep	in	his	fears	as	me,	but	he’d	gone	to	war	in	the
Black	Fort	even	so.

“Shut	up,”	I	told	Snorri.	And	he	did.
Ein	came	to	join	him,	moving	with	an	old	man’s	care.
“I	can’t	do	it.	I	really	can’t.”	I	pointed	my	gaze	towards	my	free	hand.	The

other	still	clutched	my	sword	for	some	reason;	it	was	probably	glued	on	by	all
the	gore.	“I	can’t	do	it.	But	no	man	should	go	to	Valhalla	with	brothel	rash.”
Again,	pointing	with	my	gaze.

Finally	Ein	took	the	hint.	I	screwed	both	eyes	shut,	gritted	my	teeth,
clenched	what	could	be	clenched,	and	he	grabbed	my	forearm,	setting	my
hand	against	the	rip	in	Tuttugu’s	belly.

It	made	healing	Ein	seem	like	a	simple	thing.



TWENTY-EIGHT

Iwoke	before	the	heat	of	a	fire.	My	side	ached	like	a	bastard,	but	the	heat	felt
wonderful	and	if	I	didn’t	move	a	single	muscle	it	was	almost	comfortable.
Gradually	other	hurts	made	themselves	known.	A	throbbing	pain	in	my

thigh,	a	stabbing	pain	in	my	arm,	a	generalized	wretchedness	from	all	the
muscles	I	could	name	and	many	I	couldn’t.

I	opened	an	eye.	“Where’s	Snorri?”
They’d	laid	me	out	on	one	of	the	long	tables	at	the	end	closest	to	the

hearth.	Ein	and	Tuttugu	sat	before	the	fire,	Tuttugu	binding	a	splint	about	his
knee,	Ein	sharpening	his	axe.	Both	had	cleaned	and	stitched	their	wounds,	or
had	the	other	do	it.

“Burning	the	dead.”	Tuttugu	pointed	towards	the	far	door.	“He’s	building
a	pyre	on	the	wall.”

I	tried	to	sit	up	and	lay	back	cursing.	“There’s	not	enough	wood,	surely?
Why	not	leave	them	to	freeze?”

“He	found	the	wood	store,	and	he’s	been	knocking	doors	off	hinges,
ripping	down	shutters.”

“But	why?”	I	asked,	not	sure	I	wanted	an	answer.
“Because	of	what	will	be	coming	from	the	Bitter	Ice,”	Ein	said.	“He

doesn’t	want	the	bodies	raised	against	us.”	He	didn’t	say	that	his	last	three
brothers	lay	amongst	them,	but	something	in	his	face	told	it	anyway.

“If	they’re	frozen	they	won’t	be	able	to	.	.	.”	I	tried	to	sit	again.	Sitting	is
an	important	precursor	to	running	away.

“Might	not	freeze	in	time,”	Tuttugu	said.
“And	Snorri	doesn’t	want	anything	left	to	be	defiled	after	.	.	.”	Ein	set	his

whetstone	down	and	admired	his	edge	in	the	firelight.
Between	them	the	two	men	I’d	saved	had	managed	to	make	my	blood	run

cold.	That	“in	time”	and	that	“after”	were	not	encouraging.	A	corpse	would
freeze	solid	overnight.

“We’re	expecting	.	.	.	trouble	.	.	.	before	morning?”	I	tried	to	make	it	not
sound	like	whining,	and	failed.

“No	‘we’	about	it.	It’s	what	Snorri	says.	He	says	they’re	coming.”	Tuttugu
tightened	the	bindings	about	his	knee	and	whimpered	in	pain.



“How	does	he	know?”	I	made	a	third	attempt	to	sit,	galvanized	by	fear,
and	succeeded,	ribs	grating.

“Snorri	says	the	dark	told	him.”	Ein	set	his	axe	down	and	looked	my	way.
“And	if	he	doesn’t	end	this	in	the	dark,	then	you’ll	have	to	do	it	in	the	light.”

“This—”	I	eased	down	from	the	table	and	the	pain	cut	me	off.	“This	is
madness.	He	finds	his	wife	and	child,	and	then	we	go!”	I	left	off	the	“finds
them	dead	or	alive”	part.	“Broke-Oar	is	dead—it’s	done.”

Without	waiting	to	be	contradicted,	I	hobbled	off	towards	the	far	door.
The	blood	smears,	drying	to	black	and	deepest	scarlet	now,	showed	the	way.
Where	Snorri	found	the	energy	to	drag	approaching	thirty	corpses	out	along
that	corridor	and	onto	the	fort	wall	I	didn’t	know,	but	I	did	know	that	he
would	have	neither	the	fuel,	stamina,	nor	time	to	add	the	frozen	dead	of	Olaaf
Rikeson’s	army	to	his	pyre.

The	stairs	up	to	the	outer	door	were	slippery	with	blood,	already	freezing
where	it	had	dripped	from	one	step	to	the	next.	Opening	the	door,	I	found	the
night	lit	with	a	vast	blaze,	the	wind	trailing	orange	flame	out	over	the
battlements.	Even	with	all	that	heat	not	twenty	yards	off,	the	cold	bit	me
immediately,	the	alien	cold	of	a	landscape	that	held	in	it	nothing	for	men	or
for	any	other	living	thing.

Snorri	stood	silhouetted	against	the	inferno.	I	could	see	corpses	and
timbers,	some	black	against	the	hot	glow,	others	melting	into	it.	Even	the
wind’s	strength	couldn’t	keep	the	scent	of	roasting	flesh	from	my	nostrils.	The
walkway	ran	with	hot	fats,	burning	even	as	they	spilled	down	the	inner	wall.

“It’s	done,	then?”	I	had	to	raise	my	voice	above	the	crackle	of	the	fire	and
the	wind’s	discontent.

“They’re	coming,	Jal.	The	dead	men	from	the	Bitter	Ice,	the
necromancers	who	herd	them,	Edris	and	the	rest	of	the	Broke-Oar’s
following.”	He	paused.	“The	unborn.”

“What	the	hell	are	you	doing	out	here,	then?”	I	shouted.	“Search	for	your
wife	and	let’s	be	gone.”	I	ignored	the	fact	that	I	could	barely	walk	the	length
of	the	corridor	and	that	if	his	child	were	here	we	couldn’t	march	across	the
Uplands	with	him.	Such	truths	were	too	uncomfortable.	Besides,	the	woman
and	boy	were	probably	dead,	and	I	would	rather	die	trying	to	cross	the	ice
than	facing	necromancers	and	their	horrors.

Snorri	turned	away	from	the	fire,	eyes	red	with	smoke.	“Let’s	go	in.	I’ve
spoken	the	words.	The	flames	will	carry	them	to	Valhalla.”

“Well,	not	Broke-Oar	and	his	bastards,”	I	said.
“Even	them.”	Snorri	glanced	back	at	the	blaze,	a	half-smile	twisting	his

split	lip.	“They	died	in	battle,	Jal.	That’s	all	it	takes.	When	we	arm	against	the
jotün	and	the	jotnär	at	Ragnarok,	all	men	with	fire	in	their	blood	will	stand
together.”

We	walked	in	side	by	side,	Snorri	matching	my	snail’s	pace	as	I	hobbled



down	the	stairs,	mis-stepping	once	and	uttering	every	foul	word	I	knew	until	I
reached	the	bottom.	“We	can’t	stay	here,	Snorri.”

“It’s	a	fortress.	Where	better	to	stay	when	your	enemies	march?”
He	had	me	there.
“How	long	was	I	out?	How	much	time	is	left?”
“It’s	two	hours	until	dawn.	They’ll	be	here	before	that.”
“What	will	we	do?”	Sven	Broke-Oar	had	been	bad	enough.	I	had	no

desire	to	wait	to	see	whatever	it	was	that	had	terrified	a	monster	like	him.
“Barricade	ourselves	in	the	gatehouse.	Wait.”
As	much	as	I	liked	the	idea	of	defence,	it	didn’t	sound	like	Snorri.	His

very	name	meant	“attack.”	To	hold	back	sounded	like	an	admission	of	defeat.
But	the	man	was	all	done	in.	I	could	see	that.	I	could	no	more	heal	his	wounds
than	I	could	my	own.	Just	walking	beside	him	set	the	air	crackling	with
uncomfortable	energies.	Even	with	a	yard	between	us,	my	skin	crawled	as	if
somewhere	in	the	marrow	of	my	bones,	that	crack,	the	one	the	Silent	Sister’s
magic	had	fractured	into	the	world—between	worlds—as	if	that	crack	were
seeking	to	break	out.	It	wanted	to	run	through	me	and	join	its	dark	twin	as	it
broke	from	Snorri,	to	join	together	and	race	towards	the	horizon,	splitting	and
splitting	again	until	the	world	lay	shattered.

	•	•	•	

The	gatehouse	held	several	chambers,	the	foremost	of	which	offered	views
down	over	the	gate	should	a	man	be	motivated	to	crack	open	the	shutters

and	lean	out.	In	addition	three	covered	murder-holes	would	allow	the	pouring
of	whatever	unpleasant	liquid	one	might	wish	to	flush	upon	the	heads	of	any
standing	at	the	great	doors.	This	close	to	the	Bitter	Ice,	just	pouring	water
onto	unwelcome	guests	would	be	fatal	for	most.	The	room	held	a	fireplace
with	wood	stacked	to	either	side	and	two	copper	buckets	filled	with	coal.
Tuttugu	and	Ein	set	to	lighting	a	fire,	both	of	them	moving	awkwardly	as	their
injuries	had	stiffened.	Tuttugu	had	fashioned	a	crutch	from	a	spear,	pieces	of
furniture,	and	a	wadded	cloak,	but	it	was	clear	he	could	cover	no	great
distance	on	it.	Our	serious	fighting	force	consisted	of	Snorri	and	Ein,	both
much	diminished	by	their	injuries.	Tuttugu	and	I	together	could	have	been
defeated	by	a	single	determined	twelve-year-old	armed	with	a	stick.

The	doors	and	shutters	were	all	of	heavy	construction,	iron	bolts	oiled	and
locked	in	place.

“They’ll	come	over	the	walls,”	I	said.
“The	dead	won’t.”	Snorri	swung	his	arms	to	loosen	them.	He	had	Sven

Broke-Oar’s	axe	now,	or	rather	I	suspected	he	had	reclaimed	his	father’s	axe
from	the	man.

“Then	the	Hardanger	men	will.”	Edris	would	be	with	them.	I	couldn’t	say



why	he	frightened	me	more	than	the	Vikings,	but	he	did.
“I	doubt	they	have	grapples,	probably	not	even	rope.	But	maybe.”	Snorri

shrugged.	“We	can’t	patrol	the	walls	of	this	fort	with	two	men.	They	would
just	try	in	three	places	at	once.	They’ll	get	in	or	they	won’t.	Either	way	they
will	be	cold.	We’ll	keep	watch	from	the	gatehouse	roof	and	decide	what	to	do
when	it	needs	to	be	done.”

“But	it’s	dark.”
“If	they	come	in	the	night,	Jal,	they’ll	carry	lights,	now	won’t	they?	The

ones	that	can	climb	need	to	see.	I	don’t	know	what	the	dead	see,	or	if	they
need	it	to	be	light,	but	the	dead	I	saw	in	Eight	Quays	were	like	the	dead	on	the
mountain	by	Chamy-Nix.	They	won’t	be	scaling	walls.”

“And	the	unborn?”
“Let	those	come.”	He	made	a	sudden	lunging	strike	at	the	air	with	his	axe.

	•	•	•	

It	fell	to	Tuttugu	and	me	to	keep	watch,	one	taking	a	turn	after	the	other.	Itmade	no	sense	for	either	man	who	could	still	fight	to	freeze	his	arse	off	on
the	roof.	Tuttugu	took	the	first	hour.	I	could	only	guess	what	it	cost	him	to
climb	the	stairs	with	his	shattered	knee.	I	found	him	huddled	in	his	furs,	blue
with	cold	and	semiconscious	when	I	hobbled	up	the	long	spiral	of	steps	to
relieve	him	an	hour	later.	Ein	had	to	come	up	to	help	his	friend	down	again.

I	stood	my	turn,	there	in	the	dark	with	the	wind	howling	all	about	and
nothing	to	see	but	the	glow	of	the	bone-fire	by	the	east	tower.	I’d	been	warm
for	only	a	few	hours,	but	already	the	bitter	chill	outside	came	as	a	shock.	I
found	it	hard	to	imagine	we	had	endured	it	day	after	day.

In	the	dark,	as	I	made	a	slow	tour	of	the	guard	wall,	my	mind	played
tricks:	voices	on	the	wind,	colours	in	the	night,	faces	from	my	past	come	to
visit.	I	imagined	the	Silent	Sister,	here	on	the	ice,	her	tatters	flying	in	the	wind
as	she	made	her	circuit	of	the	Black	Fort,	painting	out	her	curse	across	its
walls	as	she	went.	She	should	be	here,	that	old	woman.	She’d	brought	us	to
this,	somehow,	in	some	way	I	couldn’t	quite	fathom.	It	was	her	fault.	I’d
called	her	evil,	the	blind-eye	woman,	a	witch	burning	people	in	their	homes.
And	yet	it	seemed	perhaps	that	on	each	occasion	it	had	been	an	unborn	or
some	other	minion	of	the	Dead	King	that	had	been	her	true	target.	The	people
had	just	been	in	the	way.	Or	bait,	perhaps.

As	a	prince	I’d	been	taught	that	good	opposes	evil.	I’d	been	shown	the
good,	shining	in	chivalric	honour,	and	the	evil	hunched	about	its	wrongness,
crowned	with	horns.	And	always	I	wondered	where	I	fitted	into	this	grand
scheme,	little	Jalan	built	of	petty	wants	and	empty	lusts,	nothing	so	grand	as
evil,	nothing	closer	to	good	than	imitation.	And	now	it	seemed	that	the	blind-
eye	woman	of	my	childhood	terrors	was	in	fact	a	great-aunt	of	mine.	Indeed,



if	Great-Uncle	Garyus	was	the	true	king,	then	surely	the	Silent	Sister,	older
than	my	grandmother,	was	his	heir?

I	knuckled	my	eyes	through	the	stiff	leather	of	my	face	guard,	trying	to
knead	the	tiredness	from	them,	perhaps	the	confusion	too.	I	blinked	to	clear
my	blurred	vision.	Embers	from	the	bone-fire	danced	on	the	wind,	out	against
the	blackness	of	the	ice	plain.	Despite	the	wind,	they	hung	there.	Another
blink,	and	another,	wouldn’t	clear	them.

“Ah,	hell.”	Through	numb	lips.
Lanterns.
They	were	coming.



TWENTY-NINE

Snorri	watched	the	advance	through	a	crack	he’d	opened	in	the	shutters.	I
felt	the	wind’s	knife	even	at	my	place	by	the	fire.
“They’re	coming	to	the	front	gate.”
“How	many?”	I	asked.
“Two	dozen,	a	few	more	perhaps.”
I	had	been	expecting	an	army,	but	it	made	sense	that	there	were	so	few.

Supporting	any	significant	numbers	out	here	on	the	edge	of	survival	would	be
a	huge	undertaking,	and	pointless	if	there	were	dead	men	to	do	the	bulk	of	the
labour.	But	that	made	me	wonder	once	again	about	the	captives.	They	had
sold	the	men	south.	I’d	not	given	it	much	thought	before,	but	surely	if	they
wanted	captives	for	digging	in	the	ice	then	.	.	.	It	made	no	sense	at	all—they
would	have	killed	any	captives	they	kept	and	let	them	serve	the	same	purpose
in	death,	tireless	and	requiring	no	sustenance.

“There	are	no	captives!”	I	spoke	it	aloud—not	a	whisper,	not	a	shout,	just
a	statement.

“About	fifty	dead	ranked	behind	those	.	.	.	at	least	that’s	all	I	can	see	in
their	lights,	but	it’s	a	tight-packed	group.”	Snorri	continued	his	report.	“There
may	be	necromancers	and	Island	men	amongst	them—I	can’t	tell.”

“What—”	I	couldn’t	find	the	right	words.	“Why—”	If	there	were	no
captives	.	.	.	where	were	Freja	and	little	Egil?

“Men	coming	to	the	doors.”	Snorri	crossed	over	to	the	central	murder-
hole.	“Oil.”

Ein	came	across	with	the	iron	bucket	of	oil	they’d	had	heating	on	the	fire.
Carrying	it	with	padded	tongs.	Apparently	boiling	water	would	freeze	and
spread	as	it	fell,	landing	as	a	dust	of	ice	crystals.

Three	muffled	thuds	from	below	as	someone	hammered	on	the	great	door.
Snorri	pulled	the	cover	of	the	murder-hole	clear	and	Ein	poured.	When	the
bucket	was	empty	Snorri	replaced	the	cover,	muting	the	screams.

“What	now?”	Tuttugu,	wide-eyed,	recovered	enough	to	be	terrified.
“Jal,	back	to	the	roof	to	watch,”	Snorri	said.
“The	steps	will	kill	me	if	nothing	else	does.”	I	shook	my	head	and	made

what	speed	I	could	up	the	coiled	stair.



From	the	roof	I	could	see	what	Snorri	had	described,	and	nothing	more.
Perhaps	what	he	saw	had	been	the	sum	of	them.	Heart	pounding,	and	shaking
with	both	the	cold	and	with	the	thought	of	what	the	dark	might	hide,	I	made	a
circuit	of	the	guard	wall.	Nothing.	No	other	light.	Nothing	to	see	at	all.	That
worried	me,	both	in	general	and	for	some	other	reason	I	couldn’t	quite	put	my
finger	on.

For	long	minutes	only	the	wind	howled,	the	Vikings	held	their	ranks	in
the	lee	of	the	walls,	the	dead	behind	them,	and	nothing	moved.	A	dread	grew
in	me,	but	it	hardly	required	any	extra	malign	influence	for	that.	There	were
dead	things	out	there,	wanting	us	to	share	their	state;	only	a	madman	wouldn’t
be	quaking.

With	only	the	lights	to	watch,	I	watched	the	lights.	I	wondered	how	I
could	ever	have	fooled	myself	they	were	just	embers	from	the	bone-fire
blown	out	across	the	ice	field.	The	mind	spends	half	its	time	in	self-deception,
it	seems.	Or	maybe	I’m	deceiving	myself	.	.	.	I	watched	the	lights	a	moment
longer,	then	slapped	my	brow.	It’s	not	often	that	people	actually	do	slap	their
brow	when	a	sudden	realization	illuminates	their	skull	from	the	inside,
especially	without	an	audience.	But	I	did	it.	And	then	I	ran	down	the	icy
stairs,	two	and	three	at	a	time,	swearing	at	the	pain	with	each	impact.

“What?	What	is	it?	What	did	you	see?”	All	three	of	them	together	as	I
hunched	over	my	hurt,	clutching	my	ribs,	fighting	to	draw	breath.

“Give	him	some	room.”	Snorri,	stepping	back.
“I—”	The	cut	on	my	leg	had	broken	past	the	stitches	Ein	had	set	there

while	I	slept,	blood	running	down	my	thigh.
“What	did	you	see?”	Tuttugu,	white-faced.
“Nothing.”	I	gasped	it	out	and	drew	a	breath.
“What?”	Three	blank	looks.
“Nothing,”	I	said.	“Just	the	Hardanger	men’s	lanterns.”
Another	moment	of	incomprehension.
“There’s	no	fire	on	the	wall.”	I	pointed	in	the	rough	direction	of	Snorri’s

great	pyre.
“It	can’t	have	gone	out,”	Ein	said.	“It’ll	still	be	hot	this	time	tomorrow.”
“Yes.”	I	nodded.	When	I	came	down	to	report	the	visitors	from	the	Bitter

Ice,	the	bone-fire	had	been	ten	yards	of	orange	embers	with	flames	licking
over	them	when	the	wind	gusted.

“I’ll	go	check.”	Ein	took	up	a	lantern	from	the	mantelpiece	and	went	to
the	heavy	door	that	connected	back	to	the	corridor	and	halls	beyond.	A
pounding	from	down	below	stopped	him	in	his	tracks.	It	sounded	more	like	a
battering	ram	than	the	crash	of	shield	on	wood	that	we’d	heard	before.

“Tuttugu!	Oil!”	And	Snorri	hauled	the	cover	from	the	murder-hole.	He
stared	down,	brow	furrowing.	“There’s	nothing	th—”

BOOM!



The	sound	of	the	impact	drowned	him	out.
“Hel!	It’s	coming	from	the	inside!”	Snorri	whipped	round	towards	Ein,

who	stood	at	the	doorway	with	his	back	towards	it.
“I’ll	find	out—”	Ein	bit	his	sentence	short	and	staggered	forwards,

accompanied	by	a	splintering	thud.	Something	sharp	and	thick	and	gore-
coated	now	jutted	from	beneath	his	sternum.	A	moment	later	the	door	came
off	its	hinges	and	the	horror	beyond	shook	the	door	and	Ein’s	corpse	from	the
appendage	it	had	impaled	them	both	with.

“Jesus!”	A	shriek.	Something	hot	ran	down	my	leg.	I’d	like	to	say	it	was
blood.	The	thing	blocked	the	corridor,	a	rolling	mass	of	melted	and	blackened
flesh,	bones	embedded,	here	a	cloven	helmet,	there	a	skull,	still	smouldering
—the	stinking	remnants	of	the	bone-fire,	quenched	and	animated	into
something	more	like	a	corrupt	and	giant	slug	than	any	man.

Snorri	leapt	past	me,	roaring	and	hacking.	Chunks	of	steaming	flesh	flew
across	the	room.	The	stench	of	the	thing	put	me	on	my	knees	vomiting.	Most
of	my	puke	went	down	the	murder-hole,	but	there	was	nobody	to	receive	the
torrent.	Snorri’s	roaring	continued	for	quite	a	while,	punctuated	by	the	booms
from	below.

At	about	the	time	I	finally	raised	my	head,	Snorri	paused	in	his	assault.
The	nightmare	had	sagged	in	the	doorway,	spilling	a	yard	or	so	into	the	room,
overflowing	part	of	the	door	and	covering	Ein’s	legs	to	the	hip.	Apart	from
where	Snorri	sank	his	axe	into	it	once	more,	for	good	measure,	it	didn’t	seem
to	have	any	motion	left	in	it.

“It’s	done.”	Tuttugu	from	beside	the	fire,	nervous,	almost	hopping	on	his
one	good	leg.

Tuttugu	had	barely	shut	his	mouth	when	Ein’s	head	snapped	up	from	the
floor.	The	eyes	he	fixed	me	with	were	eyes	I	last	saw	on	a	mountain	in	Rhone
and	held	the	same	undead	hunger.	Lips	twitched	but	whatever	the	thing	that
was	Ein	had	been	about	to	say	was	cut	off,	with	his	head,	by	way	of	Snorri’s
descending	axe.

“Sorry,	brother.”	He	snatched	the	severed	head	up	by	the	hair	and	threw	it
into	the	blazing	hearth.

“This	isn’t	all	of	it,”	I	said.	There	had	been	much	more	in	the	bone-fire
than	the	mass	before	us.

By	way	of	confirmation	the	doors	below	splintered	open;	in	truth	the
restraints	on	the	locking	bar	must	have	broken	rather	than	the	doors.	Two	men
could	have	opened	the	gates	from	inside	without	much	problem,	but	the
insensate	monster	the	necromancers	had	raised	lacked	the	required	dexterity
or	intelligence.	Instead	it	had	battered	the	locking	bar	free	and	now,	spent	like
its	smaller	counterpart	up	above,	it	collapsed	through	the	opening	it	had
made.

“What	now?”	I	needed	somewhere	to	run.



“We	run,”	said	Snorri.
“Oh,	thank	God!”	Although	I	couldn’t	do	more	than	hobble	with	my

shattered	ribs.	I	paused	a	moment	and	looked	at	him.	It	seemed	his	final
admission	of	defeat,	Snorri	running	from	the	fight.	“Where	to?”

Already	he’d	pulled	open	the	second	door,	the	one	leading	to	the
chambers	within	the	walls’	thickness	on	the	left	of	the	gatehouse,	opposite
those	where	we’d	battled	the	Broke-Oar.

“There’s	a	strong-room	in	the	keep.	Iron	doors.	Many	locks.	We	need	to
hold	out	for	morning.”	He	hurried	through	into	the	freezing	corridor	beyond,
breath	steaming	around	him.

“Why?”	I	hollered	after	him,	trying	to	keep	up.	I	was	all	for	running	and
hiding,	but	I	hoped	there	was	a	better	reason	than	delaying	the	inevitable.
Behind	me	Tuttugu’s	crutch	clacked	against	the	flagstones	as	he	swung	along
with	what	speed	he	could	muster.

“Why?”	With	almost	no	breath	as	I	caught	up	a	hundred	yards	on.
Snorri,	waiting	at	the	head	of	a	flight	of	stairs,	looked	past	me	to	the	light

of	Tuttugu’s	swinging	lantern.	“Hurry!”
“Why?”	I	almost	reached	to	catch	hold	of	him.
“Because	we	can’t	win.	Not	in	the	dark.	Maybe	in	the	morning	such

magics,	such	creatures	.	.	.	maybe	they	won’t	be	so	strong.	Maybe	not.	Either
way,	we’ll	die	in	the	daylight.”	He	paused.	“I	don’t	care	about	Aslaug’s	gifts.
I	don’t	like	what	she’s	tried	to	turn	me	into.”	A	grin.	“Let’s	go	to	Valhalla	with
the	sun	on	our	faces.”

Snorri	paused	for	me	to	answer.	All	I	had	to	say	was	I	didn’t	think	the	sun
would	find	us	in	a	strong-room	buried	in	the	middle	of	the	keep,	but	I	kept
those	words	behind	my	teeth.	He	grinned	again,	tentative	this	time,	then
turned	and	set	off	down	the	stairs.	I	followed,	cursing	that	I	had	yet	more	icy
steps	to	contend	with,	though	fat	Tuttugu	and	his	broken	knee	would	have	a
still	harder	time	of	it	behind	me.

Ice	had	sealed	the	door	to	the	courtyard.	Snorri	broke	it	open	and	waited
for	us,	the	wind	howling	outside.

“How	will	we	even	get	in?”	I	panted	the	question.
“I	took	keys	off	Sven	Broke-Oar.”	Snorri	patted	his	jacket.	“I’ve	been

over	there	already.	Opened	it	all	up	.	.	.	I	had	to	search	.	.	.”	He	hooded	his
lantern	so	no	glimmer	of	it	showed.	Tuttugu	did	the	same	when	he	arrived
puffing	at	the	bottom	of	the	stairs.

We	stepped	out	into	the	courtyard.	I	could	see	nothing	but	a	scattering	of
lights	around	the	great	doors	as	the	Red	Vikings	came	through.	No	doubt
they’d	be	checking	on	their	companions	and	stores	first.	Without	food	and
fuel	they	faced	a	bleak	future.	Fort	or	no	fort,	the	Bitter	Ice	would	kill	them
all.

“Come.”	Snorri	led	off.



“Wait!”	I	literally	couldn’t	see	him.	We	could	be	separated	and	lose	each
other	in	the	dark.	The	dawn	was	much	less	than	an	hour	away	but	the	sky	held
no	hint	of	it.

Tuttugu	hobbled	between	us	and	set	a	hand	on	Snorri’s	shoulder.	“Take	a
hold,	Jal.”

I	held	on	to	Tuttugu,	and	in	a	blind	convoy	we	set	out,	crunching	over	the
ice	and	snow,	across	the	expanse	of	courtyard.

The	Red	Vikings	might	be	busying	themselves	securing	their	old
holdings,	but	I	worried	more	about	those	who	had	brought	them	here.	The
night	felt	haunted—the	wind	speaking	with	a	new	voice,	more	chill	and	more
deadly	than	before,	though	I	hadn’t	thought	it	possible.	We	pressed	on,	and
with	each	step	I	expected	some	hand	to	be	laid	upon	my	shoulder,	pulling	me
back.

Sometimes	our	worst	fears	aren’t	realized—though	in	my	experience	it’s
only	to	make	room	for	the	fears	our	imagination	was	insufficient	to	house.	In
any	event	we	reached	the	keep	and	Snorri	set	a	great	iron	key	into	the	lock	of
the	subdoor	that	sat	within	a	greater	portal	large	enough	to	admit	wagons.
With	effort	he	turned	the	key—I	thought	to	find	the	lock	too	frozen,	but	again
my	fears	were	unfounded;	the	lock	had	after	all	been	built	in	the	cold	by
people	who	understood	the	winter.

Snorri	led	the	way	inside.	He	closed	the	door,	locked	it,	unhooded	his
lantern.	We	stood	for	a	moment,	the	three	of	us,	looking	at	each	other’s	pale,
blood-spattered	faces,	our	breath	pluming	before	us.	“Come.”	Snorri	pressed
on,	threading	through	various	empty	chambers,	more	doors,	more	stairs—less
icy	here	deep	within	the	building.	We	hurried	through	deserted	halls,	shadows
swinging	all	around	us	with	the	sway	of	our	two	lanterns.	Our	bubble	of
tentative	illumination	sailed	through	a	consuming	darkness.	Our	footsteps
echoed	in	those	cold	and	empty	places	and	it	seemed	we	made	an	awful
clatter.	I	pushed	the	phrase	loud	enough	to	wake	the	dead	to	the	back	of	my
mind.	Side	passages	yawned	at	us	as	we	passed,	dark	with	threat.	Onward,
through	a	tall	archway	into	a	long	hall,	an	iron	door	standing	ajar	at	the	end	of
it.

“There.”	Snorri	gestured	with	his	axe.	“That’s	our	stronghold.”
Salvation!	In	the	worst	of	times	even	temporary	salvation	feels	like	a

blessing.	I	glanced	back	at	the	archway,	convinced	some	grave	horror	would
step	from	the	shadows	at	any	moment	and	tear	after	us.	“Hurry!”

Snorri	jogged	across	and,	with	a	squeal	of	hinges,	pulled	the	door	wide
for	us	to	pass	through.	Beyond	it	lay	a	narrow	corridor	set	with	a	series	of
thick	iron	doors.	It	was	as	well	that	Snorri	had	unlocked	them	on	his	previous
visit	or	we’d	be	fumbling	with	keys	while	the	shadows	reached	for	our	backs.
When	he	pulled	the	first	one	closed	behind	us,	the	sound	of	him	locking	it
was	a	special	kind	of	music	to	my	ears.	My	whole	body	slumped	as	that	awful



tension	eased.
I	wondered	where	Freja	and	Egil	might	be	and	hoped	it	was	somewhere

secure.	I	didn’t	mention	it,	though,	in	case	Snorri	decided	to	go	out	searching
for	them	again.	If	they’d	lasted	this	long	they’d	last	a	little	longer,	I	told
myself.	In	my	mind’s	eye	I	pictured	them,	clothing	their	names	in	Snorri’s
descriptions,	Freja	capable,	determined	.	.	.	She	wouldn’t	give	up	hope,	not	in
him,	not	while	her	son	lived.	I	saw	the	boy	too,	scrawny,	freckled,	inquisitive.
I	saw	him	smile—the	easy	grin	his	father	had—and	scamper	off	about	some
mischief	amongst	the	huts	of	Eight	Quays.	I	couldn’t	picture	them	here,
couldn’t	imagine	what	this	place	might	have	made	of	them.

I	leaned	back	against	the	wall	for	a	moment,	closing	my	eyes	and	trying
to	convince	myself	that	the	grave-scent	hanging	in	the	air	was	imagination.
Perhaps	it	was,	or	perhaps	the	pursuit	had	been	as	close	as	I	feared,	but	either
way	the	locking	of	that	door	was	a	good	thing.	A	very	good	thing	indeed.
Snorri	shot	home	heavy	bolts,	top	and	bottom.	Better	still.

“Keep	moving.”	He	waved	me	on,	careful	not	to	touch	me;	the	air
crackled	and	spat	if	we	got	too	close	and	my	skin	glowed	so	bright	I	could
almost	light	the	way.	Four	doors	stood	between	the	hall	and	the	strong-room.
Snorri	locked	all	four	behind	us,	bolting	them	too	in	case	the	enemy	held
additional	copies	of	the	keys.

With	the	last	door	sealed	behind	us	we	collapsed	upon	the	sacks	heaped
around	the	walls.	The	lanterns	revealed	a	small	cubic	room	without	windows
or	any	exit	but	the	one	we	entered	by.

“What’s	in	the	sacks?”	Tuttugu	asked,	patting	one	that	protruded	from
beneath	him.

“Black	corn,	wheat	flour,	some	salt.”	Snorri	gestured	at	two	barrels	in	the
opposite	corner.	“Crushed	ice,	and	in	the	other	one,	whiskey.”

“We	could	survive	a	month	on	this,”	I	said,	trying	to	imagine	it.
“Daylight.	That’s	all	we’re	waiting	for.	In	the	morning	we	attack.”	Snorri

looked	grim.
As	much	as	I	wanted	to	argue,	it	made	sense.	No	relief	would	come,	no

reinforcements	were	inbound.	Either	they	would	break	in	eventually,	or	we
would	starve	in	our	own	filth.	Even	so,	I	knew	when	it	came	to	leaving,	to
actually	putting	ourselves	in	the	hands	of	the	unborn,	they	would	have	to	drag
me.	I’d	rather	slit	my	wrists	and	be	done	with	it.

“What’s	out	there,	Snorri?”	I	lay	back	and	watched	the	shadows	dance	on
the	ceiling.	“Did	Aslaug	tell	you	that?	Did	she	say	what	she’d	seen	in	the
darkness?”

“Unborn.	Maybe	a	dozen	of	them.	And	the	worst	of	them,	the	Unborn
Captain.	The	Dead	King’s	hand	in	the	North.	All	digging	out	troops	for
whatever	war	he’s	planning.	The	troops	are	just	a	bonus.	What	they’re	really
after	is	Rikeson’s	key.	Not	that	Rikeson	fashioned	it.	Aslaug	says	he	tricked



Loki	out	of	it.	Or	Loki	let	it	seem	that	way,	but	really	it	was	Loki	who	tricked
Olaaf	Rikeson	into	taking	it.”

Tuttugu	stretched	out	his	leg,	sniffing	and	pulling	his	furs	about	him.	He
wrinkled	his	nose,	disapproving	of	the	air.

“Baraqel	doesn’t	tell	me	anything	useful.	I	guess	all	the	best	secrets	are
told	at	night.”	I	didn’t	pay	too	close	a	heed	to	Aslaug’s	talk	of	Loki.	It	seemed
the	voices	that	the	light	and	the	dark	used	to	speak	to	us	were	ones	we’d	given
them,	taken	from	our	expectations.	Only	natural	then	that	explanations	should
come	to	Snorri	wrapped	in	heathen	tales,	whilst	I	got	the	true	version,	spoken
by	an	angel	such	as	one	might	see	in	the	stained	glass	at	the	cathedral	in
Vermillion.

Vermillion!	God,	how	I	wanted	to	be	back	there.	I	remembered	that	day,
the	day	I	left	the	city—that	crazy	chaotic	whirl	of	a	day—and	before	I	had
even	broken	my	fast	on	that	morning	the	Red	Queen	had	been	bending	our
ears,	all	of	us	grandchildren,	and	at	the	last	when	I	was	desperate	to	be	off
about	my	own	plans,	hadn’t	Grandmother	been	talking	of	tasks,	of	quests,	of
hunting	for	.	.	.	a	key?

“Smells	like	something	crawled	in	here	and	died.”	Tuttugu	interrupted	my
thoughts.	He	sniffed	again,	casting	a	suspicious	glance	my	way.

I	shushed	him	with	a	waved	hand.	The	pieces	were	coming	together	in	my
mind.	The	Red	Queen’s	story	about	a	door	into	death,	an	actual	door.	Who
would	ever	want	to	open	such	a	door?

“The	Dead	King—”
“Jal—”	Tuttugu	tried	to	cut	across	me.
“I’m	thinking!”	But	death’s	door	couldn’t	ever	be	opened—the	lock	had

no	.	.	.	“Loki’s	key	can	open	anything!”
“Jal!”	Snorri	surging	to	his	feet.	“Get	down!”
An	empty	sack	fell	across	my	shoulders	as	I	threw	myself	forwards,

forgetting	how	much	it	would	hurt.	I	heard	grain	shifting	and	spilling.	The
grave-stink	intensified	into	something	almost	physical.

“No!”	Tuttugu	screamed,	and	threw	himself	at	whatever	had	risen	behind
me,	axe	raised.	I	hit	the	ground	and	my	world	lit	with	the	agony	of	the	impact
against	my	broken	ribs.	A	meaty	thud	and	through	slitted	eyes	I	caught	a
glimpse	of	Tuttugu	flying	back	across	the	room.	He	hit	the	wall	with	the	kind
of	crunch	that	meant	he	wouldn’t	be	getting	up	again.

I	rolled	over	and	the	unborn	towered	above	me,	uncoiling	long	and
scabrous	limbs,	shedding	the	full	sacks	and	empty	sacking	that	it	had	hidden
beneath.	A	freshly	skinned	face	peered	down	at	me,	the	top	of	that	wet	and
hairless	scalp	nearly	scraping	the	ceiling.	The	eyes	held	the	same	feral	hunger
as	those	that	had	haunted	me	for	all	this	long	and	wild	flight	from	Red	March,
but	they	weren’t	the	same	eyes	that	had	set	me	running	on	the	night	of	the
opera	what	seemed	a	lifetime	ago.	These	terrified	but	held	little	of	that	awful



knowing.
I	lurched	aside	and	tried	to	crawl	for	the	door	as	a	hand	made	of	dripping

flesh	and	too	many	bones	reached	down	for	me.
“Jal!”	Snorri	leapt	in.	Snorri	would	always	leap	in.	He	hacked	at	the	arm,

sweeping	it	aside.	The	unborn	clawed	at	him	with	its	other	hand,	sickle	talons
shredding	through	many	layers	to	the	skin	and	muscle	beneath.

I	almost	made	it	to	the	door.	What	I	would	have	done	there	if	I	had
reached	it	I	can’t	say.	Scrabbled	at	the	cold	iron	in	desperation,	most	likely.
The	unborn	saved	me	from	those	broken	fingernails	by	spearing	a	long	and
unclean	finger	through	my	side	and	dragging	me	back.	I	fought	every	inch	of
the	way,	kicking	and	screaming.	Mostly	screaming.

Snorri	charged	again,	soaked	with	his	own	blood,	and	the	unborn	caught
him	about	the	waist,	raising	him	off	the	ground,	talons	sinking	deep.

“Die,	you	bastard!”	A	howl	as	his	eyes	darkened.	And	with	the	last	of	his
strength	Snorri	ver	Snagason	swung	his	father’s	axe,	hauling	the	heavy
weapon	through	the	air	in	a	sideways	swing,	turning	in	the	unborn’s	grip,
driving	its	talons	deeper	still	but	adding	momentum	to	his	blow.	The	blade	cut
through	lantern	light,	trailing	streaks	of	darkness.	It	sheared	into	the	unborn’s
head,	splitting	that	unholy	skull,	and	with	a	roar	Snorri	yanked	the	axe	clear,
splattering	grey	filth	as	he	cracked	the	monster	wide.

The	unborn’s	convulsions	threw	us	both	clear,	scattering	grain,	salt,	pieces
of	torn	sack	while	it	thrashed	and	diminished.	I	lay	with	blood	pouring	in	a
river	from	the	dark	hole	the	creature	had	put	through	me.	Snorri	found	his	feet
again,	though	barely,	swaying	as	he	dragged	his	axe	back	towards	the	foe.

By	the	time	the	Norseman	made	it	across	the	room,	all	that	remained
amidst	a	welter	of	old	bones	and	shed	skin,	curled	and	blackened,	was	a	small
red	thing.	It	looked	almost	like	a	baby.	And,	falling	to	his	knees	before	it,
Snorri	bent	double	and	wept	as	though	his	heart	had	broken.



THIRTY

“We’re	fucked	up.”	I	raised	my	hand	to	wipe	the	blood	from	my
mouth.	The	arm	felt	like	someone	else’s,	almost	too	heavy	to	move.

Too	much	blood	to	wipe.	I	must	have	bitten	my	tongue.
“We	are.”	Snorri	lay	back,	the	sacks	around	him	stained	crimson.	His	leg

looked	uncomfortable,	folded	awkwardly	beneath	him,	but	if	it	bothered	him
he	lacked	the	strength	to	move	it.	It	bothered	me,	seeing	him	like	that,	without
fight	in	him.	Snorri	never	gave	up.	He	never	would,	not	with	his	wife	and
child	so	close.	I	looked	at	him	again,	sprawled,	bleeding,	defeated.	And	then	I
knew.

“Tell	me.”	I	lay	on	sacks	every	bit	as	bloody	as	those	beneath	him.	We
would	both	bleed	to	death	soon	enough.	I	wanted	to	know	if	this	had	ever
been	a	rescue	mission—if	his	wife	and	child	could	ever	have	been	saved.
“Tell	it	all.”

Snorri	spat	blood	and	opened	his	hand	to	let	his	axe	drop.	“The	Broke-Oar
told	me,	back	in	the	hall,	he	would	have	told	me	back	when	he	had	me
captive.	He	told	me	not	to	ask,	that	day	when	they	caught	me—and	he	scared
me	out	of	it	.	.	.	I	hadn’t	the	courage	to	ask.	He	said	I	shouldn’t	ask	or	he
would	tell.	And	I	didn’t,	and	he	kept	his	silence.”	Snorri	drew	a	great	slow
breath.	His	cheekbone	had	been	shattered;	pieces	of	bone	showed	through	the
skin.	“But	in	the	hall	with	Aslaug	filling	me	and	his	eyes	put	out,	I	asked	him
again	.	.	.	and	this	time	he	answered.”	Snorri	drew	a	shuddering	breath	and	my
face	grew	numb,	my	cheekbones	tingling,	eyes	hot	and	full.	“Egil	and	the
other	children	they	gave	to	the	necromancers.	The	lives	of	children	can	be	fed
to	unborn	and	to	the	lichkin—horrors	just	as	bad.”	Another	breath,	hitched	in.
“The	women	were	killed	and	their	corpses	raised,	then	used	to	mine	the	ice.
Only	Freja	and	a	handful	of	others	were	spared.”

“Why?”	Maybe	I	didn’t	want	to	know	after	all.	My	life	was	pooling
crimson	on	the	floor	around	me.	Bright	memories	called	to	me,	lazy	days,
sweet	moments.	Better	to	spend	what	time	remained	with	them	instead.	But
Snorri	needed	to	tell	me,	and	I	needed	to	let	him.

Dying	wasn’t	as	bad	as	I	had	imagined.	I’d	spent	so	long	afraid,	endured
so	many	deaths	in	my	imagination,	but	here	I	lay,	close	to	the	end,	almost	at



peace.	It	hurt,	yes,	but	I	had	a	friend	close	by	and	a	certain	calmness	enfolded
me.	“Why?”	I	asked	it	again.

“I	didn’t	tell	you.”	Snorri	gasped	at	some	sudden	pain.	“I	couldn’t.	It
wasn’t	a	lie.	I	just	couldn’t	say	the	words	.	.	.	too	big	.	.	.	if	you—”

“I	understand.”	And	I	did.	Some	truths	you	can’t	speak.	Some	truths	come
barbed;	each	word	would	tear	you	inside	out	if	you	forced	them	from	your
lips.

“She—	Freja,	my	wife.”	A	breath	hitched	in.	“Freja	was	pregnant.	She
carried	our	child.	That’s	why	they	kept	her.	To	make	unborn.	She	died	when
they	cut	the	baby	from	her	belly.”	A	breath	burst	from	him	in	a	crimson	spray,
hurt	escaping	in	the	short	wet	gasps	we	men	make	to	keep	from	crying	like
children.

“Pregnant?”	All	this	time	and	he	hadn’t	spoken	of	it.	Our	long	journey	a
hopeless	race	against	that	baby’s	fate.	A	tear	rolled	down	my	cheek,	hot	and
slow,	cooling	as	it	met	the	frigid	air.

“I	just	killed	my	son.”	Snorri	closed	his	eyes.
I	rolled	my	head	and	saw	once	more	the	foetus	curled	amidst	the	ruin	of

the	body	the	unborn	had	built—the	core	of	it,	the	potential,	misused	and	ill-
spent	by	some	horror	that	had	never	lived.

“Your	son	.	.	.”	I	didn’t	ask	how	he	could	know.	Perhaps	that	bond
between	them	had	let	the	unborn	know	his	mind,	had	led	it	to	wait	for	us	in
this	room.	I	didn’t	ask	anything—I	hadn’t	the	words.	Instead	I	spoke	the
smallest	one—the	one	I	should	have	used	more	in	my	short	and	foolish	life.

“Sorry.”
We	lay	a	long	moment	without	speaking.	Life	leaked	away	from	me,	drop

by	drop.	I	felt	I	should	miss	it	more.
A	squealing	noise	broke	the	silence.
“What	in	hell?”	I	lifted	my	head	a	fraction.	It	sounded	like—
“Hinges!”	Snorri	rose,	slowly,	supporting	himself	on	his	elbows.
“But	you	locked	that	door.”	The	squeal	of	iron	on	iron	set	my	teeth	on

edge.	“Bolted	it	too.”
“Yes.”
Another	squealing	sound.	Louder	this	time,	closer.
“How	is	that	possible?”	Some	energy	returning	to	my	voice	now.	A

whining	edge	too,	I’ll	admit.	“Why	aren’t	they	having	to	break	them	down?”
“They	have	the	key.”	Snorri	reached	for	his	axe,	groaning.
“But	you	bolted	all	the	doors!	I	saw	you.”
Another	shriek,	the	noise	of	old	iron	scraping	across	stone	as	the	third

door	surrendered.	Only	one	remained—the	door	I	had	my	horrified	gaze	fixed
upon.

“The	key.	Rikeson’s	key.	Loki’s	key.	The	key	that	opens	all	doors.”	Snorri
managed	to	sit,	deathly	pale,	a	tremor	in	his	limbs.	“It’s	the	Unborn	Captain.



They	must	have	found	the	key	under	the	ice.”
Moments	remained	to	us.	I	heard	a	dry	scratching	beyond	the	door	and

rust	bloomed	across	the	ancient	black	iron.	It	felt	suddenly	colder	in	that
room,	and	more	sad,	as	if	a	weight	of	sorrow	had	settled	across	my	shoulders.
More	than	I	could	bear.

“Jal—it	has	been	an	honour.”	Snorri	held	his	hand	out	towards	me.	“I’m
proud	to	have	known	you.”	He	brushed	his	palm	over	the	blade	of	his	father’s
axe,	slicing	it	open.	“Bleed	with	me,	brother.”

“Ah,	hell.”	The	bolts	shot	back	on	the	last	door	with	loud	retorts.	“I
always	knew	you’d	try	this	Viking	shit	on	me.”	The	door	started	to	judder
open,	inch	by	inch,	pushing	sacks	aside.	“Likewise,	Hauldr	Snagason.”	I	slit
my	palm	on	my	sword	blade,	wincing	at	the	deep	sting	of	it,	and	held	my
hand	out	towards	Snorri,	cupping	the	blood.

The	door	jerked	open	the	last	half	of	its	swing,	and	there	in	the	dying	light
of	our	lanterns	the	Unborn	Captain	waited,	hunched	within	the	confines	of	the
corridor,	a	parody	of	flesh,	drawn	out	into	malformations	of	every	kind,	a
plague	of	bones	jutting	out	around	a	face	that	spoke	only	of	awful	needs.

Somewhere	out	beyond	the	walls	of	the	Black	Fort	the	sun	pushed	its
brilliant	edge	above	the	ice	horizon	and	broke	the	long	night.

The	air	between	Snorri	and	me	spat	and	sparked	as	our	hands	shaped	to
grasp	the	other.	My	arm	filled	with	light	so	fierce	I	couldn’t	look	at	it.	Snorri’s
became	jet,	a	hole	in	the	world	that	ate	all	illumination	and	returned	nothing.

The	unborn	launched	itself	forwards.
We	clasped	hands.
The	world	fractured.
Night	interlaced	day.
Pretty	much	everything	exploded.

	•	•	•	

The	Silent	Sister’s	magic	left	us	and	pursued	its	prey.	Detonations	rang	out
throughout	the	keep,	out	into	the	dawn-dark	courtyard,	and	off	beyond

the	walls.	The	Unborn	Captain	had	lasted	less	than	a	heartbeat.	The	twin
cracks	had	run	through	him,	dark	had	crossed	light,	and	small	pieces	of	him
had	ricocheted	about	the	corridor	as	the	cracks	raced	on.

The	force	of	the	blast	set	us	both	on	our	backs	and	blew	us	apart.	I	lacked
the	strength	to	disagree	and	lay	where	the	explosion	had	dumped	me.

The	crack	that	had	raced	away	from	us	began	in	the	floor	at	the	spot
where	we	had	clasped	hands,	the	spot	where	our	blood	had	mixed	and	spilled.
The	free	end	of	it	began	to	spread,	slow	this	one,	fracturing	stone	with	a
sound	like	breaking	ice,	the	bright	fissure	woven	with	the	dark	one.

“Christ!”	I	blasphemed.	May	as	well	die	with	a	final	sin	on	my	lips.



The	crack	veered	towards	me,	blindingly	bright,	blindingly	dark.	I	blinked
at	it	and	behind	my	eyes	an	echo	of	Baraqel	stood,	wings	folded.	“It’s	in	your
hands	now,	Jalan	Kendeth.”

I	cursed	him	to	be	gone	and	let	me	die.
“It’s	in	your	hands.”	Quieter	now,	the	image	more	faint.
Snorri	struggled	to	get	to	his	feet,	using	his	axe	for	support.	Somehow	the

big	bastard	was	actually	doing	it—too	dumb	to	know	when	to	quit.	Still,	it
didn’t	do	for	a	prince	of	Red	March	to	be	outdone	by	a	northern	hauldr.	I
rolled,	cursing,	set	the	point	of	my	sword	into	the	gap	between	flagstones,	and
tried	to	heave	myself	up.	It	was	too	hard.	Somewhere	in	the	back	of	my	mind
Grandmother	loomed,	tall,	regal,	scary	as	hell	in	her	scarlets.	Get	up!	And,
roaring	with	the	effort	and	the	pain,	I	did.

A	step	back	and	my	shoulders	were	to	the	wall,	the	crack	a	yard	from	me,
sacks	splitting	as	it	fractured	the	stone	beneath,	corn	kernels	leaping	into	the
air	and	turning	inside	out	with	curious	popping	sounds.

When	there’s	nowhere	to	run	you	sometimes	have	to	resort	to	extreme
measures.	Baraqel	had	kept	talking	about	my	line.	The	Red	Queen’s	image
dominated	my	imagination	in	that	moment,	commanding,	fearless,	but	over
her	shoulders	I	saw	Garyus	and	the	Silent	Sister,	and	before	her,	my	father.
I’ve	taken	his	name	in	vain	time	enough,	called	him	a	coward,	a	drunk,	a
hollow	priest,	but	I	knew	deep	down	what	had	broken	him	and	that	he	had
stood	his	ground	when	my	mother	needed	him	and	not	surrendered	to	his
demons	until	she	was	past	saving.

I	stepped	towards	the	fracture,	that	crack	between	worlds,	knelt	before	it
on	one	knee,	reached	out.

“This	is	mine—I	made	it	and	the	enchantment	from	which	it	spread
started	with	my	line;	an	unbroken	chain	of	blood	joins	me	to	the	one	that	set
the	spell.”	And	I	reached	out	with	my	hand	and	with	whatever	else	lay	in	the
core	of	me	and	I	pinched	it	shut.

All	along	its	length	the	fissure	flared,	darkened,	flared	again,	and	shrank
back	upon	itself	until	only	a	foot	of	it	remained,	bright	and	dark,	leading	out
from	the	point	where	I	pinched	it	between	finger	and	thumb.

The	fracture	flexed	and	groaned,	miniature	breaks	spreading	up	from
where	I	held	it,	out	across	the	back	of	my	hand,	the	pain	excruciating.

“I	can’t	hold	it,	Snorri.”	I	was	already	dying,	but	my	great-aunt’s	spell
seemed	ready	to	make	that	happen	immediately	rather	than	an	hour	hence.

He	had	to	crawl,	heaving	himself	over	the	sacks,	the	thick	muscles	in	his
arms	trembling	with	the	effort,	black	blood	spilling	from	his	mouth.	But	he
made	it.	His	gaze	met	mine	as	he	reached	to	close	the	other	end.

“Will	it	die	with	us?	Will	this	be	an	end	to	it?”
I	nodded,	and	he	closed	finger	and	thumb	on	the	other	end.



THIRTY-ONE

The	crackle	of	logs,	burning	in	a	hearth.	I	relaxed.	In	my	dream	it	had	been
the	fires	of	hell	waiting	to	feed	on	my	sin.	I	lay	for	long	minutes	just

enjoying	the	warmth,	seeing	only	the	play	of	light	and	shadow	through	closed
eyes.

“Run!”	I	jerked	into	a	sitting	position	as	I	remembered	the	strong-room,
the	unborn,	the	doors	opening.

“What	the	hell?”	I	looked	down	at	the	furs	that	had	slid	from	me,	at	the
smooth	skin	where	I’d	been	skewered	through,	no	doubt	puncturing	several	of
the	squidgy,	vital	organs	that	men	are	packed	with.	I	pressed	the	region,	and
apart	from	a	little	tenderness,	nothing.	Running	my	hands	over	myself,	patting
and	pinching,	I	found	no	injury	worse	than	the	odd	bruise.

I	looked	around.	A	hall	in	the	Black	Fort,	Tuttugu	walking	towards	me
with	a	slight	limp.

“You’re	dead!”	I	cast	about	for	my	sword.	“I	saw	you	hit	that	wall!”
Tuttugu	grinned	and	grabbed	his	belly.	“Padding!”	Then,	more	serious,	“I

would	have	died	if	I	hadn’t	been	healed.	You	would	too.”
“The	unborn?”	Snorri	had	said	there	were	a	dozen	or	more.	The	spit	dried

from	my	mouth,	and	spread	hands	were	all	I	could	manage	to	frame	the
question.

“Any	of	them	that	weren’t	destroyed	have	fled.	Necromancers,	Red
Vikings,	corpse-men	.	.	.	all	gone,”	Tuttugu	said.	“How	are	you	feeling?”	He
seemed	a	touch	apprehensive.

“Fine.	Good.	Better	than	good.”	Fingers	pressed	to	where	my	thigh	had
been	cut	produced	no	twinge	at	all.	“How	is	that	possible?”

“You’re	not	feeling	.	.	.	evil	.	.	.	then?”	Tuttugu	pressed	his	lips	into	a	line,
his	face	a	mask.

“Um,	no	.	.	.	not	especially.”	I	looked	around	for	Snorri	but	saw	nothing
apart	from	heaps	of	furs	and	some	supplies	tight-bound	into	bails.	“How	did
this	happen?”	I	couldn’t	heal	myself.

“Snorri	did	it.”	Tuttugu	sounded	grim.	“He	said	a	valkyrie—”
“An	angel?”
“He	said	valkyrie.	He	said	the	valkyrie	helped	him.	There	was	more	but



he	couldn’t	speak	much	at	the	end.	He	said	.	.	.	but	there	are	no	male
valkyrie	.	.	.	I	think	the	valkyrie	was	a	god	.	.	.”

“Baraqel?	Did	he	say	Baraqel?”
Tuttugu	nodded.
“At	the	end?”	My	stomach	became	a	cold	knot.	I	recalled	how	much	any

healing	had	taken	from	me.	“Is	he—”
“Dead?”	Tuttugu	limped	to	the	heaped	furs.	“No.	But	he	should	be.”	He

pulled	a	wolfskin	aside	and	there	lay	Snorri,	pale	but	breathing.	He	looked	to
be	asleep	rather	than	unconscious.	The	broken	bones	in	his	face	had	been
repositioned	and	the	skin	sewn	over	them.	“I’ve	done	what	I	can.	We	can	only
wait	now.”

“How	long	have	I	been	sleeping?”	It	seemed	important,	even	with	our
enemies	fled.

“All	day,	Jal.	It’s	nearly	sunset.”
“But	if	Snorri	.	.	.	Baraqel,	you	said?	And	healing	.	.	.	So	he’s	light-sworn

now.”	I	looked	again	where	my	wounds	should	be.	“Then	the	one	who’s	dark-
sworn	is	.	.	.”

Tuttugu	nodded.
“Ah.”
I	lay	back.	It	would	be	a	long	journey	back	to	Vermillion,	and	if	we	didn’t

beat	the	arrival	of	winter,	then	the	Black	Fort	would	be	our	home	until	spring.
I’d	make	it,	though,	and	I’d	take	whatever	still	remained	of	my	newfound
courage	and	stand	before	the	Red	Queen’s	throne	and	demand	she	get	her
damned	sister	to	take	this	spell	out	of	us.

All	that,	of	course,	depended	on	no	one	being	able	to	talk	me	out	of	it
between	now	and	then.

Somewhere	the	sun	was	setting.	I	closed	my	eyes	and	waited	to	see	just
how	persuasive	Aslaug	would	be.

	•	•	•	

Six	weeks	later	and	the	first	deep	snows	of	winter	came,	falling	from
leaden	skies,	driven	by	a	cruel	wind.
“Bring	me	another	ale,	will	you,	Tuttugu,	there’s	a	good	chap!”
Tuttugu	gave	a	complacent	shrug,	pushed	his	roast	chicken	to	one	side,

and	went	to	fill	a	tankard	at	the	barrel.
Outside,	the	streets	of	Trond	lay	clogged	with	snow.	I	didn’t	care.	I

snuggled	back	deeper	into	the	fur	of	what	must	have	been	a	white	bear	every
bit	as	big	as	the	one	Snorri	vaulted	in	the	Blood	Holes.	Very	cosy.	Nobody
came	or	went	without	good	cause,	and	the	Three	Axes	tavern	saw	little	trade
—which	was	probably	the	reason	the	owner	had	sold	me	the	whole	place,
lock,	stock,	and	no	small	number	of	barrels,	for	just	two	of	the	diamonds



pried	from	Mother’s	locket.
It	was	good	to	have	so	many	fears	lifted	from	me,	so	many	cares	shed,	to

be	safe	and	warm	in	the	grip	of	winter.	The	only	worries	to	trouble	me	now	in
the	long	nights	were	little	ones,	or	at	least	far	away.	The	problem	of	Maeres
Allus	seemed	small	compared	to	the	problem	of	how	to	get	home.	In	fact,	the
only	thing	to	steal	my	sleep,	at	least	the	only	noninvited	thing,	was	the
thought	that	though	the	Unborn	Captain	had	frightened	me	to	the	point	at
which	my	heart	forgot	to	beat,	and	though	his	gaze	was	a	terrible	thing,	those
weren’t	the	eyes	that	had	watched	me	through	the	slit	of	that	porcelain	mask
back	in	the	opera	so	very	many	miles	and	months	ago.	That	stare	had	been
worse	still	and	haunted	me	even	now.

	•	•	•	

Life	is	good.
Today	Astrid	has	to	be	about	her	work	in	town,	but	I	have	the	lovely

Edda	to	warm	me	up	instead.	Snorri	says	it	will	end	in	tears	and	has	taken	to
giving	me	disgusted	looks	as	if	I	should	have	learned	something	by	now.	My
own	opinion	is	that	if	I	keep	juggling,	then	all	the	balls	will	stay	in	the	air
(even	Hedwig,	a	beauty	I’ve	my	eye	on	and	daughter	to	Jarl	Sorren)	and	my
comeuppance	will	never	come	down,	however	richly	deserved.	Aslaug
agrees.	She	is,	it	must	be	said,	far	more	agreeable	than	Baraqel	ever	was.	I’m
amazed	Snorri	took	against	her	so.

Yes,	I	should	grow	up,	and	yes,	I	will,	but	there’s	time	for	that	tomorrow.
Today	is	for	living.

So	here	we	are,	snug	in	the	Three	Axes	with	nothing	to	do	but	do	nothing.
Winter	has	us	locked	in,	safe	from	the	outside	world,	trapped	in	our	own	little
inside	world.	Ironic	when	our	prize	was	a	key	that	can	open	anything,	and
here	we	are	locked	in,	kept	in	Trond	until	the	spring	unlocks	the	ice	and	sets
us	free.

For	a	time	back	there	in	that	awful	fort,	with	Baraqel	nagging	at	me	and
my	rotten	little	existence	coming	rapidly	to	a	sharp	point,	I	did	start	to	wonder
if	I	could	have	made	a	better	job	of	the	business	of	living.	I	started	to	see	my
old	life	of	wine,	song,	and	as	many	women	as	would	have	me	as	something
shallow.	Tawdry	even.	On	the	trek	across	the	ice	and	in	that	long	dark	night
within	the	Black	Fort,	I	will	confess	to	wishing	for	my	time	over,	to
promising	I	would	treat	everyone	better,	set	aside	ugly	prejudice.	I	resolved	to
seek	out	Lisa	DeVeer,	vow	fidelity,	throw	myself	on	her	mercy,	to	be	the	man
my	age	demanded,	not	the	child	it	allowed.	And	the	horror	of	it	all	was	that	I
really	meant	it!

It	didn’t	take	Aslaug	long	to	talk	me	down.	All	I	truly	needed	was
someone	to	let	me	know	I’d	been	fine	as	I	was,	slap	me	on	the	back	and	tell



me	that	the	world	was	waiting	for	me	out	there,	and	to	go	and	get	it!
As	for	Snorri,	he’s	gloomier	than	ever	now	that	Baraqel	lectures	him	each

dawn.	You’d	think	with	his	family	lost	and	his	vengeance	exacted,	he	would
move	on.	Tuttugu	has.	He	goes	out	ice	fishing	with	the	locals	now	that	the
harbour	has	frozen	over.	Even	has	himself	a	girl	in	town,	so	he	says.	Snorri,
though,	he	broods	on	the	past.	He’ll	sit	there	on	the	porch	when	it’s	cold
enough	to	freeze	waves	in	place,	wrapped	up,	axe	across	his	lap,	staring	at
that	key.

Now	I	like	keys	by	and	large,	but	that	thing,	that	piece	of	obsidian—that	I
don’t	like.	You	look	at	it	and	it	makes	you	think.	Too	much	thinking	isn’t
good	for	anyone.	Especially	for	a	man	like	Snorri	ver	Snagason	who’s	apt	to
act	upon	his	thoughts.	He	sits	there	staring	at	it	and	I	can	tell	the	ideas	that	are
spinning	in	his	head—I	didn’t	need	Aslaug	to	tell	me	that.	He	has	a	key	that
will	open	any	door.	He	has	a	dead	family.	And	somewhere	out	there	is	a	door
that	leads	into	death,	a	door	that	swings	both	ways,	a	door	that	shouldn’t	ever
be	opened,	a	door	that	couldn’t	ever	be	opened.

Until	now.