                      PRAISE FOR     SERAPHINA



                        New York Times Bestseller
                              Indie Bestseller
                Amazon Top 20 Teen Books of the Year
            Chicago Public Library Best Books of the Year
                 Kirkus Reviews Best Books of the Year
                     Booklist Best Books of the Year
             School Library Journal Best Books of the Year
        Library Journal Best Young Adult Literature for Adults
                    ABA Top 10 Kids’ Indie Next List
                          ABC New Voices List
       Finalist for the William C. Morris Award for a YA Debut

“Just when you thought there was nothing new to say about dragons,
it turns out there is, and plenty! Rachel Hartman’s rich invention
never fails to impress—and to convince. It’s smart and funny and
original, and has characters I will follow to the ends of the earth.”
                —Ellen Kushner, World Fantasy Award-winning author

“A wonderful mix of thrilling story, fascinating characters, and unique
dragonlore. I loved being in Seraphina’s world.”
     —Alison Goodman, New York Times bestselling author of Eon and
                                                              Eona

“Seraphina is strong, complex, talented—she makes mistakes and
struggles to trust, with good reason, and she fights to survive in a
world that would tear her apart.”
       —Tamora Pierce, New York Times bestselling author of the Beka
                                                       Cooper series

  “The medieval-esque world, filled with saints and dragons, is as
deftly crafted as the characters themselves; Goredd has a distinct
history, fraught with struggle and survival, and its residents reflect the
conflicting ideologies and traditions that inform their world.
Secondary characters are given just as much nuance, and the romance
between Seraphina and a bastard prince proceeds with believable
hesitation and wariness. Readers will want to plan to return to this
richly developed world to see where this intricate fantasy goes next.
                —The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, Starred

   “[A] complex, intrigue-laden fantasy. As Seraphina navigates the
complicated politics of a court where human-dragon relations are
growing ever more fragile following a royal murder, she has to come
to terms with her true nature and powers.”
                                          —Publishers Weekly, Starred

   “To the innovative concept and high action, add Seraphina’s
tentative romance with Kiggs, rich language lively with humor and
sprinkled with an entire psaltery of saints and an orchestra’s worth of
medieval instruments, and a political conspiracy aimed at breaking
the dragon-human truce, and what you have is an outstanding debut
from author-to-watch Hartman.”
                                    —The Horn Book Magazine, Starred

 “Reading this novel is like falling into Alice’s rabbit hole and never
wanting to come out. Fans of fantasy will devour this book.”
                                    —Voice of Youth Advocates, Starred

“[Hartman’s] world-building is so detailed and well-integrated, one
wonders if they truly exist somewhere. An engaging and innovative
fantasy that uses the plights of dragons and humans as an allegory for
the real prejudices we all must face.”
                                                          —Bookpage

“A beautifully-written fantasy debut about a young girl’s journey to
gain acceptance of herself.”
                                                       —SheKnows.com
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the
  author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or
                        dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

                          Text copyright © 2012 by Rachel Hartman
                    “The Audition” copyright © 2012 by Rachel Hartman
          “A Q&A with Rachel Hartman” and “Rachel Hartman’s Favorite Authors”
                             copyright © 2013 by Rachel Hartman
                      Jacket art copyright © 2012 by Andrew Davidson
                 Title page illustration copyright © 2012 by Juliana Kolesova

   All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Random House Children’s Books,
                         a division of Random House, Inc., New York.

     Random House and the colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.

                         Visit us on the Web! randomhouse.com/teens

              Educators and librarians, for a variety of teaching tools, visit us at
                                  randomhouse.com/teachers

                       Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                                        Hartman, Rachel.
                   Seraphina : a novel / by Rachel Hartman. — 1st U.S. ed.
                                             p. cm.
Summary: In a world where dragons and humans coexist in an uneasy truce and dragons can
  assume human form, Seraphina, whose mother died giving birth to her, grapples with her
   own identity amid magical secrets and royal scandals, while she struggles to accept and
                          develop her extraordinary musical talents.
                                  eISBN: 978-0-375-89658-3
    [1. Identity—Fiction. 2. Self-actualization (Psychology)—Fiction. 3. Dragons—Fiction.
 4. Secrets—Fiction. 5. Music—Fiction. 6. Courts and courtiers—Fiction. 7. Fantasy.] I. Title.
                         PZ7.H26736Se   2012 [Fic]—dc22 2011003015

               Random House Children’s Books supports the First Amendment
                                and celebrates the right to read.

                                             v3.1_r2
In memoriam: Michael McMechan.

    Dragon, teacher, friend.
                       Contents


Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication

Prologue
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve
Chapter Thirteen
Chapter Fourteen
Chapter Fifteen
Chapter Sixteen
Chapter Seventeen
Chapter Eighteen
Chapter Nineteen
Chapter Twenty
Chapter Twenty-one
Chapter Twenty-two
Chapter Twenty-three
Chapter Twenty-four
Chapter Twenty-five
Chapter Twenty-six
Chapter Twenty-seven
Chapter Twenty-eight
Chapter Twenty-nine
Chapter Thirty
Chapter Thirty-one
Chapter Thirty-two
Chapter Thirty-three
Chapter Thirty-four
Chapter Thirty-five
Chapter Thirty-six
Chapter Thirty-seven

Cast of Characters
Glossary
Acknowledgments
About the Author
A Q&A with Rachel Hartman
Rachel Hartman’s Favorite Authors
The Audition
I remember being born.
   In fact, I remember a time before that. There was no light, but there
was music: joints creaking, blood rushing, the heart’s staccato lullaby,
a rich symphony of indigestion. Sound enfolded me, and I was safe.
   Then my world split open, and I was thrust into a cold and silent
brightness. I tried to fill the emptiness with my screams, but the space
was too vast. I raged, but there was no going back.
   I remember nothing more; I was a baby, however peculiar. Blood
and panic meant little to me. I do not recall the horrified midwife, my
father weeping, or the priest’s benediction for my mother’s soul.
   My mother left me a complicated and burdensome inheritance. My
father hid the dreadful details from everyone, including me. He
moved us back to Lavondaville, the capital of Goredd, and picked up
his law practice where he had dropped it. He invented a more
acceptable grade of dead wife for himself. I believed in her like some
people believe in Heaven.
   I was a finicky baby; I wouldn’t suckle unless the wet nurse sang
exactly on pitch. “It has a discriminating ear,” observed Orma, a tall,
angular acquaintance of my father’s who came over often in those
days. Orma called me “it” as if I were a dog; I was drawn to his
aloofness, the way cats gravitate toward people who’d rather avoid
them.
   He accompanied us to the cathedral one spring morning, where the
young priest anointed my wispy hair with lavender oil and told me
that in the eyes of Heaven I was as a queen. I bawled like any self-
respecting baby; my shrieks echoed up and down the nave. Without
bothering to look up from the work he’d brought with him, my father
promised to bring me up piously in the faith of Allsaints. The priest
handed me my father’s psalter and I dropped it, right on cue. It fell
open at the picture of St. Yirtrudis, whose face had been blacked out.
   The priest kissed his hand, pinkie raised. “Your psalter still contains
the heretic!”
   “It’s a very old psalter,” said Papa, not looking up, “and I hate to
maim a book.”
   “We advise the bibliophilic faithful to paste Yirtrudis’s pages
together so this mistake can’t happen.” The priest flipped a page.
“Heaven surely meant St. Capiti.”
   Papa muttered something about superstitious fakery, just loud
enough for the priest to hear. There followed a fierce argument
between my father and the priest, but I don’t remember it. I was
gazing, transfixed, at a procession of monks passing through the nave.
They padded by in soft shoes, a flurry of dark, whispering robes and
clicking beads, and took their places in the cathedral’s quire. Seats
scraped and creaked; several monks coughed.
   They began to sing.
   The cathedral, reverberating with masculine song, appeared to
expand before my eyes. The sun gleamed through the high windows;
gold and crimson bloomed upon the marble floor. The music buoyed
my small form, filled and surrounded me, made me larger than
myself. It was the answer to a question I had never asked, the way to
fill the dread emptiness into which I had been born. I believed—no, I
knew—I could transcend the vastness and touch the vaulted ceiling
with my hand.
   I tried to do it.
   My nurse squealed as I nearly squirmed out of her arms. She
gripped me by the ankle at an awkward angle. I stared dizzily at the
floor; it seemed to tilt and spin.
   My father took me up, long hands around my fat torso, and held me
at arm’s length as if he had discovered an oversized and astonishing
frog. I met his sea-gray eyes; they crinkled sadly at the corners.
   The priest stormed off without blessing me. Orma watched him
disappear around the end of the Golden House, then said, “Claude,
explain this. Did he leave because you convinced him his religion is a
sham? Or was he … what’s that one called? Offended?”
   My father seemed not to hear; something about me had captured
his attention. “Look at her eyes. I could swear she understands us.”
   “It has a lucid gaze for an infant,” said Orma, pushing up his
spectacles and leveling his own piercing stare at me. His eyes were
dark brown, like my own; unlike mine, they were as distant and
inscrutable as the night sky.
   “I have been unequal to this task, Seraphina,” said Papa softly. “I
may always be unequal, but I believe I can do better. We must find a
way to be family to each other.”
   He kissed my downy head. He’d never done that before. I gaped at
him, awed. The monks’ liquid voices surrounded us and held us all
three together. For a single, glorious moment I recovered that first
feeling, the one I’d lost by being born: everything was as it should be,
and I was exactly where I belonged.
   And then it was gone. We passed through the bronze-bossed doors
of the cathedral; the music faded behind us. Orma stalked off across
the square without saying goodbye, his cloak flapping like the wings
of an enormous bat. Papa handed me to my nurse, pulled his cloak
tightly around himself, and hunched his shoulders against the gusting
wind. I cried for him, but he did not turn around. Above us arched the
sky, empty and very far away.



Superstitious fakery or not, the psalter’s message was clear: The truth
may not be told. Here is an acceptable lie.
  Not that St. Capiti—may she keep me in her heart—made a poor
substitute saint. She was shockingly apropos, in fact. St. Capiti carried
her own head on a plate like a roast goose; it glared out from the
page, daring me to judge her. She represented the life of the mind,
utterly divorced from the sordid goings-on of the body.
  I appreciated that division as I grew older and was overtaken by
bodily grotesqueries of my own, but even when I was very young, I
always felt a visceral sympathy for St. Capiti. Who could love
someone with a detached head? How could she accomplish anything
meaningful in this world when her hands were occupied with that
platter? Did she have people who understood her and would claim her
as a friend?
  Papa had permitted my nurse to glue St. Yirtrudis’s pages together;
the poor lady could not rest easy in our house until it was done. I
never did get a look at the heretic. If I held the page up to the light I
could just discern the shapes of both saints, blended together into one
terrible monster saint. St. Yirtrudis’s outstretched arms sprang out of
St. Capiti’s back like a pair of ineffectual wings; her shadow-head
loomed where St. Capiti’s should have been. She was a double saint
for my double life.
   My love of music eventually lured me from the safety of my father’s
house, propelling me into the city and the royal court. I took a terrible
risk, but I could not do otherwise. I did not understand that I carried
loneliness before me on a plate, and that music would be the light
illuminating me from behind.
At the center of the cathedral stood a model of Heaven called the
Golden House. Its roof unfolded like a flower to reveal a human-sized
hollow, in which the body of poor Prince Rufus lay shrouded in gold
and white. His feet rested upon the House’s blessed threshold; his
head lay cradled by a nest of gilded stars.
   At least, it should have been. Prince Rufus’s killer had decapitated
him. The Guard had scoured forest and marshland, looking in vain for
the prince’s head; he was to be buried without it.
   I stood upon the steps of the cathedral quire, facing the funeral.
From the high balcony pulpit to my left, the bishop prayed over the
Golden House, the royal family, and the noble mourners crowding the
heart of the church. Beyond a wooden railing, common mourners
filled the cavernous nave. As soon as the bishop finished his prayer, I
was to play the Invocation to St. Eustace, who escorted spirits up the
Heavenly Stair. I swayed dizzily, terrified, as if I had been asked to
play flute upon a windy cliff.
   In fact, I had not been asked to play at all. I was not on the
program; I had promised Papa when I left that I wouldn’t perform in
public. I had heard the Invocation once or twice, but never before
played it. This wasn’t even my flute.
   My chosen soloist, however, had sat upon his instrument and bent
its reed; my backup soloist had drunk too many libations for Prince
Rufus’s soul and was out in the cloister garden, sick with regret. There
was no second backup. The funeral would be ruined without the
Invocation. I was responsible for the music, so it was up to me.
   The bishop’s prayer wound down; he described the glorious
Heavenly Home, dwelling of All Saints, where all of us would rest
someday in eternal bliss. He didn’t list exceptions; he didn’t have to.
My eyes flicked involuntarily toward the dragon ambassador and the
goodwill contingent from his embassy, seated behind the nobility but
ahead of the common rabble. They were in their saarantrai—their
human forms—but were immediately distinguishable even at this
distance by the silver bells at their shoulders, the empty seats around
them, and their disinclination to bow their heads during a prayer.
   Dragons have no souls. No one expected piety from them.
   “Be it ever so!” intoned the bishop. That was my signal to play, but
at that exact moment I noticed my father in the crowded nave,
beyond the barrier. His face was pale and drawn. I could hear in my
head the words he’d said the day I left for court a mere two weeks
ago: Under no circumstances are you to draw attention to yourself. If you
won’t think of your own safety, at least remember all I have to lose!
   The bishop cleared his throat, but my insides were ice and I could
barely breathe.
   I cast about desperately for some better focus.
   My eyes lit upon the royal family, three generations seated together
before the Golden House, a tableau of grief. Queen Lavonda had left
her gray locks loose around her shoulders; her watery blue eyes were
red with weeping for her son. Princess Dionne sat tall and glared
fiercely, as if plotting revenge upon her younger brother’s killers, or
upon Rufus himself for failing to reach his fortieth birthday. Princess
Glisselda, Dionne’s daughter, laid her golden head upon her
grandmother’s shoulder to comfort her. Prince Lucian Kiggs,
Glisselda’s cousin and fiancé, sat a little apart from the family and
stared without seeing. He was not Prince Rufus’s son, but he looked as
shocked and stricken as if he’d lost his own father.
   They needed Heaven’s peace. I knew little of Saints, but I knew
about sorrow and about music as sorrow’s surest balm. That was
comfort I could give. I raised the flute to my lips and my eyes toward
the vaulted ceiling, and began to play.
   I began too quietly, unsure of the melody, but the notes seemed to
find me and my confidence grew. The music flew from me like a dove
released into the vastness of the nave; the cathedral itself lent it new
richness and gave something back, as if this glorious edifice, too, were
my instrument.
   There are melodies that speak as eloquently as words, that flow
logically and inevitably from a single, pure emotion. The Invocation is
of this kind, as if its composer had sought to distill the purest essence
of mourning, to say, Here is what it is to lose someone.
   I repeated the Invocation twice, reluctant to let it go, anticipating
the end of the music as another palpable loss. I set the last note free,
strained my ears for the final dying echo, and felt myself crumple
inside, exhausted. There would be no applause, as befit the dignity of
the occasion, but the silence was itself deafening. I looked across the
plain of faces, across the assembled nobility and other guests of
quality, to the crushing mob of common folk beyond the barrier.
There was no movement but for the dragons shifting uneasily in their
seats and Orma, pressed up against the railing, absurdly flapping his
hat at me.
  I was too drained to find him embarrassing. I bowed my head and
retreated from view.



I was the new assistant to the court composer and had beaten out
twenty-seven other musicians for the job, from itinerant troubadours
to acclaimed masters. I was a surprise; no one at the conservatory had
paid me any heed as Orma’s protégée. Orma was a lowly music theory
teacher, not a real musician. He played harpsichord competently, but
then the instrument played itself if he hit the right keys. He lacked
passion and musicality. Nobody expected a full-time student of his to
amount to anything.
  My anonymity was by design. Papa had forbidden me to fraternize
with the other students and teachers; I saw the sense in that, however
lonely I was. He had not explicitly forbidden me to audition for jobs,
but I knew perfectly well he wouldn’t like it. This was our usual
progression: he set narrow limits and I complied until I couldn’t
anymore. It was always music that pushed me beyond what he
considered safe. Still, I hadn’t foreseen the depth and breadth of his
rage when he learned I was leaving home. I knew his anger was really
fear for me, but that didn’t make it any easier to bear.
  Now I worked for Viridius, the court composer, who was in poor
health and desperately needed an assistant. The fortieth anniversary
of the treaty between Goredd and dragonkind was rapidly
approaching, and Ardmagar Comonot himself, the great dragon
general, would be here for the celebrations in just ten days. Concerts,
balls, and other musical entertainments were Viridius’s responsibility.
I was to help audition performers and organize programs, and to give
Princess Glisselda her harpsichord lesson, which Viridius found
tedious.
  That had kept me busy for my first two weeks, but the unexpected
interruption of this funeral had piled on additional work. Viridius’s
gout had put him out of commission, so the entire musical program
had been left up to me.
   Prince Rufus’s body was removed to the crypt, accompanied only by
the royal family, the clergy, and the most important guests. The
cathedral choir sang the Departure, and the crowd began to dissipate.
I staggered back into the apse. I had never performed for an audience
of more than one or two; I had not anticipated the anxiety beforehand
and the exhaustion afterward.
   Saints in Heaven, it was like standing up naked in front of the entire
world.
   I stumbled about, congratulating my musicians and supervising
their removal. Guntard, my self-appointed assistant, trotted up behind
me and clapped an unwelcome hand upon my shoulder. “Music
Mistress! That was beyond beautiful!”
   I nodded weary thanks, twisting out of his reach.
   “There’s an old man here to see you,” Guntard continued. “He
showed up during your solo, but we put him off.” He gestured up the
apse toward a chapel, where an elderly man loitered. His dark
complexion meant he’d come from distant Porphyry. His graying hair
was done in tidy plaits; his face crinkled in a smile.
   “Who is he?” I asked.
   Guntard tossed his bowl-cut locks disdainfully. “He’s got a mess of
pygegyria dancers, and some daft notion that we’d want them dancing
at the funeral.” Guntard’s lips curled into that sneer, both judgmental
and envious, that Goreddis get when they speak of decadent
foreigners.
   I would never have considered pygegyria for the program; we
Goreddis don’t dance at funerals. However, I couldn’t let Guntard’s
sneering pass. “Pygegyria is an ancient and respected dance form in
Porphyry.”
   Guntard snorted. “Pygegyria literally translates as ‘bum-waggling’!”
He glanced nervously at the Saints in their alcoves, noticed several of
them frowning, and kissed his knuckle piously. “Anyway, his troupe’s
in the cloister, befuddling the monks.”
   My head was beginning to hurt. I handed Guntard the flute. “Return
this to its owner. And send away this dance troupe—politely, please.”
   “You’re going back already?” asked Guntard. “A bunch of us are
going to the Sunny Monkey.” He laid a hand upon my left forearm.
   I froze, fighting the impulse to shove him or run away. I took a
deep breath to calm myself. “Thank you, but I can’t,” I said, peeling
his hand off me, hoping he wouldn’t be offended.
   His expression said he was, a little.
   It wasn’t his fault; he assumed I was a normal person, whose arm
might be touched with impunity. I wanted so much to make friends at
this job, but a reminder always followed, like night after day: I could
never let my guard down completely.
   I turned toward the quire to fetch my cloak; Guntard shuffled off to
do my bidding. Behind me, the old man cried, “Lady, wait! Abdo has
to coming all this way, just for meeting you!”
   I kept my eyes straight ahead, ducking up the steps and out of his
line of sight.
   The monks had finished singing the Departure and begun it again,
but the nave was still half full; no one seemed to want to leave. Prince
Rufus had been popular. I had barely known him, but he had spoken
kindly, a sparkle in his eyes, when Viridius introduced me. He’d
sparkled at half the city, to gauge by the loitering citizens, speaking in
hushed voices and shaking their heads in disbelief.
   Rufus had been murdered while hunting, and the Queen’s Guard
had found no clues as to who’d done it. The missing head would
suggest dragons, to some. I imagined the saarantrai who attended the
funeral were only too aware of this. We had only ten days before the
Ardmagar arrived, and fourteen days until the anniversary of the
treaty. If a dragon had killed Prince Rufus, that was some
spectacularly unfortunate timing. Our citizens were jumpy enough
about dragonkind already.
   I started down the south aisle, but the southern door was blocked
by construction. A jumble of wooden and metal pipes took up half the
floor. I continued down the nave toward the great doors, keeping an
eye out lest my father ambush me from behind a column.
   “Thank you!” cried an elderly lady-in-waiting as I passed. She put
her hands to her heart. “I have never been so moved.”
   I gave half courtesy as I walked past, but her enthusiasm attracted
other nearby courtiers. “Transcendent!” I heard, and “Sublime!” I
nodded graciously and tried to smile as I dodged the hands that
reached for mine. I edged my way out of the crowd, my smile feeling
as stiff and hollow as a saarantras’s.
   I put up the hood of my cloak as I passed a cluster of citizens in
homespun white tunics. “I’ve buried more people than I can count—
sit they all at Heaven’s table,” declaimed a large guildsman with a
white felt hat jammed onto his head, “but I never seen the Heavenly
Stair until today.”
   “I never heard nobody play like that. It weren’t quite womanly, do
you think?”
   “She’s a foreigner, maybe.” They laughed.
   I wrapped my arms tightly around myself and quickened my pace
toward the great doors, kissing my knuckle toward Heaven because
that is what one does when exiting the cathedral, even when one
is … me.
   I burst out into the wan afternoon light, filling my lungs with cold,
clean air, feeling my tension dissipate. The winter sky was a blinding
blue; departing mourners skittered around like leaves in the bitter
wind.
   Only then did I notice the dragon waiting for me on the cathedral
steps, flashing me his best facsimile of a proper human smile. No one
in the world could have found Orma’s strained expression
heartwarming but me.
Orma had a scholar’s exemption from the bell, so few people ever
realized he was a dragon. He had his quirks, certainly: he never
laughed; he had little comprehension of fashion, manners, or art; he
had a taste for difficult mathematics and fabrics that didn’t itch.
Another saarantras would have known him by smell, but few humans
had a keen enough nose to detect saar, or the knowledge to recognize
what they were smelling. To the rest of Goredd, he was just a man:
tall, spare, bearded, and bespectacled.
   The beard was false; I pulled it off once when I was a baby. Male
saarantrai could not grow beards under their own power, a peculiarity
of transformation, like their silver blood. Orma didn’t need facial hair
to pass; I think he just liked the way it looked.
   He waved his hat at me, as if there were any chance I didn’t see
him. “You still rush your glissandi, but you seem finally to have
mastered that uvular flutter,” he said, dispensing with any greeting.
Dragons never see the point.
   “It’s nice to see you too,” I said, then regretted the sarcasm, even
though he wouldn’t notice it. “I’m glad you liked it.”
   He squinted and cocked his head to one side, as he did when he
knew he was missing some crucial detail but couldn’t work out what.
“You think I should have said hello first,” he hazarded.
   I sighed. “I think I’m too tired to care that I fell short of technical
perfection.”
   “This is precisely what I never comprehend,” he said, shaking his
felt hat at me. He seemed to have forgotten it was for wearing. “Had
you played perfectly—like a saar might have—you would not have
affected your listeners so. People wept, and not because you
sometimes hum while you play.”
   “You’re joking,” I said, mortified.
   “It created an interesting effect. Most of the time it was
harmonious, fourths and fifths, but every now and then you’d burst
into a dissonant seventh. Why?”
   “I didn’t know I was doing it!”
   Orma looked down abruptly. A young urchin, her mourning tunic
white in spirit if not in fact, tugged urgently at the hem of Orma’s
short cloak. “I’m attracting small children,” Orma muttered, twisting
his hat in his hands. “Shoo it away, will you?”
   “Sir?” said the girl. “This is for you.” She wormed her small hand
into his.
   I caught a glint of gold. What lunacy was this, a beggar giving Orma
coin?
   Orma stared at the object in his hand. “Was there some message
with it?” His voice caught when he spoke, and I felt a chill. That was
an emotion, clear as day. I’d never heard the like from him.
   “ ‘The token is the message,’ ” recited the girl.
   Orma raised his head and looked all around us, sweeping his eyes
from the great doors of the cathedral, down the steps, over the
peopled plaza, across to Cathedral Bridge, along the river, and back. I
looked too, reflexively, having no notion what we were looking for.
The sinking sun blazed above the rooftops; a crowd gathered on the
bridge; the garish Comonot Clock across the square pointed to Ten
Days; bare trees along the river tossed in the breeze. I saw nothing
else.
   I looked back at Orma, who now searched the ground as if he’d
dropped something. I assumed he’d lost the coin, but no. “Where did
she go?” he asked.
   The girl was gone.
   “What did she give you?” I asked.
   He did not reply, carefully tucking the object into the front of his
woolen mourning doublet, flashing me a glimpse of the silk shirt
beneath.
   “Fine,” I said. “Don’t tell me.”
   He looked puzzled. “I have no intention of telling you.”
   I inhaled slowly, trying not to be cross with him. At that very
moment a commotion broke out on Cathedral Bridge. I looked toward
the shouting, and my stomach dropped: six thugs with black feathers
in their caps—Sons of St. Ogdo—had formed a semicircle around
some poor fellow to one side of the bridge. People streamed toward
the noise from all directions.
   “Let’s go back inside until this blows over,” I said, grabbing for
Orma’s sleeve a second too late. He’d noticed what was happening
and was rapidly descending the steps toward the mob.
   The fellow pinned against the bridge railings was a dragon. I’d
discerned the silver glint of his bell all the way from the steps of the
cathedral. Orma shouldered his way through the crowd. I tried to stay
close, but someone shoved me and I stumbled into open space at the
front of the throng, where the Sons of St. Ogdo brandished truncheons
at the cringing saarantras. They recited from St. Ogdo’s Malediction
Against the Beast: “ ‘Cursed be thine eyes, worm! Cursed be thy
hands, thy heart, thy issue unto the end of days! All Saints curse thee,
Eye of Heaven curse thee, thine every serpentine thought turn back
upon thee as a curse!’ ”
   I pitied the dragon now that I saw his face. He was a raw newskin,
scrawny and badly groomed, all awkward angles and unfocused eyes.
A goose egg, puffy and gray, swelled along his sallow cheekbone.
   The crowd howled at my back, a wolf ready to gnaw whatever
bloody bones the Sons might throw. Two of the Sons had drawn
knives, and a third had pulled a length of chain out of his leather
jerkin. He twitched it menacingly behind him, like a tail; it clattered
against the paving stones of the bridge.
   Orma maneuvered into the saarantras’s line of sight and gestured at
his earrings to remind his fellow what to do. The newskin made no
move. Orma reached for one of his own and activated it.
   Dragons’ earrings were wondrous devices, capable of seeing,
hearing, and speaking across distances. A saarantras could call for
help, or could be monitored by his superiors. Orma had once taken his
earrings apart to show me; they were machines, but most humans
believed them to be something far more diabolical.
   “Did you bite Prince Rufus’s head off, worm?” cried one of the Sons,
a muscled riverman. He grabbed the newskin’s twiggy arm as if he
might break it.
   The saarantras squirmed in his ill-fitting clothes, and the Sons
recoiled as if wings, horns, and tail might burst out of his skin at any
moment. “The treaty forbids us biting off human heads,” said the
newskin, his voice like a rusty hinge. “But I won’t pretend I’ve
forgotten what they taste like.”
   The Sons would have been happy with any pretext for beating him
up, but the one he’d handed them was so horrifying that they stood
paralyzed for a heartbeat.
   Then with a feral roar, the mob came alive. The Sons charged the
newskin, slamming him back against the railing. I glimpsed a gash
across his forehead, a wash of silver blood down the side of his face,
before the crowd closed ranks around me, cutting off my view.
   I pushed through, chasing Orma’s shrubby dark hair and beaky
nose. All it would take for the mob to turn on him was a gashed lip
and a glimpse of his silver blood. I shouted his name, screamed it, but
he could not hear me above the commotion.
   Shrieks arose from the direction of the cathedral; galloping hooves
rang out across the plaza. The Guard had arrived at last, bagpipes
brawling. The Sons of St. Ogdo flung their hats into the air and
disappeared into the crowd. Two threw themselves over the bridge
railing, but I only heard one splash in the river.
   Orma was squatting beside the crumpled newskin; I rushed toward
him against the current of fleeing townspeople. I dared not embrace
him, but my relief was so great that I knelt and took his hand. “Thank
Allsaints!”
   Orma shook me off. “Help me raise him, Seraphina.”
   I scrambled to the other side and took the newskin’s arm. He gaped
at me stupidly; his head lolled onto my shoulder, smearing my cloak
with his silver blood. I swallowed my revulsion. We hauled the
injured saar to his feet and balanced him upright. He shrugged off our
help and stood on his own, teetering in the biting breeze.
   The Captain of the Guard, Prince Lucian Kiggs, stalked toward us.
People parted before him like the waves before St. Fionnuala. He was
still in his funeral weeds, a short white houppelande with long dagged
sleeves, but all his sorrow had been replaced by a spectacular
annoyance.
   I tugged Orma’s sleeve. “Let’s go.”
   “I can’t. The embassy will fix on my earring. I must stay close to the
newskin.”
   I’d glimpsed the bastard prince across crowded halls at court. He
had a reputation as a shrewd and dogged investigator; he worked all
the time and was not as outgoing as his uncle Rufus had been. He was
also not as handsome—no beard, alas—but seeing him up close, I
realized that the intelligence of his gaze more than made up for that.
   I looked away. Saints’ dogs, there was dragon blood all over my
shoulder.
   Prince Lucian ignored Orma and me and addressed the newskin, his
brows drawn in concern. “You’re bleeding!”
   The newskin raised his face for inspection. “It looks worse than it is,
Your Grace. These human heads contain a great many blood vessels,
easily perforated by—”
   “Yes, yes.” The prince winced at the newskin’s gash and signaled to
one of his men, who rushed up with a cloth and a canteen of water.
The newskin opened the canteen and began pouring the water straight
onto his head. It trickled down his scalp in ineffectual rivulets,
soaking his doublet.
   Saints in Heaven. He was going to freeze himself, and here were
Goredd’s finest just letting him do it. I snatched the cloth and canteen
from his unresisting hands, wet the cloth, and demonstrated how he
was to dab at his face. He took over the dabbing and I backed away.
Prince Lucian nodded cordially in thanks.
   “You’re rather transparently new, saar,” said the prince. “What’s
your name?”
   “Basind.”
   It sounded more like a belch than a name. I caught the inevitable
look of pity and disgust in the prince’s dark eyes. “How did this
begin?” he asked.
   “I don’t know,” said Basind. “I was walking home from the fish
market—”
   “Someone as new as yourself should not be walking around on your
own,” snapped the prince. “Surely the embassy has made that
abundantly clear to you?”
   I looked at Basind, finally taking stock of his clothing: doublet,
trunk hose, and the telltale insignia.
   “Were you lost?” probed Prince Lucian. Basind shrugged. The
prince spoke more gently: “They followed you?”
   “I do not know. I was cogitating upon preparations for river plaice.”
He flapped a soggy parcel in the prince’s face. “They surrounded me.”
   Prince Lucian dodged the fishy packet, undeterred from
questioning. “How many were there?”
   “Two hundred nineteen, although there may have been some I
couldn’t see.”
   The prince’s mouth fell open. He was unused to interrogating
dragons, evidently. I decided to bail him out. “How many with black
feathers in their caps, saar Basind?”
   “Six,” said Basind, blinking like someone unused to having only two
eyelids.
   “Did you get a look at them, Seraphina?” asked the prince, clearly
relieved that I’d stepped in.
   I nodded dumbly, a light panic seizing me at the prince’s speaking
my name. I was a palace nobody; why would he know it?
   He continued addressing me: “I’ll have my boys bring round
whomever they’ve nabbed. You, the newskin, and your friend
there”—he indicated Orma—“should look them over and see if you
can describe the ones we’ve missed.”
   The prince signaled his men to bring forth their captives, then
leaned in and answered the question I hadn’t asked. “Cousin Glisselda
has been talking about you nonstop. She was ready to give up music.
It’s fortunate you came to us when you did.”
   “Viridius was too hard on her,” I muttered, embarrassed.
   He flicked his dark eyes toward Orma, who had turned away and
was scanning the distance for embassy saarantrai. “What’s your tall
friend’s name? He’s a dragon, isn’t he?”
   This prince was too sharp for my comfort. “What makes you think
so?”
   “Just a hunch. I’m right, then?”
   I’d gone sweaty, despite the cold. “His name is Orma. He’s my
teacher.”
   Lucian Kiggs scrutinized my face. “Fair enough. I’ll want to see his
exemption papers. I’ve only just inherited the list; I don’t know all our
stealth scholars, as Uncle Rufus used to call them.” His dark eyes grew
distant, but he recovered himself. “Orma has hailed the embassy, I
suppose?”
   “Yes.”
   “Bah. Then we’d best get this over with before I have to go on the
defensive.”
   One of his men paraded the captives in front of us; they’d only
caught two. I’d have thought the ones who jumped into the river
would have been easily identified when they came out soaking wet
and shivering, but maybe the Guard hadn’t realized …
   “Two of them leaped the bridge railing, but I only heard one
splash,” I began.
   Prince Lucian apprehended my meaning immediately. With four
swift hand gestures, he directed his soldiers to both sides of the
bridge. On a silent count of three, they swung themselves underneath
the bridge, and sure enough, one of the Sons was still there, clinging
to the beams. They flushed him out like a partridge; unlike a
partridge, he couldn’t fly even a little. He splashed down in the river,
two of the Guard leaping in after him.
   The prince cast me an appraising look. “You’re observant.”
   “Sometimes,” I said, avoiding his eye.
   “Captain Kiggs,” intoned a low female voice behind me.
   “Here we go,” he muttered, stepping around me. I turned to see a
saarantras with short black hair leap down from a horse. She rode like
a man in trousers and a split caftan, a silver bell as large as an apple
fastened ostentatiously to her cloak clasp. The three saarantrai behind
her did not dismount, but kept their eager steeds at the ready; their
bells jingled a disconcertingly merry cadence on the wind.
   “Undersecretary Eskar.” The prince approached her with an
outstretched hand. She did not deign to take it, but strode
purposefully toward Basind.
   “Report,” she said.
   Basind saluted saar fashion, gesturing at the sky. “All in ard. The
Guard arrived with tolerable haste, Undersecretary. Captain Kiggs has
come directly from his uncle’s graveside.”
   “The cathedral is a two-minute walk from here,” said Eskar. “The
time differential between your signal and the second one is almost
thirteen minutes. If the Guard had been here at that point, the second
would not have been necessary at all.”
   Prince Lucian drew himself up slowly, his face a mask of calm. “So
this was some sort of test?”
   “It was,” she said dispassionately. “We find your security
inadequate, Captain Kiggs. This is the third attack in three weeks, and
the second where a saar was injured.”
   “An attack you set up shouldn’t count. You know this is atypical.
People are on edge. General Comonot arrives in ten days—”
   “Precisely why you need to do a better job,” she said coolly.
   “—and Prince Rufus was just murdered in a suspiciously draconian
manner.”
   “There’s no evidence that a dragon did it,” she said.
   “His head is missing!” The prince gestured vehemently toward his
own head, his clenched teeth and windblown hair lending a mad
ferocity to the pose.
   Eskar raised an eyebrow. “No human could have accomplished such
a thing?”
   Prince Lucian turned sharply away from her and paced in a small
circle, rubbing a hand down his face. It’s no good getting angry at
saarantrai; the hotter your temper, the colder they get. Eskar
remained infuriatingly neutral.
   His pique under wraps, the prince tried again. “Eskar, please
understand: this frightens people. There’s still so much deep-seated
distrust. The Sons of St. Ogdo take advantage of that, tap into people’s
fears—”
   “Forty years,” interrupted Eskar. “We’ve had forty years of peace.
You weren’t even born when Comonot’s Treaty was signed. Your own
mother—”
   “Rest she on Heaven’s hearthstone,” I mumbled, as if it were my job
to make up for the social inadequacies of dragons everywhere. The
prince flashed me a grateful glance.
   “—was but a speck in the queen’s womb,” continued Eskar placidly,
as if I hadn’t spoken. “Only your elders remember the war, but it is
not the old who join the Sons of St. Ogdo or riot in the streets. How
can there be deep-seated distrust in people who’ve never been
through the fires of war? My own father fell to your knights and their
insidious dracomachia. All saarantrai remember those days; all of us
lost family. We’ve let that go, as we had to, for the peace. We hold no
grudge.
   “Do your people pass emotions through your blood, mother to
child, the way we dragons pass memories? Do you inherit your fears?
I do not comprehend how this persists in the population—or why you
will not crush it,” said Eskar.
   “We prefer not to crush our own. Call it one of our irrationalities,”
said Prince Lucian, smiling grimly. “Maybe we can’t reason our way
out of our feelings the way you can; maybe it takes several
generations to calm our fears. Then again, I’m not the one judging an
entire species by the actions of a few.”
   Eskar was unmoved. “Ardmagar Comonot will have my report. It
remains to be seen whether he cancels his upcoming visit.”
   Prince Lucian hoisted his smile, like a flag of surrender. “It would
save me a lot of difficulty if he stayed home. How kind of you to
consider my well-being.”
   Eskar cocked her head, birdlike, and then shook off her perplexity.
She directed her entourage to collect Basind, who had drifted to the
end of the bridge and was rubbing himself against the railing like a
cat.
   The dull ache behind my eyes had turned into a persistent
pounding, as if someone were knocking to be let out. That was bad;
my headaches were never just headaches. I didn’t want to leave
without learning what the urchin had given Orma, but Eskar had
taken Orma aside; they had their heads together, talking quietly.
   “He must be an excellent teacher,” said Prince Lucian, his voice so
close and sudden that I startled.
   I made half courtesy in silence. I could not discuss Orma in detail
with anyone, let alone the Captain of the Queen’s Guard.
   “He’d have to be,” he said. “We were amazed when Viridius chose a
woman as his assistant. Not that a woman couldn’t do the job, but
Viridius is old-fashioned. You’d have to be something astonishing to
get his attention.”
   I made full courtesy this time, but he kept talking. “Your solo was
truly moving. I’m sure everyone’s telling you this, but there wasn’t a
dry eye in the cathedral.”
   Of course. I would never be comfortably anonymous again, it
seemed. That’s what I got for disregarding Papa’s advice. “Thank
you,” I said. “Excuse me, Highness. I need to see my teacher about
my, er, trills.… ”
   I turned my back on him. It was the height of rudeness. He hovered
behind me for a moment, then walked away. I glanced back. The last
rays of the setting sun turned his mourning clothes almost golden. He
commandeered a horse from one of his sergeants, leaped up with
balletic grace, and directed the corps back into formation.
   I permitted myself one small pang for the inevitability of his
disdain, then shoved that feeling aside and moved toward Orma and
Eskar.
   When I reached them, Orma held out an arm without touching me.
“I present: Seraphina,” he said.
   Undersecretary Eskar looked down her aquiline nose as if checking
human features off a list. Two arms: check. Two legs: unconfirmed
due to long houppelande. Two eyes, bovine brown: check. Hair the
color of strong tea, escaping its plait: check. Breasts: not obviously.
Tall, but within normal parameters. Furious or embarrassed redness
upon cheeks: check.
   “Hmph,” she said. “It’s not nearly as hideous as I always pictured
it.”
   Orma, bless his shriveled dragon heart, corrected her. “She.”
   “Is it not infertile as a mule?”
   My face grew so hot I half expected my hair to catch fire.
   “She,” said Orma firmly, as if he himself had not made the same
mistake the first time. “All humans take a gendered pronoun,
irrespective of reproductive fitness.”
   “We take offense otherwise,” I said through a brittle smile.
   Eskar lost interest abruptly, releasing me from her gaze. Her
underlings were returning from the other end of the bridge, leading
saar Basind on a skittish horse. Undersecretary Eskar mounted her
bay, wheeled it in a tight circle, and spurred it forward without so
much as a backward glance at Orma and me. Her retinue followed.
   As they passed, Basind’s reeling eye lit on me for a long moment; I
felt a sharp shock of revulsion. Orma, Eskar, and the others may have
learned to pass, but here was a stark reminder of what lay beneath.
His was no human gaze.
   I turned to Orma, who stared pensively at nothing. “That was
thoroughly humiliating,” I said.
   He startled. “Was it?”
   “What were you thinking, telling her about me?” I said. “I may be
out from under my father’s thumb, but the old rules still apply. We
can’t just go telling everyone—”
   “Ah,” he said, raising a slender hand to fend off my argument. “I
didn’t tell her. Eskar has always known. She used to be with the
Censors.”
   My stomach turned; the Censors, a dragon agency accountable only
to themselves, policed saarantrai for undragonlike behavior and
routinely excised the brains of dragons they considered emotionally
compromised. “Wonderful. So what have you done to attract the
Censors’ attention this time?”
   “Nothing,” he said quickly. “Anyway, she’s not with the Censors
anymore.”
   “I thought maybe they were after you for exhibiting undue affection
for me,” I said, then added mordantly: “You’d think I would have
noticed something like that.”
   “I bear you an appropriate interest, within accepted emotive
parameters.”
   That seemed like overstating it, alas.
   To his credit, he knew this subject upset me. Not every saar would
have cared. He squirmed, as usual not sure what to do with the
information. “You will come for your lesson this week?” he said,
making a verbal gesture toward the familiar, as close to comfort as he
could contrive to give me.
   I sighed. “Of course. And you’ll tell me what that child gave you.”
   “You seem to think there’s something to tell,” he said, but his hand
went involuntarily to his chest, where he’d stashed the bit of gold. I
felt a stab of concern, but knew it was no good haranguing him. He
would tell me when he decided to tell me.
   He declined to tell me goodbye, as was his usual custom; he turned
without a word and took off toward the cathedral. Its facade blazed
red with the setting sun; Orma’s retreating figure made a dark hatch
mark against it. I watched until he disappeared around the end of the
north transept, and then I watched the space where he had vanished.
   I barely noticed loneliness anymore; it was my normal condition, by
necessity if not by nature. After today’s stresses, though, it weighed on
me more than usual. Orma knew everything about me, but he was a
dragon. On a good day, he was friend enough. On a bad day, running
into his inadequacy was like tripping up the stairs. It hurt, but it felt
like my own fault.
   Still, he was all I had.
   The only sounds were the river below me, the wind in the empty
trees, and faint snatches of song, carried all the way downstream from
the taverns near the music school. I listened with my arms wrapped
around myself and watched the stars blink into being. I wiped my
eyes on my sleeve—surely it was the wind making them water—and
set off for home thinking of Orma, of everything I felt that must
remain unsaid, and of every debt I owed him that could never be
repaid.
Orma had saved my life three times.
   When I was eight years old, Orma hired me a dragon tutor, a young
female called Zeyd. My father had objected strenuously. He despised
dragons, despite the fact that he was the Crown’s expert on the treaty
and had even defended saarantrai in court.
   I marveled at Zeyd’s peculiarities: her angularity, the unceasing
tinkle of her bell, her ability to solve complex equations in her head.
Of all my tutors—and I went through a battalion—she was my
favorite, right up to the point where she tried to drop me off the bell
tower of the cathedral.
   She had lured me up the tower on the pretext of giving me a
physics lesson, then quick as a thought snatched me up and held me
at arm’s length over the parapet. The wind screamed in my ears. I
looked down at my shoe falling, ricocheting off the gnarled heads of
gargoyles, hitting the cobbles of the cathedral square.
   “Why do objects fall downward? Do you know?” Zeyd had said, as
pleasantly as if she’d been holding this tutorial in the nursery.
   I was too terrified to answer. I lost my other shoe and barely kept
my breakfast.
   “There are unseen forces that act upon all of us, all the time, and
they act in predictable ways. If I were to drop you from this tower”—
here she shook me, and the city spun, a vortex ready to swallow me
up—“your falling form would accelerate at a rate of thirty-two feet
per second squared. So would my hat; so did your shoes. We are all
pulled toward our doom in exactly the same way, by exactly the same
force.”
   She meant gravity—dragons aren’t good at metaphor—but her
words resonated with me more personally. Invisible factors in my life
would inevitably lead to my downfall. I felt I had known this all
along. There was no escape.
   Orma had appeared, seemingly out of nowhere, and pulled off the
impossible, rescuing me without appearing to rescue me. I didn’t
understand until years later that this had been a charade put on by
the Censors, intended to test Orma’s emotional stability and his
attachment to me. The experience left me with a deep, unshakable
horror of heights, but not a distrust of dragons, absurdly.
  The fact that a dragon had saved me played no part in that latter
calculation. No one had ever bothered to tell me Orma was a dragon.



When I was eleven, my father and I came to a crisis. I found my
mother’s flute hidden in an upstairs room. Papa had forbidden my
tutors to teach me music, but he had not explicitly stated that I was
not to teach myself. I was half lawyer; I always noticed the loopholes.
I played in secret when Papa was at work and my stepmother was at
church, working up a small repertoire of competently played folk
tunes. When Papa hosted a party on Treaty Eve, the anniversary of
peace between Goredd and dragonkind, I hid the flute near the
fireplace, intending to burst out in an impromptu performance for all
his guests.
   Papa found the flute first, guessed what I intended, and marched
me up to my room. “What do you think you’re doing?” he cried. I had
never seen his eyes so wild.
   “I’m shaming you into letting me have lessons,” I said, my voice
calmer than I felt. “When everyone hears how well I play, they’ll think
you are a fool not to let—”
   He cut me short with a violent motion, raising the flute as if he
might strike me with it. I cringed, but the blow did not land. When I
dared to raise my eyes again, he pulled the flute hard against his
knee.
   It broke with a sickening crack, like bone, or like my heart. I sank
to my knees in shock.
   Papa let the fractured instrument drop to the floor and staggered
back a step. He looked as sick as I felt, as if the flute had been some
piece of himself. “You never understood this, Seraphina,” he said. “I
have neutralized every trace of your mother, renamed her, reframed
her, given her another past—another life. Only two things of hers can
still harm us: her insufferable brother—but he won’t, with my eye
upon him—and her music.”
   “She had a brother?” I asked, my voice dense with tears. I possessed
so little of my mother, and he was taking it all away.
   He shook his head. “I am trying to keep us both safe.”
   The lock clicked when he closed my door behind him. It was
unnecessary; I could not have returned to the Treaty Eve party. I felt
sick. I lowered my forehead to the floor and wept.
   I fell asleep on the floor, my fingers wrapped around the remains of
the flute. My first impression upon waking was that I should sweep
beneath my bed. My second was that the house was oddly quiet,
considering how high the sun had risen. I washed my face at the
basin, and the cold water shocked me lucid. Of course everyone was
asleep: last night had been Treaty Eve, and they’d all stayed up till
dawn, just like Queen Lavonda and Ardmagar Comonot thirty-five
years previously, securing the future of both their peoples.
   That meant I couldn’t leave my room until someone woke up and
let me out.
   My numb grief had had an entire night to ripen into anger, and that
made me reckless, or as close as I’d ever come. I bundled up as
warmly as I could, strapped my purse to my forearm, threw open the
casement, and climbed down from my window.
   I followed my feet through alleys, over bridges, and along the icy
quays. To my surprise, I saw people up and about, street traffic, open
shops. Sledges glided by, jingling, heaped with firewood or hay.
Servants lugged jugs and baskets home from the shops, caring little
for the mud on their wooden clogs; young wives gingerly picked their
way around puddles of slush. Meat pies competed with roast chestnuts
for passersby, and a mulled-wine merchant promised raw warmth in a
cup.
   I reached St. Loola’s Square, where an enormous crowd had
gathered along both sides of the empty roadway. People chatted and
watched expectantly, huddled together against the cold.
   An old man beside me muttered to his neighbor, “I can’t believe the
Queen lets this happen. After all our sacrifice and struggle!”
   “I’m surprised that anything surprises you anymore,” said his
younger companion, smiling grimly.
   “She will rue this treaty, Maurizio.”
   “Thirty-five years, and she hasn’t rued it yet.”
   “The Queen is mad if she thinks dragons can control their thirst for
blood!”
   “Excuse me?” I squeaked, shy of strangers. Maurizio looked down at
me, eyebrows gently raised. “Are we waiting for dragons?” I said.
   He smiled. He was handsome, in a stubbly, unwashed sort of way.
“And so we are, little maidy. It’s the five-year procession.” When I
stared at him confusedly, he explained, “Every five years our noble
Queen—”
   “Our deranged despot!” cried the older man.
   “Peace, Karal. Our gracious Queen, as I was saying, permits them to
take their natural form within the city walls and march in a
procession to commemorate the treaty. She has some notion that it
will ease our fears to see them in all their sulfurous monstrosity at
regular intervals. The opposite seems more likely true, to me.”
   Half of Lavondaville had flocked to the square for the pleasure of
being terrified, if so. Only the old remembered when dragons were a
common sight, when a shadow across the sun was enough to shoot
panic down your spine. We all knew the stories—how whole villages
had burned to the ground, how you’d turn to stone if you dared look a
dragon in the eye, how valiant the knights were in the face of
terrifying odds.
   The knights had been banished years after Comonot’s Treaty took
effect. Without dragons to fight, they’d turned to antagonizing
Goredd’s neighbors, Ninys and Samsam. The three nations engaged in
festering, low-grade border wars for two decades, until our Queen put
an end to it. All the knightly orders in the Southlands had been
disbanded—even those of Ninys and Samsam—but rumor had it that
the old fighters lived in secret enclaves in the mountains or the deep
countryside.
   I found myself glancing sidelong at the old man, Karal; with all his
talk of sacrifice, I wondered whether he’d ever fought dragons. He’d
be the right age.
   The crowd gasped in unison. A horned monster was rounding the
block of shops, his arched back as high as the second-story windows,
his wings demurely folded so as not to topple nearby chimney pots.
His elegant neck curved downward like a submissive dog’s, a posture
intended to look nonthreatening.
   At least, I found him innocuous enough with his head spines
flattened. Other people didn’t seem to be catching on to his body
language; all around me horrified citizens clutched at each other,
made St. Ogdo’s sign, and muttered into their hands. A nearby woman
began shrieking hysterically—“His terrible teeth!”—until she was
hustled away by her husband.
   I watched them disappear into the crowd, wishing that I could have
reassured her: it was good to see a dragon’s teeth. A dragon with his
mouth closed was far more likely to be working up a flame. That
seemed completely obvious.
   And that gave me pause. All around me, the sight of those teeth was
making citizens sob with terror. What was obvious to me was
apparently opaque to everyone else.
   There were twelve dragons altogether; Princess Dionne and her
young daughter, Glisselda, brought up the rear of the procession in a
sledge. Under the white winter sky the dragons looked rusty, a
disappointing color for so fabled a species, but I soon realized their
shades were subtle. The right slant of sunlight brought out an
iridescent sheen in their scales; they shimmered with rich underhues,
from purple to gold.
   Karal had brought along a flask of hot tea, which he doled out
stingily to Maurizio. “It’s got to last till evening,” grumped Karal,
sniffling up a drip at the end of his nose. “If we must celebrate
Comonot’s Treaty, you’d think Ard-braggart Comonot could be
bothered to show. He scorns to come south, or take human form.”
   “I heard he fears you, sir,” said Maurizio blandly. “I think that
shows sense.”
   I wasn’t sure, afterward, how it all turned ugly. The old knight—I
felt the “sir” confirmed it—called out insults: “Worms! Gasbags! Hell-
beasts!” Several solid citizens around us joined in. Some of them
began throwing snowballs.
   A dragon near the center got spooked. Maybe the crowd drew too
close, or a snowball hit him. He raised his head and body to full
height, as tall as the three-story inn across the square. The spectators
closest to him panicked and ran.
   There was nowhere to run. They were surrounded by hundreds of
half-frozen fellow Goreddis. Collisions ensued. Collisions led to
screaming. Screaming made more dragons raise their heads in alarm.
   The lead dragon screamed, a blood-chilling bestial cry. To my
shock, I understood him: “Heads down!”
   One of the dragons opened his wings. The crowd reeled and
churned like a storm-tossed sea.
   Their leader shrieked again: “Fikri, wings folded! If you take off,
you will be in violation of section seven, article five, and I will have
your tail before a tribunal so fast—”
   To the crowd, however, the dragon’s exhortation sounded like feral
screams, and their hearts were stricken with terror. They stampeded
toward the side streets.
   The thundering herd swept me away. An elbow banged my jaw; a
kick to the knee toppled me. Someone trod on my calf; someone else
tripped over my head. I saw stars, and the sound of shouting faded.
   Then suddenly there was air again, and space.
   And hot breath on my neck. I opened my eyes.
   A dragon stood over me, his legs four pillars of sanctuary. I nearly
fainted again, but his sulfurous breath jolted me conscious. He nudged
me with his nose and gestured toward an alley.
   “I’ll escort you over there,” he cried, in the same horrible scream as
the other dragon.
   I rose, putting a shaky hand against his leg to steady myself; it was
rough and immovable as a tree, and unexpectedly warm. The snow
beneath him was melting to slush. “Thank you, saar,” I said.
   “Did you understand what I said, or are you responding to my
perceived intent?”
   I froze. I did understand, but how? I’d never studied Mootya; few
humans had. It seemed safer not to reply, so I started toward the alley
without a word. He walked behind me; people scrambled out of our
way.
   The alley led nowhere and was full of barrels, so the crowds were
not frantically squeezing through it. He planted himself at the
entrance nonetheless. The Queen’s Guard arrived, trotting in
formation across the square, plumes waving and bagpipes brawling.
Most of the dragons had organized themselves in a circle around
Princess Dionne’s carriage, shielding her from the mob; they
exchanged this duty with the Guard. The remnants of the crowd
cheered, and confidence, if not order, was restored.
   I curtsied thanks, expecting the dragon to leave. He lowered his
head to my level. “Seraphina,” he screamed.
   I stared, shocked that he knew my name. He stared back, smoke
leaking from his nostrils, his eyes black and alien.
   And yet not so alien. There was a familiarity that I could not put my
finger on. My vision wavered, as if I were staring at him through
water.
   “Nothing?” cried the saar. “She was so sure she’d be able to leave
you at least one memory.”
   The world grew dark around the edges; the shouting faded to a hiss.
I keeled over face-first in the snow.
I lie in bed, hugely pregnant. The sheets are clammy; I shiver and reel with
nausea. Orma stands across the room in a patch of sunlight, staring out the
window at nothing. He isn’t listening. I writhe with impatience; I don’t have
much time left. “I want this child to know you,” I say.
   “I am not interested in your spawn,” he says, examining his fingernails.
“Nor shall I stay in contact with your miserable husband after you die.”
   I weep, unable to stop myself but ashamed that he will see how my self-
control has eroded. He swallows, his mouth puckering as if he tastes bile. I
am monstrous in his eyes, I know, but I love him. This may be our last
chance to speak. “I’m leaving the baby some memories,” I say.
   Orma finally looks at me, his dark eyes distant. “Can you do that?”
   I don’t know for certain, and I don’t have the energy to discuss it. I shift
beneath the sheets to ease a stabbing pain in my pelvis. I say, “I intend to
leave my child a mind-pearl.”
   Orma scratches his skinny neck. “The pearl will contain memories of me,
I presume. That’s why you’re telling me this. What releases it?”
   “The sight of you as you really are,” I say, panting a bit because the
pain is growing.
   He emits a horselike snort. “Under what possible circumstances would
the child see me in my natural state?”
   “You decide, once you’re ready to admit that you’re an uncle.” I inhale
sharply as a fierce cramping grips my abdomen. There will barely be time
to make the mind-pearl. I’m not even sure I’ll have the wherewithal to
concentrate sufficiently. I speak to Orma as calmly as I can: “Get Claude.
Now. Please.”
   Forgive me, child, for including all this pain. There is no time to separate
it out.


My eyes popped open, pain searing through my head. I lay in
Maurizio’s arms, cradled like a baby. Old Karal, a few steps away, was
dancing an odd jig in the snow. The knight had found a polearm,
which he brandished at the dragon, driving it away. It retreated across
the square to its brethren.
  No, not its. His. That was Orma, my …
  I couldn’t even think it.
  Maurizio’s concerned face swam in and out of my vision. I managed
to say, “Dombegh house, near St. Fionnuala’s,” before blacking out
again. I revived only when Maurizio transferred me to my father’s
arms. Papa helped me upstairs, and I collapsed into bed.
   As I struggled in and out of consciousness, I heard my father yelling
at someone. When I awoke, Orma was at my bedside, talking as if he
had believed me awake already: “… an encapsulated maternal
memory. I don’t know what exactly she revealed, only that she
intended you to know the truth about me, and about herself.”
   He was a dragon and my mother’s brother. I had not yet dared
deduce what that made her, but he forced the conclusion upon me. I
leaned over the side of the bed and vomited. He picked his teeth with
a fingernail, staring at the mess on the floor as if it could tell him how
much I knew. “I did not expect you to attend the procession. I did not
intend you to learn this now—or ever. Your father and I were in
agreement on that,” he said. “But I could not let you be trampled by
the crowd. I’m not sure why.”
   That was all I heard of his explanations, because a vision seized me.
   It wasn’t another of my mother’s memories. I remained myself,
though disembodied, looking down upon a lively port city nestled in
the gap between coastal mountains. I did not just see it: I smelled fish
and market spices, felt the ocean’s salty breath upon my incorporeal
face. I soared through the pristine blue sky like a lark, circled over
white domes and spires, and glided above the bustling dockyards. A
lush temple garden, full of chuckling fountains and blossoming lemon
trees, drew me in. There was something there I needed to see.
   No, someone. A little boy, perhaps six years old, hung upside down
like a fruit bat in a spindly fig tree. His skin was as brown as a plowed
field, his hair like a fluffy dark cloud, his eyes lively and bright. He
ate an orange segment by segment, looking thoroughly satisfied with
himself. His gaze was intelligent, but he looked right through me as if
I were invisible.
   I returned to myself just long enough to catch my breath before two
more visions hit me in short succession. I saw a muscular Samsamese
highlander playing bagpipes on the roof of a church and then a fussy
old woman with thick spectacles excoriating her cook for putting too
much coriander in the stew. Each fresh vision compounded my
headache; my wrung-out stomach had nothing more to give.
   For a week I was bedridden; the visions came so thick and fast that
if I tried to stand I collapsed under their weight. I saw grotesque and
deformed people: men with wattles and claws; women with vestigial
wings; and a great sluglike beast churning up mud in a swamp. I
screamed myself hoarse at the sight of them, flailing against my
sweaty bedclothes and frightening my stepmother.
  My left forearm and midriff itched, burned, and erupted in weeping,
crusty patches. I tore at them savagely, which only made them worse.
  I was feverish; I couldn’t keep down food. Orma stayed by me the
entire time, and I suffered the illusion that behind his skin—behind
everyone’s—was a hollow nothingness, an inky black void. He rolled
up my sleeve to look at my arm, and I shrieked, believing he would
peel back my skin and see the emptiness beneath it.
  By the end of the week, the angry mange on my skin had hardened
and begun to flake off, revealing a band of pale rounded scales, still
soft as a baby snake’s, running from the inside of my wrist to the
outside of my elbow. A broader band encircled my waist, like a girdle.
At the sight of them, I sobbed until I was sick. Orma sat very still
beside the bed, his dark eyes unblinking, thinking his inscrutable
dragon thoughts.



“What am I to do with you, Seraphina?” asked my father. He sat
behind his desk, nervously rifling through documents. I sat across
from him on a backless stool; it was the first day I’d been well enough
to leave my room. Orma occupied the carven oak chair in front of the
window, the gray morning light haloing his uncombed hair. Anne-
Marie had brought us tea and fled, but I was the only one who’d taken
any. It grew cold in my cup.
   “What did you ever intend to do with me?” I said with some
bitterness, rubbing the rim of my cup with my thumb.
   Papa shrugged his narrow shoulders, a distant look in his sea-gray
eyes. “I had some hope of marrying you off until these gruesome
manifestations appeared on your arm and your—” He gestured at my
body, up and down.
   I tried to shrink into myself. I felt disgusting to my very soul—if I
even had a soul. My mother was a dragon. Nothing was certain
anymore.
   “I understand why you didn’t want me to know,” I muttered into
my teacup, my voice rough with shame. “Before this … this outbreak,
I might not have felt the urgency of secrecy; I might have unburdened
myself to one of the maids, or …” I’d never had many friends.
“Believe me, I see the point now.”
   “Oh, you do, do you?” said Papa, his gaze grown sharp. “Your
knowledge of the treaty and the law would not have kept you silent,
but being ugly makes it all clear to you?”
   “The time to consider the treaty and the law was before you
married her,” I said.
   “I didn’t know!” he cried. He shook his head and said in a gentler
tone, “She never told me. She died giving birth to you, bleeding silver
all over the bed, and I was thrown into the deep end of the sea,
without even the woman I loved best to help me.”
   Papa ran a hand through his thinning hair. “I could be exiled or
executed, depending on our Queen’s humor, but it may not be up to
her, ultimately. Few cases of cohabiting with dragons have ever come
all the way to trial; the accused have usually been torn to bits by
mobs, been burned alive in their houses, or simply disappeared before
it came to that.”
   My throat was too dry to speak; I swallowed a mouthful of cold tea.
It was bitter. “Wh-what happened to their children?”
   “There are no records of any of them having children,” said Papa.
“But do not imagine for one moment that the citizenry wouldn’t know
what to do with you if they found out. They need only turn to
scripture for that!”
   Orma, who had been staring into space, snapped his focus back to
us. “St. Ogdo had some specific recommendations, if memory serves,”
he said, tugging at his beard. “ ‘If soe’er the worms defile your
women, producing misshapen, miscegenated abominations, suffer not
such ghastly issue to live. Cleave the infant’s skull with a thrice-
blessed axe, ere its fontanelles harden like unto steel. Sever its scaly
limbs and burn them in separate fires, lest they return in the night,
crawling like worms, to kill righteous folk. Tear open the monster
child’s belly, piss upon its entrails, and set ablaze. Half-breeds are
born gravid: if you bury the abdomen intact, twenty more will spring
up from the ground—’ ”
   “Enough, saar,” said Papa. His eyes, the color of stormy water,
scanned my face. I stared back in horror, my mouth clamped shut to
keep myself from crying. Did he eschew religion because the Saints
themselves extolled the killing of his child? Did Goreddis still hate
dragons after thirty-five years of peace because Heaven demanded it?
   Orma had not registered my distress at all. “I wonder whether Ogdo
and those who express similar revulsion—St. Vitt, St. Munn, many
others—had experience with half-breeds. Not because Seraphina
resembles the description, obviously, but because they acknowledge
the possibility at all. There is no recorded case of crossbreeding at the
great library of the Tanamoot, which is astonishing in itself. You’d
think, in almost a millennium, someone would have tried it on
purpose.”
   “No,” said Papa, “I wouldn’t think it. Only an amoral dragon would
think it.”
   “Exactly,” said Orma, unoffended. “An amoral dragon would think
it, try it—”
   “What, by force?” Papa’s mouth puckered as if the idea brought bile
to his throat.
   The implication didn’t bother Orma. “—and record the experiment’s
results. Perhaps we are not as amoral a species as is commonly
supposed in the Southlands.”
   I could hold back tears no longer. I felt dizzy, empty; a cold draft
under the door set me swaying unsteadily. Everything had been
stripped away: my human mother, my own humanity, and any hope I
had of leaving my father’s house.
   I saw the void beneath the surface of the world; it threatened to
pull me under.
   Even Orma couldn’t help noticing my distress. He cocked his head,
perplexed. “Give her education over to me, Claude,” he said, leaning
back and gathering condensation off the diamond panes of the little
window with a fingertip. He tasted it.
   “To you,” sneered my father. “And what will you do with her? She
can’t go two hours without these infernal visions giving her seizures.”
   “We could work on that, to start. We saar have techniques for
taming a rebellious brain.” Orma tapped his own forehead, and then
tapped it again as if the sensation intrigued him.
   Why had it never struck me how deeply peculiar he was?
   “You’ll teach her music,” said my father, his golden voice pitched
an octave too high. I could see the struggle beneath his face as clearly
as if his skin were glass. He had never been merely protecting me; he
had been protecting his broken heart.
   “Papa, please.” I held out my open hands like a supplicant before
the Saints. “I have nothing else left.”
   My father wilted in his chair, blinking away tears. “Do not let me
hear you.”
   Two days later, a spinet was delivered to our house. My father
instructed them to set it up in a storeroom at the very back of the
house, far from his study. There was no room for the stool; I ended up
sitting on a trunk. Orma had also sent a book of fantasias by a
composer called Viridius. I had never seen musical notation before,
but it was instantly familiar to me, as the speech of dragons had been.
I sat until the light at the window began to fade, reading that music as
if it were literature.
   I knew nothing of spinets, but I assumed one opened the lid. The
inside of mine was painted with a bucolic scene: kittens frolicking
upon a patio, peasants making hay in the fields behind them. One of
the kittens—the one aggressively assaulting a ball of blue wool—had
a peculiar glassy eye. I squinted at it in the semidarkness and then
tapped it with my finger.
   “Ah, there you are,” crackled a deep voice. It seemed to come,
incongruously, from the throat of the painted kitten.
   “Orma?” How was he speaking to me? Was this some draconian
device?
   “If you’re ready,” he said, “let us begin. There is much to be done.”
   And that was how he saved my life the third time.
For the next five years Orma was my teacher and my only friend.
  For someone who’d never intended to declare himself my uncle,
Orma took his avuncular duties seriously. He taught me not just music
but everything he thought I should know about dragonkind: history,
philosophy, physiology, higher mathematics (as close as they came to
a religion). He answered even my most impudent questions. Yes,
dragons could smell colors under the right conditions. Yes, it was a
terrible idea to transform into a saarantras right after eating an
aurochs. No, he did not understand the exact nature of my visions, but
he believed he saw the way to help me.
  Dragons found the human condition confusing and often
overwhelming, and they had developed strategies over the years for
keeping their heads “in ard” while they took human form. Ard was a
central concept of draconic philosophy. The word itself meant roughly
“order” or “correctness.” Goreddis used the word to refer to a dragon
battalion—and that was one definition. But for dragons, the idea went
much deeper. Ard was the way the world should be, the imposition of
order upon chaos, an ethical and physical rightness.
  Human emotions, messy and unpredictable, were antithetical to
ard. Dragons used meditation and what Orma called cognitive
architecture to partition their minds into discrete spaces. They kept
their maternal memories in one room, for example, because they were
disruptively intense; the one maternal memory I’d experienced had
bowled me over. Emotions, which the saar found uncomfortable and
overpowering, were locked away securely and never permitted to leak
out.
  Orma had never heard of visions like mine and did not know what
caused them. But he believed a system of cognitive architecture could
stop the visions from striking me unconscious. We tried variations on
his maternal memory room, locking the visions (that is, an imaginary
book representing them) in a chest, a tomb, and finally a prison at the
bottom of the sea. It would work for a few days, until I collapsed on
my way home from St. Ida’s and we had to start again.
   My visions showed the same people over and over; they’d become
so familiar I’d given them all nicknames. There were seventeen, a nice
prime number, which interested Orma inordinately. He finally lit
upon the idea of trying to contain the individuals, not the visions as
such. “Try creating a representation, a mental avatar, of each person
and building a space where they might want to stay,” Orma had said.
“That boy, Fruit Bat, is always climbing trees, so plant a tree in your
mind. See if his avatar will climb it and stay there. Maybe if you
cultivate and maintain your connections to these individuals, they
won’t seek your attention at inconvenient times.”
   From this suggestion, an entire garden had grown. Each avatar had
its place within this garden of grotesques; I tended them every night
or suffered headaches and visions when I did not. As long as I kept
these peculiar denizens calm and peaceful, I was not troubled by
visions. Neither Orma nor I understood exactly why it worked. Orma
claimed it was the most unusual mental structure he had ever heard
of; he regretted not being able to write a dissertation on it, but I was a
secret, even among dragons.
   No unwanted vision had seized me in four years, but I could not
relax my vigilance. The headache I’d developed after Prince Rufus’s
funeral meant the grotesques in my garden were agitated; that was
when a vision was most likely to hit me. After Orma left me on the
bridge, I hurried back to Castle Orison as quickly as I could,
anticipating an hour’s work attending to my mental hygiene, as Orma
called it, putting my mind back in ard.
   My suite at the palace had two rooms. The first was a parlor where
I practiced. The spinet Orma had given me stood by the far wall;
beside it was a bookcase with my own books, my flutes, my oud. I
staggered into the second room, containing wardrobe, table, and bed;
I’d had only two weeks’ acquaintance with the furniture, but it felt
sufficiently mine that I was at home here. Palace servants had turned
down the bedclothes and lit the fire.
   I stripped to my linen chemise. I had scales to wash and oil, but
every inch of me whimpered for the soft bed and there was still my
head to deal with.
   I pulled the bolster off my bed and sat on it cross-legged, as Orma
had taught me. I shut my eyes, in so much pain now that it was hard
to slow my breaths sufficiently. I repeated the mantra All in ard until I
had calmed enough to see my sprawling, colorful garden of grotesques
stretching all the way to my mind’s horizon.
   I endured a moment of confusion as I got my bearings; the layout
changed each time I visited. Before me squatted the border wall of
ancient, flat bricks; ferns grew out of its every cranny like tufts of
green hair. Beyond it I saw the Faceless Lady fountain, the poppy
bank, and a lawn with bulbous, overgrown topiaries. As Orma had
instructed, I always paused with my hands upon the entrance gate—
wrought iron, this time—and said, “This is my mind’s garden. I tend
it; I order it. I have nothing to fear.”
   Pelican Man lurked among the topiaries, his slack, expansive throat
wattle dangling over the front of his tunic like a fleshy bib. It was
always harder when I ran into a deformed one first, but I plastered on
a smile and stepped onto the lawn. Cold dew between my toes
surprised me; I hadn’t noticed I was barefoot. Pelican Man took no
note of my approach but kept his eyes upon the sky, which was
always starry in this part of the garden.
   “Are you well, Master P?” Pelican Man rolled his eyes at me
balefully; he was agitated. I tried to take his elbow—I didn’t touch the
hands of a grotesque if I could help it—but he shied away from me.
“Yes, it was a stressful day,” I said mildly, circling, herding him
toward his stone bench. Its hollow seat was filled with soil and
planted with oregano, producing a lovely smell when one sat on it.
Pelican Man found it soothing. He headed for it at last and curled up
among the herbs.
   I watched Pelican Man a few moments longer, to make sure he was
truly calmed. His dark skin and hair looked Porphyrian; his red
baglike throat, expanding and contracting with every breath, looked
like nothing of this world. As vivid as my visions were, it was
disturbing to imagine him—and others still more deformed—out in
the world somewhere. Surely the gods of Porphyry were not so cruel
as to allow a Pelican Man to exist? My burden of horribleness was
light compared with that.
   He remained tranquil. That was one settled, and it hadn’t been
difficult. The intensity of my headache seemed disproportionate, but
maybe I would find others more agitated.
   I rose to continue my rounds, but my bare feet encountered
something cold and leathery in the grass. Stooping down, I found a
large piece of orange peel, and then several more scraps scattered
among the towering boxwoods.
   I had given the garden permanent features peculiar to each
grotesque—Fruit Bat’s trees, Pelican Man’s starry sky—but my deeper
mind, the hidden current Orma called underthought, filled in
everything else. New embellishments, peculiar plants or statuary,
appeared without warning. Refuse on the lawn seemed wrong,
however.
   I tossed the peels under the hedge and wiped my hands on my skirt.
There was only one orange tree that I knew of in this garden. I would
put off worrying until I’d seen it.
   I found Miserere pulling out her feathers by the rocking stile; I led
her to her nest. Newt thrashed about under the apple trees, crushing
the bluebells; I led him to his wallow and rubbed mud onto his tender
head. I checked that the lock on the Wee Cottage still held and then
picked my way barefoot through an unanticipated field of thistles. I
could see the taller trees of Fruit Bat’s grove in the distance. I took the
lime walk, ducking into leafy side gardens along the way, clucking,
soothing, putting to bed, tending everyone. At the end of the walk, a
yawning chasm blocked my way. Loud Lad’s ravine had shifted
positions and now blocked my path to Fruit Bat’s date palms.
   Loud Lad represented the Samsamese piper I’d seen. He was a
favorite; I am ashamed to say I gravitated toward the more normal-
looking denizens. This avatar was unusual in that it made noise
(hence the name), built things, and sometimes left its designated area.
This had caused me no end of panic at first. There had been one other
grotesque, Jannoula, who’d been prone to wander, and she’d
frightened me so badly that I’d locked her away in the Wee Cottage.
   The visions were like peering into someone else’s life with a
mystical spyglass. In the case of Jannoula, she had somehow been
able to look back at me through her avatar. She had spoken to me,
pried, prodded, stolen, and lied; she had drunk my fears like nectar,
and smelled my wishes on the wind. In the end, she began trying to
influence my thoughts and control my actions. In a panic, I’d told
Orma and he helped me find a way to banish her to the Wee Cottage.
I barely managed to trick her into entering. It was hard to fool
someone who could tell what you were thinking.
   With the Loud Lad avatar, however, motion just seemed to be
characteristic; I had no sense that a real-world Samsamese piper was
gazing back at me. Gazebos and pergolas sprouted all over the garden,
gifts from His Loudness, and it pleased me to see them.
   “Loud Lad!” I cried at the edge of his ravine. “I need a bridge!”
   A gray-eyed, round-cheeked head popped up, followed by an
oversized body clad in Samsamese black. He sat upon the lip of the
cliff, took three fish and a lady’s nightdress from his bag—
caterwauling all the while—and unfolded them into a bridge for me to
cross.
   It was very like dreaming, this garden. I tried not to question the
logic of things.
   “How are you? You’re not upset?” I asked, patting his bristly blond
head. He hooted and disappeared into his crevasse. That was normal;
he was usually calmer than the rest, maybe because he kept so busy.
   I hurried toward Fruit Bat’s grove, worry beginning to catch up
with me now. Fruit Bat was my very favorite grotesque, and the only
orange tree in the garden grew in his stand of figs, dates, lemons, and
other Porphyrian fruits. I reached the grove and looked up, but he
wasn’t among the leaves. I looked down; he’d stacked fallen fruit into
tidy pyramids, but he was nowhere to be seen.
   He had never left his designated space before, not once. I stood a
long time, staring at the empty trees, trying to rationalize his absence.
   Trying to slow my panicked heart.
   If Fruit Bat was loose in the garden, that explained the orange peel
on Pelican Man’s lawn, and it might very well explain the intensity of
my headache. If some little Porphyrian boy had found the way to peer
back up the spyglass like Jannoula … I went cold all over. It was
inconceivable. There must be another explanation. It would break my
heart to have to cut off my connection to one I was so inexplicably
fond of.
   I pushed on, settling the remaining denizens, but my heart wasn’t in
it. I found more orange peel in Muttering Creek and upon Three
Dunes.
   The last piece of the garden tonight was the Rose Garden, prissy
domain of Miss Fusspots. She was a short, stout old woman in a
gabled cap and thick spectacles, homely but not overtly grotesque. I’d
seen her too during that first barrage of visions, fussing about her
stew. That was the origin of her name.
   It took me a moment to spot her—a moment during which I had
panicked palpitations—but she was merely on her hands and knees in
the dirt behind an unusually large albiflora. She was pulling up weeds
before they had a chance to sprout. It was efficient, if baffling. She did
not seem particularly perturbed; she ignored me completely.
   I looked across the sundial lawn toward the egression gate; I longed
for bed and rest, but right now I didn’t dare. I had to locate Fruit Bat.
   There upon the sundial’s face lay an entire orange rind, peeled off
as one piece.
   And there was the boy himself, up the ancient yew tree beside the
border wall. He looked pleased that I had spotted him; he waved,
leaped down, and skipped across the sundial lawn toward me. I
gaped, alarmed by his bright eyes and smile, afraid of what they
might mean.
   He held out a slice of orange. It curled like a prawn on his brown
hand.
   I stared at it in perplexity. I could deliberately induce a vision by
holding a grotesque’s hands; I had done so once for each of them,
seizing control of the visions and ending their control over me. That
was the only time I’d done it. It felt wrong, like I was spying on
people.
   Was Fruit Bat merely offering me an orange, or did he wish me to
take his hand? The latter notion gave me chills. I said, “Thank you,
Bat, but I’m not hungry now. Let’s go find your trees.”
   He followed me like a puppy, past Pandowdy’s swamp, through the
butterfly garden, all the way back to his home grove. I’d expected him
to leap right back up into the trees, but he looked at me with wide
black eyes and held the orange slice up again. “You need to stay here
and not go wandering around,” I admonished. “It’s bad enough that
Loud Lad does it. Do you understand?”
   He gave no indication that he understood; he ate the piece of
orange, gazing into the distance. I patted his fluffy cloud of hair and
waited until he was up a tree before I left.
   I made my way to the gate, bowed to the sundial lawn, and said the
designated words of parting: “This is my garden, all in ard. I tend it
faithfully; let it keep faith with me.”
   I opened my eyes in my own room and stretched my stiff limbs. I
poured myself some water from the ewer on the table and tossed the
bolster back onto the bed. My headache had evaporated; apparently
I’d solved the problem, even if I hadn’t understood it.
   Orma would have some idea about this. I determined to ask him
tomorrow, and that prospect soothed my worry into sleep.



My morning routine was elaborate and time-consuming, so Orma had
given me a timepiece that emitted blasphemy-inducing chirps at
whatever early hour I specified. I kept it on top of the bookcase in the
parlor, in a basket with a few other trinkets, so that I was forced to
trudge all the way in there and dig around to switch it off.
   It was a good system, except when I was too exhausted to
remember to set the alarm. I awoke in a blaze of panic half an hour
before I was due to lead choir practice.
   I yanked my arms out of the sleeves of my chemise and shoved
them up through the neck hole, lowering the linen garment until it
rested around my hips like a skirt. I emptied the ewer into the basin
and added the contents of the kettle, which were only slightly warmed
from sitting on the hearth all night. I scrubbed the scales on my arm
and around my middle with a soft cloth. The scales themselves
registered no temperature; the trickle-down was far too cold to be
comfortable today.
   Everyone else washed once a week, if that, but no one else was
susceptible to scale mites or burrowing chibbets. I dried myself and
rushed to the bookcase for my pot of salve. Only certain herbs
emulsified in goose grease stopped my scales from itching; Orma had
found a good supplier in the one dragon-friendly part of town, the
neighborhood called Quighole.
   I usually practiced smiling while I slathered my scales with goo,
figuring that if I could smile through that, I could smile through
anything. Today I really didn’t have the time.
   I pulled up my chemise and wrapped a cord around the left forearm
so the sleeve couldn’t fall open. I put on a kirtle, gown, and surcoat; I
wore three layers at minimum, even in summer. I threw on a
respectful white sash for Prince Rufus, hastily brushed my hair, and
dashed into the corridor feeling less than ready to face the world.



Viridius, sprawled on his gout couch, had already started conducting
the castle choir by the time I arrived, breathless, breakfast rolls in
hand. He glared at me; his beetling brows were still mostly red,
though the fringe of hair around his head was a shocking white. The
bass line stumbled, and he barked, “Glo-ri-a, you gaggle of laggards!
Why have your mouths stopped? Did my hand stop? Indeed, it did
not!”
  “Sorry I’m late,” I mumbled, but he did not deign to look at me
again until the final chord had resolved.
   “Better,” he told the choir before turning his baleful eye on me.
“Well?”
   I pretended I thought he wanted to know about yesterday’s
performances. “The funeral went well, as you’ve probably already
heard. Guntard accidently broke the reed of his shawm by sit—”
   “I did have an extra reed,” piped up Guntard, who did double duty
with the choir.
   “Which you didn’t find until later, at the tavern,” quipped someone
else.
   Viridius silenced them all with a scowl. “The choir of idiots will
desist from idiocy! Maid Dombegh, I was referring to your excuse for
being late. It had better be a good one!”
   I swallowed hard, repeating This is the job I wanted! to myself. I’d
been a fan of Viridius’s music from the moment I laid eyes on his
Fantasias, but it was hard to reconcile the composer of the
transcendent Suite Infanta with the bullying old man on the couch.
   The choristers eyed me with interest. Many had auditioned for my
position; whenever Viridius scolded me, they appreciated how
narrowly they had escaped this fate.
   I curtsied stiffly. “I overslept. It won’t happen again.”
   Viridius shook his head so fiercely his jowls waggled. “Need I
underscore to any of you amateur squawkers that our Queen’s
hospitality—nay, our entire nation’s worth—will be judged by the
quality of our performances when Ardmagar Comonot is here?”
   Several musicians laughed; Viridius quashed all merriment with a
scowl. “Think that’s funny, you tone-deaf miscreants? Music is one
thing dragons can’t do better than us. They wish they could; they’re
fascinated; they’ve tried and tried again. They achieve technical
perfection, perhaps, but there’s always something missing. You know
why?”
   I recited along with the rest of the chorus, though it turned my
insides cold: “Dragons have no souls!”
   “Exactly!” said Viridius, waving his gout-mangled fist in the air.
“They cannot do this one thing—glorious, Heaven-sent, coming
naturally to us—and it is up to us to rub their faces in it!”
   The choristers gave a little “Hurrah!” before disbanding. I let them
flow out around me; Viridius would expect me to stay and speak with
him. Of course, seven or eight singers had pressing questions. They
stood around his gout couch, fondling his ego as if he were the
Pashega of Ziziba. Viridius accepted their praise as matter-of-factly as
if they were handing back their choir robes.
   “Seraphina!” boomed the master, turning his attention to me at last.
“I heard complimentary words about your Invocation. I wish I could
have been there. This infernal illness makes a prison of my very
body.”
   I fingered the cuff of my left sleeve, understanding him better than
he imagined.
   “Get the ink, maidy,” he said. “I want to cross things off the list.”
   I fetched writing implements and the roster of tasks he had dictated
to me when I first began working for him. There were only nine days
left until General Comonot, Ardmagar of All Dragonkind, arrived;
there was to be a welcoming concert and ball the first evening,
followed a few days later by the Treaty Eve festivities, which had to
last all night. I’d been working for two weeks, but there was plenty
left to do.
   I read the list aloud, item by item; he interrupted me at will. He
cried, “The stage is finished! Cross it off!” and then later, “Why
haven’t you spoken with the wine steward yet? Easiest job on the list!
Did I become court composer through masterful procrastination?
Hardly!”
   We arrived at the item I’d been dreading: auditions. Viridius
narrowed his watery eyes and said, “Yes, how are those going, Maid
Dombegh?”
   He knew perfectly well how they were going; apparently he wanted
to watch me sweat. I kept my voice steady: “I had to cancel most of
them due to Prince Rufus’s inconveniently timed demise—dine he
with the Saints at Heaven’s table. I’ve rescheduled several for—”
   “Auditions should never have been put off until the last minute!” he
shouted. “I wanted the performers confirmed a month ago!”
   “With respect, master, I wasn’t even hired a month ago.”
   “Do you think I don’t know that?” His mouth worked up and down;
he stared at his bandaged hands. “Forgive me,” he said at last, his
voice rough. “It is a bitter thing not to be able to do everything you
are accustomed to. Die while you’re young, Seraphina. Tertius had the
right idea.”
   I did not know how to respond to that. I said, “It’s not as dire as it
seems. Each of your many protégés will attend; the program is half
filled already.”
   He nodded thoughtfully at the mention of his students; the man had
more protégés than most people have friends. It was nearly time for
Princess Glisselda’s lesson, so I corked the ink and began hastily
cleaning my pen with a rag. Viridius said, “When can you meet with
my megaharmonium fellow?”
   “Who?” I said, placing the pen in a box with the others.
   He rolled his red-rimmed eyes. “Explain why I write you notes if
you don’t read them. The designer of the megaharmonium wants to
meet you.” Apparently I continued to look blank, because he spoke
loudly and slowly, as if I were stupid: “The enormous instrument
we’re building in the south transept of St. Gobnait’s? The me-ga-har-
mo-ni-um?”
   I recalled the construction I’d seen in the cathedral, but not the
note, which I must have overlooked. “It’s a musical instrument? It
looks like a machine.”
   “It’s both!” he cried, his eyes alight with glee. “And it’s nearly
finished. I funded half of it myself. It’s a fitting project for an old man
on his way out of this life. A legacy. It will make a sound like nothing
this world has ever heard before!”
   I gaped at him; I’d glimpsed an excitable young man inside the
irascible old one.
   “You must meet him, my other protégé. Lars,” he proclaimed as if
he were the Bishop of Gout Couch, speaking ex cathedra. “He built the
Comonot Countdown Clock in the cathedral plaza, too; he’s a
veritable prodigy. You would get along famously. He only comes by
late, but I shall persuade him to visit at some reasonable hour. I’ll tell
you when I see you this evening at the Blue Salon.”
   “Not tonight, forgive me,” I said, rising and pulling my harpsichord
books off one of Viridius’s cluttered shelves.
   Princess Glisselda held a soiree almost every evening in the Blue
Salon. I had a standing invitation to attend but had never gone,
despite Viridius’s pestering and snarling at me. Being guarded and
cautious all day left me exhausted by evening, and I couldn’t stay out
late because I had a garden to tend and a scale-care regimen I couldn’t
skip. I could tell Viridius none of that; I had pled shyness repeatedly,
but still he pushed.
   The old man cocked a bushy eyebrow and scratched his jowls. “You
will get nowhere at court by isolating yourself, Seraphina.”
   “I am exactly where I wish to be,” I said, thumbing through
parchment sheets.
   “You risk offending Princess Glisselda by snubbing her invitation.”
He squinted at me shrewdly and added: “It’s not quite normal to be so
antisocial, now is it?”
   My insides tensed. I shrugged, determined to give no hint that I was
susceptible to the word normal.
   “You will come tonight,” said the old man.
   “I already have plans tonight,” I said, smiling; this was why I
practiced.
   “Then you will come tomorrow night!” he cried, bursting with
anger at me now. “The Blue Salon, nine o’clock! You will be there, or
you will find yourself abruptly out of employment!”
   I could not tell whether he was bluffing; I didn’t know him well
enough yet. I took a shaky breath. It wouldn’t kill me to go once, for
half an hour. “Forgive me, sir,” I said, inclining my head. “Of course
I’ll come. I had not understood how important it was to you.”
   Keeping my smile raised like a shield between us, I curtsied and
quit the room.



I heard them giggling from out in the corridor, Princess Glisselda and
whichever lady-in-waiting she’d dragged along with her this time. It
sounded like an agemate, from the pitch of the giggle. I wondered,
briefly, what a giggle concerto might sound like. We would need a
chorus of—
   “Is she very, very cranky?” asked the lady-in-waiting.
   I froze. That question couldn’t pertain to me, surely?
   “Behave!” cried the princess, her laugh like water. “I said prickly,
not cranky!”
   I felt my face go hot. Prickly? Was I really?
   “She’s good-hearted, anyway,” added Princess Glisselda, “which
makes her Viridius’s opposite. And nearly pretty, only she does have
such dreadful taste in gowns and I can’t work out what she thinks
she’s doing with her hair.”
   “That might be easily corrected,” said the lady-in-waiting.
   I’d heard enough. I stepped through the doorway, fuming but trying
not to confirm my reputation. The lady-in-waiting was half
Porphyrian, judging by her dark curls and warm brown skin; she put a
hand to her mouth, embarrassed at being overheard. Princess
Glisselda said, “Phina! We were just talking about you!”
   It is a princess’s privilege to feel no social awkwardness, ever. She
smiled, gloriously unashamed; the sunlight through the windows
behind her made a halo of her golden hair. I curtsied and approached
the harpsichord.
   Princess Glisselda rose from her window seat and flounced after me.
She was fifteen, a year younger than me, which made me feel odd
about teaching her; she was petite for her age, which made me feel
like a gawky giantess. She loved pearl-studded brocade and was
possessed of more confidence than I could imagine having. “Phina,”
she chirped, “meet Lady Miliphrene. She is, like you, encumbered
with an unnecessarily long name, so I call her Millie.”
   I nodded acknowledgment to Millie but held my tongue about the
silliness of that comment, coming from someone named Glisselda.
   “I have reached a decision,” the princess announced. “I shall
perform at the Treaty Eve concert, that galliard and pavano. Not
Viridius’s suite: the one by Tertius.”
   I had been placing music upon the stand; I paused, book in hand,
weighing my next words. “The arpeggios in the Tertius were a
challenge to you, if you recall—”
   “Do you imply my skill is insufficient?” Glisselda lifted her chin
dangerously.
   “No. I merely remind you that you called Tertius a ‘poxy cankered
toad’ and threw the music across the room.” Here both girls burst out
laughing. I added, as gingerly as one stepping onto an unstable bridge,
“If you practice and take my advice about the fingerings, you ought to
be able to work it up sufficiently well.” Sufficiently well not to
embarrass yourself, I might’ve added, but it seemed imprudent to do
so.
   “I want to show Viridius that Tertius played badly is better than his
piddling tunes played well,” she said, wagging a finger. “Can I attain
that level of petty vindictiveness?”
   “Undoubtedly,” I said, and then wondered whether I should have
replied so quickly. Both girls were laughing again, however, so I took
it that I was safe.
   Glisselda seated herself on the bench, stretched her elegant fingers,
and launched into the Tertius. Viridius had once proclaimed her “as
musical as a boiled cabbage”—loudly and in front of the entire court
—but I’d found her diligent and interested when treated respectfully.
We hammered at those arpeggios for more than an hour. Her hands
were small—this wouldn’t be easy—but she neither complained nor
flagged.
  My stomach ended the lesson by growling. Trust my very body to
be rude!
  “We should let your poor teacher go to lunch,” said Millie.
  “Was that your stomach?” asked the princess brightly. “I’d have
sworn there was a dragon in the room. St. Ogdo preserve us, lest she
decide to crunch our bones!”
  I ran a tongue over my teeth, delaying until I could speak without
scolding. “I know deriding dragons is something of a national sport
for us Goreddis, but Ardmagar Comonot is coming soon, and I do not
think he would be amused by that kind of talk.”
  Saints’ dogs. I was prickly, even when I tried not to be. She hadn’t
been exaggerating.
  “Dragons are never amused by anything,” said Glisselda, arching an
eyebrow.
  “But she’s right,” said Millie. “Rudeness is rudeness, even if
unperceived.”
  Glisselda rolled her eyes. “You know what Lady Corongi would say.
We must show them we’re superior and put them in their place.
Dominate or be dominated. Dragons know no other way.”
  That sounded to me like an extremely dangerous way to interact
with dragons. I hesitated, uncertain whether it would be within
bounds for me to correct Lady Corongi, Glisselda’s governess, who
outranked me in every possible way.
  “Why do you think they finally surrendered?” Glisselda said. “It’s
because they recognized our superiority—militarily, intellectually,
morally.”
  “That’s what Lady Corongi says?” I said, alarmed but struggling not
to show it.
  “That’s what everybody says,” sniffed Glisselda. “It’s obvious.
Dragons envy us; that’s why they take our shape whenever they can.”
  I gaped at her. Blue St. Prue, Glisselda was going to be queen
someday! She needed to understand the truth of things. “We didn’t
defeat them, whatever you may have been told. Our dracomachia
gave us approximate parity; they couldn’t win without taking
unacceptable losses. It’s not a surrender so much as a truce.”
  Glisselda wrinkled her nose. “You imply that we haven’t dominated
them at all.”
  “We haven’t—fortunately!” I said, rising and trying to cover my
agitation by rearranging the music on the stand. “They wouldn’t stand
for it; they’d bide their time until we let our guard down.”
   Glisselda looked profoundly disturbed. “But if we’re weaker than
they are …”
   I leaned against the harpsichord. “It’s not about strength or
weakness, Princess. Why do you imagine our peoples fought for so
long?”
   Glisselda put her hands together, as if delivering a little sermon.
“Dragons hate us because we are just and favored by the Saints. Evil
always seeks to destroy the good that stands against it.”
   “No.” I nearly smacked the harpsichord lid but recalled myself in
time, slowing my hand and tapping twice. Nevertheless, the girls
stared at me round-eyed in anticipation of my astonishing opinions. I
tried to moderate that with a gentle tone. “The dragons wanted these
lands back. Goredd, Ninys, and Samsam used to be their hunting
ground. Big game ran here—elk, aurochs, felldeer—in herds stretching
to the horizon, before our kind moved in and plowed it under.”
   “That was a very long time ago. Surely they can’t still miss it,” said
Glisselda shrewdly. It would be unwise to make assumptions about
her intelligence based on her cherubic face, I noted. Her gaze was as
sharp as her cousin Lucian’s.
   “Our people migrated here two thousand years ago,” I said. “That’s
ten dragon generations. The herds have been extinct for about a
thousand, but the dragons do indeed still feel the loss. They are
confined to the mountains, where their population dwindles.”
   “They can’t hunt the northern plains?” asked the princess.
   “They can and do, but the northern plains are only a third the size
of the united Southlands, and they’re not empty, either. The dragons
compete with barbarian tribes for diminishing herds.”
   “They can’t just eat barbarians?” said Glisselda.
   I disliked her supercilious tone but could not say so. I traced the
decorative inlay on the instrument lid, channeling my irritation into
curlicues, and said: “We humans aren’t good eating—too stringy—and
we’re no fun to hunt because we band together and fight back. My
teacher once heard a dragon compare us to cockroaches.”
   Millie wrinkled her nose, but Glisselda looked at me quizzically.
Apparently she’d never even seen a cockroach. I let Millie explain; her
description elicited a shriek from the princess, who demanded: “In
what manner do we resemble these vermin?”
   “Take it from a dragon’s perspective: we’re everywhere, we can
hide easily, we reproduce comparatively quickly, we spoil their
hunting, and we smell bad.”
  The girls scowled. “We do not either smell bad!” said Millie.
  “To them we do.” This analogy was proving particularly apt, so I
took it to its logical conclusion. “Imagine you’ve got a terrible
infestation. What do you do?”
  “Kill them!” cried both girls together.
  “But what if the roaches were intelligent and worked together,
using a roachly dracomachia against us? What if they had a real
chance of winning?”
  Glisselda squirmed with horror, but Millie said, “Make a truce with
them. Let them have certain houses to themselves if they leave the
ones we’re living in alone.”
  “We wouldn’t mean it, though,” said the princess grimly, drumming
her fingers on top of the harpsichord. “We’d pretend to make peace,
then set their houses on fire.”
  I laughed; she’d surprised me. “Remind me not to earn your enmity,
Princess. But if the cockroaches were dominating us, we wouldn’t give
in? We’d trick them?”
  “Absolutely.”
  “All right. Can you think of anything—anything at all—that the
cockroaches could do to persuade us that we should let them live?”
  The girls exchanged a skeptical look. “Cockroaches can only scuttle
horridly and spoil your food,” said Millie, hugging herself. She’d had
experience, I gathered.
  Glisselda, however, was thinking hard, the tip of her tongue
protruding from her mouth. “What if they held court or built
cathedrals or wrote poetry?”
  “Would you let them live?”
  “I might. How ugly are they, though, really?”
  I grinned. “Too late: you’ve noticed they’re interesting. You
understand them when they talk. What if you could become one, for
short periods of time?”
  They writhed with laughter. I felt they’d understood, but I
underscored my point: “Our survival depends not on being superior
but on being sufficiently interesting.”
  “Tell me,” said Glisselda, borrowing Millie’s embroidered
handkerchief to wipe her eyes, “how does a mere assistant music
mistress know so much about dragons?”
  I met her gaze, clamping down on the tremor in my voice. “My
father is the Crown’s legal expert on Comonot’s Treaty. He used to
read it to me as a bedtime story.”
  That didn’t adequately explain my knowledge, I realized, but the
girls found the idea so hilarious that they questioned me no further. I
smiled along with them, but felt a pang for my poor, sad papa. He’d
been so desperate to understand where he stood, legally, for
unwittingly marrying a saarantras.
  As the saying went, he was neck deep in St. Vitt’s spit. We both
were. I curtsied and took my leave quickly, lest this Heavenly saliva
somehow become apparent to the girls. My own survival required me
to counterbalance interesting with invisible.
It was, as always, a relief to retire to my rooms for the evening. I had
practicing to do, a book on Zibou sinus-song I’d been dying to read,
and of course a number of questions for my uncle. I seated myself at
the spinet first and played a peculiar dissonant chord, my signal to
Orma that I needed to talk. “Good evening, Phina,” boomed the basso
kitten.
   “Fruit Bat has started wandering around the garden. I’m concerned
that—”
   “Stop,” said Orma. “Yesterday you were offended when I didn’t
greet you, but today you leap straight in. I want credit for saying
‘Good evening.’ ”
   I laughed. “You’re credited. But listen: I’m having a problem.”
   “I’m sure you are,” he said, “but I have a student in five minutes. Is
it a five-minute problem?”
   “I doubt it.” I considered. “Can I come to you at St. Ida’s? I’m not
comfortable discussing this through the spinet anyway.”
   “As you wish,” he said. “Give me at least an hour, though. This
student is particularly incapable.”
   As I was bundling up, I realized I had done nothing about Basind’s
blood on my cloak. The dragon’s blood had long since dried but was
still shiny as ever. I slapped at it, causing a blizzard of little silver
flakes. I beat as much of the stain out as I could and swept the
gleaming detritus into the fireplace.
   I took the Royal Road, which descended in wide, graceful curves.
The streets were dark and silent, lit only by a quarter moon, lighted
windows, and occasional Speculus lanterns that had been set out
early. Down near the river, the air was sweet with woodsmoke and
rich with someone’s garlicky dinner, then dense with the reek of a
backyard cesspit. Or maybe offal—was I near a butcher’s?
   A figure stepped out of the shadows and into the open street ahead
of me. I froze, my heart pounding. It shambled toward me, and the
choking odor grew stronger. I coughed at the stench and reached for
the little knife I kept sheathed in the hem of my cloak.
   The dark figure raised its left hand toward me, palm up as if to beg.
It raised a second left hand and said, “Thlu-thlu-thluuu?” A wisp of
blue flame played about its beaky mouth as it spoke, illuminating its
features for a moment: slick scaly skin, spiky crest like a Zibou iguana,
bulging conical eyeholes that swiveled independently of each other.
   I exhaled. It was nothing but a panhandling quigutl.
   The quigutl were a second species of dragon, much smaller than the
saar. This one was about my height, tall for a quig. The quigutl could
not change shape. They lived alongside saar in the mountains,
squeezing into the cracks and crevasses of the larger dragons’ dens,
living on garbage and using their four hands to build intricate,
minuscule devices, such as the earrings the saarantrai all wore. Quigs
had been included in Comonot’s Treaty out of politeness; no one had
anticipated that so many would come south, or that they’d find the
nooks and crannies—and garbage—of the city so much to their liking.
   Quigs couldn’t speak Goreddi, having no lips and a tongue like a
hollow reed, but most of them understood it. For my part, I
understood Quigutl; it was just Mootya with a bad lisp. The creature
had said, “Do I thmell cointh, maidy?”
   “You should not be begging after dark,” I scolded it. “What are you
doing out of Quighole? You’re not safe on the streets. One of your
brother saar was attacked yesterday, in broad daylight.”
   “Yeth, I thaw the whole thing from the eaveth of a ware-houthe,” it
said, its tubelike tongue flicking out between its teeth and raining
sparks down its speckled belly. “You have a friendly thmell, but
you’re no thaar. I am thurprithed you underthtand me.”
   “I have a knack for languages,” I said. Orma had told me my scales
smelled of saar, though not strongly. He’d said a saarantras would
have to put his nose right up to me to smell it. Did the quigutl have
more sensitive noses?
   It sidled closer and sniffed the dried bloodstain on my shoulder.
   The quig’s breath was so gut-seizingly foul that I didn’t see how it
could smell anything subtler. I’d never been able to smell saar, even
on Orma. When the quig backed away, I sniffed at the stain myself. I
could feel an odor’s presence in my nostrils—a sensation more tactile
than olfactory—but I could discern nothing else about it.
   A sharp pain shot through my head, as if I’d driven spikes up into
my sinuses.
   “You have two thaar thmells,” the creature said. “Altho, a thmall
purth containing five thilver and eight copper cointh, and a knife—
cheap thteel, rather dull.” Even these small dragons were pedantically
precise.
   “You can smell how sharp my knife is?” I said, pressing the heels of
my hands against my temples, as if I might crush the pain. It didn’t
help.
   “I could thmell how many hairs were on your head, if I wished to,
which I do not.”
   “Lovely. Well, I can’t just give you coin. I only trade metal for
metal,” I said, as I’d heard Orma respond to quigutl panhandling. It
was not the usual Goreddi response, and nothing I would have
attempted with other people watching, but Orma had acquired several
odd trinkets for me this way. I kept the eccentric collection out of
sight in the little basket. They weren’t illegal—they were nothing but
toys—but such “demonic devices” might scare the maids.
   The quigutl blinked its eyes and licked its lips. The creatures didn’t
care about money, as such; they wanted metal to work with, and we
were all carrying it in convenient, premeasured quantities.
   Behind the quigutl, half a block up the street, stable doors clattered
open. A boy emerged with two lanterns and hung them up on either
side in anticipation of riders arriving home. The quig glanced over its
shoulder, but the boy was looking the other way.
   The quigutl’s spiky silhouette stood out against the light, its eye
cones extending and retracting as it considered what to trade. It
reached into its gullet, down into its extendable throat pouch, and
withdrew two objects. “I have only thmall thingth with me: a copper
and thilver filigree fish”—the fish dangled between the two thumbs of
one right hand—“and thith, which ith mothtly tin, a lizard with a
human head.”
   I squinted in the feeble light from the stable. The man-faced lizard
was rather horrible. Suddenly I wanted the thing, as if it were an
abandoned grotesque who needed a place to live.
   “I would trade two thilver,” said the quig, noting where my
attention lingered. “That may theem like more than tin ith worth, but
it’th mechanically intricate.”
   Behind my reptilian companion came the sound of horses. I glanced
up, anxious that we would be seen. Quigs had been beaten in this
town for harassing human women; I did not care to speculate about
what happened to women who treated quigs kindly. The approaching
riders stopped at the stable, however, and did not even glance in our
direction. Their spurs jingled as their feet hit the paving stones. Each
had a dagger tucked into his belt; the steel flashed in the lamplight.
   I felt some urgency to send the quig along home and get myself to
Orma’s. I had assumed the smell of saar blood had caused my sudden
headache, but the pain had not yet dissipated. Two headaches on two
consecutive days could only be trouble.
   I extracted my purse from my sleeve. “I’ll trade, but you must
assure me that ‘mechanically intricate’ doesn’t mean ‘illegal.’ ” Certain
quigutl devices—those that could see, hear, or speak across great
distances—could only be carried by saarantrai. Certain others, such as
door worms or anything explosive, could be carried by no one.
   The creature affected shock. “Nothing illegal! I am a law-abiding—”
   “Except for staying put in Quighole after dark,” I chided, paying the
quig its silver. It tossed the coins into its mouth. I put the lizard
figurine in my purse and drew the leather strings tight.
   When I looked up again, the quigutl was gone, vanished completely
without a sound. The two riders were hurrying toward me, daggers
drawn. “St. Daan in a pan!” one cried. “The sticky shite-eater scuttled
right up the side of the house!”
   “Are you all right, maidy?” asked the other, the shorter of the two,
grabbing my upper arm urgently. His breath was tavernesque.
   “Thank you for chasing it off,” I said, pulling myself out of his
grasp. My head pounded. “It was panhandling. You know how
tenacious they can be.”
   Shorty noticed my purse in my hand. “Aw, cack, you didn’t give it
any money, did you? That only encourages the vermin.”
   “Begging worms!” snarled the tall fellow, still scanning the side of
the building, dagger held ready. He looked like Shorty’s brother, with
his identical wide nose. I guessed they were merchants; their well-
tailored but sturdy woolen clothing spoke of money mixed with
practicality.
   Tallfellow spat. “You can’t go five blocks without getting hit up.”
   “You can’t go into your own cellar but there’s one curled up in a
crate of onions,” said Shorty, flapping his arms histrionically. “Our
sister Louisa once found one stuck to the underside of her dining room
table. It breathed its pestilence all over her Speculus feast and gave
her baby the falling sickness. But can her husband defend himself
against this invader in his own home? Not without landing in prison!”
   I knew of that case. My father had defended the quigutl, but gates
went up at the entrances to Quighole, locking its nonhuman denizens
in at night—for their own safety, of course. The law-abiding
saarantrai scholars at St. Bert’s Collegium had objected; my father had
represented them too, to no avail. Quighole became more of a hole.
   I wished I could have told these brothers that the quigutl meant no
harm, that the creatures seemed unable to grasp the difference
between mine and yours when it came to living space, and that pigs
smelled just as bad, but no one suspected pigs of harboring
malevolent intentions or spreading disease. I could tell the men would
not have thanked me for enlightening them.
   The brothers glowed, a fierce luminescence just under their skin, as
if their innards were molten lead, as if they would burst into flame at
any moment.
   Oh no. That was the halo, the only warning I got before a vision
overtook me. I could do nothing to stop it now. I sat down in the
street and curled my head between my knees so that I would not hit it
when I fell.
   “Are you unwell?” asked Shorty, his voice reaching me in waves, as
if he were talking through water.
   “Don’t let me bite my tongue,” I managed to say before I collapsed
and all my consciousness whirled down into the vortex of vision.



My invisible vision-eye hovered at the ceiling of a room containing
three massive beds and a riot of unpacked luggage. Silk scarves in
green, gold, and rose were heaped up in a corner, tangled with
iridescent beaded necklaces, feathered fans, and strings of tarnished
coins. It was clearly an inn; each of the beds could have held six
people.
   There was only one person in the room now. I knew him, though
he’d grown in the years since my last vision and this time he wasn’t
up a tree.
   A Porphyrian woman stuck her head through the doorway; felted
locks as thick as fingers, each tipped with a silver bead, framed her
face. She spoke Porphyrian to Fruit Bat, who sat on the center bed
with his legs folded and his gaze upon the ceiling. He startled as if
she’d broken his concentration. Her eyebrows rose apologetically and
she mimed eating something. He shook his head, and she closed the
door without a sound.
   He stood up, his bare feet sinking into the lumpy straw mattress. He
wore Porphyrian trousers and a knee-length tunic, a paedis charm on
a cord around his neck, and small gold earrings. He waved his hands
slowly through the air as if he were breaking cobwebs overhead. The
straw tick didn’t have much spring to it, but he leaped as high as he
could and touched the ceiling on the third try.
   No one in my visions had ever been aware of my presence before.
How could they be? I wasn’t really there. He could not have touched
my face because there was no face for him to touch, but I felt myself
trying to recoil from his searching hand.
   He frowned and scratched his head carefully. His hair had been
arranged into coiled knots all over his scalp, the part lines between
sections forming tidy little hexagons. He sat again and stared hard at
the ceiling, his brows drawn. If it had not been impossible, I’d have
said he was looking right at me.



I awoke with a salty leather glove between my teeth. I opened my
eyes to see a woman cradling my head and upper body upon her
knees. She held prayer beads in one hand, moving them along rapidly
with her thumb, and her mouth moved quickly; my ears were slow to
focus, but I heard her say, “St. Fustian and St. Branche, pray for her.
St. Ninnian and St. Munn, be at her side. St. Abaster and St. Vitt,
defend her—”
  I sat bolt upright and yanked the glove out of my mouth, startling
the woman. “Excuse me,” I croaked before my stomach let loose
across the cobblestones.
  She held my forehead and handed me a pristine white handkerchief
to wipe my mouth with afterward. She called, “Brothers! She’s come
round!”
  Her brothers, Shorty and Tallfellow, emerged from the stable
leading a team and a cart with the words Broadwick Bros. Clothier
painted in black upon the side. The three of them together wrapped
me in a fine wool blanket and bundled me into the back. The woman,
who I concluded was the sister Shorty had mentioned, hefted her
matronly person into the back with me and said, “Where are we
taking you, little maid?”
  “Castle Orison,” I said. I wasn’t going to make it to Orma’s tonight.
Rather belatedly, I remembered to add, “Please?”
   She laughed kindly and directed her brothers, who had surely heard
me. The cart jostled and swayed. She took my arm and asked whether
I was cold. I was not. She spent the rest of the trip instructing me in
ways to get stains out of my gown, which I’d soiled by sitting in the
filthy street.
   It took nearly the whole cart ride for my pulse to slow and my teeth
to stop chattering. I could scarcely believe my good fortune,
collapsing in front of people who would help me. I could have been
lying in an alley, robbed and left for dead.
   Louisa was still chattering, but not about stains. “… horrid thing!
You poor dear. It must have scared you half to death. Silas and
Thomas are trying to devise a way to poison the green devils,
something you could bury in garbage so’s they wouldn’t notice. It
hasn’t been easy. They can eat most anything, can’t they, Silas?”
   “Milk makes them ill,” said the short brother, who had the reins,
“but not enough to kill them. Cheese they tolerate well, so it must be
the whey. If we concentrate the whey—”
   “They won’t eat it,” I said, my voice creaky from vomiting. “They
have such keen noses, they’d be able to avoid it.”
   “That’s why we hide it in garbage,” he said, as if I were simple.
   I shut my mouth. Anything that could smell how sharp my knife
was could smell whey even at the center of a dung heap. But let them
try. They would try and fail, and that would be the best possible
outcome for everyone.
   We reached the barbican, where the palace guard stopped the cart.
Louisa helped me climb down. “What do you do here?” she asked,
awed. I wasn’t noble, clearly, but even a lowly lady’s maid carried a
certain glamour.
   “I’m the assistant music mistress,” I said, giving small courtesy. I
was still unsteady on my feet.
   “Maid Dombegh? You played at the funeral,” cried Silas. “Thomas
and I were moved to tears!”
   I inclined my head graciously, but as I did so I felt a snap in my
mind, like a loosed bowstring, and the headache started up again
behind my eyes. My evening’s excitement was not yet over,
apparently. I turned to go inside.
   A powerful hand on my arm stopped me. It was Thomas. Behind
him, Silas and Louisa chatted at the guards, asking them to mention
the Broadwick brothers, purveyors of sturdy woolens, to the Queen.
Thomas drew me a little aside and whispered in my ear: “Silas left me
to watch you while he fetched Louisa. I saw the quig idol in your
purse.”
   My face burned. I was ashamed against all reason, as if I were the
guilty party and not the person who’d been pawing through an
unconscious woman’s belongings.
   His fingers dug into my arm. “I’ve met women like you. Worm-
riding quig lovers. You don’t know how close you came to hitting
your head during your fit.”
   He couldn’t mean what I thought he meant. I met his eye; his gaze
was a shock of cold.
   “Women like you disappear in this town,” he snarled. “Tied in
sacks, thrown in the river. No one calls for justice because they get
what they deserve. But my brother-in-law can’t kill a filthy quig in his
own home without—”
   “Thomas! We’re going,” called Louisa behind us.
   “St. Ogdo calls you to repent, Maid Dombegh.” He released me
roughly. “Pray for virtue, and pray we don’t meet again.” He stalked
off toward his siblings.
   I swayed, barely able to keep my feet.
   I had thought them kind, despite their prejudices, but Thomas had
been tempted to dash my head against the cobblestones, just for
carrying a quigutl figurine. That specific statuette didn’t carry some
deeper meaning, did it? Had I inadvertently chosen the one that
indicated I indulged in some particular perversion? Maybe Orma
would know.
   I staggered through the gatehouse, making for the palace as best I
could with my knees trembling so violently. The guards asked
whether I needed help—I must have looked terrible—but I waved
them off. I thanked every Saint I could think of and prayed that the
glow upon the castle’s turrets came from torchlight and the moon and
not from another imminent collapse.
Sick and exhausted though I was, I could not put off dealing with
Fruit Bat. I hauled my bolster onto the floor, threw myself down, and
tried to enter the garden. It took several minutes before my teeth
unclenched and I relaxed enough to envision the place.
   Fruit Bat was up a tree in his grove. I prowled around the trunk,
picking my way over gnarled roots. He appeared to be asleep; he also
looked about ten or eleven years old and had his hair in knots, just as
he had in the vision. My mind had apparently updated his grotesque
to conform to new information.
   I gazed up at his face and felt a pang of sadness. I didn’t want to
lock him away, but I saw no alternative. Visions were dangerous; I
could hit my head, suffocate, give myself away. I had to defend myself
however I could.
   One of his eyes opened, then squeezed quickly shut. He wasn’t
sleeping, the rascal; he wanted me to think he was. “Fruit Bat,” I said,
trying to sound stern and not afraid. “Come down, please.”
   He climbed down, his eyes averted sheepishly. He stooped, picked
up a handful of dates from one of his tidy piles, and offered me the
fruit. I accepted his gift this time, taking care not to touch his hand. “I
don’t know what you did,” I said slowly. “I’m not sure if it was
deliberate, but you … I think you pulled me into a vision.”
   He met my gaze then. The keenness of his black eyes frightened me,
but there was no malice there. I gathered my courage and said,
“Whatever you did, please stop. When a vision comes upon me against
my will, I collapse. It puts me in danger. Please don’t do it again, or I
will have to shut you out.”
   His eyes widened and he shook his head vigorously. I hoped he was
protesting the possibility of being ejected from the garden and not
refusing to comply.
   He climbed back into the fig tree. “Good night,” I said, hoping he
knew I wasn’t angry. He wrapped his arms around himself and went
straight to sleep.
   I had an entire garden that needed tending. I stared toward the
other end, feeling weary in my very soul and reluctant to get started.
Surely I could skip the rest this once? Everything else looked peaceful;
the deep green foliage was so pretty with colorful snow falling all
around it.
   Colorful snow?
   I scrutinized the sky. Clouds clustered thickly above me, and from
them fluttered thousands of peculiar flakes, rose, green, yellow, more
like confetti than snow. I reached out my hands to touch them; they
lit upon me, shimmering and ethereal. I twirled in a slow circle,
stirring up eddies at my feet.
   I caught one on my tongue. It crackled in my mouth like a tiny
lightning storm, and for a single heartbeat I was screaming through
the sky, diving after an aurochs.
   The flake dissolved completely, and I was back to myself in the
garden, my heart pounding. In that brief, intense instant I’d been
someone else. I had seen the entire world spread below me in
unfathomable detail: every blade of grass on the plain and bristle on
the aurochs’s snout, the temperature of the ground beneath its hooves,
the moving currents of the very air.
   I tasted another flake, and for the span of a wink I lay upon a
mountaintop in full sun. My scales shimmered; my mouth tasted of
ash. I raised my serpentine neck.
   And then I was back at Fruit Bat’s grove, blinking and stammering
and shocked. These were memories from my mother, like the one I’d
experienced when I first saw Orma in his natural form. I knew from
that memory that my mother had tried to leave me others. She had
apparently succeeded.
   Why was this happening now? Had the stresses of the last two days
triggered another round of changes? Could Fruit Bat have dislodged
them somehow?
   The precipitation slowed. On the ground, individual flakes flowed
toward each other and fused together, like scattered droplets of
quicksilver. They flattened out into scraps of parchment and blew
around.
   I could not have my mother’s memories scattered all over my head:
if I had learned anything from experience, it was that my peculiarities
tended to spring out at me unannounced. I gathered up the slips of
parchment, stamping on them as they skittered past, chasing them
through Pandowdy’s swamp and across the Three Dunes.
   I needed something to keep them in; a tin box appeared. I opened
it, and the parchments—without any prompting on my part—flew up
out of my hand, like a trick shuffle of cards, and filed themselves in
the box. The lid clanged shut after them.
   That had been suspiciously easy. I peeked in the box; the memories
stood like note cards, each labeled across the top in an odd, angular
hand I took to be my mother’s. I leafed through them; they appeared
to have ordered themselves chronologically. I pulled one out. It read
Orma gets toasted on his 59th hatch-day across the top, but the rest of
the page was blank. The title intrigued me, but I put it back.
   Some cards toward the back were brightly colored. I pulled up a
pink one and was dumbfounded to see it wasn’t blank; it had one of
my mother’s songs, in her spidery notation. I knew the song already—
I knew all her songs—but it was bittersweet to see it in her own hand.
   The title was “My Faith Should Not Come Easily.” I could not resist;
surely this was her memory of writing that song. The flakes had
dissolved upon my tongue; I guessed the same principle applied. The
page crackled and sparked in my mouth, like a wool blanket on a
winter night. It tasted, absurdly, of strawberries.


My hands dart over the page, a slender brush in each, one for the dots, one
for the strokes and arcs, winding in and around each other as if I were
making bobbin lace, not writing music. The effect is calligraphic, and
highly satisfying. Outside my open window a lark sings, and my left hand
—always the more mischievous of the two—takes a moment to jot down
the notes in counterpoint to the main melody (with but a little alteration of
the rhythm). That is serendipitous. So many things are, when we bother to
look.
   I know his tread, know it like my own pulse—better, perhaps, because
my pulse has been doing unaccountable things recently in response to that
footfall. Right now it beats seven against his three. That is too fast. Dr.
Caramus was unconcerned when I told him; he did not believe me when I
said I did not understand it.
   I am on my feet, not knowing how, almost before the knock sounds at
my door. My hands are inky, and my voice unreliable as I cry, “Come in!”
   Claude lets himself in, his face that shade of sulky that it turns when he
is trying not to get his hopes up. I snatch up a rag to wipe my hands and
cover my confusion. Is this funny or frightening? I had no idea the two
could be so close.
   “I heard you wanted to see me,” he mumbles.
   “Yes. I’m sorry, I … I should have answered your letters. I have had to
think very carefully on this.”
   “On whether you would help me write these songs?” he says, and there is
something childish in his voice. Petulant. Which is irritating, on the one
hand, and endearing on the other. He is transparently simple, this one, and
unexpectedly complicated. And radiantly beautiful.
   I hand him the page and watch his face soften into wonder. My hands go
straight to my chest, as if they could squeeze my heart and slow it. He
hands the song back to me and his voice quavers: “Would you sing it?”
   I would rather play it for him on flute, but he clearly wishes to hear the
words and tune together:

     “My faith should not come easily;
     There is no Heaven without pain.
     My days should never flutter past
     Unnoted, nor my past remain
     Beyond its span of usefulness;
     Let me not hold to grief.
     My hope, my light, my Saint is love;
     In love my one belief.”

   He stares at me during the last lines and I fear my voice will falter. As it
is, I have barely enough breath left in me for “belief.” I inhale, but the air
seems to catch on its way in, like the shudder of breath after tears.
   This emotion is maddening in its complexity. It’s like spotting difficult
prey on the ground after a long day of fruitless hunting—there’s the
exhilaration of an exciting chase mixed with the fear that it may all end in
nothing, but there is never any question that you will try, for your very
existence hangs on it. I am reminded also of the first time I dove from a
sea cliff, keeping my wings folded until the last possible second, then
scudding over the cresting waves, just out of reach of their foamy fingers,
laughing at the danger, terrified by how close I had come.
   “I’m so glad you’re here,” I say. “I understand now that I made you very
sad. That was never my intention.”
   Claude rubs the back of his neck and wrinkles his nose, about to tell me
he was never sad. I believe this is called bravado and is not limited to
lawyers, or even men, although that combination makes it almost
unavoidable. Normally I could shrug at this, but today I need him to be
truthful. Today is the beginning and the end. I reach across and take his
hand.
    That jolt we both feel—for I see it hit him too—is like electricity, but
that is a metaphor I will never be able to give him, a concept that cannot
be introduced. One of far too many, alas, but I am hoping—no, gambling,
betting my very life—that in the end it will not matter, that this, this thing
between us, this mystery, will be enough.
    “Linn,” he says hoarsely, his jaw quivering just a little. He is frightened,
too. Why should this be frightening? What purpose does that serve? “Linn,”
he begins again, “when I believed you never wanted to see me again, I felt
I’d stepped off a ledge and onto empty air: the ground was hurtling toward
me at an alarming rate.”
    Metaphor is awkward, but emotion, by its nature, leaves you no more
scalable approach. I have not adequately mastered the art, but his
comparisons always move me with their precision. I want to cry Eureka!,
but I settle for “I felt that too! That’s it exactly!”
    My other hand wants to touch his face, and I let it. He leans into it like
a cat.
    And that is when I know that I will kiss him, and the very thought of it
fills me with … well, it’s as if I have just solved Skivver’s predictive
equations or, even better, as if I have intuited the One Equation, seen the
numbers behind the moon and stars, behind mountains and history, art
and death and yearning, as if my comprehension is large enough that it
can encompass universes, from the beginning to the end of time.
    And I have to laugh a little at this conceit, because I do not even
understand the present, and there is nothing in the world beyond this kiss.


The memory ended, ejecting me not into the garden but into real life:
cold, hard floor; rumpled chemise; bitter taste in my mouth; alone. I
was woozy, disoriented, and … and ick. That was my father she’d
been kissing.
  I leaned my head back against the bed, breathing slowly, trying to
fend off an emotion so terrible I couldn’t bring myself to look at it.
  For five years I had suppressed every thought of her. The Amaline
Ducanahan of my childhood imaginings had been replaced by
emptiness, a chasm, a gap the wind blew through. I couldn’t fill that
space with Linn. That name meant nothing to me; it was a
placeholder, like zero.
   With this single memory, I’d increased my knowledge of her a
thousandfold. I knew how a pen felt in her hand, how fast her heart
beat upon seeing my father, how beautiful sounds moved her. I knew
what she’d felt; I’d been her and felt it myself.
   That depth of insight should have fostered empathy, surely. I should
have felt some connection, some joy at discovering her, some warm,
glowy resolution or peace or something. Something good, at least.
Surely it didn’t matter which flavor of good?
   She was my own mother, for Heaven’s sake!
   But I felt nothing of the kind. I glimpsed the emotion from afar, saw
how bad it was going to be, and squelched it so that I felt nothing at
all.
   I hauled myself to standing and staggered into the other room. My
little timepiece read two hours past midnight, but I didn’t care
whether I woke Orma up. He’d earned a bad night’s sleep. I played
our chord and then played it again a bit more peevishly.
   Orma’s voice crackled forth, unexpectedly loudly: “I wondered
whether I’d hear from you. Why didn’t you come into town?”
   I struggled to keep my voice under control. “You weren’t worried, I
suppose.”
   “Worried about what, specifically?”
   “One of my grotesques was behaving strangely. I intended to cross
town in the dark, but I never made it. It didn’t occur to you that
something might have happened?”
   There was a pause while he considered. “No. I suppose you’re going
to tell me something did.”
   I wiped my eyes. I had no energy to argue. I told him all that had
happened: Fruit Bat’s strange behavior, the vision, the maternal
memories. He stayed silent so long after I finished talking that I
tapped at the kitten eye. “I’m here,” he said. “It is fortunate that
nothing worse happened to you when the vision struck.”
   “Do you have any ideas about Fruit Bat’s behavior?” I said.
   “He seems to be aware of you,” said Orma, “but I don’t understand
why that would have changed over time. Jannoula saw you right from
the beginning.”
   “And she grew so strong and perceptive that it was hard to get rid
of her,” I said. “It might be safer to shut Fruit Bat away now, while I
still can.”
   “No, no,” said Orma. “If he complies with your requests, he might
be a resource rather than a threat. There are so many questions still
unanswered. Why are you seeing him? How does he see you? Don’t
squander this opportunity. You can induce visions: go looking for
him.”
  I ran my fingers over the spinet keys. That last suggestion was a bit
much, but cutting Fruit Bat off completely didn’t feel right either.
  “Maybe he’ll find a way to speak to you eventually,” Orma was
saying.
  “Or maybe I’ll travel to Porphyry someday, track him down, and
shake his hand,” I said, smiling slightly. “Not until after Ardmagar
Comonot’s visit, though. I’ll be too busy beforehand. Viridius is a
terrible taskmaster.”
  “That’s an excellent idea,” said Orma, apparently thinking me
serious. “I might come with you. The Porphyrian Bibliagathon is
supposed to be well worth seeing.”
  I grinned at his library obsession and was still grinning when I
crawled into bed. I couldn’t sleep; in my mind I was already traveling
with my uncle, meeting Fruit Bat in the real world, and getting some
answers at last.
Between staying up late and rising early for my morning routine, I
got far too little sleep. I stumbled stoically through my duties, but
Viridius noticed me struggling. “I’ll clean your pens,” he said, taking
the quill from my unresisting hand. “You are to lie down on my couch
and nap for half an hour.”
   “Master, I assure you I’m—” A gargantuan yawn undermined my
argument.
   “Of course you are. But we must have you at full capacity for the
Blue Salon this evening, and I don’t feel convinced that you’ve been
listening quite carefully enough to my dictation.” He scanned the
parchment where I’d been writing down his compositional ideas as he
hummed them. His brows lowered and he turned slightly purple.
“You’ve jotted it down in three. It’s a gavotte. Dancers are going to be
falling all over each other.”
   I intended to answer him, but I’d already reached the couch. It
pulled me under, and my explanation turned into a dream about St.
Polypous dancing a 3/4 gavotte with perfect ease. But then, he had
three feet.



That evening I arrived at the Blue Salon early, hoping I might pay my
respects, meet Viridius’s protégé, and leave before most people had
even arrived. I saw my mistake at once: Viridius wasn’t there yet. Of
course he wasn’t; he would likely come late, the old coxcomb. I would
get no credit for coming if I ducked out before he arrived. All I’d done
was given myself extra time to feel uncomfortable.
  I’d always been useless at parties, even before I knew how much I
had to hide. Large groups of semi-strangers made me clam right up. I
anticipated standing alone in a corner shoving butter tarts in my
mouth all evening.
  Even Glisselda wasn’t there yet; that was how stupidly early I’d
come. Servants lit chandeliers and smoothed tablecloths onto
sideboards, stealing surreptitious glances at me. I wandered toward
the back of the salon, past the upholstered chairs of the formal sitting
area, past the gilded columns, into a wide space with a parquet floor
intended for dancing. Music stands and stools were piled haphazardly
in the corner; I set them up for a quartet, hoping I was doing
something useful and not merely eccentric.
   Five musicians arrived—Guntard, two viols, uillean pipes, and drum
—and I set a fifth place. They seemed pleased to see me, and not
altogether surprised that the assistant music mistress should be here,
setting up. Maybe I could stand in their corner all evening, turning
pages and bringing them ale.
   Wine, that is. This was the palace, not the Sunny Monkey.
   Courtiers trickled in, resplendent in silks and brocade. I’d worn my
best gown, a deep blue calamanco with understated embroidery at all
the hemlines, but what passed for finery in town felt shabby here. I
pressed myself against a wall and hoped no one would speak to me. I
knew some of these courtiers: the palace employed professional
musicians such as Guntard and the band, but many young gentlemen
liked to dabble in music on the side. They usually joined the choir,
but that fair-haired Samsamese across from me played a mean viola
da gamba.
   His name was Josef, Earl of Apsig. He noticed my eyes upon him
and ran a hand through his wheaten hair as if to underscore how
handsome he was. I looked away.
   The Samsamese were known for austerity, but even they outshone
me here. Their merchants dressed in browns in town; their courtiers
wore expensive blacks, contriving to be simultaneously sumptuous
and severe. In case we Goreddis failed to recognize expensive cloth on
sight, the Samsamese also spouted great tufts of lace from their cuffs,
and stiff white ruffs at their throats.
   The Ninysh courtiers, by contrast, tried to incorporate every
possible color in their outfits: embroidery, ribbons, parti-colored hose,
bright silk peeking through the slashes in their sleeves. Their country
lay deep in the gloomy south; there were few colors to be seen there,
beyond what they carried with them.
   I glimpsed a Ninysh gabled cap in a vibrant green, worn by an
elderly woman. She had thick spectacles, which gave her eyes a
peevish, bulgy aspect; the heavy creases beside her wide mouth
created the impression of an enormous, disapproving toad.
  She looked like Miss Fusspots, poor old darling.
  No, that was unquestionably Miss Fusspots. That glare could belong
to no one else. My heart caught in my throat. I wouldn’t need to travel
to Porphyry after all; one of my grotesques was standing right across
the room!
  Miss Fusspots, who was diminutive, disappeared behind a grove of
ladies-in-waiting but reemerged moments later beside a redheaded
Ninysh courtier. I began to work my way across the room toward her.
  I didn’t get far, however, because at that very moment Princess
Glisselda and Prince Lucian arrived, arm in arm. The crowd opened a
wide corridor to let them pass, and I dared not cross it. The princess
gleamed in gold and white, brocade encrusted with seed pearls; she
beamed beatifically at the entire room and let a Ninysh courtier lead
her to a seat. Prince Lucian, in the scarlet doublet of the Queen’s
Guard, did not relax until the crowd’s adoring gaze had followed his
cousin to the other end of the room.
  Princess Glisselda took the midnight blue couch, where no one else
had dared to sit, and began chatting away to all and sundry. Lucian
Kiggs did not sit, but stood a little to the side, his eye upon the room;
he never seemed to go off duty. In the adjoining chamber, the
musicians finally began with a pleasant sarabande. I looked for Miss
Fusspots, but she had disappeared.
  “Others may doubt it was a dragon. I do not,” said someone behind
me in a light Samsamese monotone.
  “Ooh, how awful!” said a young woman.
  I turned to see Josef, Earl of Apsig, regaling three Goreddi ladies-in-
waiting with a tale: “I was part of his final hunting party, grausleine.
We had just entered the Queenswood when the hounds scattered in all
directions, as if there were twenty stags, not just one. We split up,
some following north, some west, each group thinking Prince Rufus
was with the other, but when we rejoined, he was nowhere to be
found.
  “We searched for him until evening, then called out the Queen’s
Guard and searched all through the night. It was his own dog—a
lovely brindle snaphound called Una—who found him, lying faceless
and facedown in the nearby fens.”
  The three ladies gasped. I had turned all the way around and was
studying the earl’s face. He had pale blue eyes; his complexion was
without a single blemish or wrinkle by which to gauge his age. He
was trying to impress the ladies, certainly, but seemed to be speaking
the truth. I disliked jumping in where I hadn’t been invited, but I had
to know: “Are you so sure a dragon killed him? Were there clear signs
in the fen?”
   Josef turned the full force of his handsomeness on me. He lifted his
chin and smiled like a Saint in a country church, all piety and
graciousness; around him the choir of cherubic ladies-in-waiting
stared at me and fluttered, silk gowns rustling. “Who else do you
imagine could have killed him, Music Mistress?”
   I folded my arms, proof against charm. “Brigands, stealing his head
for ransom?”
   “There’s been no ransom request.” He smirked; his cherubs smirked
with him.
   “The Sons of St. Ogdo, stirring up dracophobia before the Ardmagar
arrives?”
   He threw back his head and laughed; he had very white teeth.
“Come, Seraphina, you’ve omitted the possibility that he spotted a
lovely shepherdess and simply lost his head.” The heavenly host
rewarded this comment with a symphony of titters.
   I was about to turn away—he knew nothing, clearly—when a
familiar baritone chimed in behind me: “Maid Dombegh is right. It’s
likely the Sons did it.”
   I stepped a little aside, letting Prince Lucian face Josef unimpeded.
   Josef’s smile thinned. Prince Lucian hadn’t acknowledged the
disrespectful innuendo about his uncle Rufus, but he’d surely heard
every word. The earl gave exaggerated courtesy. “Begging your
pardon, Prince, but why do you not round up the Sons and lock them
away, if you’re so sure they did it?”
   “We’ll arrest no one without proof,” said the prince, seeming
unconcerned. His left boot gave three rapid taps; I noticed and
wondered whether I had such unconscious tics. The prince continued,
his tone still light: “Unfounded arrests would give the Sons more
fodder and bring new ones out of the woodwork. Besides, it’s wrong
in principle. ‘Let the one who seeks justice be just.’ ”
   I looked over at him then, because I recognized that quote.
“Pontheus?”
   “The same.” Prince Lucian nodded approvingly.
   Josef sneered. “With all due respect, the Regent of Samsam would
never permit a mad Porphyrian philosopher to guide his decisions.
Nor would he permit dragons to make a state visit to Samsam—no
offense to your Queen, of course.”
   “Perhaps that is why the Regent of Samsam was not the architect of
peace,” said the prince, voice calm, foot tapping. “Apparently he has
no qualms about receiving the benefits of our mad-Porphyrian-
inspired treaty without having to shoulder any of the risks himself.
He’ll be here for this state visit, more’s the headache for me—and I
mean that with all the love and respect in the world.”
   As fascinating as this polite, courtly aggression was, suddenly Miss
Fusspots arrested my gaze from across the adjoining room. She
accepted a glass of tawny port from a page boy. I could not get to her
without ducking through the dancing, and they’d just started a volta,
so there was a great number of flying limbs. I stayed where I was, but
did not take my eye off her.
   A trumpet flare brought the exuberant dance to an inelegant halt;
the band choked off abruptly, and there were several collisions on the
dance floor. I did not take my eyes off Miss Fusspots to see what all
the bother was, which resulted in my standing all alone in the wide
path that had once again opened up.
   Prince Lucian grabbed my arm—my right—and hauled me out of
the way.
   Queen Lavonda herself stood in the doorway. Her face was creased
with age but her back was unbent; she had a spine of steel, they said,
and her posture confirmed it. She still wore white for her son, from
her silk slippers to her wimple and embroidered cap. Her sumptuous
sleeves trailed the floor.
   Glisselda sprang up off her couch and curtsied deeply.
“Grandmamma! You honor us!”
   “I’m not staying, Selda, and I’m not here for myself,” said the
Queen. She had the same voice as her granddaughter, but aged and
edged with command. “I have brought you some additional guests,”
she said, ushering in a group of four saarantrai, Eskar among them.
They stood stiffly, as if in military formation. They had not bothered
to dress up particularly; their bells were not quite shiny enough to be
proper jewelry. Eskar was in Porphyrian trousers again. Everyone
stared.
   “Oh!” squeaked Glisselda. She curtsied again, trying to recover her
composure; her eyes were still large when she rose. “To what do we
owe this, um—”
   “To a treaty signed nearly forty years ago,” said the Queen, who
seemed to grow taller as she addressed the entire room. “I believed,
perhaps erroneously, that our peoples would simply grow accustomed
to each other, given the cessation of warfare. Are we oil and water,
that we cannot mix? Have I been remiss in expecting reason and
decency to prevail, when I should have rolled up my sleeves and
enforced them?”
   The humans in the room looked sheepish; the dragons, discomfited.
   “Glisselda, see to your guests!” the Queen snapped, and quit the
room.
   Glisselda quailed visibly. Beside me, Prince Lucian fidgeted and
muttered, “Come on, Selda.” She could not have heard him, but she
lifted her chin as if she had, trying to capture her grandmother’s
authoritative air. She strode toward Eskar and kissed her on both her
cheeks. The little princess had to rise up on her toes to reach. Eskar
submitted graciously, inclining her head, and everyone applauded.
   Then the soiree resumed, the saarantrai together on one side like a
herd of spooked cattle, their bells jingling plaintively, and the other
guests milling around them in a wide radius.
   I kept my distance, too. Eskar knew me, but I did not care to risk
the others smelling me. I wasn’t sure what they would do. I might be
taken for a scholar with a bell exemption, or Eskar might tactlessly
proclaim my parentage aloud, to be overheard by the whole room.
   Surely she wouldn’t. Orma had told me that interbreeding violated
ard so egregiously that no dragon would entertain the idea that I was
possible, let alone utter it aloud.
   “I dare you to ask her to dance,” said a gentleman behind me,
snapping me out of my preoccupations. For a moment I thought he
meant me.
   “Which one?” intoned the omnipresent Earl of Apsig.
   “Your choice,” laughed his friend.
   “No, I mean which one is a ‘her’? They’re so mannish, these dragon
females.”
   I bristled at that, but why? They weren’t talking about me—except
that, in some oblique way, they were.
   “The real difficulty with these worm-women,” said Josef, “is their
extremely inconvenient dentition.”
   “Dentition?” asked his friend, who was apparently slow on the
uptake.
   I felt my face grow hot.
   “Teeth,” said Josef, spelling it out. “In all the wrong places, if you
follow me.”
   “Teeth in … Oh! Ow!”
   “ ‘Ow’ is understating it, friend. Their males are no better. Picture a
harpoon! And they’d like nothing better than to impale our women
and rip out their—”
   I could take no more; I rushed away, skirting the dance floor, until I
found a window. I unlatched it with trembling hands, desperate for
air. Eyes closed, I pictured the tranquility of my garden, until my
embarrassment had been replaced by sorrow.
   It was just a joke between gentlemen, but I heard in it all the jokes
they would tell about me if they knew.
   Damn Viridius. I couldn’t stay. I would tell him tomorrow that I had
been here; there were witnesses. As the patron Saints of comedy
would have it, however, I met the old man in the doorway on my way
out. He blocked my path with his cane. “You can’t be leaving already,
Seraphina!” he cried. “It’s not even ten!”
   “I’m sorry sir, I—” My voice choked up; I gestured hopelessly at the
gathering, hoping he would not perceive the tears in my eyes.
   “Lars wouldn’t come either. He’s as shy as you are,” said Viridius,
his voice uncharacteristically gentle. “Have you paid your respects to
the princess and prince? No? Well, you must do that at least.” He took
my right arm with his bandaged hand, leaning on his cane with the
other.
   He guided me toward Princess Glisselda’s couch. She glittered like a
star upon the blue upholstery; courtiers orbited her like planets. We
waited our turn, and then Viridius pulled me forward.
   “Infanta,” he said, bowing. “This charming young person has a
great deal of work to do—for me—but I let her know, in no uncertain
terms, how inexcusably rude it would be to leave without paying her
respects.”
   Glisselda beamed at me. “You came! Millie and I had a wager on
whether you ever would. I owe her an extra day off now, but I’m glad
of it. Have you met cousin Lucian?”
   I opened my mouth to assure her I had, but she was already calling
the prince to her side. “Lucian! You were wondering how it was that I
suddenly held such interesting opinions on dragons—well, here she is,
my advisor on dragon affairs!”
   The prince looked tense. My first assumption was that he was
offended, that I’d been rude without even noticing, but then I saw him
glancing over at Eskar and her little group, standing uselessly in a
nearby corner. Perhaps he felt uneasy about the princess discussing
“dragon affairs” so loudly within earshot of the real, live dragons she
pretended not to see.
   Princess Glisselda looked puzzled by the awkwardness in the air, as
if it were a smell she had never encountered before. I looked to Prince
Lucian, but he stared fixedly elsewhere. Did I dare to point out what
he did not?
   It was fear that permitted the Thomas Broadwicks of the world to
flourish: fear of speaking up, fear of the dragons themselves. The
latter didn’t apply to me, and surely conscience must trump the
former.
   I could speak for Orma’s sake.
   I said, “Your Highness, please pardon my forwardness.” I gestured
toward the saarantrai with my eyes. “It would suit your kindly nature
to invite the saarantrai to sit by you, or even if you danced a measure
with one.”
   Glisselda froze. Theoretical discussion about dragonkind was one
thing; interacting with them was something else entirely. She cast her
cousin a panicked look.
   “She’s right, Selda,” he said. “The court follows our lead.”
   “I know!” fretted the princess. “But what am I … how am I to … I
can’t just—”
   “You must,” said Prince Lucian firmly. “Ardmagar Comonot arrives
in eight days, and what then? We can’t shame Grandmother.” He
tugged the ends of his doublet sleeves, straightening them. “I’ll go
first, if it’s easier.”
   “Oh yes, thank you, Lucian, of course it’s easier,” she gushed,
relieved. “He’s so much better at these kinds of things than I am,
Phina. This is why marrying him will be so useful; he understands
practical things and common people. He’s a bastard, after all.”
   I was awed, at first, that she could call her own fiancé a bastard so
casually without him minding, but then I saw his eyes. He minded. He
minded a great deal, but maybe felt he had no right to say so.
   I knew what that was like. I permitted myself the smallest of small
feelings. Sympathy. Yes. That’s what it was.
   He gathered his dignity, which was considerable; as a military man,
he knew how to carry himself. He approached Eskar as one might
sensibly approach a flaming, hissing hell-beast: with a wary calmness
and extreme self-possession. All around the room conversations trailed
off or were suspended as heads turned toward the prince. I found
myself holding my breath; I surely wasn’t the only one.
   He bowed graciously. “Madam Undersecretary,” he said, perfectly
audible across the hushed room, “would you join me in a galliard?”
   Eskar scanned the crowd as if seeking out the author of this prank
but said, “I believe I shall.” She took his arm; her Zibou caftan was a
riotous fuchsia next to his scarlet. Everyone exhaled.
   I stayed a few minutes longer to watch them dance, smiling to
myself. It could be done, this peace. It just took a willingness to do it.
I silently thanked Prince Lucian for his determination. I caught
Viridius’s eye across the room; he seemed to understand and waved a
dismissal. I turned to quit the salon, happy that I’d helped effect some
positive good, but mostly relieved to be leaving the crowd and chatter
behind. Anxiety—or the prospect of being free of it—propelled me
toward the door like a bubble toward the surface of a lake. The
hallway promised me room to breathe.
   I rushed into the corridor with such haste that I all but ran into
Lady Corongi, Princess Glisselda’s governess.
Lady    Corongi was a petite woman, old and old-fashioned. Her
wimple was severely starched and her butterfly veil—a decade out of
favor among the fashionable—was wired so rigidly that she might
have put out someone’s eye with it. Her sleeves covered her hands
completely, which made eating or writing a challenge, but she was of
an antique school that equated fine manners with elaborate rituals.
Clothing that impeded basic functioning presumably gave her more
opportunities for fastidious fussing.
  She stared at me in shock, her eyes goggling behind her veil, her
painted lips drawn up into a prim and disapproving rosebud. She said
not a word; it was up to me to apologize since I was clearly the one
with no manners.
  I curtsied so low I nearly lost my balance. She rolled her eyes at my
wobbling. “I humbly beg your pardon, milady,” I said.
  “It astonishes me that a bungling monkey such as yourself is
permitted to careen so freely up the corridors,” she sniffed. “Have you
no keeper? No leash?”
  I had hoped to speak with her about the princess’s education.
Seeing Glisselda so cowed by real, live saarantrai had only increased
my impetus to speak, but now I felt cowed myself.
  Lady Corongi curled her lip into a sneer and brushed past me,
bumping me out of the way with a sharp elbow to the ribs. She only
went two steps further before turning abruptly. “What did you say
your name was, maidy?”
  I dove into a hasty curtsy. “Seraphina, milady. I teach Princess
Glisselda—”
  “Harpsichord. Yes, she’s mentioned you. She said you were smart.”
She stepped back in front of me, lifted her veil so she could see me
more clearly, and scrutinized my face with sharp blue eyes. “Is that
why you fill her head with nonsense about dragons? Because you’re so
very smart?”
   Here was the thing I had wanted to discuss, without my having to
steer the conversation at all. I tried to reassure her: “It’s not a question
of being smart, milady. It’s a question of exposure. My father, as you
may know, is the Crown’s expert on Comonot’s Treaty. I myself had a
dragon tutor for many years. I have some insight—”
   “That dragons consider us mere insects? That’s an insight?” She
stood close enough that I could see her makeup condensing in the
creases of her face and smell her cloying Ninysh perfume. “I am trying
to give the second heir confidence, to make her proud of her people
and their victory over dragonkind.”
   “It’s not confidence; it’s contempt,” I said, warming to my
argument. “You should have seen her alarm earlier at merely speaking
with saarantrai. She’s disgusted and frightened. She’s going to be
Queen someday; she can afford to be neither.”
   Lady Corongi made a ring of her thumb and forefinger and pressed
it to her heart: St. Ogdo’s sign. “When she is Queen, Heaven willing,
we will finish this conflict the way we should have finished it, instead
of treating like cowards.”
   She turned on her heel and stalked into the Blue Salon.



My encounter with Lady Corongi left me agitated in the extreme. I
returned to my rooms, practiced spinet and oud to calm myself, and
crawled into bed many hours later, still not tired.
  I needed to tend my garden, of course, but I could do that lying
down. Half the grotesques were already asleep when I reached them.
Even Fruit Bat was lolling about dreamily. I tiptoed past and let him
be.
  When I reached the Rose Garden, I stared a long time at Miss
Fusspots shooting aphids off the leaves with a very small crossbow. I
had forgotten all about seeing her at the soiree, but some deeper part
of my mind had not. Her dress was changed to the green velvet she
had worn this evening. In fact, her entire person seemed sharper and
more present, stouter and more solid. Was that proof that I’d really
seen her, or merely that I believed I had?
  If I took her hands right now, what would I see? If she was still at
the Blue Salon, I would recognize it instantly. I felt a twinge of guilt
about deliberately spying on her, but curiosity overruled it. I had to
know.
   Miss Fusspots gave me her hands without any fuss. Entering the
vision felt like being sucked down a drain and spit out into the world.
   The dimly lit room below my vision-eye was not the Blue Salon,
which perplexed me only for a moment. It had been hours; she might
have gone home. I was peering down into a tidy boudoir: heavy
carven furniture in an older style, curtained bed (empty), bookshelves,
peculiar bit of statuary, all of it lit only by the hearth. It didn’t look
like a palace room, but perhaps she had a house in town.
   Where was she, though?
   “Who’s there?” she said abruptly, nearly startling me out of the
vision altogether.
   The shape I had mistaken for statuary moved, was moving, slowly,
one arm raised, feeling around in the empty air as if she were blind,
or as if she were looking for something invisible.
   “I don’t know who you are,” snarled the old woman below me, “but
you have two choices: identify yourself, or wait for me to find you.
You don’t want the latter. I don’t care if it’s the middle of the night. I
will come straight to you, and I will make you sorry.”
   I was still having trouble recognizing her. I blamed the firelight, but
it wasn’t just the poor illumination. She looked different.
   She was unclothed and far skinnier than she appeared with her
gown on. In fact, she looked almost boyish. Was her portly bosom all
made up of padding? I’d caught her in the middle of getting ready for
bed, clearly, and while I was utterly embarrassed, I couldn’t seem to
blink or turn away. One would think such a high lady, even one with
fictitious breasts, would have servants to undress her.
   Then I saw why not, and the shock of it threw me straight out of the
vision and back to myself.
   I felt like I’d fallen into my own bed from a considerable height; I
was dizzy and disoriented and agog with what I’d seen.
   She had a tail, a stubby one, shingled over entirely with silver
scales.
   Scales just like mine.



I pulled the covers over my head and lay there shivering, horrified by
what I had seen, doubly horrified at my own horror, and absurdly
excited by the implications.
   She was a half-dragon. Surely there was no other way to interpret
those scales.
   I was not the only one of my kind! If Miss Fusspots was half dragon,
could that mean that the rest of my grotesques were as well?
Suddenly all the horns and wattles and vestigial wings in my garden
made sense. I’d gotten off lightly with nothing but visions, scales, and
the occasional blizzard of maternal memory.
   I was still awake an hour later when there came a pounding at my
door.
   “Open this door at once, or I shall fetch the steward to open it for
me!”
   Miss Fusspots’s voice was perfectly recognizable through the door. I
rose and crossed through my parlor, preparing an explanation. Fruit
Bat had sensed my presence, but no one else in a vision ever had.
What had changed? Seeing her in the real world? Being so near? If I
had known she would detect me, I never would have looked in on her
like that.
   There was nothing to do but apologize. I opened the door, prepared
to do just that.
   She hit me right in the face, with a bloom of stars and a burst of
pain.
   I staggered back, dimly aware that my nose was gushing. Miss
Fusspots stood in the doorway, brandishing an enormous book—her
weapon of choice—breathing hard, a maniacal glint in her eye.
   She paled when she saw me bleeding, which I mistook for a sign of
impending mercy. “How did you do that?” she snarled through
clenched teeth, stepping up and kicking me in the shin. She swatted at
my head again, but I managed to duck; her arm left an incongruous
waft of lilac perfume in its wake. “Why are you spying on me?”
   “Nggblaah!” I said, not my most cogent explanation, but I was
unaccustomed to speaking with my face covered in blood.
   She stopped kicking me and closed the door. For a moment I feared
that meant she intended something worse, but she wet a cloth at the
basin and handed it to me, gesturing at my nose. She seated herself on
the spinet bench while I cleaned up; her toadly mouth worked up and
down, from disgust to annoyance to amusement and back. She was
dressed now, of course, her figure back to its stout dignity.
   How did she contrive to sit on that tail? I dabbed at the blood on
my chemise, to keep myself from staring at her.
   “Forgive me, lady,” I said, pressing the reddened cloth to my nose
again. “I don’t even know who you are.”
   Her brows shot up in surprise. “Is that so. Well, I know who you
are, Maid Dombegh. I’ve met your father. He’s an excellent lawyer, a
humane and gentle man.” Her expression grew stern. “I trust you take
after him in discretion. Tell no one.”
   “Tell no one what? That you arrived in the middle of the night to
beat me up?”
   She ignored that; she was scrutinizing my face. “Maybe you didn’t
understand what you saw.”
   “Maybe I saw nothing.”
   “Liar. I followed my stomach here, and my stomach is never
wrong.”
   The word liar rankled; I shifted in my seat. “How did you know you
were being watched? Could you see me?”
   “No. I felt a presence—eyes upon me? I can’t explain—I’ve never
felt such a thing before. Was it sorcery? I don’t believe in that, but
then, I imagine there are people who don’t believe in the likes of me,
either.” She folded her arms across her artificially portly bosom. “I am
out of patience. What did you do, and how did you do it?”
   I worried the bloody cloth between my hands and sniffled dismally;
the inside of my nose smelled of iron. I owed her an explanation,
maybe even the truth. She was a half-breed like me; she must have
felt as utterly alone. I could let her know she wasn’t just by pulling up
my sleeve and showing her my scales.
   I had dreamed of this, but now that it came to it my voice didn’t
work. The sheer weight of my intention hunkered down on my chest. I
could not do it. Something would prevent me. The Heavens would
cave in. I would roll up my sleeve and burst into flame. My chemise
sleeve was unbound. I raised my hand high and let the loose sleeve
fall away from my wrist, exposing my arm up to the elbow.
   Her face fell, and for a breathless moment it felt like time had
stopped.
   She stared, bug-eyed, and was silent so long that I began to doubt
whether I had really seen what I had seen. Maybe it had been a trick
of the light, or I was so desperate for kindred that I had imagined it. I
lowered my arm and covered it back up, ashamed.
   “I don’t believe it,” she said at last. “There are no others. This is
some sort of trick.”
   “I promise you, it’s not. I am, um, what you are.” She had avoided
the word half-dragon; I found myself absurdly embarrassed to say it.
   “You expect me to believe you have a tail?” she said, craning her
neck to get a look at my backside.
   “No,” I said, embarrassed by her gaze. “Just scales on my arm and
at my waist.”
   Her mouth curled into a sneer. “You feel terribly sorry for yourself,
I suppose.”
   My face grew hot. “It may not be as dramatic as a tail, but I—”
   “Yes, yes, poor you. You must have trouble sitting down, and need
your clothing especially made so it looks like you have a proper
human body under there. You must have lived an impossibly long
time thinking you were alone in the world. Oh no, I’m sorry, that’s
me.”
   I felt as if she’d slapped me. Whatever I’d expected, it wasn’t
hostility.
   She glowered. “None of this explains how you spy on people.”
   “It’s unintentional. I have visions. Typically, no one in my visions is
aware of my presence.” I left it at that. She didn’t need to know I
could see her at will; let her think she was special, popping into my
head unbidden, uniquely able to perceive me.
   I would not deliberately look in on her again. I’d learned my lesson.
   Some of the bitterness in her expression dissipated; apparently my
mental quirks were not as irksome as my scales. “I have something
similar,” she said. “A very, very short-range predictive skill. It is
essentially an uncanny ability to be in the right place at the right
time.”
   “That’s what you meant by your stomach?” I hazarded.
   She laid a hand on her padded belly. “It’s not magic; it’s more like
indigestion. Typically, its instructions are vague or simple—turn right
here, avoid the oysters—but I had quite a keen one that I could find
the owner of those invisible eyes.” She leaned in toward me, the lines
beside her mouth deepening with her scowl. “Don’t do it again.”
   “You have my word!” I squeaked.
   “I can’t have you stomping about in my head.”
   I thought of Fruit Bat and Jannoula and felt some sympathy. “If it
helps, I only see people from above, like a sparrow might. I can’t read
thoughts—I’d know your name otherwise.”
   Her expression softened slightly. “Dame Okra Carmine,” she said,
inclining her head. “I am the Ninysh ambassador to Goredd.”
   All the ire seemed drained out of her at last. She rose to go but
paused with her hand on the door latch. “Forgive me if I was
undiplomatic, Maid Dombegh. I react poorly to surprises.”
  Poorly hardly covered it, but I said, “Of course,” and handed back
her book, which she’d left on the spinet bench.
  She fingered the leather spine absently, shaking her head. “I must
admit, it boggles the mind to learn that your father, whose dearest
mistress is the law, should have flouted it so egregiously in carrying
on with your mother.”
  “He didn’t know what she was until she died in childbirth.”
  “Ah.” She stared into the middle distance. “Poor fellow.”
  I closed the door behind her and looked at my quigutl timepiece. I
could squeeze in a little sleep before morning if I got right to it. I
turned restlessly and threw off my blankets for an hour, excited and
unable to turn off my thoughts. How could I ever sleep again?
  Fruit Bat, climbing trees in Porphyry, was just like me. My brother
Loud Lad piped upon the rooftops of Samsam. Nag and Nagini raced
across the sands somewhere; mighty Pandowdy lolled in his swamp.
Fierce Miserere fought brigands, malevolent Jannoula plotted, and the
rest of the garden denizens walked this world and were mine.
Scattered and peculiar—some of us skeptical and bitter—we were a
people.
  And I was at the hub of this enormous wheel. I could bring us
together. In a way, I already had.
Of course, I couldn’t run off in search of my people. I had a job.
Viridius was demanding late nights and early mornings. I barely had
time to tend my garden properly; taking Fruit Bat’s hands and locating
him was out of the question. I promised myself I would go looking for
him later, once Treaty Eve had come and gone. Fruit Bat kept his part
of our agreement and gave me no trouble, although his black eyes
scrutinized my face when I visited, and I suspected any rustle in the
shrubbery was him, following me around the garden.
   A dearth of sleep and a bruised, puffy nose made for a crabby music
mistress, which made the days drag by in turn. My musicians weren’t
bothered; they were used to Viridius, whose crankiness knew no
limits. The master himself found me amusing. The more I snarled, the
jollier he got, until he was almost giggly. However, he did not insist
that I attend any more soirees, or try to pin down a time for me to
meet Lars, the mechanical megaharmonium genius. He tiptoed around
me; I let him.
   I still had to finalize the programs for General Comonot’s
welcoming concert and the entertainments for Treaty Eve. Comonot
was to arrive five days before the anniversary of his treaty. He wanted
to experience a bit of what we Goreddis call Golden Week: the cluster
of holy days beginning with Speculus, the longest night of the year. It
was the season for reconciliation and reunion; for grand acts of
charity and grander feasts; for circling the Golden House and praying
that St. Eustace keep his hands to himself for another year; for
watching the Golden Plays and going mumming door to door; for
making grandiose promises for the coming year and asking Heaven for
favors. It just so happened that Queen Lavonda had made peace with
Comonot during Golden Week, so the treaty was commemorated too
with Treaty Eve, where we stayed up all night, and Treaty Day, where
we all slept it off. That marked the beginning of the new year.
   I had filled half the program with Viridius’s students at his
recommendation, sight unseen. His darling Lars got a prime spot,
though the old man muttered, “Don’t let me forget to tell him he’s
playing!” which was not particularly encouraging. There was a lot of
time to fill, especially on Treaty Eve, and I still didn’t have enough
auditions lined up. I spent several days reading more petitions from
prospective performers and auditioning them. Some were excellent;
many were dreadful. It would be tough to fill an entire night unless I
repeated some acts. I’d been hoping for more variety than that.
   One petition kept reappearing at the top of the stack: a troupe of
pygegyria dancers. It had to be the same troupe I’d turned away at the
funeral, unless there was some pygegyria festival in town. I had no
intention of auditioning them; there was no point. Princess Dionne
and Lady Corongi had a difficult enough time condoning our native
Goreddi dances, which permitted young women to have far more fun
than was appropriate. (I had this on the authority of Princess
Glisselda, who found herself greatly inconvenienced by the bad
attitudes of her mother and governess.) I could only imagine what
they would make of a foreign dance with a reputation for being
risqué.
   I tore up the petition and threw it in the fire. I remembered doing
it, quite distinctly, when a pygegyria petition appeared atop the pile
again the next day.



Viridius occasionally let me take days off to keep up my studies with
Orma; I decided I’d earned a break three days before Comonot and
chaos descended upon us. I dressed warmly, slung my oud across my
back, packed my flute in my satchel, and set off for St. Ida’s
Conservatory first thing. I all but skipped down the hill, feeling
pleasantly unburdened. Winter had not yet found its teeth; the rooftop
frost melted with the first kiss of the sun. I bought breakfast along the
river quay, fish custard and a glass of tea. I detoured through St.
Willibald’s Market, which was covered, crowded, and warm. I let
riotous Ninysh ribbons cheer my heart, laughed at the antics of a
noodle-stealing dog, and admired enormous salt-crusted hams. It was
good to be an anonymous face in the crowd, feasting my eyes upon
the glorious mundane.
   Alas, I was not as anonymous as I used to be. An apple seller called
out laughingly as I passed: “Play us a tune, sweetheart!” I assumed
he’d noticed my oud, which hung in plain sight, but he mimed playing
flute. The flute was bundled away where he could not have seen it. He
recognized me from the funeral.
   Then the crowd opened in front of me like a curtain, and there was
Broadwick Bros. Clothiers, their stall heaped high with folded felts.
Thomas Broadwick himself was just tipping his sugarloaf cap to a
wide-hipped matron, the proud new owner of several yards of cloth.
   He looked up and our eyes met for a long moment, as if time had
stopped.
   It occurred to me to approach him, to march boldly up and tell him
I’d seen the light and repented my quig-coddling ways. In the same
instant, though, I remembered that the lizard figurine was still in my
coin purse; I had never bothered taking it out. That consideration
made me hesitate too long.
   His eyes narrowed, as if guilt were written plainly on my face. My
window of opportunity for bluffing him had passed.
   I turned and plunged into the densest part of the crowd, pulling my
oud in front of me so I could protect it from jostling. The market took
up three city blocks, giving me ample scope for vanishing. I ducked
around the end of a coppersmith’s stall and peered back between the
gleaming kettles.
   He was there, moving slowly and deliberately through the crowd, as
if he were wading though deep water. Thank Allsaints he was tall, and
the sugarloaf hat gave him an additional three inches of bright green.
It would surely be easier for me to see him than for him to see me. I
started working my way up the arcade again.
   I zigged and zagged as best I could, but he was always there when I
looked back, a little closer each time. He’d catch up before I found the
way out, unless I started running, which would have drawn the entire
market’s attention. No one but a thief runs in the market.
   I began to sweat. Merchants’ voices echoed in the vaulted ceilings,
but there was another sound, something sharper, shrilling underneath
the dull murmur.
   It sounded like a good distraction to me.
   I turned a corner and saw two Sons of St. Ogdo standing on the
edge of the public fountain. One pontificated and the other stood
alongside, looking tough and keeping an eye open for the Guard. I
skirted the crowd and ducked behind a great fat cobbler—judging by
his leather apron and awls—whence I might spy Thomas without his
spotting me. As I’d hoped, Thomas stopped short at the sight of the
black-plumed Son prancing passionately on the fountain ledge. He
listened, openmouthed, with the rest of the crowd.
   “Brothers and sisters under Heaven!” cried St. Ogdo’s champion, his
feather bobbing, fire in his eyes. “Do you imagine that once the chief
monster sets foot in Goredd, he intends to leave?”
   “No!” cried scattered voices. “Drive the devils out!”
   The Son raised his knobby hands for silence. “This so-called treaty
—this dishrag!—is but a ruse. They lull us to sleep with peace; they
trick our Queen into banishing the knights, who were once the pride
of all the Southlands; and they wait until we are utterly helpless.
Whither the mighty dracomachia, our art of war? There is no
dracomachia now. Why should the worms fight us? They’ve already
sent a stinking quig vanguard, burrowing into the rotten heart of this
city. Now they walk in, forty years on, invited by the Queen herself.
Forty years is nothing to such long-lived beasts! These are the
selfsame monsters our grandfathers died fighting—and we trust
them?”
   A raucous cry went up. Thomas shouted enthusiastically with the
rest; I watched him through a forest of fist shaking. This was my
chance to slip out. I shouldered my way through the suffocating
crowd and burst out of the labyrinthine market into the feeble
sunlight.
   The cold air cleared my head but did not slow my racing heart. I
had come out only a block from St. Ida’s. I set off quickly, fearing he
still followed me.
   I took the steps of St. Ida’s two at a time, reaching the music library
within minutes. Orma’s office door spanned a gap between two
bookcases; it looked like it had merely been propped there, because it
had. At my knock, Orma lifted the entire door to let me enter, then set
it back in place.
   His office wasn’t properly a room. It was made of books, or more
accurately, the space between books, where three little windows had
prevented the placement of bookcases against the wall. I had spent
vast tracts of time here, reading, practicing, taking instruction, even
sleeping here more than once, when home got too tense.
   Orma moved a pile of books off a stool for me but seated himself
directly on another stack. This habit of his never ceased to amuse me.
Dragons no longer hoarded gold; Comonot’s reforms had outlawed it.
For Orma and his generation, knowledge was treasure. As dragons
through the ages had done, he gathered it, and then he sat on it.
  Just being with him in this space made me feel safe again. I
unpacked my instruments, my anxiety releasing in the form of chatter:
“I was just chased through St. Willibald’s, and you know why?
Because I was kind to a quig. I scrupulously hide every legitimate
reason for people to hate me, and then it turns out they don’t need
legitimate reasons. Heaven has fashioned a knife of irony to stab me
with.”
  I didn’t expect Orma to laugh, but he was even more unresponsive
than usual. He stared at motes of dust dancing in the sunbeams from
his tiny windows. The reflection upon his spectacles made his
expression opaque to me.
  “You’re not listening,” I said.
  He did not speak; he removed his glasses and rubbed his eyes with a
thumb and forefinger. Was his vision bothering him? He had never
gotten used to human eyes, so much weaker than their dragon
counterparts. In his natural form he could spy a mouse in a field of
wheat. No spectacles, however strong, could possibly bridge that gap.
  I looked at him hard. There were things my eyes—and the human
mind behind them—could discern that his never could. He looked
dreadful: pale and drawn, with circles under his eyes, and … I barely
dared articulate it, even to myself.
  He looked upset. No dragon could have seen that.
  “Are you ill?” I sprang to his side, not quite daring to touch him.
  He grimaced and stretched pensively, coming to some conclusion.
He removed his earrings and deposited them in a drawer of his desk;
whatever he was going to tell me, he did not want the Board of
Censors hearing. From the folds of his doublet, he drew an object and
placed it in my hand. It was heavy and cold, and I knew without
being told that this was what the beggar had given him after Prince
Rufus’s funeral.
  It was a gold coin, utterly antique. I recognized the obverse Queen,
or her symbols anyway; Pau-Henoa, the trickster hero, pranced on the
reverse. “Does this date from the reign of Belondweg?” I said. She was
Goredd’s first queen, nearly a thousand years ago. “Where would one
acquire such a thing? And don’t tell me the town beggars were
handing them out to everyone, because I didn’t get mine.” I passed it
back to him.
  Orma rubbed the coin between his fingers. “The child was a random
messenger. Irrelevant. The coin comes from my father.”
  A chill ran up my spine. In repressing every thought of my mother
—and I dared not even think of Orma as uncle very often, lest I slip
up and call him that—I had made a habit of squelching all thoughts of
my extended dragon family. “How do you know?”
   He raised an eyebrow. “I know every coin in my father’s hoard.”
   “I thought hoarding was illegal.”
   “Even I am older than that law. I remember his hoard from when I
was a child, every coin and cup of it.” His gaze grew distant again and
he licked his lips as if gold were something he missed the taste of. He
shook it off and grimaced at me. “My father was forced to give it up,
of course, although he resisted for years. The Ardmagar let it pass
until your mother’s disgrace stained us all.”
   He rarely spoke about my mother; I found myself holding my
breath. He said, “When Linn took up with Claude and refused to come
home, the Censors flagged our entire family for mental health
scrutiny. My mother killed herself for shame, confirming a second
irrefutable case of madness in the family.”
   “I remember,” I said hoarsely.
   He continued: “You’ll also recall that my father was a prominent
general. He didn’t always agree with Ardmagar Comonot, but his
loyalty and his glorious career were beyond dispute. After Linn …” He
trailed off as if he couldn’t say “fell in love”; it was too horrible to
contemplate. “Suddenly our father was being watched, every action
probed, every utterance dissected. Suddenly they no longer turned a
blind eye to his hoard, or to his occasional resistance.”
   “He fled before his trial, didn’t he?” I said.
   Orma nodded, his eyes on the coin. “Comonot banished him in
absentia; no one has seen him since. He’s still wanted for stirring up
dissent against the Ardmagar’s reforms.”
   His carefully neutral expression was breaking my heart, but there
was nothing human I could do to help him. “So what does the coin
signify?” I asked.
   Orma looked at me over his spectacles, as if it were the most
unnecessary question ever uttered. “He’s in Goredd. You may be
certain of it.”
   “Didn’t his hoard get reabsorbed into the High Ker’s treasury?”
   He shrugged. “Who knows what the wily saar contrived to take
with him.”
   “Could no one else have sent it? The Board of Censors, to gauge
your reaction?”
   Orma pursed his lips and gave a tight shake of his head. “No. This
was our signal when I was a child. This very coin. It admonished me
to behave at school. ‘Don’t shame us,’ was the sense of it. ‘Remember
your family.’ ”
   “What can it possibly mean in this context?”
   His face looked thinner than before; his false beard fit poorly, or he
hadn’t bothered to put it on quite straight. He said, “I believe Imlann
was at the funeral, and he suspects I may have noticed him, though in
fact I did not. He’s telling me to stay out of his way, to pretend I don’t
recognize his saarantras if I see it, and to let him do what honor
demands.”
   I folded my arms; the room seemed suddenly colder. “Do what? And
more urgently: to whom? To the man his daughter married? To their
child?”
   Orma’s brown eyes widened behind his spectacles. “That had not
occurred to me. No. Do not fear for yourself; he believes Linn died
childless.”
   “And my father?”
   “He never permitted your father’s name to be spoken in his
presence. Your father’s very existence violates ard, and was vigorously
denied by everyone.”
   Orma picked lint off the knee of his woolen hose; he wore a pair of
silks underneath, or he’d have been scratching like a flea-bitten
hound. “Who knows what Imlann has been stewing upon for the last
sixteen years?” he said. “He has no incentive to obey the law or keep
his human emotions under wraps. Even for myself, constantly
monitored and obeying the law as best I can, this shape takes a toll.
The borderlands of madness used to have much sterner signage
around them than they do now.”
   “If you don’t think he’s after Papa and me, then what? Why would
he be here?”
   “This close to Comonot’s visit?” He stared over the rims of his
glasses again.
   “An assassination?” He was making great suppositional leaps, or
else I was. “You think he’s plotting against the Ardmagar?”
   “I think it would be foolish to close our eyes and proceed as if he
weren’t.”
   “Well then, you’ve got to tell Prince Lucian and the Guard about
this.”
   “Ah. That’s just it.” He leaned back and tapped the edge of the coin
against his teeth. “I can’t. I’m caught—what’s your expression?—
between a rock and another rock? I’m too involved. I do not trust
myself to make an unemotional decision.”
   I studied his face again, the crease between his brows. He was
unquestionably struggling with something. “You don’t want to turn
him in, because he’s your father?”
   Orma rolled his eyes toward me, the whites flashing like a
frightened animal’s. “Quite the contrary. I want to set the Guard on
him, want to see him brought to trial, want to see him hang. And not
because he is truly, logically, a danger to the Ardmagar—because
you’re right, he might not be—but because, in fact, I … I hate him.”
   Absurdly, my first response to this was a knot of jealousy, like a fist
to the stomach, that he not only felt something, but felt it intensely
about someone who wasn’t me. I reminded myself that it was hatred; I
could not possibly prefer that to his benevolent indifference, could I? I
said, “Hate is serious. You’re sure?”
   He nodded, finally letting everything show on his face for more
than a fraction of a second. He looked terrible.
   “How long have you felt this?” I asked.
   He shrugged hopelessly. “Linn was not just my sister; she was my
teacher.”
   Orma had often told me that among dragons there was no higher
word of esteem than teacher; teachers were more revered than
parents, spouses, even the Ardmagar himself.
   “When she died and the shame fell on our family,” he said, “I could
not denounce her the way my father could—the way we were all
supposed to, for the satisfaction of the Ardmagar. We fought; he bit
me—”
   “He bit you?”
   “We’re dragons, Phina. The one time you saw me …” He gestured
vaguely with his hand, as if he didn’t want to say it aloud, as if I’d
seen him naked—which I guess technically I had. “I kept my wings
folded, so you probably didn’t notice the damage to the left, where
the bone was once broken.”
   I shook my head, horrified for him. “Can you still fly?”
   “Oh, yes,” he said absently. “But you must understand: in the end I
denounced her, under duress. My mother killed herself anyway. My
father was banished anyway. In the end—” His lips trembled. “I don’t
know what it was for.”
   There were tears in my eyes, if not in his. “The Board of Censors
would have sent you down for excision if you hadn’t.”
   “Yes, that’s highly likely,” he mused, his tone back to a studied
neutral.
   The Censors would have excised my mother, too, reached in and
stolen every loving memory of my father. In my head, the tin box of
memories gave a painful twitch.
   “Denouncing her didn’t even free me from the Censors’ scrutiny,”
said Orma. “They don’t know my true difficulties, but they assume I
have some, given my family history. They suspect, certainly, that I
care more for you than is permitted.”
   “That’s what Zeyd was sent to test,” I said, trying to keep the
bitterness from my voice.
   He squirmed, imperceptibly to any eye but mine. He had never
shown the tiniest bit of remorse for putting me in mortal danger as a
child; this fleeting discomfiture was the best I could expect.
   “I don’t intend to give them any inkling of my real difficulty,” he
said, handing me the coin. “Do with it what you think right.”
   “I’ll turn it over to Prince Lucian Kiggs, though I don’t know what
he can do with your vague premonition. Any advice on recognizing
Imlann’s saarantras?”
   “I’d recognize him, unless he’s in disguise. I’d know him if I smelled
him,” said Orma. “My father’s saarantras was lean, but he may have
spent the last sixteen years exercising, or forcing custard down his
gullet. I can’t know. He had blue eyes, unusual in a saar but not in a
Southlander. Fair hair is easily dyed.”
   “Could Imlann pass as easily as Linn?” I asked. “Was he practiced in
courtly manners, or musical like his children? Where might he try
blending in?”
   “He’d do best as a soldier, I should think, or concealed somewhere
at court, but he’d know I would expect that. He’ll be somewhere no
one would expect.”
   “If he was at the funeral and saw you without your seeing him, it’s
likely he would have been standing …” Saints’ dogs. Orma had been
at the center of everything. I’d seen him from behind the quire screen;
he might have been seen from any angle.
   Orma stiffened. “Do not go looking for Imlann yourself. He might
kill you.”
   “He doesn’t know I exist.”
   “He doesn’t need to know you’re you to kill you,” said Orma. “He
needs only believe you’re trying to stop him doing whatever he’s here
to do.”
   “I see,” I said, half laughing. “Better Prince Lucian Kiggs than me, I
suppose.”
   “Yes!”
   The vehemence of that yes made me stagger back a step. I could not
reply; some emotion had seized my throat.
   Someone was rapping on the lopsided door. I moved the door to the
side, expecting one of the librarian monks.
   There slumped Basind, the disjointed newskin, breathing loudly
through his mouth. His eyes pointed two different directions. I
recoiled, holding the door before me like a shield. He pushed past,
jingling like an Allsaints wreath, gaping at the room, and stumbling
over a pile of books.
   Orma was on his feet in an instant. “Saar Basind,” he said. “What
brings you to St. Ida’s?”
   Basind fished around in his shirt, then in his pants, finally locating a
folded letter addressed to Orma. Orma read it quickly and held it out
to me. I put the door back in its place, grasped the letter with two
fingers, and read:

      Orma: You will recall Saar Basind. We find him useless at the
   embassy. Apparently the Ardmagar owes Basind’s mother a favor
   for turning in her hoarding husband. Basind should never have been
   permitted to come south otherwise. He needs remedial human
   behavior lessons. Given your family history, and your own ability to
   pass, it occurs to me that you might be the ideal teacher.
      Give whatever time you have to give, recalling that you are in no
   position to refuse this request. In particular, persuade him to keep
   his clothes on in public. The situation is that dire. All in ard, Eskar.

  Orma uttered no cry of dismay. I exclaimed for him: “St. Daan in a
pan!”
  “Evidently they’re anxious to get him out from underfoot while they
prepare for the Ardmagar’s arrival,” said Orma evenly. “That’s not
unreasonable.”
  “But what are you to do with him?” I lowered my voice, because
anyone could be on the other side of the bookcases. “You’re trying to
pass among the music students; how do you explain being saddled
with a newskin?”
  “I’ll devise something.” He gently removed a book from Basind’s
hands and put it on a high shelf. “I might plausibly be homebound
with pneumonia this time of year.”
  I didn’t want to leave until I was sure he was all right, and I
particularly didn’t want to leave him with the newskin, but Orma was
adamant. “You have a lot of other things to do,” he said, opening the
door for me. “You have a date with Prince Lucian Kiggs, if I recall.”
  “I had hoped for a music lesson,” I griped.
  “I can give you homework,” he said, infuriatingly oblivious to my
dismay. “Stop by St. Gobnait’s and observe the new megaharmonium.
They’ve just finished it, and I understand it puts into practice some
intriguing acoustical principles, hitherto untested on so large a scale.”
  He tried to smile, to show me he was fine. Then he closed the door
in my face.
I strolled to the cathedral, as Orma suggested, having no desire to
return to the palace yet. The sky had drawn a thin white veil across
the sun, and the wind had picked up. Maybe snow would come soon;
it was five days till Speculus, the longest night of the year. As the
saying goes: when the days lengthen, the cold strengthens.
   The Countdown Clock was visible all the way across the cathedral
square. Apparently it changed numbers midmorning, about the time
Comonot would be arriving. I appreciated that kind of pedantry, and
stopped to watch the mechanical figures emerge from little doors in
its face. A bright green dragon and a purple-clad queen stepped
forward, bowed, took turns chasing each other, and then hoisted a
drapery between them, which I assumed represented the treaty. There
was a grinding and clunking sound, and the massive clock hand
pointed toward three.
   Three days. I wondered whether the Sons of St. Ogdo felt pressed
for time. Was it difficult to organize rioting? Did they have enough
torches and black feathers? Enough rabid speechifiers?
   I turned back toward St. Gobnait’s cathedral, feeling some curiosity
about Viridius’s protégé. He had certainly made an interesting clock.
   I felt the megaharmonium before I heard it, through the soles of my
feet, through the very street, experiencing it not as sound but as
vibration and a peculiar oppressive weight of air. Closer to the
cathedral, I understood a sound was present but would have been
hard-pressed to identify it. I stood in the north transept porch, my
hand upon a pillar, and I felt the megaharmonium to the center of my
bones.
   It was loud. I did not yet feel qualified to offer a more nuanced
opinion.
   I opened the door into the north transept; the music nearly blasted
me back out again. The entire cathedral was packed with sound, every
cranny, as if sound were some solid mass, leaving no air, no medium
to move through. I could not enter until my ears adjusted, which they
did surprisingly quickly.
  Once I had ceased to be terrified, I was awed. My paltry flute had
made the building ring, but that thin sound had risen like candle
smoke; this was a conflagration.
  I worked my way toward the Golden House at the great crossing,
wading through sound, then pressed on into the south transept. I saw
now that the instrument had four manual keyboards, gleaming like
rows of teeth, and a larger one for the feet. Above, around, and
behind it, pipes had been fitted in neat rows, making a palisade
fortress of chanters; it looked like the unnatural offspring of a bagpipe
and a … a dragon.
  A large man in black dominated the bench, his feet dancing a
ground-bass jig, his broad shoulders affording him a reach like a
Zibou rock ape. I wasn’t short but I could not have reached in so
many directions at once without straining something.
  There was no music on the stand; surely no music had yet been
written for this monstrosity. Was this cacophony his own
composition? I suspected it was. It was brilliant, the way a
thunderstorm across the moors or a raging torrent is brilliant, insofar
as a force of nature may be said to have genius.
  I was judging too hastily. I began to hear structure in the piece, the
longer I listened. The volume and intensity had distracted me from
the melody itself, a fragile thing, almost shy. The surrounding
bombast was all a bluff.
  He released the last chord like a boulder off a trebuchet. A bevy of
monks who’d been hiding in nearby chapels like timid mice scurried
out and accosted the performer in whispers: “Very nice. Glad it works.
That’s enough testing; we’re about to have service.”
  “I couldt play durink service, yes?” said the big man in a dense
Samsamese accent. His head, close-cropped and blond, bobbed
submissively.
  “No. No. No.” The negative echoed all over the transept. The big
man’s shoulders slumped; even from the back, he looked heartbroken.
A pang of pity surprised me.
  Surely this was Viridius’s golden boy, Lars. He had designed an
impressive machine, taking up an entire chapel with its pipes and
tubes and bellows. I wondered which Saint had been evicted to make
room for it.
  I should greet him. I felt I’d glimpsed his humanity, a piece of his
heart in his playing. We were friends; he just didn’t know it yet. I
stepped up and gently cleared my throat. He turned to look at me.
   His middling chin, round cheeks, and gray eyes shocked me
speechless. It was Loud Lad, who piped and yodeled and built
pergolas in the garden of my mind.



“Hello,” I said calmly, my pulse racing in excitement and plain terror.
Would all my grotesques, the entire freakish diaspora of half-dragons,
walk into my life one by one? Would I spot Gargoyella busking on a
street corner and Finch in the palace kitchens, turning the spits?
Maybe I wouldn’t have to go looking for them after all.
   Loud Lad gave courtesy with Samsamese simplicity, and said, “We
hev not been introduced, grausleine.”
   I shook his enormous hand. “I’m Seraphina, Viridius’s new
assistant.”
   He nodded eagerly. “I know. I am calledt Lurse.”
   Lars. He spoke Goreddi like his mouth was full of pebbles.
   He rose from his bench; he was taller than Orma, and as massive as
two and a half Ormas, at least. He seemed simultaneously strong and
soft, as if he had ended up with a lot of muscles rather by accident
and didn’t care about keeping them. He had a nose like a compass
needle; it pointed with purpose. He pointed it toward the quire, where
the monks had begun cheerful hymns to St. Gobnait and her blessed
bees. “They are havink service. Perheps we can …” He gestured past
the Golden House, toward the north transept. I followed him out, into
the hazy glare of afternoon.
   We walked to the Wolfstoot Bridge, a shy silence hanging over us.
“Would you like lunch?” I said, gesturing toward the clustered food
carts. He said nothing, but stepped up eagerly. I bought us pies and
ale; we carried them to the bridge’s balustrade.
   Lars hefted himself up with unexpected grace and sat on the
balustrade with his long legs dangling over the river. Like all proper
Samsamese, he dressed gloomily: black doublet, jerkin, and joined
hose. No ruffs or lace, no slashing or puffy trunk hose here. His boots
looked like he’d owned them a long time and could not bear to give
them up.
   He swallowed a bite of pie and sighed. “I hev needt to speak with
you, grausleine. I heardt you at the funeral and knew you were my …”
   He trailed off; I waited, filled with curiosity and dread.
   River gulls circled, waiting for us to drop the smallest crumb. Lars
threw bits of pie crust over the river; the gulls swooped and caught
them in midair. “I start over,” he said. “Hev you noticedt, perheps,
thet an instrument can be like a voice? Thet you can tell who plays it
just from listenink, without lookink?”
   “If I am very familiar with the performer, yes,” I said carefully,
unsure what he was getting at.
   He puffed out his cheeks and looked at the sky. “Do not think me
mad, grausleine. I hev heardt you play before, in dreamink, in …” He
gestured toward his blond head.
   “I didt not know what I was hearink,” he said, “but I believedt in it.
It was like crumbs on the forest path: I followedt. They leadt me here
where I can buildt my machine, and where I am less the, eh,
vilishparaiah … sorry, my Gorshya not goodt.”
   His Goreddi was better than my Samsamese, but vilishparaiah
sounded like a cognate. The “paraiah” part did, anyway. I did not
dare ask him about being half dragon; as much as I hoped that was
the link between all my grotesques and me, I did not yet have proof. I
said, “You followed the music—”
   “Your music!”
   “—to escape persecution?” I spoke gently, trying to convey
sympathy and let him know I understood all about the difficulties of
being a half-breed.
   He nodded vigorously. “I am a Daanite,” he said.
   “Oh!” I said. That was unexpected information, and I found myself
reevaluating everything Viridius had said about his protégé, the way
his eyes had gleamed.
   Lars stared intently at the remains of his lunch, a veil of shyness
drawn over him again. I hoped he hadn’t mistaken my silence for
disapproval. I tried to coax him back out: “Viridius is so proud of your
megaharmonium.”
   He smiled but did not look up.
   “How did you calculate the acoustics for that contraption?”
   He raised his gray eyes sharply. “Acoustics? Is simple. But I needt
somethink to write with.” I pulled a small charcoal pencil—a
draconian innovation, rare in Goredd, but very useful—from the
pocket of my surcoat. His lips twitched into a little smile and he
started scrawling an equation beside him on the balustrade. He ran
out of room to write as the notation approached his bum—he wrote
sinister-handed—so he stood up on the railing, balancing like a cat,
and wrote leaning over. He diagrammed levers and bellows,
illustrated the resonant properties of types of wood, and elucidated
his theory of how one might emulate the sounds of other instruments
by manipulating wave properties.
   Everyone turned to look at the enormous and unexpectedly graceful
man balancing on the balustrade, doubled over writing, gabbling
about his megaharmonium in intermittent Samsamese.
   I grinned at him and marveled that anyone could possess such
single-minded passion for a machine.
   A cadre of courtiers approached the bridge on horseback but found
it difficult to cross with all the merchants and townspeople gaping at
Lars’s antics. The gentlemen made a ruckus with their horses; people
scampered out of their way to avoid being trampled. One courtier,
dressed in rich black, smacked dawdling gawpers with his riding crop.
   It was Josef, Earl of Apsig. He didn’t notice me; his eye was fixed on
Lars.
   Lars looked up, met the earl’s fierce glare, and went white.
   Goreddis claim that all Samsamese sounds like cursing, but Josef’s
tone and body language left no doubt. He rode straight for Lars,
gesticulating and shouting. I knew the words mongrel and bastard, and
guessed the obscure halves of some compound words. I looked to Lars,
horrified for him, but he stoically took the abuse.
   Josef drove his horse right up against the balustrade, making it
difficult for Lars to keep his balance. The earl lowered his voice to a
vicious whisper. Lars was strong enough to have pitched scrawny
Josef right off his horse, yet he did nothing.
   I looked around, hoping someone would come to Lars’s aid, but no
one on the crowded bridge made any move to help. Lars was my
friend, for all that I’d known him two hours; I’d known Loud Lad for
five years, and he’d always been a favorite. I sidled up to the horse
and tapped at the Earl of Apsig’s black-clad knee, gingerly at first and
then harder when he ignored me.
   “Hey,” I said, as if I could talk to an earl that way. “Leave him
alone.”
   “This is not your affair, grausleine,” Josef sneered over his starched
ruff, his pale hair flopping into his eyes. He wheeled his horse, driving
me back. Unintentionally—perhaps—his horse’s hindquarters swung
around and knocked Lars into the freezing river.
   Everyone took off running then—some for the river’s edge, some to
put as much distance between themselves and this fracas as possible. I
rushed down the steps to the quayside. Rivermen were already
shoving off in rowboats and coracles, extending poles over the choppy
water, shouting directions to the flailing figure. Lars could swim, it
seemed, but was hindered by his clothing and the cold. His lips were
tinged blue; he had trouble getting his hands to close around the
proffered poles.
   Someone finally hooked him and reeled him in to shore, where old
river ladies had hauled piles of blankets off their barges. A riverman
brought out a brazier and stoked it high, adding a tang of charcoal to
the fishy breeze.
   I felt a pricking behind my eyes, moved by the sight of people
pulling together to help a stranger. The bitterness I’d carried since
morning, since the incident at St. Willibald’s Market, melted away.
People feared the unfamiliar, certainly, but they still had tremendous
capacity for kindness when one of their own—
   Except that Lars wasn’t one of their own. He looked normal, except
for his height and girth, but what lay under his black jerkin? Scales?
Something worse? And here were the well-meaning, easily terrified
townsfolk about to strip off his soaked clothing. He was shyly evading
an old woman’s helping hands even now. “Come, lad,” she laughed,
“ye need not be bashful wi’ me. What hain’t I seen, in my fifty years?”
   Lars shivered—big shivers, to match the rest of him. He needed to
get dry. I could think of only one thing to do, and it was slightly mad.
   I leaped up on one of the wharf piles, cried, “Who wants a song?”
and launched into a stirring a capella rendition of “Peaches and
Cheese”:

    The vagabond sun winks down through the trees,
    While lilacs, like memories, waft on the breeze,
    My friend, I was born for soft days such as these,
    To inhale perfume,
    And cut through the gloom,
    And feast like a king upon peaches and cheese!
    I’ll travel this wide world and go where I please,
    Can’t stop my wand’ring, it’s like a disease.
    My only regret as I cross the high seas:
    What I leave behind,
    Though I hope to find,
    My own golden city of peaches and cheese!

   People laughed and clapped, most of them keeping their eyes on
me. It took Lars a minute to grasp that this was all the cover he was
going to get. He turned modestly toward the river wall, a blanket
draped over his shoulders, and began peeling off his clothes.
   He needed to move faster than that; this song only had five verses.
   I remembered the oud strapped across my back, pulled it around,
and launched into an improvised interlude. People cheered. Lars
stared at me again, to my irritation. Had he not believed I could play
either? Thanks for all the faint praise, Viridius.
   Then, however, it was my turn to stare at Lars, because he appeared
not to have anything odd about him at all. I spied no trace of silver on
his legs, but he quickly covered them up with borrowed trousers. He
kept the blanket draped across his shoulders as best he could until it
slipped. I ogled his torso. Nothing.
   No, wait, there it was, on his right bicep: a slender band of scales
running all the way around. From a distance it looked like a bracelet
in the Porphyrian style; he’d even found a way to inlay it with
colorful glass gems. It might be taken for jewelry, easily, by anyone
not expecting to find scales.
   Suddenly I understood Dame Okra’s irritation with me. How easy
life must be if that slender band was your only physical manifestation!
And here I’d stood up in front of everybody and risked myself, when
he’d barely anything to hide.

    I’ll ask my true love, and I’ll hope she agrees,
    How could she not, when I’m down on my knees?
    My Jill, say you will, and don’t be such a tease.
    When it’s time to eat,
    I say sweets to the sweet,
    My love, let your answer be peaches and cheese!

   I finished with a flourish. Lars was decent, in mismatched
riverman’s garb only slightly too small. The crowd called for more,
but I was done, my rush of panicked energy spent. All that remained
was to figure out how to get off my perch; looking down now, I wasn’t
sure how I’d gotten up. Desperation gives you a longer leap,
apparently.
  A hand reached up to help me; I looked down to see the dark curls
and merry eyes of Prince Lucian Kiggs.
  He smiled at the sheer absurdity of me, and I could not stop myself
smiling back.
  I leaped down, not quite nimbly. “I was heading up to Castle Orison
with the evening patrol,” said the prince. “Thought we’d stop and see
what the commotion was—and the singing. That was nicely done.”
  Many people had cleared out with the arrival of this small party of
Guardsmen; those who remained told our tale with gusto, as if it
might replace Belondweg, our national epic. The eponymous Brutal
Earl of Apsig victimizes an innocent clod on the bridge railing! A fair
maidy tries to save him, heroic townsfolk fish him out of the drink,
and then—triumphal music!
  Prince Lucian seemed to enjoy the tale. I was just glad I didn’t have
to explain what I’d really been doing; it had seemed perfectly logical
to everyone. Lars stood quietly, ignoring an officer who was
attempting to question him.
  The frustrated officer reported back to the prince: “He has no
interest in pursuing justice for this incident, Captain Kiggs.”
  “Find Earl Josef. I’ll speak to him about this. He can’t go knocking
people into the river and riding off,” said Prince Lucian, waving a
dismissal. His deputies departed.
  The sun was beginning to set and the breeze along the river had
picked up. The prince faced my shivering friend. Lars was older and a
head taller, but Prince Lucian stood like he was Captain of the
Queen’s Guard. Lars looked like a little boy who wanted to sink into
his boots. I was amazed at how far he succeeded.
  The prince spoke, his voice unexpectedly gentle: “You’re Viridius’s
protégé.”
  “Yes,” said Lars, mumbling as a man must who’s sunk into his
footwear.
  “Did you provoke the earl in some way?”
  Lars shrugged and said, “I was raisedt on his estate.”
  “That’s hardly a provocation, is it?” asked Prince Lucian. “Are you
his serf?”
  Lars hesitated. “I hev spendt more than a year and a day away from
his landts. I am legally free.”
  A question took root in my mind: if Lars had grown up on his
estate, might Josef know Lars was half dragon? It seemed plausible,
and Josef’s hostility made sense in light of his attitudes toward
dragonkind. Alas, I could not ask in front of Lucian Kiggs.
  Prince Lucian looked disgusted. “Maybe a man can harass his
former serfs in Samsam, but that is not how we conduct ourselves
here. I will speak with him.”
  “I’dt rather you didt not,” said Lars. Prince Lucian opened his
mouth to protest, but Lars cut him off. “I can go, yes?”
  The prince waved him along. Lars returned my pencil, slightly
soggy, and held my gaze for a moment before he turned to go. I
wished I could have embraced him, but I felt a peculiar reluctance to
do so in front of the prince. We shared a secret, Lars and I, even if
Lars didn’t know it yet.
  He climbed the stone steps up the Wolfstoot Bridge without a word.
His broad shoulders sagged, as if under the burden of whole worlds
we could not see.
“But of course I might say anything, because you are quite far away
just now,” said Prince Lucian, who had apparently been speaking to
me for some time.
   “Sorry.” I tore my eyes away from Lars and gave the prince full
courtesy.
   “We can dispense with some formality,” he said when I rose, his
eyebrows raised in plain amusement. He put a hand to his crimson
doublet, right over his heart, and said earnestly, “Right now I’m
merely Captain of the Guard. Half courtesy is adequate, and you may
call me Captain Kiggs—or simply Kiggs, if you will. Everyone else
does.”
   “Princess Glisselda calls you Lucian,” I said breezily, covering my
fluster.
   He gave a short laugh. “Selda’s an exception to everything, as you
may have noticed. My own grandmother calls me Kiggs. Would you
gainsay the Queen?”
   “I wouldn’t dare,” I said, trying to echo his levity. “Not about
something this important.”
   “I should think not.” He gestured grandly toward the steps up the
bridge. “If you’ve no objection, let us walk while we talk; I have to get
back to Castle Orison.”
   I followed, unsure what he wished to speak with me about, but
recalling that Orma had given me a task. I put a hand to the purse at
my waist, but the little lizard figurine made me anxious, as if it might
pop its head out without permission.
   How would this prince react if he saw it? Perhaps I could just tell
him the story.
   A guildsman of the town watch stood on the balustrade as Lars had
done, lighting lamps in anticipation of sunset; laughing merchants
dismantled their stalls. Prince—Kiggs strolled through the thinning
market crowd, perfectly at ease among them, as if he were simply
another townsman. I started up the gently sloping Royal Road, but he
gestured toward a narrow street, the more direct route. The road, not
wide to begin with, narrowed even further above us; the upper stories
cantilevered over the street, as if the houses were leaning together to
gossip. A woman on one side might have borrowed a lump of butter
from her neighbor on the other without leaving home. The looming
buildings squeezed the sky down to a rapidly darkening ribbon.
   When the noise of the marketplace had faded and only the sound of
his boots echoed up the street, Lucian Kiggs said, “I wanted to thank
you for your intervention with the saarantrai the other evening.”
   It took me a moment to remember what he was talking about.
Dame Okra beating me with a book had rather eclipsed the other
events of that day.
   He continued: “No one else dared speak so plainly to Selda—not
even I. I suffered the same paralysis she did, as if the problem might
solve itself if we all refused to acknowledge it. But of course, Selda
says you know a great deal about dragons. It seems she was right.”
   “You’re very kind to say so,” I said evenly, giving no hint of the
anxious knot his words produced in my chest. I did not like him
associating me with dragons. He was too sharp.
   “It raises questions, of course,” he said, as if he’d read my mind.
“Selda said your knowledge comes from reading the treaty with your
father. Maybe some of it does, but surely not all. Your comfort with
saarantrai—your ability to talk to them without breaking out in a cold
sweat—that’s not something one gains from studying the treaty. I’ve
read the treaty; it makes you wary of them, rather, because it’s as full
of holes as a Ducanahan cheese.”
   My anxious knot tightened. I reminded myself that the cheese of
Ducana province was famously riddled with holes; he was making a
simple analogy, not some veiled reference to Amaline Ducanahan, my
fictional human mother.
   Kiggs looked up toward the purpling sky, his hands clasped behind
his back like one of my pedantic old tutors, and said, “My guess is
that it has something to do with your dragon teacher. Orma, was it?”
   I relaxed a little. “Indeed. I’ve known him forever; he’s practically
family.”
   “That makes sense. You’ve grown easy with him.”
   “He’s taught me a lot about dragons,” I offered. “I ask him questions
all the time; I am curious by nature.” It felt nice to be able to tell this
prince something true.
   The street was so steep here that it had steps; he hopped up ahead
of me like a mountain sheep. Speculus lanterns hung along this block;
broken mirrors behind the candles cast dazzling flecks of light onto
the street and walls. Beside them hung Speculus chimes, which Kiggs
set ringing. We murmured the customary words beneath the bright
cacophony: “Scatter darkness, scatter silence!”
   Now seemed a reasonable moment to bring up Orma’s concern,
since we had just been talking about him. I opened my mouth but
didn’t get any further.
   “Who’s your psalter Saint?” asked the prince with no preamble.
   I had been mentally arranging what I should say about Orma, so for
a moment I could not answer him.
   He looked back at me, his dark eyes shining in the fragmented
lantern light. “You called yourself curious. We curious types tend to
be children of one of three Saints. Look.” He reached into his doublet,
extracting a silver medallion on a chain; it glinted in the light. “I
belong to St. Clare, patron of perspicacity. You don’t appear obsessed
with mystery, though, or social enough to be one of St. Willibald’s.
I’m going to guess St. Capiti—the life of the mind!”
   I blinked at him in astonishment. True, my psalter had fallen open
to St. Yirtrudis, the heretic, but St. Capiti had been my substitute
Saint. It was close enough. “How did you—”
   “It’s in my nature to notice things,” he said. “Both Selda and I have
noticed your intelligence.”
   I suddenly found myself warm from the exertion of climbing and
cold at this reminder that he was so observant. I needed to be careful.
His friendliness notwithstanding, the prince and I could not be
friends. I had so many things to hide, and it was in his nature to seek.
   My right hand had wormed as far as it could under the binding of
my left sleeve and was fingering my scaly wrist. That was exactly the
sort of unconscious habit he would notice; I forced myself to stop.
   Kiggs asked after my father; I said something noncommittal. He
solicited my opinion of Lady Corongi’s pedagogy; I expressed a small
amount of polite concern. He gave his own opinion of the matter, in
blunt and unflattering terms; I kept my mouth shut.
   The road flattened out, and soon we passed through the barbican of
Castle Orison. The guards saluted; Kiggs inclined his head in return. I
began to relax; we were almost home and this interview was surely
over. We crunched across the gravel yard of Stone Court, not
speaking. Kiggs paused at the steps and turned toward me with a
smile. “Your mother must have been very musical.”
   The box of maternal memories gave a sickening twitch in my head,
as if it would have liked to answer him. I tried to get away without
speaking, with just a curtsy. It came out poorly: my arms were
gripped so tightly around my middle that I could barely bend.
   “She was called Amaline Ducanahan, right?” he said, scrutinizing
my face. “I looked her up when I was young, intrigued by your
father’s mysterious first marriage, the one no one had heard of until
you popped out like a cuckoo at his second. I was there. I heard you
sing.”
   Every part of me had turned to ice except my hammering heart and
the memory box, which bucked like a colt in my mind.
   “It was my first mystery: who was that singing girl, and why was
Counselor Dombegh so very embarrassed when she appeared?” he
said, his eyes distant with memory. His silent laugh manifested as a
cloud of vapor in the air, and he shook his head, marveling at his
youthful obsession. “I couldn’t let it go until I’d uncovered the truth. I
may have been hoping you were illegitimate, like me, but no,
everything was in order. Congratulations!”
   Everything would have been in impeccable order, surely; my
father’s paranoia had omitted no detail—marriage contract, birth and
death certificates, letters, receipts.…
   “Have you been back to Ducana province?” Kiggs asked out of
nowhere.
   “Why?” I’d lost the thread of his thought. I felt like a crossbow
being drawn: everything he said wound the cranequin a little further.
   “To see her stone. Your father had a nice one made. I didn’t go
myself,” he added hastily. “I was nine years old. One of Uncle Rufus’s
men had family at Trowebridge, so I asked him. He made a rubbing. I
might still have it, if you’d like it.”
   There was no answer I could give. I was so horrified to learn that
he’d investigated my family history that I was afraid of what I might
say. How close had he come? I was wound to full tension; I was
dangerous now. I waved the last white flag I had: “I don’t wish to talk
about my mother. Please excuse me.”
   His brow furrowed in concern; he could tell I was upset, but not
why. He guessed exactly wrong: “It’s hard that she left you so young.
Mine did too. But she did not live in vain. What a wonderful legacy
she left you!”
   Legacy? Up my arm, around my waist, and scattershot through my
head? The hooting memory box, which I feared would burst open at
any moment?
   “She gave you an ability to touch people’s very souls,” he said
kindly. “What is it like to be so talented?”
   “What is it like to be a bastard?” I blurted.
   I clapped a hand to my mouth, horrified. I had felt the shot coming;
I hadn’t realized the bow was loaded with this very quarrel, perfectly
calibrated to hit him hardest. What part of me had been studying him,
stockpiling knowledge as ammunition?
   His open expression slammed shut; suddenly he looked like a
stranger, his gaze unfamiliar and cold. He drew himself up in a
defensive posture. I staggered back a step as if he’d pushed me.
   “What’s it like? It’s like this,” he said, gesturing angrily at the space
between us. “Almost all the time.”
   Then he was gone, as if the wind had whisked him away. I stood in
the courtyard alone, realizing that I had failed to speak with him
about Orma. My annoyance at forgetting paled before everything else
that was clamoring to be felt, so I clung to it tightly, like a stick of
driftwood in a tempestuous sea. Somehow, my aching legs carried me
indoors.
I   took comfort in the normalcy and routine of my garden that
evening. I lingered a long time at the edge of Loud Lad’s ravine,
watching him build a tent out of cattails and Pandowdy’s shed skin.
Loud Lad, like Miss Fusspots, looked sharper and more detailed now
that I had seen him in the real world; his fingers were long and
nimble, the curve of his shoulders sad.
   Fruit Bat was still the only grotesque who looked back at me.
Despite my having asked him to stay in his grove, he came and sat
beside me at the edge of the gorge, his skinny brown legs dangling
over the edge. I found I didn’t mind. I considered taking his hands,
but just thinking about it was overwhelming. I had enough to worry
about right now. He wasn’t going anywhere.
   “Besides,” I told him, as if we’d been having a conversation, “the
way things are going, I have only to wait for you to drop in on me.”
   He did not speak, but his eyes gleamed.
   The next morning, I dawdled over washing and oiling my scales. I
dreaded facing Princess Glisselda’s lesson; surely Kiggs would have
spoken to her about me. When I finally arrived at the south solar,
however, she wasn’t there. I sat at the harpsichord and played to
comfort myself; the timbre of that instrument is, to me, the musical
equivalent of a warm bath.
   Today it was cold.
   A messenger arrived with a message from the princess, canceling
the lesson without explanation. I stared at the note a long time, as if
the handwriting could tell me anything about her mood, but I wasn’t
even sure she’d written it herself.
   Was I being punished for insulting her cousin? It seemed likely, and
I deserved it, of course. I spent the rest of the day trying not to think
about it. I went about my (sulking) duties to Viridius, drilling the
symphonia on the (pouting) songs of state, supervising construction of
the (glowering) stage in the great hall, finalizing the lineup for the
(self-pitying) welcome ceremony, now just two days away. I threw
myself (stewing) into work to stave off the (moping) feeling that
descended when I stopped.
   Evening fell. I made for the north tower and dinner. The quickest
route from Viridius’s suite led past the chambers of state: the Queen’s
study, the throne room, the council chamber. I always passed quickly;
it was the sort of place my father would haunt. This evening, almost
as if he’d heard me thinking about him, Papa stepped out of the
council chamber and into my path, deep in conversation with the
Queen herself.
   He saw me—Papa and I have a cat’s-whisker sensitivity to each
other—but he pretended he didn’t. I was in no mood for the
humiliation of being pointed out to him by the Queen in the belief he
hadn’t noticed me, so I ducked down a little side corridor and waited
just on the other side of a statue of Queen Belondweg. I was not
hidden, exactly, but out of the way enough that I wouldn’t be noticed
by anyone who wasn’t looking for me. Other dignitaries streamed out
of the council chamber; Dame Okra Carmine, Lady Corongi, and
Prince Lucian Kiggs all passed my corridor without looking down it.
   A merry voice at my back said, “Who are we spying on?”
   I jumped. Princess Glisselda beamed at me. “There’s a secret door
out of the council room. I’m evading that withered courgette, Lady
Corongi. Has she passed?”
   I nodded, shocked to find Princess Glisselda her usual impervious,
friendly self. She was practically dancing with delight, her golden
curls bouncing around her face. “I’m sorry I had to miss my lesson
today, Phina, but we’ve been dreadfully busy. We just had the most
exciting council ever, and I looked very clever, largely due to you.”
   “That’s … that’s wonderful. What’s happened?”
   “Two knights came to the castle today!” She could barely contain
herself; her hands fluttered about like two excitable small birds. They
lit briefly on my left arm, but I managed not to cringe visibly. “They
claim to have spotted a rogue dragon, flying around the countryside
in its natural shape! Isn’t that awful?”
   Awful enough to have her grinning ear to ear. She was a strange
little princess.
   I found myself fingering my scaly wrist; I hastily crossed my arms.
“Prince Rufus’s head went missing,” I half whispered, thinking out
loud.
   “As if it had been bitten off, yes,” said Princess Glisselda, nodding
vigorously.
   “Does the council suspect a connection between this dragon and his
death?”
   “Grandmamma doesn’t like the notion, but it seems unavoidable,
does it not?” she said, bouncing on her heels. “We’re breaking for
dinner now, but we’ll take the rest of the evening to figure out what
to do next.”
   I was fingering my wrist again. I clamped my right hand under my
armpit. Stop that, hand. You’re banished.
   “But I haven’t told you the best part,” said Glisselda, putting a hand
to her chest as if she were about to make a speech. “I, myself,
addressed the council and told them dragons view us as very
interesting cockroaches, and that maybe some of them intended the
peace as a ruse! Maybe they secretly plan to burn the cockroaches’
house down!”
   I felt my jaw drop. Maybe this was why her governess didn’t tell her
anything: give her an inch and she took it all the way to the moon.
“H-how did that go over?”
   “Everyone was astonished. Lady Corongi stammered something
stupid, about the dragons being defeated and demoralized, but that
only made her look a dunce. I believe we made the rest of them
think!”
   “We?” St. Masha’s stone. Everyone would think I was giving the
princess mad ideas. I’d made the cockroach analogy, yes, but the
house of burning bugs—to say nothing of the peace being a ruse!—
was her own extrapolation.
   “Well, I didn’t credit you, if that’s what you’re hoping,” she sniffed.
   “No, no, that’s fine,” I said hastily. “You never need to credit me!”
   Princess Glisselda looked suddenly stern. “I wouldn’t say never.
You’re smart. That’s useful. There are people who would appreciate
that quality. In fact,” she said, leaning in, “there are people who do,
and you do yourself no favors alienating them.”
   I stared at her. She meant Kiggs, there was no mistaking it. I gave
full courtesy and she smiled again; her elfin face wasn’t made for
sternness. She skipped off, leaving me to my thoughts and my regrets.



I mulled over her news on the way to supper. A rogue dragon in the
countryside was unprecedented. Whose responsibility was it? I knew
the treaty well, but that specific question wasn’t answered anywhere.
On the Goreddi side, we would doubtless try to make the dragons deal
with it—and yet how could they, without sending dragons in their
natural shape to apprehend the rogue? That was unacceptable. But
then what?
   We relied heavily upon dragon cooperation in the enforcement of
the treaty. If even a few of them refused to accept it anymore, what
recourse had we but the help of other dragons? Wouldn’t that
effectively invite them to battle each other in our skies?
   My steps slowed. There wasn’t just the one rogue dragon. My own
grandfather, banished General Imlann, had attended the funeral and
sent Orma that coin. Could there be illegal, unregistered dragons all
around, eschewing the bell and blending into crowds?
   Or was there just the one after all? Could the knights have seen
Imlann?
   Could my own grandfather have killed Prince Rufus?
   The idea made my stomach knot; I almost turned away from dinner,
but I took a deep breath and willed myself forward. Dining hall gossip
was a chance to learn more about the rogue, if more was known.
   I crossed the long dining room to the musicians’ table and squeezed
onto a bench. The lads were already deep in conversation; they barely
noticed I was there. “Twenty years underground—are the old codgers
even sane?” said Guntard around a mouthful of blancmange. “They
probably saw a heron against the sun and took it for a dragon!”
   “They want to stop Comonot’s coming by stirring up trouble, like
the Sons,” said a drummer, picking raisins out of his olio. “Can’t
blame ’em. Does it just about make the hairs on your neck stand up,
dragons walking among us like they was people?”
   Everyone turned in unsubtle unison to peer at the saars’ table,
where the lowest-ranking members of the dragon embassy took dinner
together. There were eight of them tonight, sitting like they had rods
up their spines, hardly speaking. Servants shunned that corner; one
saarantras returned the serving bowls to the kitchen if they needed a
refill. They ate bread and root vegetables and drank only barley
water, like abstemious monks or certain austere Samsamese.
   A scrawny sackbutist leaned in close. “How do we know they all
wear the bell? One could sit among us, at this very table, and we’d
have nary an inkling!”
   My musicians eyeballed each other suspiciously. I conscientiously
followed suit, but curiosity had seized me. I asked, “What happened to
the knights in the end? Were they released back into the wild?”
  “Banished men, and likely troublemakers?” scoffed Guntard.
“They’re locked in the eastern basement, the proper donjon being full
of wine casks for some significant state visit coming up.”
  “Sweet St. Siucre, which one might that be?” someone asked with a
laugh.
  “The one where your mother beds a saar and lays an egg. Omelette
for all!”
  I laughed mechanically along with everyone else.
  The conversation turned to the concert schedule, and suddenly all
inquiries were directed at me. I’d had an idea, however, and was too
preoccupied with it to focus on their questions. I referred everyone to
the schedule posted on the rehearsal room door, handed my trencher
to the little dogs under the table, and rose to take my leave.
  “Seraphina, wait!” cried Guntard. “Everyone—how were we going
to thank Mistress Seraphina for all the work she’s doing?” He blew a
pitch whistle while his fellows hastily swallowed their mouthfuls and
washed them down with wine.
  To the great amusement of the rest of the dining hall, the saarantrai
alone excepted, they began to sing:

    O Mistress Seraphina,
    Why won’t you marry me?
    From first I ever seen ya,
    I knew you were for me!
    It’s not just that you’re sassy,
    It’s not just that you’re wise,
    It’s that you poke Viridius
    In his piggy little eyes!

  “Hurrah!” cried all my musicians.
  “Boldly taking on Viridius, so we don’t have to!” cried a lone
smarty-breeches.
  Everyone burst out laughing. I smiled as I waved farewell—a real
smile—and kept grinning all the way to the east wing. It had occurred
to me that these knights might be able to describe the dragon in
enough detail that Orma could identify it as Imlann. Then I would
have real, concrete evidence for Lucian Kiggs, more than just a coin, a
dragon’s worry, and the vaguest of vague descriptions.
  Then perhaps I might work up enough courage to speak to him
again. I owed him an apology, at the very least.
  A single guard manned the top of the eastern basement steps. I
stood a little straighter and wiped the leftover grin off my face; I
needed all my serious concentration if I was to pull this off. I tried to
make my steps ring out confidently as I approached. “Excuse me,” I
said. “Has Captain Kiggs arrived yet?”
  The fellow tugged his mustache. “Can’t say I’ve seen ’im, but I’ve
just come on duty. He might be downstairs.”
  I hoped not, but I’d deal with that if I had to. “Who’s on duty
downstairs? John?” John was a good, common name.
  His eyes widened a bit. “John Saddlehorn, yes. And Mikey the
Fish.”
  I nodded as if I knew them both. “Well, I don’t mind asking them
myself. If Captain Kiggs shows up, would you please let him know I’m
already below?”
  “Hold on,” he said. “What’s this about? Who are you?”
  I gave him a lightly flabbergasted look. “Seraphina Dombegh,
daughter of the eminent lawyer Claude Dombegh, the Crown’s expert
on Comonot’s Treaty. Captain Kiggs wanted my insight in questioning
the knights. Am I in the wrong place? I had understood they were
being held here.”
  The guard scratched under his helmet, looking conflicted. I
suspected he didn’t have specific orders against letting anyone down,
but he still didn’t think he should.
  “Come with me, if you like,” I offered. “I have a few questions
about the dragon they saw. I hope we can identify it.”
  He hesitated, but agreed to accompany me downstairs. Two guards
sat outside a stout wooden door, playing kingfish on an upturned
barrel; they lowered their cards confusedly at the sight of us. My
guard jerked his thumb toward the stairs. “Mikey, take the top. When
the captain arrives, tell him Maid Dombegh is already here.”
  “What’s this, then?” said the one called John as my guard unlocked
the door.
  “She’s to question the prisoners. I’ll go in with her; you stay here.”
  I didn’t want him there but saw no immediate way to prevent it.
“You’re coming in for my protection? Are they very dangerous?”
  He laughed. “Maidy, they’re old men. You’re going to have to speak
loudly.”
   The two knights sat up on their straw pallets, blinking at the light. I
gave them half courtesy, keeping close by the door. They weren’t as
decrepit as reported. They were gray-haired and bony, but had a
certain wiry toughness; if the brightness of their eyes was any
indication, they were playing “helpless old men” for everything they
could.
   “What have you brought us, lad?” asked the stouter one, who was
bald and mustachioed. “Do you supply your prisoners with women
now, or is this some newfangled way of making us talk?”
   He was impugning my virtue. I ought to have been offended, but for
some reason the idea tickled me. That could be my next career:
instrument of torture! Seducing prisoners, and then revealing my
scales! They would confess out of sheer horror.
   The guard turned red. “Have some respect!” he blustered through
his mustache. “She’s here on behalf of Captain Kiggs and Counselor
Dombegh. You will answer her questions properly, or we will find
harder quarters for you, Grandpa.”
   “It’s all right,” I said. “Would you mind leaving us?”
   “Maid Dombegh, you heard what he just said. It wouldn’t be
proper!”
   “It will be perfectly fine,” I assured him in a soothing voice.
“Captain Kiggs will be down any minute now.”
   He set the torch in a sconce and left me, grumbling. The room,
which served as storage most of the time, contained some small casks;
I pulled one up, sat down, and smiled warmly at the old men. “Which
of you is which?” I said, realizing I would already know their names if
I were here legitimately. To my embarrassment, I recognized the
skinnier of the two, the one who hadn’t spoken yet. He had shooed
Orma away from me at that disastrous dragon procession five years
ago and had helped Maurizio carry me home. I had grown a lot taller
since then, and he was old; maybe he didn’t remember me.
   “Sir Karal Halfholder,” he said, sitting up straighter. He was dressed
like a peasant, tunic, clogs, grubbiness, and all, but his mien was that
of a well-bred man. “My brother-in-arms, Sir Cuthberte Pettybone.”
   It was Sir Cuthberte who’d taken me for a strumpet. He bowed,
saying, “My apologies, Maid Dombegh. I should not have been so
boorish.”
   Sir Karal attempted to preempt my next question: “We’ll never tell
you where our brothers are hiding!”
   “You’d have to seduce us first!” Sir Cuthberte twirled his mustache.
Sir Karal glared at him, and Cuthberte cried, “She’s smiling! She
knows I jest!”
   I did know. For some reason, it kept being funny. Old men, hidden
for decades with only other old men for company, found me worth
flirting with. That was something.
   “The Crown knows where your order is,” I said, suspecting that was
likely true. “I don’t care about that; I want to know where you saw
the dragon.”
   “It came right up to our camp!” said Sir Karal. “We said that!”
   Oops. I’d have known that if I weren’t lying. I tried to sound
impatient: “From which angle? From the north? The village? The
wood?” Saints in Heaven, let there be a village and a wood nearby. In
Goredd, both were a good bet but not guaranteed.
   However, I’d got them thinking, so they didn’t notice my ignorance.
“It was dark,” said Sir Karal, scratching the stubble on his skinny
chicken neck. “But you’re right, the beast could be staying in the
village as a saarantras. That hadn’t occurred to us; we’d been looking
to the limestone caves, south.”
   My heart sank. If it was dark, they hadn’t seen much. “You’re
certain it was a dragon?”
   They looked at me disdainfully. “Maidy,” said Sir Karal, “we fought
in the wars. I was left punch in a dracomachia unit. I have soared
through the sky, dangling by my harpoon from a dragon’s flank while
flaming pyria whizzed around me, scanning the ground desperately
for a soft place to land when the beast finally caught fire.”
   “We all have,” said Sir Cuthberte quietly, clapping his comrade on
the shoulder.
   “You don’t forget dragons,” snarled Sir Karal. “When I am blind and
deaf, senile and stroke-addled, I will still know when I’m in the
presence of a dragon.”
   Sir Cuthberte smiled weakly. “They radiate heat, and they smell of
brimstone.”
   “They radiate evil! My soul will know, even if body and mind don’t
work!”
   His hatred hurt me more than it had any right to. I swallowed and
tried to keep my voice pleasant: “Did you get a good look at this
particular dragon? We suspect we know who he is, but any confirming
detail would help. Distinctive horn or wing damage, for example, or
coloration—”
   “It was dark,” said Sir Karal flatly.
  “It had a perforation in its right wing,” offered Sir Cuthberte.
“Closest membrane to its body. Shape of a … I don’t know. A rat, I
want to say. The way they hunch their backs when they eat.” He
demonstrated, realized how silly he looked, and laughed.
  I laughed back, and pulled out my charcoal pencil. “Draw it on the
wall, please.”
  Both knights stared at the pencil, horror writ large on their faces.
St. Masha and St. Daan. It was a draconian innovation.
  Mercifully, they blamed not me but the peace. “They infiltrate
everything, these worms,” cried Sir Karal. “They’ve got our women
carrying their blasted devices as casually as smelling oils!”
  Sir Cuthberte took it nonetheless and drew a shape upon the wall’s
graying plaster. Sir Karal corrected the shape. They squabbled a bit
but finally settled on something that did, indeed, look like a rodent
eating corn.
  “That was his only distinguishing mark?” I asked.
  “It was dark,” said Sir Cuthberte. “We were lucky to make out that
much.”
  “I hope it’s enough.” Long experience with Orma told me the odds
weren’t good.
  “Whom do you suspect it is?” said Sir Karal, his fists clenched in his
lap.
  “A dragon called Imlann.”
  “General Imlann, who was banished?” asked Sir Cuthberte, looking
unexpectedly delighted. The knights both whistled, long and low,
producing an interval of rather apropos dissonance.
  “Did you know him?”
  “He led the Fifth Ard, didn’t he?” Sir Cuthberte asked his fellow.
  Sir Karal nodded gravely. “We fought the Fifth twice, but I never
grappled the general. Sir James Peascod, at our camp, specialized in
identification. He’d be your best bet. I don’t suppose you asked Sir
James if he knew this dragon, did you, Cuthberte?”
  “Didn’t occur to me.”
  “Pity,” sniffed Sir Karal. “Still, how does knowing his name help
you catch him?”
  I didn’t know, now that he mentioned it, but tried to answer
logically: “We can’t catch him without the embassy’s help, and they
won’t help us if they don’t believe us. They might be motivated if we
had proof it was Imlann.”
  Sir Karal turned dangerously red; I could see his pulse at his temple.
“That baby-eating worm was in clear violation of the treaty. You’d
think that would be enough for them, if they had any honor! Be it
known that we upheld our part of that accursed agreement. We didn’t
attack it, although we could have!”
   Sir Cuthberte snorted. “Who could have? Pender and Foughfaugh?
That would have been over in seconds.”
   Sir Karal glared venom at Sir Cuthberte. “I tire of this. Where’s
Captain Kiggs?”
   “Good question,” I said, rising and dusting off my skirts. “I’ll look
for him. Thank you for your time, gentle knights.”
   Sir Karal rose and bowed. Sir Cuthberte said, “What? No kiss?”
   I blew him a kiss, laughing, and left.
   Outside, the guards seemed surprised to see me. “Captain Kiggs still
hasn’t arrived, Maid Dombegh,” said John, pushing back his helmet.
   I smiled, merry with relief that this was over and I’d gotten away
with it. I would return to my rooms, contact Orma on the kitten
spinet, and see whether he could identify his father from the
perforation. “Captain Kiggs must have been detained. No matter—I’m
finished here. I’ll go see whether I can find him.”
   “You won’t have far to go,” said a voice from halfway up the stairs.
   Prince Lucian descended the stairs, and my heart descended into my
stomach.
I dared not let my eyes widen in horror or the guards would be on to
me; to buy myself some time, I curtsied deeply, to a slow count of
three.
   The prince, when I finally dared to look at him again, seemed
amused. He gestured broadly. “You are finished here, one hopes?”
   “Yes, thank you,” I said, managing to keep any tremor out of my
voice. “If you wish to question the knights yourself, perhaps I can
meet you tomorrow morning—”
   “Oh no,” he said lightly, his smile hardening. “I rather think you’re
meeting with me now. Wait for me upstairs, if you would be so kind.”
   I had no option but to climb the stairs. Behind me, the prince said,
“Who remembers what my token looks like? Right. And did Maid
Dombegh bear my token?”
   “But, sir, we weren’t to start that protocol until Comonot arrives!”
   “We’re starting it tonight. Only someone with my token speaks in
my name.”
   “Were we wrong to let her down here, Captain?” said John.
   Lucian Kiggs paused before answering: “No. You followed your
instincts about her, and they did not lead you astray. But it’s time to
tighten things up, hm? The palace will be full of strangers soon.”
   He started up the stairs; I hurried to reach the top before he did.
The look he gave me when he reached the top was less amused. He
acknowledged Mikey the Fish’s salute, grabbed me by the right elbow,
and marched me up the corridor.
   “Who are you working for?” he asked when we were out of earshot.
   Was this a trick question? “Viridius.”
   He stopped and faced me, his brows pulled together darkly. “This is
your chance to tell the truth. I dislike games of cat and mouse. You’re
caught; don’t toy with me.”
   Sweet Heavenly Home, he thought I was some sort of agent for a
foreign government, perhaps—or for some individual. A dragon, say.
Maybe he wasn’t wrong. “Could we talk somewhere besides the
hallway, please?”
   He glanced up and down the passage, frowning. The east wing was
full of servants and storage, kitchens and workshops. He led me up a
short hallway and unlocked the heavy door at the end with a key. He
lit a lantern at the hall sconce, ushered me through the door, and
closed it behind us. We were at the bottom of a spiral stair leading up
into blackness. Instead of climbing the stairs, however, he seated
himself about five steps up and set the lantern beside him.
   “What is this place?” I said, craning my neck to peer upward.
   “My ‘beastly tower,’ Glisselda calls it.” He seemed disinclined to
discuss it further. The lantern lit him eerily from below, making it
difficult to interpret his expression; he wasn’t smiling, in any case. “It
would have been easy enough to interview the knights with my
blessing. You had only to ask. I dislike your invoking my name under
false pretenses.”
   “I—I shouldn’t have. I’m sorry,” I stammered. Why had it seemed
like a good idea? Why was I more prepared to bluff complete
strangers than to speak plainly to this prince? I opened my purse
cautiously, blocking any glimpse of the quig figurine, and passed the
gold coin to the prince. “My teacher, Orma, also has a concern
regarding a possible rogue dragon. I promised him I’d speak to you.”
   Lucian Kiggs silently examined the coin in the lantern light. He’d
been so chatty before; his silence unnerved me. But of course he was
doubtful when I claimed to speak on someone else’s behalf. How
could he not be? Saints’ dogs, I’d miscalculated in bluffing his guards.
   “A messenger gave him that coin after your uncle’s funeral,” I
pressed on. “Orma claims it belonged to his father.”
   “Then it probably did,” he said, studying the back. “Dragons know
their coins.”
   “His father is General Imlann, disgraced and banished for
hoarding.”
   “Hoarding doesn’t usually merit banishment,” said the prince, his
mouth set in a line. Even his looming shadow seemed skeptical.
   “Imlann committed other crimes too, I believe. Orma didn’t lay it
all out in detail.” Here I was, already lying. It never ended. “He
believes Imlann is here, in Goredd, and may be planning some harm
to the Ardmagar or mischief to the celebrations or … he doesn’t know
what. It’s all vague supposition, alas.”
   Lucian Kiggs glanced from me to the coin and back. “You’re
uncertain whether he’s right to be worried.”
   “Yes. My hope in speaking to the knights was that they could give
me some identifying details, enabling me to confirm with Orma that
their rogue dragon is Imlann. I didn’t want to waste your time with
guesses.”
   He leaned forward intently. “Might Imlann have wished to harm my
uncle?”
   He was interested now; that was an immeasurable relief. “I don’t
know. Did the council conclude that the rogue had something to do
with Prince Rufus’s death?”
   “The council concluded very little. Half the people there suspected
the knights of fabricating the whole thing to stir up trouble and
prevent Comonot’s visit.”
   “What do you think?” I pressed.
   “I think I was on my way to speak with the knights myself when I
learned that someone was already speaking to them in my name.” He
wagged a finger at me, but it was only a mock scolding. “What’s your
impression? Did they truly see a dragon?”
   “Yes.”
   He raised an eyebrow. “What makes you so sure?”
   “I—I suppose it had to do with the kinds of detail they were and
weren’t able to give me. I wish I could say it was more than just an
intuition.” I also wished I could say that being a liar myself gave me
some insight into these things.
   “Don’t shrug off intuition so blithely! I advise my men to notice gut
reactions. Of course, they were wrong about you.” He flashed me an
irritated look, then seemed to think better of it. “No, let me amend
that. They were wrong to believe I’d given you permission to speak
with the prisoners, but they were not wrong about you.”
   How could he still think well of me after I’d been so awful to him?
A warm wash of guilt rolled over me. “I—I’m sorry—”
   “No harm done.” He waved off my confusion. “In fact, this has
turned out very well. You and I appear to be working toward a
common purpose. Now that we know, we can help each other.”
   He thought I was apologizing for the lie; I’d already done that. “I’m,
uh, also sorry for what I said to you. Yesterday.”
   “Ah!” He smiled at long last, and a knot of anxiety in my chest
released. “There’s the other half of your hesitation. Forget it. I already
have.”
   “I was rude!”
   “And I was offended. It was all very by-the-book. But let us set that
aside, Seraphina. We’re pulling in the same team.” I wasn’t buying
such easy forgiveness; he noticed my doubt and added: “Selda and I
had a long talk about you. She spoke quite eloquently in your
defense.”
   “She didn’t say I was prickly?”
   “Oh, she absolutely did. And you are.” He looked vaguely amused
by whatever expression sprawled across my face. “Stop glowering.
There’s nothing wrong with letting people know when they’ve stepped
on your tail. The thing to ask ourselves when you bite is, why?”
   Bite. Tail. I crossed my arms over my chest.
   “Selda has observed that you dislike personal questions, and
certainly I was getting a bit personal. So. My apologies.”
   I looked at my feet, embarrassed.
   He continued: “In this particular case, I think there was more to it
than that. You honestly answered my question.” He sat back smugly,
as if he’d solved a difficult riddle. “I asked what it’s like to be so
talented, and you gave me a straightforward comparison: like being a
bastard! And with a little extra thought, I get it. Everyone gawps at
you for something you can’t help and did nothing to deserve. Your
very presence makes other people feel awkward. You stand out when
in fact you’d rather not.”
   For the merest moment I couldn’t breathe. Something inside me
quivered, some oud string plucked by his words, and if I breathed it
would stop.
   He did not know the truth of me, yet he had perceived something
true about me that no one else had ever noticed. And in spite of that
—or perhaps because of it—he believed me good, believed me worth
taking seriously, and his belief, for one vertiginous moment, made me
want to be better than I was.
   I was a fool to let myself feel that. I was a monster; that could never
change.
   I almost snapped at him, almost played the monster in earnest as
only I could play it, but something stopped me. He wasn’t some
dragon, coldly observing me. He was offering me something true
about himself in return. It shone like a diamond. That wasn’t trivial;
that was generous. If I knocked this gift out of his hand, I wasn’t
getting another. I inhaled shakily and said, “Thank you, but …” No,
no buts. “Thank you.”
   He smiled. “There’s more to you than meets the eye. I’ve observed
that more than once. Which of the Porphyrian philosophers do you
favor?”
   It was such a non sequitur that I nearly laughed, but he kept
talking, finally at ease with me again. “You recognized that quote the
other evening, and I thought, ‘At long last, someone else who’s read
Pontheus!’ ”
   “I’m afraid I haven’t, much. Papa had his Analects—”
   “But you’ve read other philosophers. Confess!” He leaned forward
eagerly, elbows on his knees. “I’d guess you like … Archiboros. He
was so keen on the life of the mind that he never bothered to
determine whether his theories worked in the real world.”
   “Archiboros was a pompous ass,” I said. “I preferred Necans.”
   “That morose old twig!” cried Kiggs, slapping his leg. “He takes it
too far. If he had his way, we’d all be nothing but disembodied minds,
floating and ephemeral, completely disconnected from the matter of
this world.”
   “Would that be so awful?” I said, my voice catching. He’d hit upon
something personal again, or else I was so raw I could be hurt by
anything, no matter how innocuous.
   “I’d have thought you preferred Pontheus, is all,” he said,
examining an invisible speck on the sleeve of his doublet, giving me a
little space to collect myself.
   “A jurisprudence philosopher?”
   “Clearly you’ve only read his early work. All his genius is in his
later writings.”
   “Didn’t he go mad?” I was aiming for supercilious, but the look on
his face told me I’d missed and landed squarely on amusing.
   “If it was madness, Phina, it was such a madness as you or I could
only dream of! I will find you his last book.” He looked at me again
and his eyes shone in the lamplight, or with the inner light of
delighted anticipation.
   His enthusiasm made him beautiful. I was staring; I looked at my
hands.
   He coughed and rose, tucking the coin into his doublet. “Right.
Well. I’ll take Orma’s coin to Eskar tomorrow morning and see what
she says. With my luck, she’ll conclude we’re harboring criminals; I
don’t think she’s forgiven me for letting that newskin get hurt—or for
dancing with her, for that matter. Ask your teacher about the details
the knights gave you; I’d appreciate that. If we could identify this
rogue, that might impress upon the embassy that we are making a
good-faith effort to … I was going to say ‘maintain order,’ but it’s a bit
late for that, isn’t it?”
   I said, “Until tomorrow, then.” Of course, it was up to him to
dismiss me, not the other way around. I cringed at myself.
   He seemed not to register the breach in manners. I curtsied to make
up for it. He smiled and opened the tower door for me. My mind was
racing, scrambling to think up one more thing to say to him before I
left, but it came up empty. “Good evening, Seraphina,” he said, and
closed the door.
   I heard his footfall grow faint as he climbed the tower steps. What
did he do up there? It was none of my business, to be sure, but I stood
for a long moment with my hand upon the oaken door.
   I stood so still, for so long, that I nearly jumped out of my skin
when a voice said, “Music Mistress? Are you ill?”
   I looked behind me; there stood one of my musicians, the scrawny
sackbutist whose name I never remembered, who had apparently been
passing by and spotted me looking catatonic. He stepped toward me
hesitantly. “Is there anything you need?”
   “No,” I croaked, my voice as rough as if I were breaking a years-
long vow of silence. “Thank you,” I added. I bent my head, skirted
him meekly, and headed back up the hallway toward my rooms.
The next day was the last before Comonot arrived, and Viridius
planned to rehearse us within an inch of our lives. I rose extra early; I
needed to contact Orma first thing so I could let Kiggs know what he
said. I played our chord upon the spinet and waited, scalding my
tongue on my tea and wondering where I might find Kiggs this time of
day. He had an office near the main guardroom, I knew, but he also
spent a lot of time in the city.
  When the spinet kitten finally spoke, it startled me so much that I
almost lost my teacup. “Can’t talk,” buzzed Orma’s voice. “I’m
babysitting Basind.”
  I’d forgotten all about the newskin. “When can you talk?”
  “Dinner? The Mallet and Mullet? Six?”
  “Fine, but make it seven. Viridius intends to flog us until we bleed
today.”
  “I’ll see you then. Don’t eat that!”
  I looked to my cup of tea and back. “Don’t eat what?”
  “Not you. Basind.” The kitten crackled, and he was gone.
  I sighed, pushed back from the instrument, and heard the great
clock above the central courtyard chime. There was more than enough
time for my morning routine and breakfast. I was running early,
which was just as well. Viridius would find no fault with me today.
  I arrived at Castle Orison’s vast great hall early and alert.
Carpenters were swarming all over the stage, which could not be a
good sign, and I saw neither hide nor wispy hair of the gouty old man.
Musicians were everywhere, like ants, but no Viridius. Finally his
phlegmatic manservant, Marius, crept up with a message for me: “The
master’s not here.”
  “What do you mean he’s not here? This is dress rehearsal.”
  Marius cleared his throat nervously. “To quote him precisely: ‘Tell
Seraphina I leave everything in her more than capable hands. Don’t
forget to rehearse smooth entrances and exits!’ ”
  I bit back the first word that occurred to me, and the second. “So
where is he?”
  The man ducked his gray head; apparently my tone had been
ungentle. “At the cathedral. His protégé was having some problem—”
  “Lars?” I said. Someone with keen hearing stopped in his tracks
behind me. I lowered my voice. “What kind of problem, exactly?”
  Viridius’s man shrugged. “The master wouldn’t say.”
  “The usual, no doubt,” sneered Earl Josef, at my back. “Brawling,
bringing his filthy radt-grauser into the cathedral, getting drunk and
smashing up his own machine.”
  I understood “red-women.” “They wear black and yellow stripes
here in Goredd,” I said, trying to plaster over my agitation with a
joke. “But I expect you know that firsthand.”
  The earl ran his tongue over his perfect teeth and tugged his lace
cuffs. “Normally I wouldn’t bother, but I like you, grausleine. Stay
away from Lars. He’s a Daanite and a liar and trouble incarnate. He’s
barely human.”
  “Viridius trusts him,” I said.
  “Master Viridius has taken a dangerous fancy to him,” the earl said.
“Neither of you understands what he is. I pray every day that St. Ogdo
destroy him.”
  I wanted so badly to say I knew exactly what Lars was and did not
hold it against him, but the closest I could manage was “I don’t care
what you say. He is my friend. I will hear no more of this slander.”
  He snaked an unwelcome arm around my waist; I tried to pull
away, but he had a grip like a lobster. “You are the sweetest and most
innocent of grausleiner,” he murmured. “But there are people in this
world who commit horrifying and unnatural acts beyond anything
your naive imagination could conceive. He is your worst nightmare.
Heed my warning and stay away from him. I fear for you otherwise.”
  He leaned in and kissed my ear as if sealing my compliance, but he
drew back abruptly. “What is that odd perfume you wear?”
  “Let go of me,” I said through clenched teeth.
  Josef gave a haughty sniff and released me, stalking off without a
backward glance.
  I beat back a wave of panic. He’d smelled me. Had he recognized
the smell as saar?
  I gathered what dignity I could muster after being so unpleasantly
manhandled, and approached the gathered herd of performers,
prepared to go full Viridius on them. They expected nothing better,
after all.
   The stage was beautiful but turned out to be unsound over the
trapdoor in the center, as we learned to our dismay when five bassos
disappeared at once. I yelled at the carpenters and drilled the choir on
the other side of the hall while they made modifications. Then the
curtain mechanism didn’t work, the stilt walker’s costume fell off mid-
jig—funny, under other circumstances—and Josef’s viola solo kept
drifting flat.
   I took no satisfaction in the last; in fact, I suspected it was a ploy to
make me look at him. I grimly kept my gaze elsewhere.
   That was very little gone wrong for a dress rehearsal, but it was
more than my mood would support. I growled bearishly at everyone,
deservedly or not. The itinerant performers seemed alarmed, but my
palace musicians found me amusing; I made an unconvincing Viridius,
even at my crankiest. Snatches of my praise song drifted in my wake
as I stormed past, making it difficult to keep scowling.
   Evening came at last, and my musicians decided it was high time
they refused to work. This, of course, meant they set up a massive
session in the great hall playing reels and jigs for fun. Music is only
work if someone else makes you do it. I’d have liked to join in—I’d
more than earned it, I felt—but Orma was waiting. I bundled up and
headed downhill into town.
   The warmth of the Mallet and Mullet was welcome, although I
never felt quite comfortable in the presence of strangers and smoke,
chatter and clatter. The fire and lamps provided too little light. It took
me some time scanning the tables to realize Orma had not yet arrived.
I claimed a place near the hearth, ordered myself some barley water,
to the barmaid’s scornful amusement, and sat down to wait.
   It wasn’t like Orma to be late. I sipped my beverage, keeping my
eyes to myself, until a commotion by the door grew too loud to
ignore.
   “You can’t bring his kind in here,” snarled the tapmaster, who had
come out from behind his bar, dragging a muscular cook with him as
backup. I turned around to look; Orma stood in the foyer, unfastening
his cloak clasp. Basind lurked behind him, his bell tinkling plaintively.
Patrons near the door made St. Ogdo’s sign or pressed fragrant sachets
to their noses as if warding off disease.
   The tapmaster folded his arms over his dingy apron. “This is a
respectable establishment. We’ve served the likes of Baronet
Meadowburn and the Countess du Paraday.”
  “Recently?” said Orma, widening his eyes mildly. The tapmaster
took that for disrespect and puffed out his chest; the cook fingered the
edge of his cleaver.
  I was already on my feet, slapping a coin onto the table. “Go back
outside!”
  The open night air, when I reached it, came as a relief even if
Basind’s slouching silhouette did not.
  “Why did you bring him along?” I said crossly as we stepped into
the empty street. “You should have known they wouldn’t serve him.”
  Orma opened his mouth, but Basind spoke first: “Where my teacher
goes, I go.”
  Orma shrugged. “There are places we can eat.”
  Places, maybe, but only in one part of town.



Quighole was closed after sunset, technically. Only two streets led
into what had once been St. Jobertus’s Close; each had been fitted
with a tall wrought-iron gate that the Queen’s Guard, with great
ceremony, padlocked every evening. Of course, the buildings facing
the square had back doors, so one had simply to walk through a shop,
a tavern, or a house full of quigs to get in and out—and there were
always the tunnels below. Disgruntled saarantrai characterized
Quighole as a prison; it was a porous prison, if so.
  Old St. Jobertus’s had once been a church; when the parish outgrew
the building, New St. Jobertus’s had been built across the river, where
there was more room. After Comonot’s Treaty, some dragons had
aspired to run a little collegium to help fulfill Comonot’s proposed
interspecies knowledge exchange. Old St. Jobertus’s was the largest
unused building they could find. While bell-exempt dragon students
such as Orma sneaked around studying our mysterious ways, other
scholars, fully belled and graduated, came to St. Bert’s (as it was now
called) to teach their sciences to backward humans.
  They got few students, and fewer who would admit to being
students. St. Bert’s trained the best physicians, but few humans
wanted a doctor practicing spooky saar medicine on them. A recent
scandal over the dissection of human cadavers hadn’t helped matters.
Riots all over town had nearly turned into a bloodbath; people
demanded vengeance against the saarantrai—and their students—who
dared paw through human remains. There had been a trial, with my
father right in the middle of things as usual. Dissection was forbidden
and several dragons were sent back to the Tanamoot, but physicians
continued to train in secret.
   I had only been to Quighole once, when Orma took me with him to
fetch my itch ointment. It was not a place respectable young girls
should be seen, and my father had been adamant that I should avoid
the neighborhood. As many of his objections as I had overturned or
disregarded, I’d willingly abided by this one.
   Orma took us up an alley, reached over top of a gate to unlock it,
and led us into someone’s muddy kitchen garden. Dead marrow vines
squished underfoot. A pig grunted in one enclosure; another was full
of rotting vegetables. I feared the house’s owner would come after us
with a pitchfork at any minute, but Orma walked straight up to the
door and knocked three times. No one answered. He knocked three
more times and then scratched the flaking paint with his nails.
   A little hatch window opened. “Who is it?” asked a scratchy voice.
   “It’s the polecat,” said Orma. “I’ve come to nix the mink.”
   An old woman with a wide toothless grin opened the door to us. I
followed Orma down the stairs into a fetid semidarkness. We arrived
in a humid, stenchy cellar lit by a wide hearth, small lamps, and a
hanging light fixture in the shape of a mermaid with antlers, her
bosom bared to all the world, brandishing two candles like swords.
Her eyes bugged out at me as if she were astonished to see a sister
monster.
   My eyes adjusted. We were in some sort of underground public
house. There were rickety tables and a variety of patrons—human,
saarantrai, and quigutl. Humans and saarantrai sat at the same tables
here, students engaged in deep discussions with teachers. Here was a
saar demonstrating principles of surface tension—just as Zeyd had
taught me before her special tutorial in gravitation—by holding a
glass of water upside down with only a slip of parchment between his
rapt students and a drenching. In another corner I saw an impromptu
dissection of a small mammal, or dinner, or both.
   No one came to Quighole who didn’t have to; I had more personal
dealings with saarantrai than most people, and I’d only been the once.
I had never seen both my … my peoples together like this. I found
myself a little overcome.
   The human students did not interact much with the quigutl, but it
was still remarkable how little fussed they were at the presence of the
creatures. Nobody sent back food that had been touched by quigs—
there were quig servers!—and nobody shrieked upon discovering one
under the table. Quigutl had affixed themselves to the rafters and the
walls; some clustered around tables with saarantrai. The global stench
undoubtedly came from quig breath, but the nose falls asleep quickly.
By the time we found a table, I barely smelled anything at all.
  Orma went to order us dinner, leaving me with Basind. Our table
was covered in chalk equations. I pretended to look at them while
studying the newskin sidelong. He gaped vapidly at a nearby table full
of quigs.
  I couldn’t talk to Orma in front of Basind, but I didn’t see how to
get around it.
  I followed Basind’s gaze to the next table and gasped. The quigs
there had their tongues out and sparks were flying. It was hard to see
through the gloom, but they appeared to be altering the shape of a
bottle, melting the glass with focused heat from their tongues and
pulling it like taffy. The long fingers of their dorsal arms—the
twiglike, dexterous limbs they had in place of wings—seemed
impervious to heat. They pulled glass as thin as thread, heated it
again, and looped it around into lacy structures.
  Orma returned and set down our drinks. He followed my gaze to
the glass-spinning quigutl. They’d made a hollow, basket-sized egg of
green glass threads. “Why don’t glassblowers hire them?” I asked.
  “Why don’t goldsmiths hire them?” said Orma, passing Basind a cup
of barley water. “They don’t follow instructions willingly, for one
thing.”
  “How is it that you saar don’t understand art?” I said, marveling at
their gleaming creation. “Quigs make art.”
  “That’s not art,” said Orma flatly.
  “How would you even know?”
  His eyebrows drew together. “They don’t value it the way a human
would. There’s no meaning to it.” One of the quigs had climbed onto
the table and was attempting to sit on the glass egg. It shattered into a
thousand shards. “See?” said Orma.
  I thought about the human-faced lizard in my purse; I wasn’t sure
he was right. That figurine spoke to me somehow.
  The tapmaster came rushing toward the quigs, brandishing a broom
and shouting. The quigs scattered, some under the table, some up the
walls. “Clean this up!” the man cried. “You can’t come in here if
you’re going to jump around like apes!”
  The quigs all lisped insults at him, but they crept back and cleaned
the table, using the sticky fingers of their ventral hands to pick up
splintered glass. They collected it in their mouths, masticated it, and
spit molten globs, hissing, into a glass of beer.
   There was a glass of beer at our table, too, belonging to Orma.
Basind had homed in on it and was leaning over the cup, sniffing. He
rose with a drip on the end of his nose. “That’s an intoxicant. I should
report you.”
   “Recall clause nine of the exemption papers,” said Orma coolly.
   “ ‘A scholar working incognito may bend Standard Protocols 22 and
27, or such other Protocols as he deems necessary for the successful
maintenance of his disguise’?”
   “That’s the one.”
   Basind continued: “ ‘Clause 9a: Said scholar will file Form 89XQ for
each of his deviations, and may be required to undergo a
psychological audit and/or defend the necessity of his actions before
the Board of Censors.’ ”
   “Enough, Basind,” said Orma. As the patron Saints of comedy would
have it, however, a quigutl brought our dinner at that very moment:
lamb olio for me, leek and turnip soup for Basind, and for my uncle, a
fat boiled sausage.
   “Tell me, must you file a separate form for each item individually,
or can you lump together sausage and beer consumed at the same
meal?” asked Basind with surprising acuity.
   “Separate forms when I’m overdue for an audit,” said Orma. He
took a drink. “You can help me fill them out later.”
   “Eskar says rules have reasons,” rasped Basind. “I must wear
clothing so as not to frighten people. I mustn’t spread butter on my
itchy skin, because it offends my landlady. Similarly, we may not eat
the flesh of animals because it makes us hunger for the abundant flesh
around the table.” Basind flashed his horrid buggy eyes toward me.
   “That’s the idea, yes,” said Orma. “But I’ve never found it to be the
case—particularly with sausages, where the meat barely resembles
meat at all.”
   Basind looked around the dim basement at the other saarantrai and
muttered, “I should report this whole room.”
   Orma ignored this. He drew a small handful of coins out of the
hidden recesses of his doublet, lowered his hand to his lap, and
jingled the coins. Suddenly there were quigs on the floor all around
us, crawling under the table, winding around our ankles like snakes.
This was a bit much, even for me.
   Orma broadcast the coins into the tangle on the floor, as if he were
feeding chickens; the quigs scrambled for coins, went still a moment,
and then swarmed Basind.
   “No I don’t,” said Basind confusedly. “Leave me alone.”
   I gaped at Basind, not recognizing the opportunity Orma had
created until my uncle grabbed my arm, pulled me away from the
table, and whispered, “I know quig hand signals; I told them Basind
has a hoard at home. If you have news, out with it now.”
   “I showed Kiggs the coin and told him your concerns.”
   “And?”
   “A rogue dragon has been spotted in the countryside. Two knights
came to report it. I interviewed them. They say the dragon had a
distinctive perforation in its left wing, in the shape of a rat. Did your
father have any such—”
   “His wing was once injured by ice, but it was repaired. Sixteen
years is ample time to acquire additional perforations, however.”
   “In other words, it may or may not be Imlann.” I sighed, frustrated.
“So what can you tell me about his natural shape? How might Kiggs
recognize him?”
   Orma had described his father’s saarantras so vaguely that I did not
expect the wealth of detail he gave me now: the sheen of Imlann’s
skin (different in moonlight), how sharp he habitually kept his talons,
the precise shape and color of his eyes (different when he pulled his
third eyelid across), the curl of horn and fold of wings (delineated
with mathematical precision), the spiciness of his brimstone breath,
his tendency to feint left and strike right, the width of the sinews at
his heels.
   Orma remembered his father’s dragon shape as clearly as if it had
been treasure. I felt like I was hearing him describe a heap of gold
coins, which I would be expected to distinguish from other heaps by
description alone. There was no point asking for more. Did dragons
find descriptions of humans confusing? Did it take time and
experience to tell us apart?
   “I can tell you’re not going to retain any of this,” said Orma. “You
have that empty look you used to give your history tutors. You could
look for Imlann—”
   “You told me not to!”
   “Let me finish. You could look for him in your own head, among
your maternal memories. Surely Linn left you some image of our
father.”
  I opened my mouth and shut it again. I did not care to go digging
around in that box again, not if I could avoid it.
  The knights had mentioned a Sir James as their specialist dragon
identifier. He was the one I needed to talk to—Kiggs needed to talk to,
that is. In the meantime, I hoped Kiggs hadn’t put off talking to Eskar
in hopes that I might gain good information.
  Basind, with the help of the tapmaster and his broom, had cleared
off nearly all the quigs. Our time was ending.
  “Turn your back toward Basind,” Orma whispered. “I don’t want
him to see me give you this.”
  It was a bit late to start pretending he was a law-abiding saar. “Give
me what?”
  Never taking his eyes off the newskin, Orma pretended to scratch
his head. His hand came down and pressed cold metal into mine. It
was one of his earrings. I gasped and tried to hand it back. Orma said,
“The Censors aren’t watching. A quig modified them for me.”
  “Won’t the Censors notice they can’t check in on you anymore?”
  “I’m sure they already have. They’ll see to it I get a new pair. It’s
happened before. Switch it on if you’re in trouble, and I’ll come as
soon as I can.”
  “I promised I wouldn’t go looking for Imlann.”
  “Trouble may find you,” he said. “I have an interest in this
particular problem.”
  I tucked the earring into my bodice and we turned back toward the
table. Basind’s tunic was covered with grubby handprints; his dinner
was gone, but it wasn’t clear he’d been the one to eat it. He looked
bewildered, or like his face had melted a little.
  “We must return to St. Ida’s,” said Orma, extending a hand to me to
show Basind how it was done. I shook it, trying to hide my
amusement. We never shook hands.
  Basind tried it next but he wouldn’t let go. When I finally pried him
off, he gave me a look I didn’t dare identify. “Touch me again!” he
rasped, and my stomach turned.
  “Home,” said Orma. “You have meditation and partitioning to
practice.”
  Basind whined, rubbing his hand fiercely as if he could recover
something of my touch, but he followed my uncle up the tavern stairs,
docile as a lamb.
  I checked with the tapmaster that Orma had paid for our dinner;
one could never be certain he’d remember something like that. I took
one last look around this peculiar, smelly slice of interspecies
coexistence, the treaty’s mad dream come to raucous life, then took
myself toward the stairs.
   “Maidy?” said a hesitant voice at my back. I turned to see a fresh-
faced young student with chalk dust in his hair. In one hand he
grasped a very short straw; behind him an entire table of young men
pretended not to be watching.
   “Are you rushing off?” He didn’t stammer with his voice but with
his waving hands and his nervous blink. “Would you not join us?
We’re all human over here—well, except for Jim—and we’re not bad
company. We wouldn’t have to talk math. It’s just … we’ve seen no
human girls in Quighole since dissection was outlawed!”
   Almost the entire table behind him burst out laughing; the
saarantras looked baffled by everyone else’s reaction, saying, “But he’s
not wrong, is he?”
   I couldn’t stop myself from laughing along with them; in fact, I
found myself tempted far more by this offer than by Guntard’s
invitation to the Sunny Monkey. These chalk-dusted fellows, arguing
and scribbling trigonometry on the table, felt familiar to me, as if St.
Bert’s Collegium attracted all the most saar-like humans. I patted his
shoulder in a comradely fashion and said, “Honestly, I wish I could
stay. For future reference: do not underestimate the seductive power
of math. If I come again, I shall expect to scrawl on the tables right
along with you.”
   His friends welcomed him back to the table, hooting and toasting
his bravery. I smiled to myself. First those aged knights, and now this.
I was evidently the sweetheart of all Goredd. That made me laugh,
and laughing gave me the courage to plunge out into the night, away
from the warmth of this gathering.
It was late enough when I reached Castle Orison that I wasn’t sure
where I’d find Lucian Kiggs. It occurred to me that I could check the
Blue Salon, where Princess Glisselda was almost certainly holding her
miniature court, but I feared I smelled of tavern—or worse yet,
quigutl—and surely by the time I changed clothes and cleaned up, it
would be too late and everyone would have gone to bed.
  I knew better than that; I just didn’t want to go.
  I went to my suite and wrote Kiggs a note:

   Your Highness:
      I spoke with Orma, but alas, he could not identify the rogue
   dragon from the knights’ description. However, I forgot to mention
   to you that the knights claimed one of their own, Sir James Peascod,
   specialized in identifying dragons during the war. Sir James was
   there the evening of the rogue’s visit and may have recognized him. I
   think it would be well worth interviewing him about this matter.
      I hope you didn’t put off speaking with Eskar in hopes that I
   would return with useful information. My apologies for Orma’s
   vagueness.

  I couldn’t work out how to sign off; everything seemed too familiar
or ridiculously stiff. I decided to err on the side of stiff, given how I’d
begun the letter. I found a page boy in the corridor and handed it off
to him. I bid all my grotesques good night and went to bed early;
tomorrow was going to be the longest of long days.



The sun rose into a dappled sky, pink and gray like the belly of a
trout. The maids were pounding on my locked door before I was done
washing; the breakfast hall was abuzz with anticipation. The green
and purple banner of Belondweg, Goredd’s first queen, flew from
every turret and hung in long drapes upon the houses in town. A line
of carriages ran all the way from Stone Court to the bottom of Castle
Hill: dignitaries arriving from all over the Southlands. No one dared
miss this rare opportunity to meet with Ardmagar Comonot in human
form.
   I watched the Ardmagar’s slow procession from atop the barbican,
along with most of our musicians. Comonot had flown to Southgate
before the sun was up so as to minimize alarm at his scaly presence,
but everyone in town knew he was coming and a crowd had been
gathered there since last night. Representatives of the Crown had been
on hand to greet the Ardmagar and to provide him and his entourage
with clothing once they transformed. Comonot partook of a leisurely
breakfast; it was midmorning before he set out for the palace with his
entourage. Comonot refused a horse and insisted on traversing the
city on foot, personally greeting the people—cheering and otherwise
—who lined the streets.
   Apparently he arrived at the cathedral plaza just as the Countdown
Clock chimed for the last time. They say it played an eerie,
mechanized hurdy-gurdy tune, and that the Queen and the dragon
danced a jig together. People who saw it insisted that it was not a
machine but a puppet performance. No machine could have put on
such a show.
   I’d have bet a Lars-built machine could, but alas I didn’t get to see it
for myself.
   Though the Ardmagar was dressed in bright blue, he was hard to
spot among the milling throngs and waving flags; his saarantras was
not a tall man. Those of us shivering on the barbican did not find
ourselves unduly impressed. “He’s so tiny!” cooed the scrawny
sackbutist. “I could squish him under my boot heel!”
   “Who’s a cockroach now, Ard-bugger?” cried one of my drummers,
not quietly.
   I cringed, hoping no one who mattered had heard. How did word
move so quickly at court? I said: “Not one more disrespectful word—
any of you!—or you will find yourself playing for your supper on
street corners.” They flashed me any number of skeptical looks.
“Viridius has given me full discretion in this,” I assured them. “Push
me, if you imagine I don’t mean it.”
   They looked at their shoes. I thanked St. Loola, patroness of
children and fools, that no one seemed inclined to call my bluff.
   Those of us responsible for the fanfare took off for the reception
hall and found it packed to the rafters with the aggregate nobility of
the Southlands. From my perch in the gallery, I saw that Count
Pesavolta of Ninys and the Regent of Samsam had each colonized a
quarter of the room, the former flamboyant and noisy, the latter dour
and severe. I spotted Dame Okra among the Ninysh; she was more
subdued than most, but then, she had lived a long time in Goredd.
   The Ardmagar stepped into the doorway, and the room went
instantly silent. He was as stout and as jowly as Viridius. His dark hair
looked like it had been wetted and combed severely straight; it was
threatening to burst into unruliness as it dried. Nevertheless, his
hawkish nose and piercing stare gave him a formidable presence. He
radiated intensity, as if compelled by some inner fire he could barely
contain; the very air around him seemed to shimmer, like the heat off
city streets in summertime. He wore his bell like a medal, on a heavy
gold chain around his thick neck. He raised an arm in salutation; the
room held its breath. The Queen rose; Princess Dionne rose with her,
looking awed. Glisselda and Kiggs, together on the left, were mere
shadows playing at the periphery of history.
   We gallery rats were supposed to burst forth in fanfare at exactly
this point, but we were all struck dumb. My musicians must have
found Comonot a bit more impressive up close.
   I, on the other hand, had broken into a cold sweat.
   I shook all over, filled with a rancorous cacophony of emotions:
fear, anger, disgust. The stew of emotions wasn’t mine, though.
   I closed my eyes and saw the tin box of memories sitting in a
puddle, leaking. Fat pearls of condensation rolled down its sides. I
couldn’t do my job with my mother’s feelings about Comonot leaking
into my consciousness. I cast around inside my head for a … a towel.
One appeared at my thought. I mopped up underneath and then
wrapped the box in it.
   The mess of emotions dissipated, and I opened my eyes. Comonot
had proceeded no further up the carpet toward the dais. His arm was
still raised; he looked like a plaster statue of himself.
   “Wake up, you louts!” I hissed to my musicians. They startled as if
they’d been entranced, hoisted their instruments into position, and
burst into music on my mark.
   At the blare of his tardy fanfare, the general began the long walk
toward the dais, leaving a glamour in the air behind him as he passed,
waving and smiling. He seemed to wink at every single one of us
individually.
   He stepped up, kissed the Queen’s jeweled hand, and addressed the
crowd in a resounding basso: “Queen Lavonda. Princesses. Gathered
people of quality. I come to honor forty years of peace between our
peoples.”
   He waited for the clapping to subside, his expression as self-satisfied
as a cat’s. “Do you know why dragons learned to take human form?
We change that we might speak with you. In our natural form, our
throats are so rough with smoke that we cannot make your words.
You, on your side, fail to recognize our Mootya as speech. It was the
dragon sage Golya, or Golymos, as they call him in Porphyry, who
discovered how to effect this change almost a millennium ago. He
wished to speak with the Porphyrian philosophers and found a mighty
university for our people. That was the first incidence of dragons
looking to humans for something good and useful, but not the last.
Golya has gone down in history as one of our greats—and so shall I.”
   Applause again shook the hall. Comonot waited it out, wedging his
left hand into the gap between buttons at the front of his satin doublet
as if he intended to surreptitiously scratch his stomach.
   “The idea of peace came to me in a dream when I was a student at
Golya’s university, the Danlo Mootseye. We dragons do not dream. I
took a class on dreaming: we slept in our saarantrai and reported each
day on the wonders we had seen.
   “One night I saw a hoard, gleaming like the sun. I stepped up to it,
to run my fingers through it, but it wasn’t gold, it was knowledge!
And I realized a wondrous truth: that knowledge could be our
treasure, that there were things humankind knew that we did not, that
our conquest need not comprise taking and killing, but could consist
of our mutual conquest of ignorance and distrust.”
   He began pacing the dais and gesticulating at oddly precise
intervals, as if he’d seen a human do this before and concluded that it
was a ritual dance that he could master. He said: “I told my dream in
class, and was ridiculed. ‘What does knowledge look like? What
knowledge could be worth having that we cannot discover on our
own?’ But I knew the truth of it, I believed it down to my smoldering
core, and from that day forward, I acted only for the sake of that
vision. I grew mighty for its sake. I wrought a peace of steel. I
wrestled with how best to learn your arts, your diplomacy, your
ability to band together, while still retaining our essential dragonness.
It has not been easy.
   “Dragons are slow to change; we each want to fly our own
direction. The only way to lead is to drag the rest, flapping and
flaming, toward what is right. I treated with Queen Lavonda in secret,
knowing it would be better to impose a treaty upon my own people
than to endure a century of debating it in the Ker. I was right.
   “The treaty has been and continues to be successful, thanks to
reforms on our side and continuing good faith on yours. Here’s to
forty more years, or—if I may extrapolate—a hundred. My cosigner
will be long dead by then, and I’ll be addressing your grandchildren,
but I intend this peace to last until the end of my days, and beyond.”
   The gathered nobility hesitated, put off perhaps by such a casual
reference to our shorter life spans, but in the end they all applauded.
The Queen directed Comonot to the chair that had been placed for
him between herself and Princess Dionne, and the long, tedious ritual
of paying respects began. Everyone in that hall, from the Regent of
Samsam to Little Lord Nobody of Pisky-on-the-Pigpond, expected an
opportunity to meet Ardmagar Comonot and kiss the rings upon his
thick fingers. I noted the Earl of Apsig lining up with everyone else,
and felt a certain grim satisfaction.
   The endless reception line required musical accompaniment, of
course. I was on oud, but I’d forgotten my plectrum; I had blisters on
my fingers by lunchtime.
   I also had a headache. It had started with the leaking memory box
and grown by the hour. “Are you all right, Music Mistress?” asked a
voice from … I could not pinpoint it. I looked across at my musicians,
who seemed bizarrely far away. Their faces wobbled. I blinked. “She’s
gone so pale!” said a very slow voice indeed, a sound like dark honey
through a sieve.
   I wondered whether I’d miss lunch, and then my mother’s memory
ambushed me.


One hundred sixty-one dragons perched atop High Nest. Below us:
mountains. Above us: nimbus clouds moving south-southeast at 0.0034
terminus.
   The Ardmagar lectures the students and faculty of the Danlo Mootseye
as the new term unfurls. His lecture’s title: “The Insidious Sickness.”
   I know what that refers to. I cannot sleep, thinking about it. I am likely
infected.
   I bring out my note block and turn it on. It was made by one of my
father’s quigutl. It helps me remember, but nothing helps me forget.
   “Humanity can be our teacher,” cries the Ardmagar. “The point of peace
is the exchange of knowledge. My reforms—the bans on vendetta and on
hoarding, for two—are buoyed by human philosophies. Where such
philosophies are logical, ethical, and quantifiable, we can make them our
own.
   “But let me warn you, all of you, from the newskin on his first trip south
to the venerable teacher who has flown into the macrocloud of unvigilance:
there is danger in humanity. Do not lose yourself to the wet brain. Tempted
by the chemical intoxication of emotion, dragons forget what they are.”
   The Ardmagar is wrong about that. I have never forgotten, to three
significant digits, even when I wished to. And here I perch, not forgetting
Claude.
   “Emotions are addictive!” cries the Ardmagar. “They have no meaning:
they are antithetical to reason. They fly toward illogical, non-draconian
moralities.”
   “They fly toward art,” I mutter.
   He hears the echo of my voice; the acoustics of High Nest have been
perfected over a millennium, that everyone may be heard. “Who spoke out
of ard?”
   I raise my head to an angle of 40 degrees, breaking the submissive
stance. Everyone stares. “I said, Ardmagar, that emotions fly humans
toward art.”
   “Art.” He fixes me with a hunter’s gaze, gauging my speed and defenses.
“Art gleams before us all, a hoard ungathered. I understand that,
hatchling. But we study art. We fly over it from every direction, from a
sane, safe distance. Someday we will comprehend its power. We will put it
in ard. We will learn to hatch it, and why it’s worth hatching. But do not
be tempted into the human flight path. Is a breath’s span of art worth a life
span enslaved by the fetid backwash of the meaty brain?”
   I lower my head, biting down on my instinct. This would be anger, for a
human; I’ve felt that. In the dragon brain, it manifests as “flame or flee.”
Why did I speak? He will measure my words and calculate that I am
miasmic. The Censors will come at night; I will be sent down for excision.
They will cut the unquantifiable right out of me.
   It would put my neurons back in ard. I have wished to forget; it’s why I
came home. I want it, and don’t want it.
   One cannot fly in two directions at once. I cannot perch among those
who think that I am broken.
   I scan the text recorded on my note block. To it I add: Love is not a
disease.


I opened my eyes, closing them again immediately when I saw Kiggs
leaning over me, looking concerned, his hand on my forehead. Saints’
dogs, I’d collapsed under that memory. Why couldn’t I have plunged
headfirst over the parapet and saved myself the mortification of
waking up with everyone staring at me?
   “She’s coming round,” he said. “Phina, do you hear me?”
   “It’s stuffy up here,” said our best trumpeter. “We’ve been playing
for three hours. She’s really all right?”
   “It’s that bastard Viridius’s fault. He lets her take everything on
herself!” That sounded like Guntard.
   The hand on my forehead tensed at the word bastard. My eyes
opened just in time to catch the irritation on Kiggs’s face; it softened
upon seeing me awake.
   He helped me rise. I swayed dizzily—the ground was so far away!—
until I realized I was still up in the gallery, looking down at the almost
empty hall. The last few dignitaries were trickling out, trying to
pretend they weren’t staring up at me.
   “What happened?” I croaked, my throat like parchment.
   “You fainted,” said Guntard. “We thought you’d overheated, but we
didn’t know how to cool you down decently. We took off your shoes—
your pardon, please—and we were just going to roll up your sleeves
—”
   I looked away, bracing my hands against the railing so they
wouldn’t shake.
   “—but Prince Lucian suggested we fan you. Your oud is
undamaged.”
   “Thank you, Guntard,” I said, avoiding his eye and reaching for my
shoes.
   My musicians hovered solicitously, as if uncertain what I required. I
waved a dismissal; they nearly trampled each other rushing off to
lunch. Kiggs had claimed a chair and was sitting on it backward,
leaning his chin on his hands, watching me. He was wearing a fancier
scarlet doublet today, with ropes of gold braid crisscrossing it; his
plain white armband looked all the more mournful in contrast.
   “Don’t you have someplace official to be?” I said lightly as I buckled
my shoes, trying to be funny but fearing he’d hear the crankiness
beneath it.
   He raised his eyebrows. “In fact, I do. But I’m also in charge of
security, and there was quite a commotion up here when you keeled
over. Selda promised she’d guard my plate. I’ll escort you down, if
you like.”
   “I don’t feel like eating.” I didn’t feel like vomiting either, thank
Allsaints. I sat and rubbed my eyes; behind them, my head still ached.
“Did you get my note?” I asked.
   He sat up straighter. “Yes. Thank you. Sounds like your efforts
yesterday were as futile as mine. I didn’t manage to speak with Eskar;
she’d left for Dewcomb’s Outpost with the rest of the embassy staff to
await the Ardmagar’s arrival.”
   I said, “Does the embassy know about the knights’ story?”
   He puffed out his cheeks as he exhaled. “Grandmother met with
Ambassador Fulda before he left, apprising him of the ‘rumor.’ ”
   “Rumor?” I said, astonished. “She doesn’t believe Sir Karal saw a
dragon?”
   Kiggs shook his head irritably. “It pains me to say so, but she
doesn’t want to believe that dragons might violate her treaty. She’s
staked her entire reign upon the idea that we can trust dragons, and
she refuses to consider the possibility of an unauthorized dragon loose
in the countryside—to say nothing of killing Uncle Rufus—without an
awful lot of unambiguous proof.”
   “Orma’s coin—” I began.
   “Convinced her of nothing,” he said, drumming his fingers on the
back of his chair; his nails were short as if he bit them, an unexpected
habit in a Captain of the Guard. His eyes narrowed thoughtfully. “I
don’t suppose your teacher described Imlann’s saarantras at all?”
   “Blue eyes, fair hair,” I said. “That describes two-thirds of the
Ninysh courtiers.”
   “It describes all the Ninysh, counting the redheads, and half the
Highland Samsamese,” said the prince. “But there’s no reason to think
he’s at court, surely? Where does Orma think he’d be?”
   “Orma has no idea, of course. He only knows Imlann was at the
funeral.”
   Kiggs wagged a finger at me. “Selda and I talked it over. We think
your idea about going to see Sir James and the knights—”
   A clatter below interrupted him. A cadre of the palace guard had
entered the hall; they snapped to attention at the sight of Kiggs up in
the gallery. “Captain! The Queen is most displeased that you disregard
the dictates of politeness to our—”
   “I’ll be there directly,” Kiggs said, rising. He turned to me
apologetically. “We’re not finished. Save me the fourth dance at the
ball.”
   I counted off the order of dances. “The pavano?”
   “Perfect. We’ll talk more then.” He raised a hand as if to give me a
soldierly slap on the shoulder, but then deftly turned it into a polite
bow. He departed for his luncheon with the Ardmagar.
   I sat for some moments, my thoughts in a tangle. I’d accepted an
invitation to dance. I couldn’t dance, by anyone’s definition. Beyond
that, I had no business dancing with a prince of any kind, even one
who appeared to forget the differences in our social standing and who
seemed, inexplicably, to find me a plausible person to confide in.
   I leaned my forehead upon the cool stone balustrade. He thought I
was normal, and that made me feel normal, and that was just cruel. I
could have dispelled his illusions in an instant by pulling up my
sleeve. Why live in fear that he might find me disgusting someday,
when I could make it happen right now? I worked my right hand
under the bindings of my left sleeve, feeling the cold plates, the sharp
scalloped edges, my bodily horrors, and hating it.
   Why had that memory sprung out at me so unexpectedly? Was it
another “mind-pearl,” like the one Orma had triggered by revealing
his natural form? Were there more? Was my head full of tinder, just
waiting for a spark?
   I stood up shakily, and my mother’s words came back to me: I
cannot perch among those who think that I am broken. I chafed at her
arrogance, and her good fortune. “The thing is, Mother, you weren’t
broken,” I muttered, as if she were standing right next to me. “I am.
And it was you who made me this way.”
   Inside my head, the box twitched like a thing alive.
I returned to my room for a nap, making sure to wake in plenty of
time to change into my formal houppelande. It was maroon,
embroidered with black; I added a respectful white sash for Prince
Rufus. I attempted to do my hair nicely, because Glisselda’s comments
had made me insecure; I redid it multiple times to no satisfactory
result. I finally left it loose in sheer frustration and put on nice
earrings as an apology to anyone who cared. I didn’t own much other
jewelry except the earring Orma had given me. I considered hooking
it into my hair—it would make an interesting ornament, and no
human would recognize it—but a saarantras might discern that it was
quigutl-made. I left it in my room.
   We’d been preparing this welcoming concert for more than a
month, but the sheer scale of the spectacle still astonished me. Maybe
everything looks more impressive in the light of hundreds of candles,
or an appreciative audience lends a performance a certain glamour, I
don’t know, but some magic in the air made everything go well. No
one was late or out of order; no one fell off the stage; if anyone played
a wrong note, they played with such conviction that it sounded right.
   That’s the secret to performance: conviction. The right note played
tentatively still misses its mark, but play boldly and no one will
question you. If one believes there is truth in art—and I do—then it’s
troubling how similar the skill of performing is to lying. Maybe lying
is itself a kind of art. I think about that more than I should.
   The Ardmagar sat front and center for the stage performances,
bright-eyed and keen. I watched him from behind the curtain during
Guntard’s shawm solo, trying to reconcile the look on Comonot’s face
with his lecture at High Nest. For someone so convinced of the
toxicity of human emotion, he certainly appeared to enjoy himself.
   Glisselda sat by Comonot playing the ornament; her mother sat on
his other side. I saw the Queen, Dame Okra, and Viridius, but no
Kiggs until I looked further afield. He stalked the back of the hall
checking in with the guards, one eye on the performance and one on
security. It was a stressful job, to gauge by his expression.
  I had not put myself on the program. I divided my time between
reminding the next performers to ready themselves and listening from
the wings of the stage.
  During the sackbut quartet, I noticed nobody was waiting to come
on. I glanced at my schedule: Lars was up next. He was to play the
binou, a smaller, milder type of bagpipe. My heart sank; I hadn’t so
much as glimpsed Lars today. I marched up the hallway, poking my
nose behind the curtains of the closets we had commandeered for
dressing rooms.
  Honestly, I had anticipated the rooms being used for warming up
and not for the actual changing of clothes. I made one of my lute
players scream as if he’d found a quig in his bed.
  Further down the hall, I heard tense voices from behind the last
curtain. I approached cautiously, not caring to walk in on anyone
again, and recognized one voice as Lars’s. I raised a hand toward the
curtain, but hesitated. Lars sounded angry, and he was speaking
Samsamese. I drew closer, listening hard and letting my ear adjust.
My Samsamese was rusty, and it had never been completely fluent.
  The second voice was, unsurprisingly, the Earl of Apsig’s. I
understood “You’re following me!” but not the rest.
  Lars denied it vehemently: “Never!” Then “I am here …,” something
unintelligible, “for the machine and the flute music.” Ah, right. He’d
heard me from afar.
  Josef swore a lot, followed by “the flute of madness,” which struck
me as an amusing phrase. Josef’s boots clomped as he paced; his voice
turned pleading. “No one must learn what you are!”
  “And you?” said Lars. “What will you do if they learn what you
are?”
  Josef barked something I didn’t understand, and then came a thud
and a crash. I whipped the curtain aside. The earl stood with his back
to me; Lars was sprawled on the floor among the instrument cases. At
the sound of the curtain opening, Earl Josef spun and slammed me
into the wall. We stood frozen that way for a moment: Josef pinning
me to the wall, breathing hard; me struggling to regain the breath
he’d knocked out of me.
  He released me abruptly and started tugging his lacy cuffs, making
excuses: “I told you not to associate with him! What will it take to
make you understand that he is dangerous?”
  “You’re the one who’s dangerous.”
  His face fell. “Music Mistress, I was just—”
  “Punching my piper? Flinging me into the wall?” I shook my head.
“You are off the program. Take your viola and go.”
  He ran a shaking hand through his pale hair. “You can’t be serious.”
  “I will fetch Lucian Kiggs if you’d prefer, and you can explain
yourself to him.”
  Earl Josef brushed past me, jabbing me in the stomach with his
elbow and yanking the door curtain violently shut. He’d left his viola
behind; I wasn’t about to call him back for it.
  I turned to Lars, who was just getting to his feet. He avoided
looking at me, surely as frightened as Josef that I had heard what I
should not. I was ready to tell him everything when I heard Guntard
in the hallway. “Mistress Seraphina! Your concert is falling apart!”
  I threw back the curtain. “What?”
  “Well, not yet,” said Guntard defensively, fidgeting with a button
on his doublet, “but the sackbuts are almost done, there’s no one
waiting to take their place, and no sign of you anywhere.”
  Lars grabbed his instrument and rushed past me, up the stairs, into
the wing of the stage.
  Guntard was smirking. “That’s put you in a better mood, I hope!” he
said, batting his eyes at me. He thought we’d been up to something
back here, with the curtains drawn. Tuning each other’s lutes, as they
say. Practicing our polyphony. Playing the crumhorn.
  “Do you flirt with Viridius like this?” I said. “Get out of here!”
  He took off down the corridor, laughing. He turned back to say one
last thing, but at that very moment there was an explosion. The force
of it pushed me back a step.
  It was Lars. He wasn’t playing binou pipes.
  For a moment I half fancied he’d somehow brought the
megaharmonium with him, but in fact he was playing the Samsamese
war pipes, the largest, fiercest member of the bagpipe family.
Samsamese highlanders had invented the instrument as a means of
threatening each other’s mountain enclaves; it made a sound like a
mountain shaking its fist at those bastards across the way. The pipes
were not intended for indoor use. Sound filled every cranny of the
hall. I glanced up, cringing, expecting to see plaster flake off the
ceiling.
  It felt like someone was driving a nail into my ear.
  I rushed into the wing of the stage, annoyed. Without thinking—
without even closing my eyes or entering the garden—I reached
inward for Loud Lad’s imaginary hand. You were to play binou pipes!
This is too loud!
   Lars stopped abruptly. The silence hit hard, a shock wave of relief,
but he wasn’t finished playing. He had merely paused to shout: “I like
it loudt!”
   The brawling pipes sprang back to cacophonous life, but there was
a smattering of laughter and applause, as if his statement had lent the
performance some humor or at least some sense. The big fellow likes it
loud, ha ha! He sure does! I couldn’t stay where I was, however, and
not because the nail pierced my eardrum again. I rushed out, down
the passage, and back into the dressing room whence I’d come.
   Mercifully, there was no one there. I sank to the floor, my hand
clapped to my mouth.
   Lars had answered me. I had spoken to him just by thinking—no
garden, no meditation, no avatar. Meeting my grotesques in person
was spooky enough; this was something far spookier.
   Or more exciting. I couldn’t work out which.
   He sounded good from this distance; my appreciation increased
with the square of the distance separating us—that is, in proportion to
the volume decreasing. I leaned my head against the wall and listened
until he’d finished, tapping my fingers along to “The Clumsy Lover”
and “The Halfhearted Maidy.” The applause was muted, as if his
audience was reluctant to spoil the sweet silence by clapping.
   The next solo began. There were only three left before the big
finale, the castle choir singing Viridius’s passionate arrangement of
the Mirror Hymn. I was to conduct. I forced myself to my feet. Those
ne’er-do-well choristers needed as much advance warning as I could
give them. I threw aside the door curtain and ran into a solid wall.
   The wall was Lars.
   “It is one thing to hear music in my headt,” he said, a tremor in his
voice. He stepped forward, driving me back into the little room. “But
thet … thet was your voice!”
   “I know,” I said. “I didn’t mean to.”
   “Why does this heppen?”
   His short hair stood up on his head like a boar-bristle brush; his
nostrils flared. He folded his arms, as if he had no intention of moving
until I had sufficiently explained myself. I said, “I have something to
—to show you.” The room was not too dark, I hoped, for him to
discern the gleam of my grotesquery.
   I balked. Showing Dame Okra hadn’t turned out like I expected; I
had no idea how Lars would react. And this room didn’t even have a
proper door. Guntard might pop his head through the curtain. Anyone
might.
   Lars glowered defensively, as if he anticipated a scolding or a
profession of love. Yes, that was it: he thought I meant to proposition
him. He wore a closed expression, as if rehearsing a speech in his
head, a way to let me down gently after I stripped off all my clothes.
Sorry, Seraphina, I dondt like grausleiner thet can put their voices in my
headt.
   Or maybe: I dondt like girls at all. I like Viridius.
   It wasn’t that funny, but it gave me enough momentum to untie my
sleeve and pull it up.
   He froze for three heartbeats and then reached for my forearm
gently, almost reverently, cradling it in his large hands, running a
finger down the curving band of scales. “Ah.” He sighed. “Now thet
all makes sense.”
   I wished I could have shared that sentiment, wished it so hard that
tears leaked down my cheeks. His expression closed again. I thought
he was angry, but I revised that to “protective” when he wrapped me
in a crushing embrace. We stood that way a long time. Thank Heaven
no one came in; we’d have fueled palace gossip for months.
   A passerby would not have heard the enormous black-clad man
whisper in my ear: “Sesterleine!”
   Little sister.
The Mirror Hymn went smoothly. Behind me the audience rose, and
some sang along. I managed to keep reasonable time, although I was
not as present as I should have been. I kept replaying those moments
with Lars: the one where he’d called me sister, and then the
conversation after.
   “What is Josef to you?” I had asked him. “What’s going on, and is
there any way I can help?”
   “I dondt know what you mean,” he’d said, his eyes suddenly cold. “I
hev said nothink against Josef.”
   “Well, no, not to me,” I pressed on. “But you can’t deny—”
   “I ken. And I do. Dondt speak to me of him again, grausleine.”
   With that, he had stormed off.
   Music surrounded me as I conducted, lifting my heart and bringing
me back to myself. The choir belted out the last two lines:
Undeserving, we are granted grace / We are a mirror raised to Heaven’s
face. I smiled warmly at my singers, and they returned the favor
fiftyfold from all around me.
   The choir cleared the stage and the symphonia moved in. My work
was finished now, and I could dance as much as I liked, meaning
exactly once. It was kind of Kiggs to choose a pavano, which consisted
of walking in a stately circle. I could manage that.
   Servants scurried around, pulling chairs and benches toward the
walls, redistributing candelabra, bringing people drinks. I was parched
myself; being onstage dries you right up. I made for the drinks table in
the far corner and found myself behind the Ardmagar. He spoke
grandiloquently to a server: “True, our scholars and diplomats drink
no intoxicants, but it’s less a rule and more of a guideline, a
concession to your people, who tend toward paranoia at the idea of a
dragon losing control. Dragons, like you, have different tolerances. A
bit of wine may be taken by one as conscientious as myself, and no
harm done.”
   His eyes glittered as he took the proffered cup; he looked around at
the room as if it were made of gold. Other guests, bright as poppies,
paired up in anticipation of the dancing. The symphonia finished
tuning and sent a warm chord wafting over the room.
   “I haven’t taken human form in forty years,” said the Ardmagar.
With a start, I realized he was addressing me. He turned his cup in his
fat fingers, giving me sly, sidelong looks. “I forget what it’s like, how
your very senses differ from ours. Sight and smell are frustratingly
muted, but you compensate with the intensity of the others.”
   I curtsied, not wanting to engage him in conversation. More of my
mother’s memories might be waiting to pounce on me. The tin box
was quiet, for now.
   He persisted: “Everything tastes of ash to us, and our scales permit
little sensitivity to touch. We hear well, but your auditory nerve
connects to some emotional center—all your senses link to emotion,
absurdly, but that one in particular … that’s why you make music,
isn’t it? To tickle that part of your brain?”
   I could tolerate this kind of incomprehension from Orma, but this
arrogant old saar irritated me. “Our reasons are more complicated
than that.”
   He waved a hand and puffed his lips dismissively. “We have studied
art from every conceivable angle. There is nothing rational in it. It is,
in the end, just another form of autogratification.”
   He swallowed his wine and went back to observing the ball. He was
like a child gawping at spectacle, dazzled by the vast sensory banquet
before him: sweet perfume and spicy wine, the patter of ball slippers,
the scrape of bows on strings. He reached out and touched a
countess’s green silk gown as she rustled past. Mercifully, she did not
notice.
   Couples took the floor for a cinque pas. Comonot gazed at them
tenderly, as if they were cherry blossoms—not an expression one
typically sees on a saarantras—and I wondered how many glasses of
wine he’d had. It bothered me that he could stand here playing the
sensualist while Orma couldn’t even talk to me without taking
precautions against the Censors.
   “Is this dance difficult?” he asked, leaning in close. I stepped away
from him; he was unlikely to smell my scales while he was in his cups,
but there was no point taking unnecessary risks.
   “This one intrigues me,” he said. “I want to try everything. It may
be another forty years before I take this shape again.”
   Was he asking me to dance? No, he was asking me to ask him. I
could not decide whether this was flattering or irritating. I kept my
voice neutral. “I’ve never danced the cinque pas. If you watch the
dancers carefully and analyze the steps, you should uncover repeating
patterns, which I suspect parallel the repetitions in the music.”
   He stared at me; his eyes were slightly bulgy, reminding me
unpleasantly of Basind’s. He licked his thick lips and said, “That is just
how a dragon would approach the problem. You see, our peoples are
not so different after all.”
   Before he could speak again, a regal presence loomed behind us and
a woman’s stern voice said, “Ardmagar, would you care to try our
Goreddi dances?”
   It was Glisselda’s mother, Princess Dionne, in shining yellow silk;
she wore a simple circlet and light veil, her hair tucked up in
crispinettes. She gleamed like the golden phoenixes of Ziziba; I, in my
maroon houppelande, was a dull little peahen in comparison. I backed
away, relieved that she had eclipsed me in the Ardmagar’s attention,
but Comonot, the old fox, pointed me out to her. “I was just
discussing the dances with this peculiar young person.”
   The princess gazed coolly down her elegant nose. “That is our
assistant music mistress. She aided Viridius in organizing tonight’s
music.”
   I didn’t have a name, apparently; that was fine with me. I curtsied,
drifting further away as quickly as I dared.
   Something satiny and rose-colored hit me in the side of the head. I
looked up, startled, just in time to get the end of Princess Glisselda’s
trailing sleeve full in the face again. She laughed, whirling away from
me; her partner, the Earl of Apsig, was light on his feet. My heart sank
at the sight of him, but he scorned to even look at me. He was an
adept dancer, and a handsome fellow when he wasn’t threatening
anyone. His severe blacks set off her rosy gown; they captivated every
eye in the room. He pranced her back toward me. I braced myself for
the sleeve again, but she called out to me, “Did Lucian speak with
you? I didn’t see you dancing!”
   Kiggs had said he’d discussed Imlann with her; I hoped she hadn’t
thoughtlessly babbled everything to the earl. “We’re waiting for the
pavano,” I said as she passed again.
   “Cowards! Dancing with you was my idea, you know! You’ll be
harder to overhe …” Josef whisked her away across the floor.
   I lost the end of the word, but not the idea.
   The second dance ended; the musicians transitioned to a sarabande
with almost no pause. I watched the promenading couples; Comonot
was not the only one mesmerized by all the pomp. Glisselda still
danced with Josef, earning herself a pointed glare from her mother.
The Earl of Apsig was not a nobody, presumably, but the second heir
could not just dance for fun; serious politics happened on the floor.
   Kiggs had danced the cinque pas with Amerta, daughter of Count
Pesavolta of Ninys, gavotted with the Regina of Samsam, and now
sashayed his way through the sarabande with some duchess I couldn’t
identify. He danced competently, if not as flashily as Josef, and
seemed to enjoy it. He smiled at the duchess, a glorious, unguarded,
unself-conscious smile, and for a moment he was transparent to me: I
felt I could see all the way to the center of him. I’d glimpsed that at
the funeral too, I realized with a start. He didn’t wear his heart on his
sleeve, exactly, but he did keep it in a place where I could see it.
   The sarabande wound down. Half the symphonia got up; after every
third dance, half the musicians took a “pie break,” and the rest played
a repetitive placeholder until everyone came back. It was a nice
system in that the dancers got a breather and the elderly—our Queen
not least among them—could maintain their stamina.
   Beside me stood Princess Dionne and Lady Corongi, eating pie. “Pie
break” was, of course, a euphemism; it tickled me that these two
highborn ladies should be breaking for pie, in fact. “I confess I’m
shocked at the Ardmagar,” Lady Corongi said, dabbing the corners of
her mouth with a handkerchief carefully, so as not to smear her
crimson lips.
   “It wasn’t his fault,” said the princess. “He’s short; he tripped. My
décolletage was right there.”
   I tried to picture what must have happened, and regretted it
instantly.
   “He’s a fool,” said Lady Corongi, puckering her face as if the
Ardmagar were as sour as she was. Her eyes darted slyly, however,
and she said, “What must it be like to take one of them to bed?”
   “Clarissa!” Princess Dionne’s laugh reminded me of Glisselda’s.
“Now I am shocked, you naughty thing. You hate dragons!”
   Lady Corongi smirked nastily. “I didn’t say marry one. But one
hears—”
   I had no intention of sticking around to hear what one hears. I
moved off toward the drinks table, but there was Josef, complaining
bitterly. “We Samsamese—those of us who take our faith to heart—
don’t imbibe the devil’s drink,” he snapped at the hapless serving lad.
“St. Abaster never did. Should I spit in the face of his holy example?”
   I rolled my eyes; I was not overly fond of wine myself, but there
were nicer ways to ask for tea. I dove back into the crowd,
shouldering my way through forests of gossamer veils and ermine-
edged houppelandes until I was halfway around the hall. The
symphonia’s holding cycle drew to its conclusion, and they began the
opening strains of the pavano. I stepped toward the dance floor but
saw no red doublet anywhere.
   “You look nice!” Kiggs said in my ear, making me jump.
   I blinked stupidly. There was something one said in response to
compliments, something normal people instinctively replied, but my
heart pounded in my ears and I couldn’t come up with it. I said, “No I
don’t.”
   He grinned, presumably because I was absurd. He offered me his
arm and led me onto the floor into the heart of the pavano. I didn’t
know where to stand. He pulled me up next to him, our hands palm to
palm at shoulder level, the opening stance.
   “Your piper was rather remarkable,” he said as the promenade
began.
   “He’s not my piper,” I said, pricklier than I should have been due to
Guntard’s earlier innuendo. “He’s Viridius’s piper.”
   We did a left-hand pass, and a right. Kiggs said, “I know exactly
what he is to Viridius. Tell your guilty conscience to stand down. You
obviously love someone else.”
   I startled. “What do you mean?”
   He tapped the side of his head with his free hand. “Worked it out.
Don’t be alarmed. I’m not judging you.”
   Not judging me? Whom did he imagine I was in love with? I wanted
to know, but not so badly that I would willingly keep the conversation
trained on myself. I changed the subject: “How long have you known
the Earl of Apsig?”
   Kiggs raised his eyebrows as we circled slowly right, the starhand
move. “He’s been here about two years.” He studied my face. “Why do
you ask?”
   I gestured toward the other dancers in our circle. Josef’s black
doublet stood out, only two places away from us in the circle. “He’s
making life difficult for Viridius’s piper. I caught him lambasting the
poor fellow back in the dressing rooms.”
   “I looked into Josef’s background when he first came to court,”
Kiggs said, handing me around in a pas de Segosh as the circle
reversed. “He’s the first Apsig to crawl out of the highlands in three
generations; that house was believed extinct, so of course I was
curious.”
  “You? Curious?” I said. “I find that difficult to believe.”
  He rewarded my impudence with a grin. “Apparently his
grandmother was the last of the line and he revived the name. He’s
also rumored in Samsam to have an illegitimate half brother. Lars
might not be a mere serf after all.”
  I frowned. If Lars was not some random half-dragon but the familial
shame incarnate, that would explain Josef’s animosity. Still, I couldn’t
help feeling it was more complicated than that.
  Kiggs was talking; I focused back on him. “They take a harsh stance
on illegitimacy in Samsam. Here, it’s mostly inconvenient for the poor
bastard; there, it taints the entire family. The Samsamese are great
devotees of St. Vitt.”
  “ ‘Thy sins burn brightly backward through the ages’?” I hazarded.
  “ ‘And forward unto all thy sons’ horizons’—yes. Well quoted!” He
handed me round again; his eyes twinkled, reminding me of Prince
Rufus. Kiggs leaned in and added in an earnest voice: “I realize you’re
conducting a survey on the subject, but I’d recommend against asking
Lars what it’s like to be a bastard.”
  Startled, I met his eye. He was laughing silently, and then we were
both laughing, and then something changed. It was as if I had been
watching the world through oiled parchment or smoked glass, which
was yanked abruptly away. Everything grew very clear and bright; the
music burst forth in majesty; we stood still and the room turned
around us; and there was Kiggs, right in the middle of all of it,
laughing.
  “I—I shall have to be content with asking you,” I stammered,
suddenly flustered.
  He gestured broadly, encompassing the room. “This is it. The
quintessence of bastardy. No rest for the wicked. Dance after dance,
until your feet are ready to fall off.”
  The circle reversed direction for the last time, reminding us both
why we were here. “To business,” he said. “My grandmother may
think there is nothing to be discovered out in the country, but Selda
and I think she’s wrong.” He leaned in closer. “You should carry on as
planned. We talked it over, though, and we can’t let you go alone.”
  I drew back in surprise. “You can’t let me go where alone?”
   “In search of Sir James Peascod. It’s not safe,” he insisted, his brow
creased with worry. “And I’m not convinced you even know where
you’re going. You were surely bluffing when you told those elderly
gentlemen that you knew where they lived?”
   My mouth opened, but my torpid brain had not formed any words
for it to say. When I’d written that a visit to the knights was
warranted, I meant Kiggs should go, not me!
   Kiggs put a hand on my waist for the final promenade. His breath
warmed my ear. “I’m going with you. That’s final. Tomorrow we
won’t be missed: you’ve got no musical programs and all the most
important people will be shut up in meetings all day—including
Selda, to her great disgust. I propose that we ride out at dawn, visit
the knights, and then, depending on how late it is …”
   I heard nothing beyond that. My ears buzzed.
   How could anyone think it remotely plausible that I intended to
ride off into the countryside—alone, or any other way? It was my own
stupid fault for bluffing my way down to the knights. Nothing but
trouble had come of that. Everyone had the wrong idea about me
now; they thought me brave and reckless.
   Looking into Kiggs’s dark eyes, though, I felt a little reckless.
   No: a little breathless.
   “You hesitate,” he said. “I suspect I know why.” I suspected he
didn’t. He smiled; the whole room seemed to shimmer around him.
“You’re worried that it’s improper, the pair of us riding off
unescorted. I don’t see a problem. A larger party would put the
knights on the defensive before we even arrived, and as for propriety,
well. My fiancée isn’t worried, my grandmother won’t mind, Lady
Corongi will be off visiting her sick cousin for the next couple days,
and I see no one else of consequence likely to judge us.”
   That was easy for him to say; he was a prince. I imagined I could
and would be judged. Lady Corongi would lead the chorus; being
away was no impediment to her.
   We circled each other in the final pas de Segosh. Kiggs said, “Your
beau doesn’t seem the jealous type. We have a fair shot at failing to
scandalize anyone in any way.”
   Not the jealous type? Who? Alas, again my mouth failed to launch
the requisite questions, and then it was too late. The pavano was
finished; people were applauding.
   “Dawn,” he whispered. “Meet at the Queen’s study. We’ll take the
postern gate.”
  He let me go. My waist felt cold where the warmth of his arm had
been.
I quit the ball very soon thereafter, retreating to the sanctuary of my
suite. I needed to tend my garden, and needed sleep if I was to get up
early. Those were surely two very good reasons to leave.
   Those weren’t my reasons. I didn’t visit the grotesques, and I didn’t
sleep.
   My limbs buzzed with restlessness. I undressed, folding the
houppelande and gown with obsessive neatness, creasing the folds
with my fists, as if pleats might calm me. I usually left my chemise on
—I hated myself naked—but now I took it off, folded it, refolded it,
flung it fitfully against the privacy screen, picked it up, threw it again.
   I paced, rubbing the scales on my stomach, mirror-smooth one way,
like a thousand sharp teeth the other. This is what I was. This here.
This. I made myself look at the shingle of silver half-moons, the
hideous line where they sprouted from my flesh like teeth pushing
through gums.
   I was monstrous. There were things in this world I could not have.
   I climbed into bed, curled up, and wept, my eyes tightly shut. I saw
stars behind my lids. I didn’t enter my garden; I was nowhere with a
name. A door appeared unexpectedly in the undifferentiated fog of my
mind. It frightened me that it could just appear, unbidden, but it
startled me out of my self-pity, too.
   It opened. I held my breath.
   Fruit Bat peeked around the edge. I quailed. He had been so well
behaved since I’d asked him to that I’d almost forgotten there’d been
any trouble. Seeing him outside the garden scared me, though. I could
not help but think of Jannoula, with all her peeking and prying, and
how she’d practically set up housekeeping in my head.
   Fruit Bat’s face lit up when he saw me. He seemed incurious about
my private mind; he had merely been looking for me. To my horror, I
was naked in my own head; I changed that with a thought.
   “You found me,” I said, smoothing my imaginary gown, or
reassuring myself that it was there. “I know, I haven’t been to the
garden tonight. I—I couldn’t face it. I’m tired of having to tend it. I’m
tired of—of being this.”
   He held out his wiry brown hands.
   I considered the offer but could not bring myself to induce a vision.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “Everything feels so heavy right now, and …” I
could not continue.
   I was going to have to shut him out. I did not see how I could
muster the strength to do it.
   He hugged me; he was short, not even up to my shoulder. I held
him, put my cheek against the soft, dark knots of his hair, and wept.
Then somehow, and I’m not sure how, I slept.



Kiggs was woefully cheerful for a man who could not have gotten
more than four hours’ sleep. I had taken my time with the morning
routine, assuming we’d be off to a slow start, but he had arrived at the
Queen’s study ahead of me, dressed in dull colors like a peasant. No
one would have mistaken him for a peasant up close, however; the cut
of his jerkin was too fine, his woolens too soft, his smile too bright.
   A man hulked beside him; I realized with a start that it was Lars.
“He was asking for you last night after you absconded,” said Kiggs as I
drew near. “I told him he could catch you this morning before we
left.”
   Lars reached inside his black jerkin and pulled out a large, folded
parchment. “I hev designedt it lest night, and want you to hev it,
Mistress Dombegh, because I hev no other goodt way of … to thank
you.” He handed it to me with a little flourish, and then, surprisingly
quickly for such a large man, disappeared up the hallway.
   “What is it?” said Kiggs.
   The parchment fluttered as I spread it out. It looked like schematics
for some sort of machine, although I couldn’t make head or tail of it.
Kiggs had a more concrete notion: “A ballista?”
   He was reading over my shoulder; his breath smelled of anise.
   I said, “What’s a ballista?”
   “Like a catapult, but it flings spears. But this one flings … what is
that?”
   It looked like a harpoon with a bladder full of something
unspecified. “I don’t think I want to know,” I said. It looked like a
giant clyster pipe, for delivering a dragon’s colonic, but I didn’t care
to say that aloud before a prince of the realm, bastard or no.
   “Stow it in here,” he said, handing me a saddle pack, which
appeared to contain our lunch. “You’re dressed warmly enough to
ride?”
   I hoped so. I’d never actually ridden a horse, being a city girl, but
I’d scrounged up a pair of Porphyrian trousers and wore my usual
overabundance of layers.
   I had Orma’s earring fastened by a cord around my neck. I could
feel the cold lump of it if I put my hand to my heart.
   We set off through the palace, down corridors, through a door
concealed behind a tapestry, and down into a series of passages I’d
never seen. Stairs took us below the level of the basements, through a
rough tunnel. We passed three locked doors, which Kiggs
conscientiously relocked behind us while I held the lantern. We were
going roughly west, according to my internal compass. Past a pair of
enormous stone doors, the tunnel broadened into a natural cave
system; Kiggs avoided the smaller branches, taking the widest, flattest
route each time, until we reached the mouth of a cave in the hillside
below the western wall of the castle.
   The broad valley of the Mews River spread before us, cloaked in
morning mist. Thick clouds hid the face of the sky. Kiggs paused, arms
akimbo, taking in the vista. “This was a sally port in war times,
invisible from below. We saved ourselves a trip through the city, see?
There’s a stable at the base of the hill; we’ve horses waiting there.”
   The dusty cave floor had been recently disturbed. “Who uses these
caves now?”
   “Uncle Rufus, rest he in the bosom of Allsaints, used this route to go
hunting. I thought it couldn’t hurt to retrace his steps. No one else
uses it that I’m aware of.” He looked at me; I gestured toward some
discarded clothing behind a rock. “Hm! Shepherds taking shelter from
a storm?” He lifted one item, a well-made but simple gown. Every
woman in the palace owned a couple like it; I know I did. “Serving
girls meeting their lovers? But how would they get through three
locked doors, and why would they leave clothing behind?”
   “It is peculiar.”
   He grinned. “If this is the biggest mystery we encounter today, I’ll
call us lucky.” He refolded the gown and placed it back behind the
rock. “You’re perceptive. You may wish to keep that skill at the ready:
the slope is rocky, and it’s likely to be wet.”
   As we picked our way downhill, I found myself breathing easier.
The air was clean and empty; the atmosphere of city and court
seemed dense by comparison, saturated with troubles and heavy with
worries. There were only two of us out here under the weightless,
unbounded sky, and I sighed with relief, noticing for the first time
how claustrophobic I had been.
   Horses were, indeed, waiting for us. Kiggs had apparently sent word
that he was riding with a woman, because my horse was fitted with a
little sideways basket seat, complete with footrest. This struck me as
far more sensible than the usual setup. Kiggs, however, was unhappy
with it. “John!” he cried. “This won’t do! We need proper tack!”
   The old ostler frowned. “Sharpey told me you was riding out with
the princess.”
   “No, Sharpey did not tell you that! You assumed that. Maid
Dombegh expects to control her own horse, not be led around on a
pony!” He turned to me apologetically, but something in my face
stopped him short. “You do intend to ride?”
   “Oh yes,” I said, resigned to it now. I hoisted the hem of my skirts
to show how I was ready with the Porphyrian trousers and all. He
blinked at me, and I realized that had been a most unladylike action—
but wasn’t he setting me up to ride in an unladylike way? I couldn’t
seem to behave properly, no matter what I did.
   Maybe that meant I could stop fretting about it so much.
   They brought out my refitted horse; I hitched up my skirts and
mounted on the first try, not wanting anyone grabbing me around the
waist to help me up. The horse turned in a circle. I’d never done this,
but I knew the theory, and it wasn’t long before I had her moving in a
straight line, in almost the correct direction.
   Kiggs caught me up. “Eager to get going? You left without your
saddle pack.”
   I managed to stop my horse and hold her almost still while he
secured my bags, and then we were off. My horse had definite ideas
about where we should go; she liked the look of the water meadows
ahead and thought we couldn’t get there fast enough. I tried to hold
her back and let Kiggs lead, but she was quite determined. “What’s
beyond that leat?” I called back to him, as if I had some notion where
we were going.
   “The fens where Uncle Rufus was found,” he said, craning his neck
to look. “We can stop there, although I doubt the Guard missed
much.”
   My horse slowed as we approached the little canal; she wanted the
water meadow, not the brambly bog. I gestured to the prince to take
the lead, as if I were slowing on purpose. My horse tried to turn away
from the bridge. “No you don’t,” I muttered to her. “Why should you
play the coward? You outweigh all of us.”
   Kiggs trotted ahead, his dun cloak flapping behind him. He sat
lightly in the saddle, and his horse seemed to respond to his very
thoughts; there was none of this unseemly yanking of reins that I was
forced to do. He led us off the road almost immediately on the other
side of the leat. The fen was relatively dry this time of year; what
standing water there was had frozen into a glassy crust that crunched
underhoof. I still managed to find a muddy patch where my horse’s
hooves skidded and sucked. “Steer her toward the grasses,” Kiggs
advised, but my horse, smarter than me, was already headed that
way.
   Kiggs paused beside some barren shrubbery and pointed to the hills
north of us, black with winter trees. “They were hunting in the
Queenswood, there. His courtiers claim the hounds scattered—”
   “And the hunters scattered after them?”
   “No, no, that’s not how it works. The hounds are supposed to
investigate all leads; they’re bred for independence. They follow a
scent to the end, and if it doesn’t lead to anything useful, they return
to the pack. That’s what they’re for, so the hunters don’t have to
follow every dead end in the forest.”
   “But the Earl of Apsig said Prince Rufus had followed his hounds.”
   Kiggs stared at me. “You questioned him about that day?”
   The earl had required no interrogation; he’d been bragging to the
ladies-in-waiting at the Blue Salon. Kiggs had walked in on that
conversation, in fact, but apparently he had missed the discussion of
hounds. It seemed I had a reputation as a shrewd investigator to
uphold, however, so I said, “Of course.”
   Kiggs shook his head in wonderment, and I felt immediately guilty.
“They’re supposing that my uncle took off after his prize hound, Una,
because he got separated from the group and nobody saw where he
went. But he had no reason to do that. She knows what she’s doing.”
   “Then why did he leave the group?”
   “We may never know,” said Kiggs, spurring his horse a little further
along. “Here’s where they found him—with Una’s help—the next
morning, beside this rivulet.”
   There was little to see, no blood, no sign of struggle. Even the
hoofprints of the Guard had been obscured by rain and filled in with
seeping fen water. There was a rather deep water-filled crater, and I
wondered whether that was where the prince had lain. It was not
dramatically Rufus-shaped.
   Kiggs dismounted and reached into the pouch at his belt, drawing
out a Saint’s medallion, tarnished with use and age. Disregarding the
mud, he knelt by the water and held the medallion reverently to his
lips, muttering as if to fill it with prayers. He squeezed his eyes shut,
praying fervently but also trying to stave off tears. I felt for him; I
loved my uncle too. What would I do if he were gone? I was a poor
excuse for pious, but I cast a prayer up anyway, to any Saint who
might catch it: Hold Rufus in your arms. Watch over all uncles. Bless this
prince.
   Kiggs rose, surreptitiously wiping his eyes, and cast the medallion
into the pool. The cold wind tossed his hair the wrong way across his
head; the medallion’s ripples disappeared among choppy little waves.
   It suddenly occurred to me to think like a dragon. Could a dragon
have sat right here in broad daylight, killing someone without being
seen? Absolutely not. I could see the road and the city in the distance.
Nothing obscured that view at all.
   I turned to Kiggs, who was already looking at me, and said, “If a
dragon did it, your uncle must have been killed somewhere else and
moved here.”
   “That’s exactly what I think.” He glanced up at the sky, which was
beginning to spit drizzle at us. “We need to get moving, or we’re
going to get drenched.”
   He mounted his horse and led us out of the fen, back to the high,
dry road. He took the north fork, toward the rolling hills of the
Queenswood; we passed through just the southern corner of that vast
forest. It had a reputation for being dark, but we saw daylight the
entire time, black branches dividing the gray sky into panes, like the
lead cames of a cathedral window. It began to drizzle harder and
colder.
   Over the third ridge, the forest turned into coppice, the rolling hills
into sinkholes and ravines. Kiggs slowed his horse. “This seems a more
likely area for a dragon to kill someone. Coppice is thinner than
forest, so it could maneuver adequately, if not well. It’d be concealed
down one of the hollows, unseen until one was right on top of it.”
   “You think Prince Rufus stumbled upon the rogue dragon by
accident?”
   Kiggs shrugged. “If a dragon really killed him, that seems likely.
Any dragon intending to assassinate Prince Rufus could find a
hundred easier ways to do it without raising suspicions against
dragons. If it were me, I’d infiltrate the court, gain the prince’s trust,
lure him into the forest, and put an arrow through the back of his
skull. Call it a hunting accident—or disappear. None of this messy
biting off of heads.”
   Kiggs sighed. “I was convinced it was the Sons of St. Ogdo before
the knights came to us. Now I don’t know what to think.”
   A noise had been growing at the edge of my perception, a chittering
like locusts in summer. It grew loud enough now that I noticed it.
“What’s that sound?”
   Kiggs paused to listen. “That would be the column of rooks, I
assume. There’s an immense rookery in a ravine north of here. The
birds are so numerous there’s always a flight of them above the place,
visible from miles away. Here, I’ll show you.”
   He steered his horse off the path, through the coppice, up the ridge;
I followed. From the top we saw, half a mile off, a lazy cloud of black
birds, hovering, swooping all together. There must have been
thousands for us to hear their cries this far away.
   “Why do they gather right there?”
   “Why do birds do anything? I don’t think anyone has ever bothered
to find out.”
   I chewed my lip, knowing something he didn’t and trying to work
out how best to tell him. “What if the dragon was there? Maybe it left
some, uh, carrion,” I said, wincing at my own feebleness. Sure, rooks
liked carrion; that wasn’t the only thing a dragon ever left behind.
   “Phina, that rookery has been there for years,” he said.
   “Imlann has been banished for sixteen.”
   Kiggs looked skeptical. “You can’t believe he would camp out in the
exact same spot for sixteen years! It’s coppice. Woodcutters tend it.
Someone would have noticed.”
   Bah. I had to try a different tack. “Have you read Belondweg?”
   “I couldn’t call myself much of a scholar if I hadn’t,” he said.
   He was adorable and he made me smile, but I couldn’t let him see.
“Do you remember how the Mad Bun, Pau-Henoa, tricked the
Mordondey into thinking Belondweg’s army was mightier than it
really was?”
   “He made a fake battlefield. The Mordondey believed they’d
stumbled across the site of a terrible slaughter.”
   Why did I have to spell everything out for everyone? Honestly. He
was as bad as my uncle. “And how did Pau-Henoa counterfeit that
kind of carnage?”
   “He scattered dragon dung all over a field, attracting millions of
carrion crows, and … oh!” He looked back toward the column. “You
don’t think—”
   “That might be a dragon’s cesspit over there, yes. They don’t leave
it scattered about; they’re fastidious. In the mountains, there are
‘vulture valleys.’ Same thing.”
   I glanced at him, embarrassed to be having this discussion,
embarrassed still more that Orma had told me these kinds of things—
in response to my inquiries, of course. I tried to gauge how mortified
the prince was. He looked at me wide-eyed, not disgusted, not
laughing, but genuinely intrigued. “All right,” he said. “Let’s have a
look.”
   “That’s way out of our way, Kiggs. It’s just a hunch—”
   “And I have a hunch about your hunches,” he said, kicking his
horse gently in the ribs. “This won’t take long.”
   The raucous cawing grew louder at our approach. When we’d
crossed half the distance, Kiggs raised a gloved hand and motioned
me to stop. “I don’t want to stumble across this fellow by accident. If
that’s what happened to Uncle Rufus—”
   “The dragon isn’t here,” I said. “Surely the rooks would be alarmed,
or silent. These look unconcerned to me.”
   His face brightened as an idea hit him. “Maybe that drew Uncle
Rufus here: the birds were acting strangely.”
   We rode closer, slowly, through the coppice. Ahead of us yawned a
wide sinkhole; we stopped our horses at the edge and looked in. The
bottom was rocky where an underground cavern had collapsed. The
few existing trees were tall, spindly, and black with quarrelling birds.
There was ample room here for a dragon to maneuver, and
unambiguous evidence that one had.
   “Are dragons sulfuric through and through?” muttered Kiggs,
pulling the edge of his cloak up over his face. I followed suit. We
could handle the stench of sewage—we were city dwellers, after all—
but this reek of rotten eggs turned the stomach.
   “All right,” he said. “Light a fire under that keen brain of yours,
please. That looks fairly fresh, there, would you agree?”
   “Yes.”
   “That’s the only one I see.”
   “He wouldn’t have to come here more than once a month. Dragons
digest slowly, and if he were becoming a saarantras regularly, I
understand that makes them …” No. No, I was not going into more
detail than that. “The rooks would have finished off anything older,
perhaps,” I offered limply.
   Only his eyes were visible above his cloak, but they’d crinkled into
a smile at my discomfiture. “Or the rain would have dissolved it, I
suppose. Fair enough. But we can’t confirm that the rooks live here
because a dragon habitually uses this space.”
   “We don’t have to confirm that. A dragon was here recently,
without question.”
   Kiggs narrowed his eyes, thinking. “Say the rooks were acting
strangely. My uncle came to see what was happening. He stumbled
upon a dragon. It killed him and carried his headless body back to the
fen under cover of night.”
   “Why move the body?” I mused aloud. “Why not eat all the
evidence?”
   “The Guard would have kept scouring the wood for Uncle Rufus’s
body. That would lead us here, eventually, to unambiguous proof of a
dragon.” Kiggs darted his gaze back toward me. “But then, why did it
eat his head?”
   “It’s hard for a dragon to make it look like something else killed
you. Biting off the head is fairly ambiguous. And maybe it knew
people would blame the Sons of St. Ogdo,” I said. “You did, didn’t
you?”
   He shook his head, not exactly conceding the point. “So why did it
reveal itself to the knights? Surely it knew we would connect the
two!”
   “Maybe it didn’t expect the knights to risk imprisonment by
reporting to the Queen. Or maybe it assumed the Queen would never
believe their story—which also happened, didn’t it?” I hesitated,
because it felt like giving away something personal, but finally added:
“Sometimes the truth has difficulty breaching the city walls of our
beliefs. A lie, dressed in the correct livery, passes through more
easily.”
   He wasn’t listening, however; he stared at a second object of intense
rookish interest on the floor of the hollow. “What’s that?”
   “A dead cow?” I said, wincing.
   “Hold my horse.” He handed me his reins, dismounted, and was
scrambling down into the stony sinkhole before I could express
surprise. The rooks startled, exploding noisily into the air, obscuring
my view of him. If he’d been in uniform, I could have made out the
scarlet through all that black, but he might have been a mossy rock
for all that I could see.
   The rooks swirled and dove in unison, screaming, then scattered
into the trees. Kiggs, his arms wrapped protectively around his head,
had nearly reached the bottom.
   My horse shifted uneasily. Kiggs’s horse pulled at the reins and
whickered. The rooks had all but disappeared, leaving the coppice and
hollow eerily silent. I didn’t like this one bit. I considered shouting
down to Kiggs, but his horse gave a violent tug, and I had to focus all
my attention on not falling off my own mare.
   The cold drizzle had continued to fall, and I now saw, to the north
of us, a cloud of vapor rising out of the coppice. Maybe it was fog; the
mountains further north were nicknamed Mother of Mists. But this
seemed too localized to me. This seemed like what you might see if
cold drizzle were falling on something warm.
   I put a hand to my heart, to Orma’s earring, although I did not pull
it out just yet. Orma would be in so much trouble for transforming
and coming to my rescue that I couldn’t afford to call him if I wasn’t
completely sure.
   The mist was spreading, or its source moved. How much surer did I
need to be? It would take time for Orma to get here; he would not be
able to fly for several minutes after he transformed, and we were
miles away. The wisps moved west, then curled toward the sinkhole.
There was no sound in the coppice. I listened hard for the telltale rasp
of branches on hide, for footsteps, for the hot rush of breath, but
heard nothing.
   “Let’s go,” said Kiggs beside me, and I almost fell off my horse.
   He swung himself into the saddle; I handed him the reins, noticing
a glint of silver in his hand. I couldn’t ask about it just then, however.
My heart pounded frantically. The mist curled still closer, and now we
were making noise. Whether he was consciously aware of the danger
or not, Kiggs spurred his horse forward quietly, and we hurried
together back toward the road.
   He waited until we had cleared the coppice altogether, emerging
into rolling farmland on the other side, to show me what he’d found:
two horse medals. “This was Uncle Rufus’s patron, St. Brandoll: the
welcomer, kind to strangers,” said Kiggs, trying unsuccessfully to
smile. He did not narrate the other medal; he seemed to have run out
of words. He held it up, however, and I saw it bore the arms of the
royal family: Belondweg and Pau-Henoa, the Goreddi crown, St.
Ogdo’s sword and ring.
  “Her name was Hilde,” he said when he recovered his voice, a
quarter mile down the road. “She was a good horse.”
We pressed on harder after that, ostensibly to make up lost time, an
unspoken anxiety hanging over us at how close we might have been.
We passed fallow winter fields and brown grazing pastures. Low stone
walls crawled up and down the hills. We passed villages—Gorse,
Rightturn, Fetter’s Mill, Remy, a few too small to have names. Their
attendant manor houses squatted sternly nearby. At Sinkpond we
opened my saddle pack and ate lunch as we rode: boiled eggs, cheese,
a dense sweet loaf shared between us.
   “Listen,” said Kiggs around his bread. “I know it’s none of my
business, and I know I said I don’t judge you for it, but I can’t stay
silent, not after what we just saw in that ravine. I know you’re of age
to decide for yourself—’an autonomous being, unfettered and free,
stepping up to the first agon of your heart’—”
   Now he was quoting tragedy to me, which couldn’t bode well.
“That’s ‘willful, unfettered, and free’—is it not?” I said, trying to
deflect dread with pedantry.
   He laughed. “Trust me to omit the most important word! I should
know better than to quote Necans to you.” His face grew grave again,
his gaze painfully earnest. “Forgive me, Phina, but I feel compelled to
say, as your friend—”
   As my friend? I grabbed my saddle tightly to keep from falling off.
   “—that it’s a bad idea, falling in love with a dragon.”
   I was glad I had braced myself. “Blue St. Prue,” I cried, “who can
you possibly mean?”
   He fiddled with his reins. “Your ‘teacher,’ right? The dragon
Orma?”
   I said nothing, utterly flabbergasted.
   “It didn’t add up, to me, that he was merely your teacher,” he said,
pulling off a glove and slapping it absently against his horse’s
shoulder. “You know him too well, for one thing. You know too much
about dragons in general.”
   “It wasn’t such a liability in the coppice,” I said, fighting to keep my
voice even.
   “No, no! It’s never been a liability,” he said, his eyes widening. He
reached a hand toward me but held off touching my arm. “I didn’t
mean it that way! We now have concrete evidence linking my uncle
and a dragon, and that’s all thanks to you. But you’re going to an
extraordinary amount of trouble for this Orma. You’re fond of him,
protective of him—”
   “Fond and protective equals in love?” I wasn’t sure whether to
laugh or cry.
   “You’ve put your hand to your heart,” he said. He wasn’t smiling.
   I had unconsciously felt for Orma’s earring. I put my hand back
down.
   “I have agents, you know.” He sounded defensive now. “They saw
you meeting him the other night. They saw you go to Quighole.”
   “You’re spying on me?”
   He turned rather charmingly red. “Not on you! On him. He claims
his father is a threat to the Ardmagar. It seemed prudent to find out
more about him and his family.”
   I felt light-headed; the horizon wobbled a bit. “And what have you
learned?”
   His face brightened; we were back to discussing a mystery. “His
entire family seems to exist under a cloud of suspicion, but no one
will explicitly say what crime was committed. It seems to have been
more than just his father, though. If I had to guess, based on the stony
silence at the embassy, I’d say—”
   “You asked at the embassy?”
   “Where would you have asked? Anyway, my guess is madness.
You’d be astonished how many ordinary things dragons consider
madness. Perhaps his father started telling jokes or his mother found
religion or—”
   I couldn’t stop myself. “Or his sister fell in love with a human?”
   Kiggs smiled grimly. “As grotesque as that sounds, yes. But you see
where I’m going with this. Your boy is under scrutiny. If he loved you
—I’m not saying he does—he would be taken home and forcibly
excised. They would remove all his memories of you and—”
   “I know what excision means!” I snapped. “Saints’ bones! He feels
nothing for me. You needn’t concern yourself.”
   “Ah,” he said, gazing off into the middle distance. “Well. He’s an
idiot.”
  I stared at him, trying to gauge his meaning. He smiled, and tried to
clarify. “Because he’s hurt you, clearly.”
  No, that wasn’t clear, but I played along. “Maybe I’m the idiot, for
loving him.”
  He had no answer for that, although I couldn’t quite take his silence
for agreement, the way he looked off into the distance and frowned.



We turned south onto something more sheep track than road. I began
to fret about how long this journey was taking. Today was Speculus,
the shortest day of the year; by the time we reached the knights, we’d
have to leave almost at once to make it back in daylight. Surely Kiggs
did not intend us to ride home in the dark? Maybe that was of no
concern to an experienced horseman, but I felt I was barely holding
on as it was.
  We reached a grim old barn that had caught fire recently; the rear
of the roof sagged, the back wall was charred and blistered, and the
whole area reeked of smoke. Someone had put it out, or it had been
too damp to burn. Kiggs stared at it hard, then abruptly turned off the
road toward a thicket. We skirted the thicket, which turned out to be
a small patch of forest; what looked like shrubs from the rise above
were revealed to be trees once we’d reached the low end of the
hollow. Entering from the far side, we rode up the middle of the
shallow creek until we reached its source, the mouth of a cave under
the hill.
  Kiggs leaped from his horse, grabbed his pack, and approached the
cave on foot. I was not so adept at the dismount. I had substantial
difficulty convincing the horse to stand still. Happily, Kiggs wasn’t
looking at me. He stood near the mouth of the cave, his hands on his
head in a gesture of surrender, crying, “By Belondweg and Orison, we
come in peace!”
  “Don’t pretend you’re scared of me.” An unshorn, bony-wristed, no-
longer-exactly-young man emerged from the shadows with a crossbow
over his shoulder. He wore a peasant’s work smock, incongruously
embroidered with fruit, and wooden clogs over his boots.
  “Maurizio!” said Kiggs, laughing. “I took you for Sir Henri.”
  The fellow grinned like a lunatic and said, “Henri would have been
ready and willing to menace you a bit. I couldn’t have shot you. Bow’s
not even loaded.”
  He and Kiggs clasped hands; clearly they knew each other. I stared
at my hands, overtaken by a sudden shyness, wondering whether
Maurizio would recognize me as the girl he’d carried home five years
ago. I had a nagging feeling that I’d vomited at some point during that
journey; I really hoped it hadn’t been on him.
  “What’d you bring me?” asked Maurizio, lifting his pointy chin and
looking not at the pack but at me, half on, half off my horse.
  “Er. Woolies,” said Kiggs, following Maurizio’s gaze and looking at
me in surprise. I waved casually. He picked his way back downstream
toward me.
  “Have you eaten?” asked Maurizio, joining Kiggs in holding my
horse’s bridle. He turned lively blue eyes on me. “The oatmeal is fine
today. Not even moldy.”
  My feet landed on solid ground just as an old man in a threadbare
tabard emerged from the cave blinking. He had liver spots on his
scalp and used a nasty-looking polearm for a walking stick. “Boy!
Who’s this?”
  “I just turned thirty,” said Maurizio quietly, so the old knight would
not hear, “but I’m still called boy. Time has stopped out here.”
  “You’re free to leave,” said Kiggs. “You were just a squire when
they were banished; technically, you weren’t banished at all.”
  Maurizio shook his shaggy head sadly and offered me his skinny
arm. “Sir James!” he said loudly, as to one hard of hearing. “Look
what the dragon dragged in!”



There were sixteen knights in all, plus two squires, holed up in that
cave. They’d been there twenty years and had civilized the place,
carving out new rooms for themselves that were cleaner and drier
than the main body of the cave. They had scavenged and built sturdy
furniture; at one end of the main hall stood twenty-five suits of
fireproof dracomachia armor, black and quilted. I did not know the
proper names of the weapons displayed on the wall—hooks and
harpoons and what appeared to be a flat spatula on a pole—but
assumed they had some specialized purpose in dracomachia.
   They invited us to sit by the fire and gave us warm cider in heavy
ceramic mugs. “You oughtn’t’ve come out today,” cried Sir James,
who was deaf in one ear, at least. “It’s like to snow.”
   “We had no choice,” said Kiggs. “We need to identify this dragon
you saw. He may be a danger to the Ardmagar. Sir Karal and Sir
Cuthberte told us you were the man who knew his generals, back in
the day.”
  Sir James straightened up and raised his grizzled chin. “I could tell
General Gann from General Gonn, in my prime.”
  “All in the midst of general mayhem,” chirped Maurizio into his
mug.
  Sir James flashed him the fish-eye. “Those were terrible times. We
had to know who was who, so we’d have some inkling what they’d
do. Dragons don’t work well together; they prefer an attack of
opportunity, like the Zibou crocodile, and they’ve a devilish fast eye
for an opening. If you know who you’re dealing with, you know what
he’s likely to do, and you can lure him in with a false opportunity—
not every time, but then, it only has to work once.”
  “Did you recognize the one that approached your camp?” asked
Kiggs, looking around. “And what did it do? Stick its head in the cave
entrance?”
  “It set the barn on fire. Our third sally port comes out in that barn;
there was smoke pouring all the way into the great hall here.”
  “It’s taken two squires a week of dancing around with vinegar-
soaked rags to get the smell out of the air,” said Maurizio drily.
  “Sir Henri went to see what had caught fire. He came back
reporting a dragon hunkered beside the barn, and of course we all
laughed at him.” He grinned at the memory; he was missing a number
of molars. “It was getting smokier: the barn burned but poorly, being
damp and moldy. We split up. It’s been a while since we drilled
properly, but you never forget your basic approach.”
  “You send the squires out first, as bait,” said Maurizio.
  Sir James didn’t hear, or ignored him. “I was upwind, so I was
speaker. I said, ‘Halt, worm! You are in violation of Comonot’s Treaty
—unless you have the documents to prove otherwise!’ ”
  “Fierce!” said Kiggs.
  Sir James waved a gnarled hand. “They’re nothing but feral file
clerks, dragons. They used to alphabetize the coins in their hoards.
Anyway, this one neither spoke nor moved. He tried to gauge our
numbers, but we’d done the standard numbers bluff.”
  “What’s that, then?”
  Sir James looked at Kiggs like he was mad. “You conceal your
numbers—harder than you’d think. They can distinguish individuals
by smell, so you put men downwind and a distracting stench upwind.
We brought decoy torches and two sacks of warm cabbages, and made
a little extra noise. Don’t grin at me, you young rapscallion! You never
let a dragon know how many you are, or where you’re all concealed.”
   “That’s a prince of the realm you’re calling rapscallion,” said
Maurizio.
   “I shall call him what I like! I’m banished already!”
   “I’m awestruck that you had warm cabbages sitting around,” said
Kiggs.
   “Always. We are always prepared for anything.”
   “So what did the dragon do then?” I asked.
   Sir James looked at me, a fond spark in his watery eyes. “He spoke.
My Mootya’s not what it was, and it never was much, but I’d say he
was trying to goad us into action. Of course, we took none. We abide
by the law, even if the monsters do not.”
   That was funny, coming from a banished man who hadn’t been
banished particularly far. Kiggs met my eye; we silently shared the
humor of it. He nudged Sir James back toward fact. “Was this dragon
anyone you knew?”
   Sir James scratched his bald pate. “I was so shocked, I hadn’t
considered. He reminded me of one I faced, but where? White Creek?
Mackingale oast houses? Let me think. We’d lost our pitchman and
fork; we staggered back to Fort Trueheart, when we stumbled into
the … right. Mackingale oast houses, and the Fifth Ard.”
   A chill coursed down my spine. That was the one.
   “A dragon of the Fifth Ard?” Kiggs prompted, leaning forward
keenly. “Which dragon?”
   “The general. I know they all call themselves General—they’re not
pack hounds, dragons; don’t take orders well—but this fellow really
was what we’d call a general. He knew what he was doing and kept
the rest ‘in ard,’ as they say.” He rubbed his eyes with a thumb and
finger. “His name, though. That will come to me directly after you’ve
gone, I expect.”
   I wanted so badly to blurt out the name, but Kiggs flashed me a
warning glance. I understood; my father was a lawyer. Witnesses can
be very suggestible.
   “Squire Foughfaugh!” cried the old man, meaning Maurizio,
apparently. “Fetch me the old register of ards from my trunk. I don’t
know why I’m trying to wring water from my stone of a head when
I’ve got it all written down.”
   Maurizio brought the book. The pages flaked and cracked as Sir
James turned them, but the name was still legible: “General Imlann.
Yes, that sounds right, now.”
   I had known it was coming, but I still shivered.
   “You’re certain it was him?” asked Kiggs.
   “No. But that’s my best guess, a week later. That’s all I can give
you.”
   It was enough, and yet it wasn’t. We’d come all the way out here to
confirm this, and now that we knew, we were no closer to knowing
what to do next.
   The knights made tea and chatted at us, asking after their
imprisoned comrades and news from town. Maurizio kept joking—
that seemed to be his primary function as squire—but Kiggs, lost in
thought, did not respond to his banter, and I too sat silently, trying to
work out our next step.
   No course of action struck me as good. Scour the coppice for him?
Search the villages for his saarantras? Kiggs couldn’t get enough men
out here without diverting them from Comonot’s security. Tell Eskar?
Why not the Ardmagar himself, and the Queen? Make the authors of
the treaty, the ones most invested in the continuation of the peace,
sort this out.
   “Are we leaving soon?” I whispered to Kiggs when the conversation
died down. Most of our hosts had wandered off for a nap; others
stared torpidly at the fire. Maurizio and Pender, the other squire, had
disappeared. “I’m not eager to ride after dark.”
   He ran a hand over his head and looked like he was trying not to
laugh. “Had you ever ridden before today?”
   “What? Of course I—” His look stopped me short. “Am I that bad?”
   “You’re allowed to ask for help when you need it.”
   “I didn’t want to slow us down.”
   “You didn’t, until it became clear you didn’t know how to
dismount.” He picked at a fingernail, the silent laugh still in his eyes.
“Once again, however, you leave me in awe. Is there nothing you’re
afraid of?”
   I stared dumbly. “Wh-why would you even think that?”
   He began counting off on his fingers. “You bluff my guards and
determine to come out here on your own. You climb on a horse as if
you know what you’re doing, assuming it will just come to you.” He
leaned closer. “You stand up to Viridius and the Earl of Apsig. You ask
mad pipers to the palace. You fall in love with dragons.… ”
   I did sound pretty crazy, when he put it that way; only I knew how
scared I’d been. Sitting there so close to him was almost the scariest
thing of all because the kindness in his face made me feel safe, and I
knew it for an illusion. For the merest moment I let myself imagine
telling him I feared everything, that the bravery was a cover. Then I
would pull up my sleeve and say, Here’s why. Here I am. See me. And
by some miracle he would not be disgusted.
    Right. While I was using my outrageous imagination, maybe I
should also imagine him not engaged. Maybe he’d kiss me.
    I was not allowed to want that.
    I stood up. “Esteemed sirs,” I said, addressing our hosts, who had
dozed off on their benches. “We thank you for your hospitality, but
we really must—”
    “You were going to stay for the demonstration, I thought?” cried
Maurizio, popping out of a side room. His head now had a helmet on
it.
    Kiggs and I looked at each other. We’d apparently been so
preoccupied that we’d agreed to something without it registering. “If
it doesn’t take too long,” said Kiggs. “It’s going to be dark soon, and
we’ve a long road ahead of us.”
    Maurizio and his fellow squire emerged, clad all in dracomachia
armor. “We’ve got to go out to the pasture to show you properly,”
said the other squire, Pender.
    “Putting ourselves out to pasture,” said Maurizio with his strange,
desperate cheer. “Bring the horses. You can depart from there.”
    There was a stirring round the cavern as the old men realized the
young ones were about to demonstrate the last vestiges of their
ancient pride. Dracomachia was once a formidable martial art; Pender
and Foughfaugh may have been the last two able-bodied practitioners
in Goredd.
    We followed the old knights down the creek into a stubbly field and
made a semicircle around a tumbledown hayrick. It had grown
considerably colder while we dallied in the cave; the drizzle had
turned to light snow, which clung to the stubble, outlining the broken
stalks in white, and the wind had picked up. I pulled my cloak closer
about me and hoped this wouldn’t take long.
    Pender and Foughfaugh carried long polearms with a peculiar hook
on each end, angled in such a way that it did not hinder them using
the pole for vaulting. They flipped and cartwheeled, leaped and spun,
exchanged poles in midair, and viciously attacked the hayrick with
their hooks.
   Sir James undertook to educate us. “These hooks we call the slash.
Now we’ll show you the punch. Squires! Harpoons!”
   The squires exchanged their hooks for a more spearlike weapon,
demonstrating its use on the poor, abused hayrick.
   “Dragons are flammable,” said Sir James. “They developed their
flame for use against each other. They don’t cook their meat with it,
after all. They fear no other beast—or didn’t, until we learned to fight.
Their hide is tough but it burns, given enough heat for enough time;
their insides are volatile, which is how they flame in the first place.
   “The key to dracomachia is setting the monster on fire. We’ve got
pyria—St. Ogdo’s fire—which clings to them and is not easily
extinguished. One good puncture and their blood whistles out like
steam. Set that ablaze, and they’re done.”
   “How many knights made up a unit?” asked Kiggs.
   “Depended. Two slash, two punch, fork, spider, swift. That’s seven
knights, but we had pitchmen flinging pyria and squires running
weapons … Fourteen was full complement, although I’ve taken out a
dragon with as few as three.”
   Kiggs’s eyes gleamed. “Oh, to have seen it in action, just once!”
   “Not without armor, lad. The heat was unbearable—and the
stench!”
   The squires clambered up on each other’s shoulders, flipping and
leaping over top of the hayrick. I found their precision and strength
inspiring. Being banished and having little else to do, they’d clearly
spent a lot of time practicing. We should all be as dedicated to our art.
   “Sweet St. Siucre!” I exclaimed.
   “What’s wrong?” asked Kiggs, alarmed by my sudden beeline for
the horses.
   I fished around in my mare’s saddle pack until I found the diagram
Lars had given me. Kiggs apprehended my thought at once and helped
me unfold the parchment against the side of the horse. We stared at
the clyster-pipe ballista, then at each other.
   “The bladders would be for pyria,” I said.
   “But how would you ignite it?” puffed a breathless voice behind us,
which turned out to be Squire Foughfaugh.
   “It would be self-igniting, Maurizio. Look,” said Kiggs, pointing to a
matchlock mechanism I hadn’t understood.
   “Clever,” said Maurizio. “The squires could have operated that—
anyone could have. Put the knights out of a job, almost.”
   Sir James came to see what the fuss was about. “Humbug. Machines
limit mobility. Hunting dragons is not a question of brute force, or
we’d be knocking them out of the sky with trebuchets. It’s an art; it
takes finesse.”
   Maurizio shrugged. “Having one of these on our side couldn’t have
hurt.”
   Sir James sniffed disdainfully. “We might have used it as bait.
Nothing lures a dragon like an odd contraption.”
   The snow was blowing harder now; it was past time to go. We made
our farewells. Maurizio insisted on helping me onto my horse. I
cringed, irrationally fearing he’d discern my scales. “It’s such a relief
after all these years to learn that you recovered from your fright,” he
said in a low voice, giving my hand a squeeze, “and that you grew up
so pretty!”
   “Were you worried?” I asked, touched.
   “Yes. What were you, eleven? Twelve? At that age we’re all gawky,
and the outcome is always in doubt.” He winked, smacked my horse’s
hindquarters, and waved until we were out of sight.
   Kiggs led the way back to the sheep track, and I urged my horse to
keep up.
   “You appear not to have gloves,” said Kiggs as I pulled up beside
him.
   “I’ll be all right. My sleeves almost cover my whole hand, see?”
   He said nothing, but pulled off his own gloves and handed them to
me with a look that told me I didn’t dare refuse. They were
prewarmed; I hadn’t realized how frigid my fingers were until I put
them on.
   “All right, I’m an idiot,” said Kiggs after we’d ridden a few miles in
silence. “I had fully intended to scoff at your fear of riding after dark,
but if it keeps snowing like this, we’re not going to be able to make
out the road.”
   I had been thinking the opposite: the road now stood out, two
parallel white lines where snow filled in the wagon tracks. It was
nearly dark, however. This was the longest night of the year, and the
heavy cloud cover was working toward making it even longer. “There
was an inn at Rightturn,” I said. “The other villages were too small.”
   “Spoken like someone unaccustomed to traveling with a prince!” he
laughed. “We can commandeer any manor house along the way. The
question will be, which one? Not Remy, unless you want to spend the
evening with Lady Corongi and her cousin the reclusive duchess. If we
can make it all the way to Pondmere Park, that would minimize our
travel time in the morning. I have duties to attend to tomorrow.”
   I nodded as if I did too. I’m sure I did, but I could not remember a
single one.
   “I’ve been meaning to tell you all day,” said Kiggs, “that I had some
additional thoughts on being a bastard, if you’d like to hear them.”
   I could not stop myself laughing. “You … really? All right then.”
   He reined his horse back even with mine. He had not put up his
cloak hood, and there was snow in his hair. “You’ll find me eccentric,
perhaps, but I haven’t been able to stop thinking about that. No one
ever asks.
   “My father was a Samsamese admiral. My mother, Princess Laurel,
was the youngest daughter of Queen Lavonda and was, according to
legend, a bit headstrong and spoiled. They ran off when she was
fifteen years old; it was as dreadful a scandal in Samsam as here. He
was demoted to freighter captain. I was born on dry land but was
often at sea as a baby. They didn’t take me on their final voyage: the
day before they were to set sail from the Ninysh port of Asado they
met Dame Okra Carmine, who persuaded them to let her take me to
Goredd, to meet my grandmother.”
   I had considered her short-range prognostication talent a bit silly; I
was wrong.
   He stared up at the clouds. “They perished in a terrible storm. I was
five years old, lucky to be alive, but feeling quite at sea myself. I
didn’t even speak Goreddi. My grandmother didn’t take to me right
away; Aunt Dionne hated me instantly.”
   “Her own sister’s child?” I cried.
   He shrugged; his cloak flapped in the wind. “My very existence was
an embarrassment to everyone. What were they to do with this
unexpected child, his low-class manners—even for a Samsamese—and
his mortifying ethnic surname?”
   “Kiggs is a Samsamese name?”
   He smiled ruefully. “It’s not even Kiggs; it’s Kiggenstane. ‘Cutting-
stone.’ Somebody up the family tree was a quarryman, apparently. But
everything worked out. They got used to me. I showed them I was
good for a thing or two. Uncle Rufus, who spent years at the court of
Samsam, helped smooth my way.”
   “You looked so sad, praying for him this morning,” I blurted out.
   His eyes glittered in the twilight; his breath made mist in the cold.
“He’s left a tremendous hole in the world, yes. Only my mother’s
death compares. But you see, this is what I’ve been aiming toward,
the thing I keep imagining myself telling you because I feel you’ll
understand it.”
   I held my breath. The silent snow came down all around us.
   “I have such mixed feelings about her. I mean, I loved her, she was
my mother, but … sometimes I’m angry with her.”
   “Why?” I asked, but I knew. I’d felt exactly that. I could barely
believe he was about to utter it aloud.
   “Angry with her for leaving me so young—you may have felt that
too, about your mother—but also, to my mortification, angry with her
for falling in love so recklessly.”
   “I know,” I whispered into the icy air, hoping and fearing that he
would hear me.
   “What kind of villain begrudges his own mother the love of her
life?” He gave a self-deprecating laugh, but his eyes were all sadness.
   I could have reached right across and touched him. I wanted to. I
gripped the reins tighter and stared at the track ahead.
   “You’re not a villain,” I said. Or else we were two villains in a pod.
   “Mm. I rather suspect I am,” he said lightly. He went silent; for
some moments there was only the crunch of hooves in snow and the
squeaking of cold saddle leather. I looked over at him. The frosty air
had reddened his cheeks; he blew into his hands to warm them. He
gazed back at me, his eyes deep and sorrowful.
   “I didn’t understand,” he said quietly. “I judged her, but I didn’t
understand.”
   He averted his eyes, tried to smile, broke the moment of
strangeness. “I won’t fall prey to the same destructive impulsiveness,
of course. I’m on my guard against it.”
   “And you’re engaged, anyway,” I added, trying to sound flippant
because I feared he might hear my heart beating, it was pounding so
violently.
   “Yes, that’s a nice assurance against the unexpected,” he said, his
voice rough with some emotion. “That, and faith. St. Clare keeps me
to my rightful course.”
   Of course she did. Thanks for nothing, St. Clare.
   We rode on in silence. I closed my eyes; snow blew against my
cheeks, stinging like sand. For a moment I let myself imagine that I
had no dragon scales and he was unfettered by promises already
made. There in the freezing darkness, under the endless open sky, it
might well have been true. No one could see us; we might have been
anyone.
  It turned out someone did see us, however, someone with an ability
to see warm objects in darkness.
  I felt a hot blast against my skin, smelled sulfur, and opened my
eyes to see my grandfather in all his hideous reptilian hugeness land
on the snowy road ahead.
My horse reared, and I was on the ground, flat on my back in the
snow, not a whisper of breath left in me.
   Kiggs was off his horse in an instant, sword drawn, making himself
a wall between me and the brimstone blackness, the muscular furl of
wing against sky. He reached back left-handed to help me to my feet,
groping around in the air; I forced myself to sit up, put my hand in
his, pull breath back into my lungs. He heaved me to my feet and we
stood there, hand in hand, and faced the dread behemoth, my
grandfather.
   To my utter shock I recognized Imlann, even as darkness rapidly
descended. It wasn’t Orma’s nonsensical description; it came from my
mother, from the memory box, which had given a smoky belch inside
my mind. I knew the contours of his spiny head; the arch of his snaky
neck resembled Orma’s.…
   Orma. Neck. Right. I fumbled at my neck, left-handed because Kiggs
still had my right, seeking the cord to Orma’s earring. Kiggs stepped
forward a little, shielding me again, and said, “You are in violation of
Comonot’s Treaty—unless you have the documents to prove
otherwise!”
   I grimaced. It was easy to think of dragons as feral file clerks when
there wasn’t an enormous, choleric specimen snorting sulfur in your
face. I found the earring, flipped its tiny switch, and tucked it back
into my clothes.
   Orma was going to kill me; I hoped he’d help me first.
   The dragon screamed, “You smell of saar!”
   He meant me. I cringed. Kiggs, who didn’t understand Mootya,
cried, “Stand down! Return to your saarantras immediately!”
   Imlann ignored that, fixing his beady black eyes on me and
screeching, “Who are you? Which side are you on? Have you been
spying on me?”
   I didn’t answer; I didn’t know what to do. Imlann thought I was a
saarantras. Would Kiggs assume the same if he learned that I knew
Mootya? I kept my eyes on the snow.
   Kiggs waved his sword. A lot of good that was going to do.
   “You feign deafness,” cried my grandfather. “What can I do to make
you hear? Shall I kill this irritating little princeling?”
   I flinched, and the saar laughed, or what would have been a laugh
from a human. It was more like crowing, a horrid hoot of victory. “I
bit a nerve! Surely you can’t be so attached to a mere human? Perhaps
I will not kill you after all. I still have a friend on the Board of
Censors; maybe I’ll let him turn you inside out.”
   I had to do something; I could think of only one thing to try. I
stepped forward and said, “It’s you the Censors should be after.”
   Imlann recoiled, rippling his serpentine neck sideways and emitting
a blast of acrid smoke from his nostrils. Kiggs pulled my arm and
cried, “What are you doing?”
   I couldn’t reassure him. A saarantras wouldn’t have, and that’s what
I had to appear to be if we were to bluff Imlann long enough for Orma
to get here.
   If Orma was even coming. How far was it? How fast could he fly?
   “I’ve contacted the embassy,” I cried. “Eskar is on her way, with a
committee.”
   “Why don’t you transform, and we’ll have this out properly?”
   It was a frighteningly reasonable question. “I obey the law, even if
you do not.”
   “What’s to stop me from killing you this instant?”
   I shrugged. “You apparently don’t know about the device implanted
in my head.”
   The dragon cocked his head to one side, flaring his nostrils,
appearing to consider; I hoped he reached a conclusion favorable to
letting me live a bit longer. I added: “It’s in my tooth. Flame me, or
hit me with any percussive shock, and it will explode, destroying you
too. If you bite off my head and swallow it, my tooth will continue to
signal from inside your stomach. The embassy will track you down,
General Imlann.”
   He looked mystified; he’d never heard of such devices—he couldn’t
have; I was making this up—but then, he’d been away from the
Tanamoot for sixteen years. I lifted my chin haughtily, though I was
shaking, and said, “The game is up. Surrender now and tell us
everything. Where have you been hiding?”
   That broke the spell. Smugness crept over him. I only knew it for
smugness from my maternal memories; all my human eyes saw were
the spines at the base of his head shift their angle. He said: “If you
don’t know that, you know nothing worth knowing. I shall leave you
to your disgusting infatuation. Plans are unfurling, all in their proper
time; I shall let them. We shall meet again, and sooner than you
expect.”
   He turned with a serpentine ripple, swiping at us with his spiky tail,
ran forward, and launched himself into the air. He made a wide, low
circle in the sky, presumably scanning for embassy dragons, then flew
swiftly south, disappearing in the clouds.
   My knees trembled and my head throbbed, but I was elated. I could
barely believe that had worked. I turned toward Kiggs; I must have
been wild-eyed with relief.
   He backed away, his expression closed, saying, “What are you?”
   St. Masha and St. Daan. I’d saved us, but now I had to pay for it. I
raised my hands as if in surrender. “I am what I ever was.”
   “You’re a dragon.”
   “I’m not. By Heaven’s hearthstone, I’m not.”
   “You speak Mootya.”
   “I understand it.”
   “How is that possible?”
   “I am very, very smart.”
   He didn’t question that; I would have. He said, “You’ve got a
draconian device. It is illegal for humans to be in possession of
quigutl-built communication machinery—”
   “No! I’ve got nothing! It was a bluff.”
   He was breathing heavily now, delayed-onset panic finally catching
up with him. “You bluffed him? A Porphyrian double ton of fire and
brimstone, fangs like swords, claws like … like swords! And you
just … bluffed him?”
   He was yelling. I tried not to take it personally. I folded my arms.
“Yes. I did.”
   He ran his hands roughly through his hair. He bent double as if he
might vomit, scooped up some snow, rubbed it over his face. “Sweet
Heavenly Home, Seraphina! Did you think about what might have
happened to us if that hadn’t worked?”
   “No better plan presented itself.” Heavens, I sounded as cold as any
dragon.
   He had dropped his sword at some point; he picked it out of the
snow, wiped it on his cloak, and resheathed it, his eyes still wide and
shocked. “You can’t just … I mean, brave is one thing. This was
madness.”
   “He was going to kill you,” I said, my chin quivering. “I had to do
something.”
   Damn propriety. Forgive me, St. Clare.
   I stepped forward and took him in my arms. He was exactly my
height, which surprised me; my awe of him had made him seem
taller. He emitted a whimper of protest, or maybe surprise, but
wrapped his arms around me and buried his face in my hair, half
weeping, half scolding me.
   “Life is so short,” I said, not sure why I was saying it, not even sure
if that was really true for someone like me.
   We were still standing there, clinging to each other, our feet ice-
cold in the snow, when Orma landed on the next hilltop, followed
closely by Basind. Kiggs lifted his head and stared at them, big-eyed.
My heart fell.
   I’d told him I had no devices. I’d lied right to the prince’s face, and
here was the proof: the dragon I’d called, and his dim-witted sidekick.
Speculus, for us Goreddis, should be spent in contemplation of one’s
sins and shortcomings. It’s the longest night of the year, representing
the long darkness of death for the soul who rejects the light of
Heaven.
   It was certainly the longest night I have ever lived through.
   Kiggs, of course, had drawn his sword again, but it hung from his
hand in a desultory manner. It had been useless against one dragon; it
was merely token resistance against two.
   “We’re not in danger,” I said, trying to reassure him but fearing my
good intention was as futile as his sword. “It’s Orma, and behind him
is Basind. I didn’t call Basind.”
   “But you did call Orma? With that device you don’t have?”
   “I don’t have the one I told Imlann about—I invented that on the
spur of the moment—and I was trying to reassure you, and I … I
forgot.”
   “I see. So Orma gave you this device and came instantly when
called as if he were your lap dog, because he—how did you put it
exactly?—he feels nothing for you?”
   “We’re not … no. It’s not like that.”
   “Then what is it like?” he cried, furious with me. “Are you his
agent? Is he your thrall? There is something between you, beyond this
facade of mentorship, beyond what dragons and humans should ever
engage in. It is not normal, and I can’t work out what it is, and I am
sick of guessing!”
   “Kiggs …” I had no other words.
   “Prince Lucian, if you would be so kind,” he said. “Tell them to
shrink down.”
   Orma approached, head lowered in a submissive stance. He had
apparently told Basind to flatten himself into the snow, because
Basind did a good impression of a lizard run over by a cart—a giant
lizard, and an unthinkably enormous cart.
   “You are all under arrest,” said Kiggs, loudly and slowly. “You two,
for unauthorized transformation; Maid Dombegh, because you are
clearly in cahoots with two unauthorized dragons—”
   “Association with dragons is not a crime,” I said.
   “Possession of a quigutl-made transmission device is. Aiding and
abetting the delinquency of dragons is. I could go on.” He turned to
the dragons and said, “You will shrink yourselves down now.”
   Orma cried, “Seraphina, if I have transformed for nothing, I am
going to be in an unquantifiable amount of trouble. Tell me why I
shouldn’t bite your head off. It couldn’t make things any worse for
me.”
   I translated that as: “ ‘We’ll come along quietly, Prince, and will
comply with your every reasonable demand, but we cannot shrink
ourselves down because you don’t have clothing for us, and we would
freeze.’ ”
   “Are you in love with Prince Lucian?” screamed my uncle. “What
were you up to when I arrived? You weren’t going to mate right here
in the snow, were you?”
   I gave myself a moment to get my voice under control before
saying, “The dragons suggest that they walk ahead. Their sharp eyes
can make out the road more easily than ours. They won’t flee.”
   “I told you not to go after Imlann,” screeched my uncle. “I know he
was here; I smell him. Why did you not keep him here so I could kill
him?”
   That was too much. I shouted back, “You can’t have it both ways,
Orma!”
   “Get back on your horse,” said Kiggs, who’d been able to round up
the animals. They were still skittish in the continuing presence of full-
sized dragons, so it took me some time to get on. Kiggs held my
mare’s bridle, but he would not look at me.
   The dragons kept their heads down, docilely, as they followed the
road; they left slushy footprints, huge and clawed, behind them. The
prince and I followed in painful silence.
   It gave me a lot of time to think. How had Imlann found us? Had he
tracked us from the coppice, or had he been waiting for us to come
back along the same road? How could he know we would return?
   “Prince Lucian,” I began, drawing my horse up alongside his.
   “I would rather you not speak, Maid Dombegh,” he said, his eyes
upon the saar.
   That hurt, but I plowed ahead. “I suspect Imlann knew where we
were going and that we were coming back. Someone at the palace
may have told him—or someone at the palace is him. Who knew
where we were going today?”
   “My grandmother,” he said tersely. “Glisselda. Neither of them is a
dragon.”
   I hardly dared suggest it, but I had to. “Might Glisselda have
mentioned it in passing to the Earl of Apsig?”
   He turned toward me sharply. “If she had—which I deem unlikely—
what are you suggesting? That he’s a traitor, or that he’s a dragon?”
   “He came out of nowhere two years ago—you said so yourself. He
takes no wine. He’s got fair hair and blue eyes.” He’d discerned the
scent of my scales, too, but obviously I could not include that detail.
“He was part of your uncle’s last hunting party,” I hazarded. That
wasn’t evidence, though, so much as circumstance.
   “You’re omitting a substantial amount of counterevidence,” said
Prince Lucian, finally engaged, even if just to refute me. “I thought
we’d concluded he was Lars’s half brother.”
   “You said it was a rumor. It might be false.” I dared not suggest
what now occurred to me: if Josef was a dragon, he might be Lars’s
father.
   “He plays viola like an angel. He professes to hate dragonkind.”
   “Imlann might adopt such an attitude strategically, to deflect
suspicion,” I said. I couldn’t address the accusation of angelic viola
playing without bringing up my own mother, who’d played flute with
an eerily human cadence, according to Orma.
   The prince looked at me sarcastically, and I hastened to add, “All I
ask is that you consider the possibility. Inquire whether anyone saw
Josef at court today.”
   “Will that be all, Maid Dombegh?”
   My teeth chattered with cold and nerves. “Not quite all. I want to
explain Orma.”
   “I really don’t care to hear it,” he said, spurring his horse a little
ahead.
   “He saved my life!” I cried at his back, determined to make him
hear it whether he wanted to or not. “Orma was my tutor when I was
little. You recall that his family is flagged for scrutiny. Well, the
Censors feared he might become too attached to his students, for he
dearly loved teaching and was good at it. They sent a dragon called
Zeyd to test him. She lured me up the bell tower of St. Gobnait’s with
the promise of a physics lesson, then dangled me out over the plaza,
as if she might drop me. If Orma rescued me, you see, that would
indicate that he was compromised. He should not have cared that
much.”
   I swallowed. My mouth still went dry, recalling the terror of my
shoes falling, the wind roaring in my ears, the tilting world.
   Kiggs was listening in spite of himself; my horse pulled up even
with his. “Orma arrived,” I said, “and my first thought was, Hurrah,
he’s rescued me! But he leaned against the balustrade, utterly
unconcerned with my welfare, and began trying to convince Zeyd that
it would be the end of her career—to say nothing of the peace—if she
dropped me. She shook me around, let me slip a bit in her grasp, but
he never flinched. He didn’t care about me at all; he was just helping
out his fellow saar.”
   That part still hurt, frankly. “She finally set me down on the
walkway. Orma took her arm and they walked away together, leaving
me alone, weeping and barefoot. I crawled down the stairs, all four
hundred twenty of them, and when I finally made it home, Orma
scolded me for trusting a dragon and called me an idiot savant.”
   “But he’s a dragon,” said Kiggs sensibly, fiddling with his horse’s
reins.
   Cack. I supposed it couldn’t matter if I told him. “I didn’t know back
then.”
   He studied me now, but I couldn’t meet his eye. “Why are you
telling me this?”
   Because I want to tell you something true, and this is as close as I can
manage. Because I think, at some level, you will understand this story.
Because I need you to understand it.
   I said, “I want you to understand why I have to help him.”
   “Because he was so cold to you?” Kiggs said. “Because he left you to
walk home alone and called you an idiot?”
   “Because he—he saved my life,” I stammered over my rising
confusion.
   “You’d think, as Captain of the Queen’s Guard, I’d have heard this
story before. A dragon almost killing someone is no small matter, and
yet your father didn’t jump right in to see her prosecuted?”
   My stomach knotted. “No.”
   Kiggs’s expression hardened. “I wish I knew how much of your story
was true.”
   He spurred his horse forward, leaving me alone.
We approached the city at a crawl; dragons are not as fast as horses
on foot, and these two seemed in no hurry. It was long after midnight
by the time we reached the stable at the foot of the hill.
   The dragons transformed in sight of the stable, cooling and
condensing and folding themselves into a pair of naked men. They
followed me in with the horses while Kiggs went to see what spare
clothing John Ostler might have for them. Orma no longer had his
false beard; I hoped he’d at least stowed his spectacles somewhere
safe before transforming. “I’m astonished you’re not hurt,” he said
through chattering teeth, a bit more sympathetic as a human. “How
did you contrive not to get yourself killed?”
   I pulled him aside, away from Basind, and told him how I’d bluffed
Imlann. Orma’s eyes narrowed as he listened. “It’s lucky he believed
you were a saar. I could not have predicted that your peculiarities
could be so useful.”
   “I don’t think the truth ever crossed his mind.”
   “The truth?” said Kiggs, who had stepped up right behind us, his
arms heaped high with tunics and trousers. “Don’t tell me I missed it,”
he said, passing clothing to the saarantrai.
   I could not meet his gaze. He snorted in disgust.
   Basind, bless his thick skull, was the only one among us who
seemed to be enjoying himself. During the long haul home he had
kept asking Orma what was going to happen next, and whether we
were there yet. Now, back in his saarantras, he croaked, “Are they
going to throw us in the dungeon?” He seemed almost gleeful at the
prospect.
   “I don’t know,” said Kiggs unhappily, his shoulders sloping. He’d
had only four hours’ sleep the night before; exhaustion was catching
up with him. “I’m turning you over to the Queen and the Ardmagar.
They’ll sort out what to do with you.”
   We obtained new horses and set off again, this time toward the city
gate. Kiggs did not wish to reveal the sally port to dragons. The
guards gruffly blocked our way but fell back when they recognized
their prince. We wound our way through the untouched snow of the
sleeping city, back up the hill to the castle.
   Neither the Queen nor the Ardmagar was awake, of course, but
Kiggs would not let us out of his sight. He kept us cooped up in the
anteroom to the Queen’s study under the watchful eye of three
guards. Basind, seated by my uncle on an elegant velvet settee, dozed
off against Orma’s shoulder. Kiggs paced endlessly. His chin was gritty
with stubble; his eyes glinted with an edgy, feverish energy, the last
dregs of exhaustion. He couldn’t keep his gaze in one place; he looked
everywhere but at me.
   I couldn’t stop looking at him, even though something terrible
threatened to rise in me every time I did. My body was filled with
restlessness; my left forearm began to itch. I needed to get away from
here, and I could think of only one way to do it.
   I rose; the three guards leaped to attention. Kiggs had to look at me
then. I said, “Prince, I hate to be a nuisance, but I need the
garderobe.”
   He stared at me as if he didn’t understand. Was garderobe not what
they called it in polite society? What would Lady Corongi say? The
chamber of unfortunate necessity? Urgency to be gone made my voice
unnaturally high: “I am not a dragon. I can’t just duck down a ravine
or piss brimstone into the snow.” The latter referenced something
Basind had done on the way home.
   Kiggs blinked rapidly, as if to wake himself up, and made two hand
gestures. Before I knew it, one of our guards was marching me down
the hallway. He seemed determined I should be made as
uncomfortable as possible: we bypassed all the relatively warm
latrines of the inner keep and crossed Stone Court, through the snow,
out toward a soldiers’ jake-hole on the southern wall. We passed the
night guard, clustered around charcoal braziers, cleaning their
crossbows and laughing raucously; they fell silent and stared as their
comrade herded me past.
   I didn’t care. He could have marched me all the way to
Trowebridge. I just needed to be somewhere away from Kiggs.
   I shut the door of the little room and scrupulously bolted it. The
latrine smelled better than I had feared; it was a two-seater and
dumped directly into the defensive ditch below. I could see the snowy
ground through the holes. An icy wind gusted up, enough to freeze
the staunchest soldier’s nether end.
   I opened the shutter of the paneless window to let in some light. I
knelt upon the wood between the dragon’s eyes (as some call such
holes). I rested my elbows upon the windowsill, my head in my hands.
I closed my eyes, repeating mantras Orma had taught me to quiet my
mind, but one thought kept buzzing around me, stinging me like a
hornet, over and over.
   I loved Lucian Kiggs.
   I emitted a single, sour laugh, because I couldn’t have chosen a
more ludicrous place to have this realization. Then I wept. How stupid
was I, letting myself feel things I should not feel, imagining the world
could be other than it was? I was a scaly fiend; I could have confirmed
it with a hand up my sleeve. That could never change.
   Thank Allsaints the prince had both principles and a fiancée to act
as barriers between us; thank Heaven I’d alienated him by being a
filthy liar. I should rejoice in these obstacles; they had saved me from
abject humiliation.
   And yet my mind, in its perversity, kept returning to what had
happened after Imlann flew off. For one moment—a moment
transfixed in my obstinate memory—he had loved me too. I knew it,
beyond question. One moment, however fleeting, was far more than I
had ever believed myself worthy to receive, and it was far short of
enough. I should never have allowed even that much; knowing what I
was missing only made everything worse.
   I opened my eyes. The clouds had parted; the moon shone
gloriously across the snowy rooftops of the city. It was beautiful,
which only made me hurt the more. How dare the world be beautiful
when I was so horrifying? I pulled up my outer sleeves and carefully
untied the cloth band binding the sleeve of my chemise. I turned that
last sleeve back, exposing my silver scales to the night.
   The moon gave enough light that I could discern each scale in the
narrow, curling band. The individual scales were tiny compared with
a real dragon’s scales, each the size of a fingernail, with hard, sharp
edges.
   Hatred tore at my insides. I was desperate to stop feeling it; like a
fox in a snare, I’d have gnawed my own leg off to escape it. I drew my
little dagger from the hem of my cloak and stabbed myself in the arm.
   The dagger glanced off, but not without jabbing the tender human
skin beside the scales. I clamped my lips together to muffle my cry of
surprise, but my dull dagger hadn’t broken the skin. I sliced at the
scaly band with the side of the blade this time, which was hard to do
quietly; the steel slipped and sparked. I could start a fire with those
sparks; I wanted to burn the whole world.
   No: I wanted to put the fire out. I could not live, hating myself this
hard.
   A terrible idea bloomed in me like frost upon glass. I flexed my
wrist to bring the edges of the scales up; I edged the knife under the
end of one. What if I pulled them off? Would they grow back? If it left
my arm scarred, would that really be worse?
   I pried. The scale didn’t budge. I worked the knife under slowly,
back and forth, as if I were peeling an onion. It hurt, and yet … I felt
a glacial coldness wash over my heart, extinguishing the fire of
shame. I gritted my teeth and pried harder. A corner came up; I
doubled over in pain and inhaled frigid air sharply through my teeth.
I felt the freeze again, all through me, and experienced it as relief. I
could not hate when my arm hurt this much. I squeezed my eyes shut
and gave one final pull.
   My scream filled the tiny room. I cradled my arm, weeping. Dark
blood welled up where the scale had been. The scale glittered on the
end of my knife. I flicked it down the jake-hole; it twinkled as it fell.
   I had almost two hundred scales on my arm alone. I couldn’t do it.
It was like yanking out my own fingernails.
   Orma had once told me that when dragons first learned to take
human form, centuries ago, some had been prone to harming
themselves, rending their own flesh with their teeth because the
intensity of human emotions had taken them unprepared. They had
rather endure physical pain than mental anguish. This was one reason
among many that they kept their human emotions so tightly under
wraps.
   If only I could have done that. It never worked; it just put the
feeling off until later.
   Soldiers were pounding on the door in response to my scream. How
long had I been in here? The cold had caught up with me: I shivered
as I sheathed my knife and wrapped up my bloody wrist with my
chemise binding. I mustered what dignity I could and opened the
door.
   My guard glared at me from under his helmet visor. “Queen
Lavonda and Ardmagar Comonot are awake and waiting on your
presence,” he snapped. “St. Masha and St. Daan, what were you doing
in there?”
   “Female things,” I said, watching him balk at the mention of the
unmentionable.
   Even my human half could frighten people. I brushed past him,
hating that. Somewhere in my heart, the flame still burned.
By the time I arrived, Kiggs had debriefed the Queen and Comonot
and had taken himself off to bed. I felt his absence like a punch in the
stomach.
  The Queen’s study reminded me of my father’s, though it had fewer
books and more antique statuary. The Queen sat behind a broad desk,
precisely where my father would have sat. Ardmagar Comonot took a
thronelike chair near the windows; behind him, the sky was beginning
to glow pink. They’d each brought a little entourage, who stood along
the walls as if guarding the books from our grubby hands. We three
miscreants were not offered seats.
  I was relieved that no one had thought to notify my father. He
would have been furious with me, but maybe that wasn’t obvious to
others. Maybe they feared he’d turn his baleful lawyer’s gaze on them.
  Orma showed no concern for my long absence, although he did sniff
rather loudly when I drew near. He would notice I was bleeding. I had
no intention of discussing it.
  “One request,” said Orma, speaking first, way out of turn. “Excuse
Basind from these proceedings. Allot his blame to me. He’s a newskin,
inexperienced and singularly stupid. I am supposed to be teaching
him; he merely followed my lead.”
  “Granted,” said Comonot, raising his jowly chin. “Newskin Basind,
go.”
  Basind saluted his Ardmagar and left without so much as a nod to
the Queen.
  “Prince Lucian has given us his account of your encounter with the
dragon Imlann,” said the Queen, frowning as she followed the
newskin with her eyes. “I would like to hear your version, Maid
Dombegh.”
  I told all I could, underscoring our commitment to the peace and
our desire to uncover the truth, the better to protect the Ardmagar.
   The Queen listened impassively; Comonot seemed touched that
we’d undertaken to measure this threat. One might almost have taken
them for their opposites: Comonot the sympathetic human, Queen
Lavonda the dispassionate saar. Perhaps those qualities were what
had enabled them to reach an agreement after centuries of distrust
and war. Each saw something familiar in the other.
   “Maid Dombegh has committed no material violation of the treaty,”
said the Queen. “I see no justification for holding her. Possession of a
transmitting device is against the law, but I am inclined to overlook
that, if she gives it back.”
   I plucked the earring from the cord around my neck and handed it
to Orma.
   Comonot addressed Orma. “By rights, I should revoke your
scholarship and travel permissions for your unauthorized
transformation. However, I’m impressed with your initiative and your
drive to protect your Ardmagar.”
   Apparently I’d lent sufficient color to that part of the story. Orma
saluted at the sky, saar fashion.
   “I elect to waive your penalties,” said Comonot, glancing sidelong
at the Queen as if to gauge her reaction to his magnanimity. She
looked merely tired. “We shall discuss the best course of action at
council. A lone malcontent poses little threat to me, thanks to the fine
security of my hosts, but he is still in breach of treaty and must be
apprehended.”
   Orma saluted again and said, “Ardmagar, may I take advantage of
this unexpected audience to petition you privately?”
   Comonot assented with a wave of his thick fingers. The Queen and
her attendants left for breakfast, leaving Comonot with just a small
retinue of saarantrai. I made to leave also, but Orma’s hand on my
elbow restrained me. “Would you dismiss your retainers as well,
Ardmagar?” said Orma.
   The Ardmagar complied, to my astonishment. Orma must have
seemed particularly harmless, despite his notorious father.
   “All in ard,” said Orma. “This involves the Censors, and I did not
wish—”
   “I do not see that your family could sink much further,” said the
Ardmagar. “Quickly, if you please. I find this body gets irritable
without its breakfast.”
   Orma squinted without his spectacles. “I have been hounded by the
Censors for sixteen years: relentlessly tested, monitored, retested, my
research sabotaged. How much is enough? When will they be satisfied
that I am all I should be?”
   Comonot shifted warily in his seat. “That is a question for the
Censors, scholar. They fall outside my jurisdiction; indeed, I am as
subject to them as you are. That is as must be. Their neutrality keeps
checks on us when we descend into the monkey mind.”
   “There is nothing you can do?”
   “There is something you could do, scholar: voluntary excision. I
have one scheduled myself, almost as soon as I get back.” He tapped
his large head; his plastered-down hair gave it the appearance of a
seaweed-covered rock. “I shall have all emotional detritus removed.
It’s unexpectedly refreshing.”
   Orma dared not look disturbed; I hoped the little muscle working
near his jawline was noticeable only to me. “That would not do,
Ardmagar. They inevitably remove memories as well, and that would
spoil my research. But what if I hunted Imlann down?” Orma seemed
not to know when to quit. “Would that not prove where my loyalty
lies, or put the state in my debt—”
   “The state does not repay debts in this fashion, as you well know,”
said Comonot.
   The quickness of his interjection raised my hackles; he was lying.
“Basind shouldn’t be here, but he is,” I snapped. “Eskar explicitly said
it was a favor to his mother, for turning in her husband.”
   “I don’t recall the case, but that is certainly not policy,” said
Comonot, his voice a warning.
   “Seraphina,” said my uncle, his hand hovering near my arm.
   I ignored him; I wasn’t finished. “Fine. Call it an exceptional
circumstance, but could not an exception be made also for my uncle,
who has done noth—”
   “Scholar Orma, who is this person?” asked the Ardmagar, suddenly
on his feet.
   I turned toward my uncle, openmouthed. His eyes were closed, his
fingers tented in front of his chin as if he were praying. He inhaled
deeply through his nose, opened his eyes, and said, “Seraphina is my
nameless sister’s daughter, Ardmagar.”
   Comonot’s eyes bugged alarmingly. “No … not with that …”
   “With him, yes. The human, C—”
   “Do not say his name,” ordered the Ardmagar, suddenly the most
dispassionate of saarantrai. He considered a moment. “You reported
that she died childless.”
   “Yes, I reported that,” said Orma. My heart broke a little along with
his voice.
   “The Censors know you lied,” guessed the Ardmagar shrewdly.
“That’s a mark against you; that’s why they won’t let you go. Odd that
it was not reported to the Ker.”
   Orma shrugged. “As you say, Ardmagar, the Censors aren’t
accountable to you.”
   “No, but you are. Your scholar’s visa is revoked, saar, as of this
instant. You will return home; you will put yourself down for excision.
Failure to report to the surgeons within one week’s time will result in
a declaration of magna culpa. Do you understand?”
   “I do.”
   Comonot left us. I turned to Orma so full of rage and horror and
sorrow that for a moment I could not speak. “I assumed he knew,” I
cried. “Eskar knew.”
   “Eskar used to be with the Censors,” said Orma softly.
   I threw up my hands in futile despair, pacing around him; Orma
stood very, very still, staring at nothing. “I’m sorry,” I said. “This is
my fault. I ruin everything, I—”
   “No,” said Orma evenly. “I should have sent you out of the room.”
   “I assumed you intended to introduce me to him, like with Eskar!”
   “No. I kept you here because I … I wanted you here. I thought it
would help.” His eyes widened in horror at himself. “They’re right. I
am emotionally compromised beyond redemption.”
   I wanted so badly to touch his shoulder or take his hand so he
would know he was not alone in the world, but I couldn’t do it. He
would swat me away like a mosquito.
   Yet he’d taken my elbow and wanted me to stay. I struggled with
tears. “So you’ll be going home?”
   He looked at me like my head had fallen off. “To the Tanamoot?
Never. It’s not just a matter of sweeping away ‘emotional detritus,’ not
for me. The cancer runs too deep. They’d excise every memory of
Linn. Every memory of you.”
   “But you’d be alive. Magna culpa means if they find you, they can
kill you on sight.” Papa would have been shocked at how many times
I’d played the lawyer tonight.
   He raised his eyebrows. “If Imlann can survive in the south for
sixteen years, I imagine I can manage a few.” He turned to go, then
thought better of it. He removed his earring and handed it back to me.
“You may still need this.”
  “Please, Orma, I’ve already gotten you in so much trouble—”
  “That I can’t possibly get into more. Take it.” He wouldn’t stop
glaring at me until I’d put the earring back on its cord. “You are all
that’s left of Linn. Her own people won’t even say her name. I—I
value your continued existence.”
  I could not speak; he had pierced me to my very heart.
  As was his wont, he bid me no farewell. The full weight of
everything that had befallen me, on this longest night of the year,
landed squarely upon me, and I stood a very long time, staring at
nothing.
I’d been up all night; I staggered off to bed.
   I can’t usually sleep during the day, but in truth I did not wish to be
awake. Awake was a distinctly unpleasant state to be in. I hurt all
over, and when I wasn’t fretting about my uncle, I could not stop
thinking about Lucian Kiggs.
   An indignant pounding woke me halfway through the afternoon. I
had fallen asleep in my clothes, so I rolled out of bed and staggered to
the door, barely opening my eyes. A shimmering being, pearly and
opalescent, brushed past me imperiously: Princess Glisselda. A gentler
presence, who led me to a chair, was Millie.
   “What did you do to Lucian?” cried Glisselda, looming over me,
hands on her hips.
   I couldn’t pull myself into full wakefulness. I stared at her,
uncomprehending. And what was there to say? That I had saved his
life and made him hate me, all in one go? That I had felt things I
should not, and I was sorry?
   “The council has just adjourned,” she said, pacing toward the
hearth and back. “Lucian told us all about encountering the rogue in
the countryside, about your bravery in persuading the dragon not to
kill you. You’re quite the pair of investigative heroes.”
   “What did the council decide?” I croaked, rubbing an eye with the
heel of my hand.
   “We’re sending a group of dragons—a petit ard, we’re calling it—
into the country, led by Eskar.” She toyed with her long string of
pearls, tying it in a large knot. “They’re to stay in their saarantrai
except in an emergency; they’ll start at the column of rooks as one
place they know Imlann has recently been and attempt to sniff him
out from there.
   “But you see, here’s what perplexes me.” She scowled and shook the
knotted necklace at me. “You were so helpful and knowledgeable, one
would expect Lucian to be singing your praises unto Heaven’s dome.
He’s not. I know he arrested you on little pretext. He’s mad at you,
evidently, but he won’t say why; he’s shut himself in his beastly
tower. How do I mediate if I don’t know what’s going on? I can’t have
you two at odds!”
   I must have reeled a bit, because Glisselda snapped, “Millie! Make
this poor woman some tea!”
   Tea helped, although it also seemed to moisten my eyes. “My eyes
are watering,” I said, just to clarify to everyone.
   “It’s all right,” said Glisselda. “I’d weep too if Lucian were that
angry with me.”
   I couldn’t work out what to tell her. This had never happened to me
before: I always knew which things were tellable and which were not,
and while I had not liked lying, it had never felt like such a burden. I
tried to remember my rules: simpler was always better. I said, my
voice shaky, “He’s angry because I lied to him.”
   “Lucian can be touchy about that,” said Glisselda sagely. “Why did
you lie?”
   I gaped at her as if she’d asked why I drew breath. I couldn’t tell
her that lying wasn’t so much something I did as something I was, or
that I had wanted to reassure Kiggs that I was human, desperate that
he not be frightened of me because I had known, there among the
blowing snow and ash, that I …
   I could not even think the word with his fiancée right here, and that
was itself another lie. It never ended.
   “We—we were so terrified after facing Imlann,” I stammered. “I
spoke without thinking, trying to reassure him. Honestly, in that
moment, I forgot I even had the—”
   “I see the open sincerity in your face. Say just that to him, and it
will be well.”
   Of course, I had already said that to him, more or less, and it had
made things worse. Princess Glisselda stepped toward the door, Millie
like a shadow behind her. “There will be a meeting between you, and
you will make up. I shall arrange it.”
   I rose and curtsied. She added, “You should know: Earl Josef was
absent from the palace all day yesterday. Lucian mentioned your
suspicions, and I made him ask around. Apsig claims he was in town
visiting his mistress but has not been forthcoming with her name.”
She looked almost apologetic. “I did mention your expedition to him
at the ball. He wanted to know why Lucian would speak with you. It
was ill-advised, perhaps.
  “But,” she added, brightening again, “our eye is upon him now.”
  The girls took their leave, but Glisselda paused in the doorway,
raising a finger as if to scold me. “I can’t have you and Lucian
feuding! I need you!”
  I stumbled into the other room and flopped back onto my bed when
she had gone, wishing I shared her optimism, wondering whether
she’d be so keen to patch things up between us if she knew what I
held unspoken in my heart.



I awoke at midnight in a panic because something was on fire.
   I sat bolt upright, or tried to; the morass of my feather mattress
pulled me back down as if the bed tick were trying to eat me. I was
drenched in sweat. The bed curtains wafted gently, illuminated by the
perfectly tame fire in the hearth. Had I been dreaming? I recalled no
dream, and I knew the fire was … still burning. I could almost smell
smoke; I could feel the heat of it inside my head. Was something
happening to the garden of grotesques?
   Saints’ dogs. I’d have believed I was going mad if things like this
didn’t happen in my mind all the time.
   I flopped back in the bed, closed my eyes, and entered my garden.
There was smoke in the distance; I ran until I reached the edge of
Pandowdy’s swamp. Mercifully, Pandowdy itself was underwater,
sleeping, and I was able to pick my way past it. It was the least human
of all my grotesques, a sluglike, wallowing creature. It filled me with
pity and dread, but it was one of mine as surely as Lars was.
   At the heart of the swamp crouched Fruit Bat, and he was on fire.
   Or not exactly: the flames came from my memory box, which he
clutched to him, his entire body curled around it. He whimpered
again, which snapped me out of my shock. I rushed over, grabbed the
thing—it seared my fingers—and hurled it into the black water. It
hissed, throwing up a cloud of foul steam. I knelt before Fruit Bat—he
was just a child!—and examined his bare stomach, the insides of his
arms, his face. He had no visible blisters, but his skin was so dark that
I wasn’t sure I would recognize the look of burns. I cried, “Are you
hurt?”
   “No,” he said, prodding himself with his fingertips.
   St. Masha’s stone, he was talking to me now. I struggled with fear as
I said, “What were you doing? Prying open my box of secrets?”
   He said, “The box caught fire.”
   “Because you tried to look in it!”
   “Never, madamina.” He crossed his thumbs, making his hands into
a bird, the Porphyrian gesture for supplication. “I know what’s yours
and what’s mine. It burst into flames last night. I threw myself upon it
so it would not harm you. Have I done well?”
   I turned sharply toward the water; the tin box bobbed, but the fire
had not gone out. I was beginning to feel the pain of the flames
myself, now that Fruit Bat wasn’t smothering them with his body.
   I knew, without knowing how, that it had caught fire when Imlann
landed in the snowy field, just as it had flooded at the sight of
Comonot. It was extremely fortunate that Fruit Bat had leaped upon it
when he did; if I had been seized by a memory while Imlann bore
down on us, it would have been more than just an imaginary box in
flames.
   I turned back to the boy. The whites of his eyes shone starkly
against his dark face. “What’s your name? Your real name,” I said.
   “Abdo,” he said. The name hit a light chord of déjà vu, but I could
not place it.
   “And where are you, Abdo?”
   “I am at an inn, with my family. Holding the box gave me a
headache; I was in bed all day. My grandfather is very worried, but I
can sleep now and ease his heart.”
   The burning box had been causing him pain, but he’d held on to it
for more than a day. “How did you know to help?” I said.
   “There are two sacred causes in this world,” he said, holding up his
pinkie and ring finger. “Chance and necessity. By chance, I was there
to help when you had need.”
   He was a little philosopher. Maybe in his country they all were. I
opened my mouth to question him further, but he put his hands upon
my cheeks and gazed at me earnestly. “I heard you, sought you, and
have found you. I have reached for you, across space and sense and
the laws of nature. I do not know how.”
   “Do you speak to others this way? Do others speak to you?” My fear
melted away. He was so innocent.
   He shrugged. “I only know three other ityasaari, in Porphyry. But
you know them too: they are here. You named them Newt and
Miserere and Pelican Man. None of them speak to me with their
minds, but then, none of them called me. Only you.”
  “When did I call you?”
  “I heard your flute.”
  Just like Lars.
  “Madamina,” he said, “I must sleep. My grandfather has been
worried.”
  He released me and bowed. I bowed back uncertainly, and then
looked toward the flaming box. Pandowdy burbled underwater and
gave an irritable flop of its tail, sending the box bobbing back toward
me. I felt the headache intensely now. I could not put off dealing with
the box; the memory would surely engulf me against my will if I
suppressed it, just as the other one had. I glanced at Abdo, but he had
curled on his side, asleep under a large skunk cabbage. I guided the
box toward shore with a sturdy cattail.
  The box exploded at my touch in a burst of pyrotechnic hysteria. I
choked on the smoke, wondering how it was possible that I could
taste anger and feel the smell of green against my skin.


I burst from the mountainside and fly into the sun. My tail lash buries the
exit under an avalanche. The combined mass of twelve old generals will
exceed this icefall; I have merely bought myself a delay. I must not waste
it. I dive east, with the wind, careening through low lenticular clouds into a
glacial cirque.
    There is a cave beneath the glacier, if I can reach it. I skim the chalky
meltwater too closely; the cold scalds my ventrum. I push off the moraine
with a spray of stones, elevate quickly to avoid pinnacles of ice sharp
enough to gut me.
    I hear a roar and a rumble behind me, high up the mountain. The
generals and my father are free, but I have flown fast enough. Too fast: I
slam into the edge of the cirque, send shale skittering down the cliff face,
and worry that they will spot the crushed lichens. I writhe into the cave,
blue ice melting at my touch, easing my passage.
    I hear them cross the sky, screaming, even over the roar of the glacial
streams. I move deeper in, lest I make too much vapor and give myself
away.
    The ice cools my thoughts and condenses my rationality. I saw and
heard what I should not have: my father and eleven other generals
speaking together upon his hoard. Words upon a hoard must be hoarded,
as the ancient saying goes. They could kill me for eavesdropping.
    Worse: they spoke treason. I cannot hoard these words.
   The cave makes me claustrophobic. How do quigutl stay squeezed into
crevasses without going mad? Perhaps they don’t. I distract myself by
thinking: of my hatchling brother, who is studying in Ninys and safe if he
will stay there; of the quickest route back to Goredd; and of Claude, whom
I love. I do not feel love when I take my natural shape, but I remember it
and want it back. The vast, empty space where the feeling once was makes
me writhe in discomfort.
   Oh, Orma. You are not going to understand what has happened to me.
   Night comes; the gleaming blue ice dims to black. The cave is too tight to
turn around in—I am not as lithe and serpentine as some—so I back out,
step by step, up the slick passage. The tip of my tail emerges into the night
air.
   I smell him too late. My father bites my tail on the pretext of pulling me
out, then bites me again, behind the head, in chastisement.
   “General, put me back in ard,” I say, submitting to three more bites.
   “What did you hear?” he snarls.
   There is no point pretending I heard nothing. He did not raise me to be
an imperceptive fool, and my scent in the passageway would have told him
how long I listened. “That General Akara infiltrated the Goreddi knights,
and that his actions led to their banishment.” That is the least of it; my
own father is part of a treacherous cabal, plotting against our Ardmagar. I
am loath to utter that aloud.
   He spits fire at the glacier, bringing the cave entrance crashing down. “I
might have buried you alive in there. I did not. Do you know why?”
   It is hard to play submissive all the time, but my father accepts no other
stance from his children, and he outweighs me by a factor of two. The day
will come when the strength of our intellects counts for more than physical
power. That is Comonot’s dream and I believe in it, but for now I bow my
head. Dragons are slow to change.
   “I permit you to live because I know you will not tell the Ardmagar what
you heard,” he says. “You will tell no one.”
   “What is the foundation of this belief?” I flatten myself further, no
threat to him.
   “Your loyalty and your family honor should be basis enough,” he cries.
“But you admit that you have neither.”
   “And if my loyalty is to my Ardmagar?” Or to his ideas, anyway.
   My father spits fire at my toes; I leap back but smell singed talons.
“Then heed this, Linn: my allies among the Censors tell me you’re in
trouble.”
   I have heard no official word, but I have expected this. I flare my
nostrils and raise my head spines, however, as if I were startled. “Did they
say why?”
   “They hoard details, but it doesn’t matter what you did. You’re on the
list. If you reveal what was said upon my hoard—or whom you saw, or
how many—it will be your word against mine. I will number you a
dangerous deviant.”
   In fact I am a dangerous deviant, but until this moment I had been a
dangerous deviant who was torn about returning to Goredd. I am no longer
torn.
   My father climbs the glacier face so that he might launch himself more
easily. The ice is weakened by summer’s heavy melt; blocks as large as my
head break off beneath his claws, tumble toward me, dash to pieces. His
collapse of the tunnel has put the glacier under stress; I see a deep crack in
the ice.
   “Climb, hatchling,” he cries. “I shall escort you back to your mother’s.
You won’t go south again; I shall see to it that the Ker cancels your visas.”
   “General, you are wise,” I say, raising the pitch of my voice, imitating
the chirp of the newly hatched. I do not climb; I am completing a
calculation. I must stall him. “Put me back in ard. If I am not to go south
again, is it not time I was mated?”
   He has reached the top of the ice cliff. He arches his neck, muscles
rippling along it. The moon has risen behind him, giving him a formidable
gleam. He is intimidating; my cower is almost in earnest. I have a few more
vectors to account for, and friction. Will friction befriend or foe? I extend
a wing inconspicuously, trying to more accurately gauge the temperature.
   “You are the daughter of Imlann!” he shrieks. “You could have any one
of those generals you saw today. You could have all of them, in whatever
order you wish.”
   It is a challenge to keep him talking while my mouth is busy. I recoil in
overstated awe, histrionic for a dragon, but my father accepts this
unquestioningly as his due.
   “I will arrange it,” he says. “You are not the mightiest female, but you
fly well, and your teeth are sound. They will be honored to join their lines
with mine. Only promise to break any weak eggs before they hatch, as I
ought to have broken Orma’s.”
   Oh, Orma. You are the only one I will miss.
   I expel a swift, surgical ball of flame, targeting a slim buttress beneath
the ice wall. Its destruction tips the structural balance. A crevasse yawns
behind my father; the ice screams as the face of the glacier shears off. I
spring back, out of the path of flying ice, and scramble down the moraine,
bounding over boulders until I can push off into the air. I tack into the
winds of the glacial collapse, circling upward. I should fly as fast as I can
toward anywhere else, away, but I cannot bring myself to leave. I must see
what I have done: it is my pain, I have earned it, and I will carry it with
me the rest of my days.
   It is no less than either of us deserves.
   As per my calculation, the ice beneath his calefactive bulk was too soft
and slick for his claws to get good purchase. He could not push off in time;
he has tumbled backward into the crevasse. A spire of ice from higher up—
from an area not figuring in my algebra—has fallen on top of him, pinning
his wing. Maybe piercing it. I circle, trying to determine whether I have
killed him. I smell his blood, like sulfur and roses, but he snarls and
thrashes, and I conclude he is not dead. I switch on every quigutl device I
have and shed them down upon his body; they twinkle in the moonlight,
and I estimate someone might mistake him for treasure, from a distance.
He will be found.
   I circle the sky, bidding farewell to the Tanamoot—mountains, sky,
water, all dragonkind. I have broken my family, my father, my promises,
everything. I am the traitor now.
   Oh, Orma. Keep yourself safe from him.


The bed curtains danced their ghostly sarabande in the warm air
currents. I stared at them for some time, seeing nothing, feeling wrung
out and boneless.
  Each subsequent memory filled gaps in my understanding. That first
memory, so long ago, had forcefully ripped the scales from my blind
eyes and destroyed my peace, I thought perhaps for good. The next
had left me resenting her thoughtless selfishness; I could admit that to
myself now. I envied her after the third, but now … something was
different. Not her—she was dead and unchangeable—but me. I was
changed. I clasped my aching left wrist tightly to my chest,
understanding the nature of it.
  I felt her struggle this time, felt echoes of my own. She had chosen
Papa over family, country, her own kind, everything she’d grown up
with. She had cared about Orma, insofar as dragons could care; that
went a long way toward earning my sympathy. As for the ringing
emptiness at the very heart of her, that was only too familiar. “I
thought I was the only one who’d ever felt that, Mother,” I whispered
to the bed curtains. “I thought I was all alone, and maybe a little bit
mad.”
  The feather bed had stopped trying to devour me; it seemed a
cloud, rather, lifting me toward some bright epiphany: she had
uncovered the existence of a cabal hostile to the Ardmagar. However
personally difficult it was, however much more Kiggs despised me or
the Ardmagar condemned me, I could not hoard these words.
But whom could I tell?
   Kiggs was mad at me. Glisselda would wonder how I knew and why
I had not come forward sooner. I supposed I could lie and say Orma
had only just told me, but the very thought of Orma made me sick at
heart.
   I should tell Orma. It struck me that he would want to know.
   I rose at first light and sat at the spinet, hugging myself against the
morning chill. I played Orma’s chord, having no idea whether he
would answer or whether he had already departed for parts unknown.
   The kitten buzzed to life. “I’m here.”
   “That’s eighty-three percent of what I wanted to know.”
   “What’s the other seventeen?”
   “When do you leave? I need to talk to you.”
   There was a silence punctuated by thumps, as if he were setting
down heavy books. If he was packing up every book he owned, he’d
be lucky to be gone within the week. “Do you remember that newskin
I was burdened with? He’s still here.”
   Saints’ dogs. “Haven’t you been deemed unfit to mentor him?”
   “Either no one cares that I’m leading him toward deviancy—
possible, given how useless he is—or they think he’ll be a help
packing, which he is not.”
   The kitten broadcast some disgruntled muttering, and then my
uncle said clearly, “No, you’re not.” I smiled wan sympathy at the
kitten eye. “In answer to your question,” he said at last, “I will depart
for home and the surgeons in three days, upon your New Year, after
I’ve packed up everything here. I will do exactly what is required of me
by law. I am caught, and I am chastened, and there is no other
alternative.”
   “I need to talk to you alone. I want to say goodbye while you still
know me.”
  There was a very long pause, and for a moment I thought he had
gone. I tapped the kitten eye in concern, but at last his voice came
through, weakly: “My apologies, this body’s ridiculous larynx seized
up, but it seems to be functioning again. Will you come into town
tomorrow with the rest of the court, to watch the Golden Plays?”
  “I can’t. Tomorrow is dress rehearsal for the Treaty Eve concert.”
  “Then I don’t see how it will be possible to speak with you. Here’s
where I emit a thunderous oath, I believe.”
  “Do it,” I urged him, but this time he really was gone.
  I puzzled over all his odd emphases while I tended my scales and
dressed and drank my tea. I may have witnessed the first known
incidence of a dragon attempting sarcasm. It was a pity I didn’t know
how the spinet device worked because it surely could have recorded
his utterance for future generations of dragons to learn from: This,
hatchlings, is a valiant effort, but not quite it.
  I tried to laugh at that, but it rang hollow. He was leaving; I did not
know when or where or for how long. If he was fleeing the Censors,
he couldn’t risk staying near me. He would be gone for good. I might
get no chance to say goodbye.



Something had changed during the day I’d spent abed. The halls were
devoid of chatter; everyone went about their business looking grim
and anxious. Dragons loose in the countryside didn’t sit well with
anyone, apparently. As I walked to breakfast, I noticed people
scuttling into side rooms at my approach, refusing to meet my eye or
bid me good morning if they found themselves forced to pass me in
the corridor.
  Surely no one was blaming me? I’d found Imlann, but I hadn’t sent
the petit ard after him; that had been up to the Queen and the
council. I told myself I was imagining things until I entered the north
tower dining hall and the entire room fell silent.
  There was space on the bench between Guntard and the scrawny
sackbutist, if either of them moved over an inch. “Your pardon,” I
said, but they pretended not to hear. “I would like to sit here,” I said,
but each had an extremely interesting bowl of groats in front of him
and couldn’t look up. I hoisted my skirts and stepped over the bench
in unladylike fashion; they couldn’t scoot fast enough then. In fact,
the sackbutist decided his breakfast wasn’t that fascinating after all
and abandoned it entirely.
   I couldn’t catch the serving lad’s eye; nobody at the table would
acknowledge me. I couldn’t take it: these fellows were, if not exactly
friends, colleagues and the authors of my praise song. Surely that
counted for something. “Out with it, then,” I said. “What’ve I done to
earn the silent treatment?”
   They looked at each other, sidelong and shifty-eyed. Nobody
wanted to be the one to talk. Finally Guntard said, “Where were you
last evening?”
   “In bed, asleep, making up for a sleepless night the night before.”
   “Ah, right, your heroic expedition to find the rogue dragon,” said a
crumhornist, picking his teeth with a kipper bone. “Well, now you’ve
given the dragons an excuse for roaming Goredd freely, and Princess
Glisselda an excuse for having us all jabbed!”
   “Jabbed?” All around the table, musicians held up bandaged
fingers. Some of the fingers were rude ones. I tried not to take that
personally, but it wasn’t easy.
   “The princess’s species-check initiative,” grunted Guntard.
   There was only one foolproof way to tell a saarantras: the silver
blood. Glisselda was trying to flush out Imlann, if he was concealed at
court.
   A lutist waved his fish fork dangerously. “Look at her; she has no
intention of letting herself get poked!”
   Dragons don’t blush; they turn pale. My red cheeks might have
banished doubts, but of course they didn’t. I said, “I’ll gladly
cooperate. This is the first I’m hearing of it, is all.”
   “I told you oafs,” said Guntard, throwing an arm across my
shoulders, suddenly my champion. “I don’t care what the rumors say,
our Phina’s no dragon!”
   The bottom fell out of my stomach. Blue St. Prue. There was a huge
difference between “won’t take a jab like the rest of us” and “is
rumored to be a dragon in disguise.” I tried to keep my voice light,
but it came out squeaky: “What rumor is this?”
   Nobody knew who’d started it, but it had run through court the day
before like fire over summer fields. I was a dragon. I’d gone not to
hunt down the rogue but to warn him. I could speak Mootya. I had
devices. I had willfully endangered the prince.
   I sat there, stunned, trying to work out who could have said all
these things. Kiggs might have, but I was unwilling to believe him so
spiteful. No, unwilling was too tepid: it was unthinkable. I had little
faith in Heaven, but I had faith in his honor, even when he was angry.
Perhaps especially while angry—he struck me as someone who would
cleave harder to his principles under duress.
   But then who?
   “I’m not a dragon,” I said feebly.
   “Let’s test that right now,” said Guntard, slapping his palms on the
table. “Put everybody’s mind at ease and have a spot of fun, all in one
go.”
   I recoiled, thinking he intended to stab me—with what, his porridge
spoon?—but he rose and grabbed my left arm. I yanked it away
ungently, my smile brittle as glass, but rose to follow, hoping he’d feel
no need to grab me again if I came willingly. Eyes followed us from
all quarters.
   We crossed the eerily silent dining hall and stopped at the dragons’
table. There were only two this morning, a pasty male and short-
haired female, lowly amanuenses who had not gone hunting Imlann,
but were left behind to run the embassy offices. They sat stiffly, rolls
halfway to their mouths, staring at Guntard as though he were some
talking turnip who had sneaked up on them.
   “Your pardon, saarantrai,” cried Guntard, addressing the whole
room, tables, windows, serving lads, and all. “You can recognize your
own kind by smell. True?”
   The saarantrai exchanged a wary glance. “The word of a saarantras
does not hold up in court on certain issues, and this is one,” said the
male, fastidiously wiping his fingers on the tablecloth. “If you’re
hoping to evade the species check, we can’t help you.”
   “Not me. Our music mistress, Seraphina. She will submit to the
bleed, as will all of us who must, but there have been vicious, hateful
rumors circulating and I want them put to rest.” Guntard put one
hand to his chest and the other in the air, like a blowhard in a play.
“She is my friend, not some vile, deceitful dragon! Smell her and
affirm it.”
   I couldn’t move; I had wrapped my arms around myself, as if that
alone prevented me from spontaneously combusting. The saarantrai
had to rise and approach me in order to get close enough to discern
anything. The female sniffed behind my ear, holding my hair aside
like a dark curtain. The male bent over my left hand theatrically; he’d
get a noseful. I’d changed the bandage on my self-inflicted wound this
morning, but he would unquestionably discern it. Maybe I smelled
edible; my blood was red as any Goreddi’s.
  I clenched my teeth, bracing for the blow. The saarantrai stepped
away and reseated themselves without a word.
  “Well?” demanded Guntard. The entire room held its breath.
  Here it came. I said a little prayer.
  The female spoke: “Your music mistress is not a dragon.”
  Guntard started clapping, like a handful of gravel tossed down the
mountainside, and little by little more hands joined in until I was
buried under an avalanche of applause.
  I gaped at the saarantrai. They could not have failed to smell
dragon. Had they assumed I was a bell-exempt scholar and kept quiet
out of respect for my supposed research? Perhaps.
  “Shame on all of you, believing rumors!” said Guntard. “Seraphina
has never been anything but honorable, fair, and kind, a fast friend
and an excellent musician—”
  The male saar blinked, slowly, like a frog swallowing its dinner; the
female gestured toward the sky in a subtle but unmistakable way. My
doubts dissolved: they’d smelled me. They’d lied. Maybe they hoped I
was an unauthorized dragon, just to spite Guntard and everyone else
nodding agreement at all the noble, moral, non-draconian qualities I
possessed.
  I had never seen the rift between our peoples laid out so starkly.
These saarantrai wouldn’t lift a finger for the humans in this room;
they might not have turned in Imlann himself. How many dragons
would take his side if their choice was between submitting to Goreddi
bigotry and breaking the law?
  Guntard was still clapping me on the back and extolling my human
virtues. I turned and walked out of the hall without my breakfast. I
imagined Guntard failing to notice I had gone, clapping at the empty
air.



“I want you to take tomorrow off. See the Golden Plays, visit your
family, go out drinking, anything. I’ll handle dress rehearsal,” said
Viridius, in his suite after choir practice. He’d been dictating a
composition; his comment surprised me so that I jammed the quill
awkwardly against a rough patch of parchment, creating an enormous
inkblot.
  “Have I done something wrong, sir?” I asked, dabbing at the mess
with a rag.
   He leaned back on his velvet cushion and gazed out the window at
the overcast sky and the snowy courtyard. “Quite the contrary. You
improve upon everything you touch. I think you’ve earned a day of
rest.”
   “I just had a day of rest. Two, if being beset by dragons counts as
rest.”
   He chewed his lower lip. “The council passed a resolution last night
—”
   “The species-check initiative? Guntard told me.”
   He gazed at me keenly. “I thought you might prefer not to be here.”
   My hands went clammy; I wiped them on my skirts. “Sir, if you are
referring to a rumor circulated about me, by persons unknown, I can
assure you—”
   He put his gout-swollen, clawlike hand on my forearm and raised
his rusty brows. “I’ll put in a good word for you,” he said. “I know I’m
not the cuddliest old brick, not always easy to work with, but you’ve
done well. If I don’t say so often, it doesn’t mean I don’t notice. You’re
the most talented thing we’ve had round these parts since Tertius was
taken from us, may he dine at Heaven’s table.”
   “Put in a good word for me why?”
   His thick lips quivered. “Seraphina, I knew your mother.”
   I gasped. “You are mistaken, sir.” The room seemed not to contain
enough air.
   “I heard her perform at Château Rodolphi in Samsam, some twenty
years ago, when I was traveling with Tertius—rest he on Heaven’s
hearthstone. She was utterly captivating. When Tertius told me she
was a saar, I didn’t believe him at first.”
   Viridius gestured toward the ewer; I poured him a cup of water, but
when I brought it to him, he said, “No, no, for you. You’ve gone
purple around the gills. Calm yourself, child. I’ve known all along,
haven’t I? And said nothing?”
   I nodded shakily. The cup clattered against my teeth.
   He idly tapped his cane on the floor until he thought I was ready to
listen again. “I asked Linn to teach at St. Ida’s, where I was
headmaster at the time. She said she couldn’t; she was a student
herself, just finishing up her research. I sponsored her petition for bell
exemption, that she might pursue her research here without terrifying
the librarians—or her students, because I hoped she’d teach. It seemed
ideal.”
   I found myself desperate to slap him, as if he were the author of all
my troubles. “It wasn’t ideal.”
   “In hindsight, perhaps that’s not surprising. She could really pass,
your mother, and she was something extraordinary. She wasn’t
bothered with daintiness or coyness or other flavors of silliness; she
was strong and practical, and she took no nonsense from anyone. If I’d
any interest in women, even I could have seen my way to loving her.
It was academic, of course, like the idea that one might shift the
entire world with a long-enough lever. One could, but one can’t. Close
your mouth, dear.”
   My heart palpated painfully. “You knew she was a saar and my
father was human, and you never told anyone?”
   He heaved himself to his feet and limped over to the window. “I’m
a Daanite. I don’t go around criticizing other people’s love affairs.”
   “As her sponsor, weren’t you supposed to report her to the embassy
before it went too far?” I said, my voice full of tears. “Couldn’t you
have warned my father, at the very least?”
   “It seems so obvious, in retrospect,” he said quietly, examining a
spot on the front of his loose linen shirt. “At the time, I was merely
happy for her.”
   I took a shaky breath. “Why are you telling me now? You haven’t
decided to—”
   “To give up my peerless assistant? Do I look mad to you, maidy?
Why do you think I’m warning you about the bleed? We’ll spirit you
away somewhere, or we’ll find one trustworthy person high up who
can keep a secret. The prince—”
   “No,” I said, too quickly. “There’s no need. My blood is as red as
yours.”
   He sighed. “So I’ve gone and revealed how much I admire your
work for nothing. Now you’ll feel free to laze around self-importantly,
I suppose!”
   “Viridius, no,” I said, stepping toward him and impulsively kissing
his balding head. “I’m well aware that that’s your job.”
   “Damned right,” he grumbled. “And I’ve earned it, too.”
   I helped him back to his gout couch, and he finished dictating the
major theme and two subthemes of his composition, along with an
idea for metamorphosing each into the other, involving an
extraordinary transposition. I jotted everything down mechanically at
first; it took some time for me to settle down after Viridius’s
revelation about my mother, but the music calmed and then awed me.
I was gawping inside, like a country girl seeing the cathedral for the
first time. Here were flying buttresses and rose windows of music;
here columns and vaulting, more prosaic structural elements; and all
of it in service to a unified purpose, to clarifying and perfecting the
majestic space inside, a soaring expanse as awe-inspiring as the
architecture that bounded it.
   “I suspect you of not taking me seriously,” grumped Viridius as I
cleaned my pens and made ready to depart.
   “Sir?” I said, stricken. I had spent the last hour in awe of his
artistry. That qualified as taking someone seriously, to my mind.
   “You are new enough to court that perhaps you don’t understand
the damage rumors can do. Get gone, maidy. There is no shame in a
strategic retreat while you wait for Scandal, that damned basilisk, to
turn its withering gaze elsewhere—especially if you’re someone who,
in fact, has something to hide.”
   “I’ll bear that in mind,” I said, giving him half courtesy.
   “No, you won’t,” he muttered as I turned to go. “You’re too like
your mother.”



Daylight failed impossibly early, assisted by a glowering cloud cover;
more snow was coming. After a full day of errands and tasks, I had
only the princess’s harpsichord lesson left. She’d had a hectic day
herself, overrun with council-related duties; five messengers found me
over the course of the day, each requesting a further delay of her
lesson until it had been pushed back to almost suppertime. As I
approached the south solar one last messenger intercepted me; I
must’ve rolled my eyes, because the lad stuck out his tongue before
scurrying up the hall.
   The note had clearly been dictated. It read: The princess requests that
you meet her downstairs in the second laundry. It is urgent. Come
immediately.
   I blinked at the parchment in confusion. Why would Glisselda want
to meet in such an obscure place? Perhaps she was afraid of being
overheard.
   I ducked down a servants’ stairway to the narrow, utilitarian
passages below. I passed under the great hall and the chambers of
state, past storerooms, servants’ quarters, and the barred, gloomy
entrance of the donjon. I passed a sweltering laundry, but it was the
wrong one—or so I deduced by the distinct absence of Princess
Glisselda. I questioned a laundress, who pointed me further down the
corridor into darkness.
   I reached the furnace belonging to the hypocaust for the Queen’s
bathroom. Three grimy men fed coal into its open mouth, which
reminded me uncomfortably of Imlann’s.
   The men leered at me, too, leaning on their shovels and grinning
toothlessly.
   I paused, the stink of coal heavy in my nostrils. Had I understood
the laundress properly? Surely no one would want to wear clothing
washed in such close proximity to coal fumes?
   I considered asking the hypocaust stokers for directions, but there
was something ominous in their aspect. I watched them shoveling; I
could not seem to turn away. The heat blasted against my exposed
face, even from this distance. Their silhouettes were dark holes in the
frantic firelight. Acrid smoke permeated the entire room, making my
eyes and lungs sting.
   It was like the Infernum, the torments that awaited souls who
rejected the light of Heaven. Somehow, eternal pain was still
considered preferable to having no soul at all. I wasn’t sure I saw why.
   I turned my back upon this hellish vision. A dark, horned figure
stepped directly into my path.
To my dumbfoundment, it was Lady Corongi; I’d mistaken the two
peaks of her old-fashioned butterfly hennin. “Is that you, Maid
Dombegh?” she asked, peering as if her eyes were not adjusted. “You
seem lost, dear girl.”
   I emitted a small laugh of relief and gave courtesy, but did not
think I should confess that I was to meet the princess somewhere
down here. “I was just on my way to Glisselda’s music lesson.”
   “You’ve chosen an eccentric route.” She glanced toward the grimy
troglodytes behind me and wrinkled her powdered nose in distaste.
“Come, I will show you the way back.” She stood waiting, her left
elbow jutting out like a chicken’s wing; I deduced I was supposed to
take it.
   “So,” she said as we walked back up the narrow corridor together.
“It has been some time since we spoke.”
   “Er … I suppose it has,” I said, uncertain as to her point.
   She smirked under her veil. “I hear you’ve become quite the brave
adventuress since then, dallying with knights, sassing dragons, kissing
the second heir’s fiancé.”
   I went cold. Was that story going around too? Was this what
Viridius had meant, that rumors gained momentum as they careered
along until they were utterly beyond our power to halt? “Milady,” I
said shakily, “someone has been telling you lies.”
   Her hand upon my arm had tightened into a claw. “You think you
know so much,” she said, her voice incongruously pleasant. “But you
are outmaneuvered, my pet. Do you know what St. Ogdo says about
arrogance? ‘There is blindness in sight, and folly in cleverness. Be
patient: even the brightest fire burns itself out.’ ”
   “He was talking about dragons,” I said. “And what have I done to
make you think me arrogant? Is it because I criticized your teaching?”
   “All shall become clear, to the righteous,” she said lightly, dragging
me along. We turned west; we entered a laundry.
   The second laundry.
   The cauldrons were all upturned and the laundresses gone up to
supper, but the fires still roared. Bedsheets hung from the ceiling
racks, their hemlines grazing the floor, wafting like gowns at a ghostly
ball. Shadows flickered grotesquely against these pale screens,
growing and shrinking with the fickle firelight.
   One shadow moved with purpose. There was someone else here.
   Lady Corongi led me through the labyrinth of drying linens to the
far corner of the room, where Princess Dionne awaited us, pacing like
a caged lioness. This felt wrong. I stopped short; Lady Corongi hauled
me forward. The princess sneered. “I suppose it would be fair to let
you explain yourself, Maid Dombegh.”
   The room had no other door and only the tiniest window, high up
the wall, completely steamed over. I began to sweat in the heat; I
couldn’t tell what she wanted explained. My dodging the bleed? My
rumored dragonhood? Lady Corongi’s other accusation? All of these? I
dared not guess. “Explain what, exactly, Your Highness?”
   She drew a dagger from her bodice. “Kindly note: I was fair.
Clarissa, hold her.”
   Lady Corongi was shockingly strong for one so petite and genteel.
She put me in a wrestling hold—“the belt buckle,” it’s called, though
it’s like a buckle for the shoulders and neck. Princess Dionne moved as
if to grab my left arm; I quickly presented her with my right. She gave
a small nod and sniffed, satisfied that I was cooperating. I expected
her to jab one of my fingers, but she pushed up my sleeves, wrenched
my hand back, and drew her knife swiftly across my pale wrist.
   I cried out. My heart was galloping like a horse. I jerked my hand
away and a spray of red splotches bloomed across the linens hung in
front of us like a field of poppies or some hideous parody of a bridal
sheet.
   “Well. That’s irritating,” said the princess, disgusted.
   “No!” cried Lady Corongi. “It’s a trick! I have it on good authority
that she reeks of saar!”
   “Your good authority got it wrong,” said Princess Dionne, wrinkling
her nose. “I smell nothing, and you don’t, either. Rumor changes with
the telling; perhaps she wasn’t the one originally implicated. They all
look alike, these common brutes.”
   Lady Corongi let go of me; I collapsed to the floor. She lifted the
hem of her gown fastidiously, pinkies raised, and kicked me with her
pointy shoes. “How did you do it, monster? How do you disguise your
blood?”
   “She’s not a saarantras,” said a calm female voice from beyond the
forest of sheets. Someone began crossing the room toward us, paying
no attention to the maze, pushing linens aside and barging straight
through. “Stop kicking her, you bony bitch,” said Dame Okra
Carmine, letting the bloodied sheet fall in place behind her.
   Princess Dionne and Lady Corongi stared, as if Dame Okra’s solid
shape made a more convincing ghost than all the billowing sheets
around her. “I heard a scream,” said Dame Okra. “I considered calling
the Guard, but I decided to see what had happened first. Maybe
someone merely saw a rat.” She sneered at Lady Corongi. “Close
enough.”
   Lady Corongi kicked me one last time, as if to prove that Dame
Okra couldn’t stop her. Princess Dionne wiped her dagger on a
handkerchief, which she tossed into a nearby hamper, and stepped
genteelly around my prone form. She paused to glare down at me.
“Do not imagine that being human is all it takes to regain my esteem,
strumpet. My daughter may be a fool, but I am not.”
   She took Lady Corongi’s arm, and the pair of them departed with
the dignified air of noblewomen who have nothing to be ashamed of.
   Dame Okra held her tongue until they were gone, then rushed to
help me, clucking, “Why, yes, you are an idiot for following them into
an empty laundry room. Did you imagine they had a fine pillowcase
to show you?”
   “I never imagined this!” I cradled my arm, which bled alarmingly.
   Dame Okra recovered Princess Dionne’s handkerchief and wrapped
my wrist. “You do smell of saar,” she said quietly. “A bit of perfume
would cover that right up. That’s how I do it. Can’t let a little thing
like parentage stand in our way, can we?”
   She helped me to my feet. I told her I needed to get to the south
solar; she pushed up her glasses with a fat finger and scowled at me
like I was mad. “You need help, on multiple fronts,” she said. “My
stomach is pulling two directions at once, which is highly irritating.
I’m not sure which way to go first.”
   We emerged upstairs in the vicinity of the Blue Salon. Dame Okra
raised a hand in warning; I held back while she peered around the
corner. I heard voices and footsteps, the sounds of Millie and Princess
Glisselda heading away from the south solar, where they’d waited for
a music lesson that never happened.
   Dame Okra squeezed my elbow and whispered, “Whatever her
mother may say, Glisselda’s no fool.”
   “I know,” I said, swallowing hard.
   “Don’t you be one either.”
   Dame Okra pulled me around the corner, into the path of the girls.
Princess Glisselda emitted a little scream. “Seraphina! Saints in
Heaven, what have you done to yourself?”
   “Looks like she has a good excuse for being late,” said Millie. “You
owe me—”
   “Yes, yes, shut up. Where did you find her, Ambassadress?”
   “No time to explain just now,” said Dame Okra. “Take her
someplace safe, Infanta. There may be people looking for her. And see
to her arm. I have one more thing to attend to, and then I will find
you.”
   The handkerchief had soaked through; there was a streak of blood
all the way down the front of my gown. My sight grew dim, but then
there was a young woman at each of my elbows, propping me up,
moving me on, chatting away. They swept me upstairs into an
apartment I deduced was Millie’s. “… you’re nearly the same size,”
Glisselda squealed excitedly. “We’ll finally have you looking pretty as
can be!”
   “First things first, Princess,” said Millie. “Let’s see that arm.”
   I needed stitches; they called the Queen’s own surgeon. He
administered a glass of plum brandy, then another, until I had choked
down three. I appeared immune to its dulling effects, so he finally
gave up and stitched me up, tut-tutting at my tears and wishing aloud
that I had been drunker. I’d expected the girls to look away, but they
did not. They gasped, clutching each other, but watched every needle
jab and tug of thread.
   “Might one inquire how you did this to yourself, Music Mistress?”
asked the surgeon, a phlegmatic old fellow without a hair on his head.
   “She fell,” Glisselda offered. “On a sharp … thing.”
   “In the basement,” added Millie, which I’m sure bolstered the
story’s credibility immensely. The surgeon rolled his eyes but could
not be bothered to inquire further.
   Once the girls had shooed him out, Glisselda grew grave. “How did
it happen?”
   The spirits seemed finally to have reached my head; between
brandy and blood loss and a dearth of supper, the room began to
swim before my eyes. As much as I wanted to lie—because how could
I tell Glisselda that her own mother cut me?—I could come up with
no plausible alternative story. I would omit Princess Dionne, at least.
“You’ve heard the rumor that I am a … a saar?”
   Heaven forfend that she had heard the other rumor.
   “It was vicious,” said the princess, “and evidently unfounded.”
   “I hadn’t been bled yet. Some zealous, uh, vigilantes decided to do
it for me.”
   Glisselda leaped to her feet, seething. “Isn’t this exactly what we
hoped to avoid?”
   “It is, Princess,” said Millie, shaking her head and putting the kettle
on the hearth.
   “Seraphina, I’m appalled it came to this,” said the princess. “My
original idea—”
   “And Lucian’s,” said Millie, apparently allowed to interrupt the
second heir.
   Glisselda flashed her an irritated look: “One of his Porphyrian
philosophers helped too, if you’re going to be that way about it. The
idea was that we should all be jabbed, everyone, from Grandmamma
herself to the lowliest scullion, noble with common, human with
dragon. It would be fair.
   “But several nobles and dignitaries argued vociferously against it.
‘We should be exempt! We are people of quality!’ In the end, only
courtiers of less than two years’ tenure and commoners must get
tested—and you see the result, my Millie? Vigilantism, and that
bastard Apsig gets off without a scratch.”
   Glisselda ranted on; I couldn’t focus on it. The room swayed like the
deck of a ship. I was thoroughly inebriated now; I suffered the illusion
that my head might fall off, for it seemed too heavy to support.
Someone spoke, but it took some minutes for the words to penetrate
my consciousness: “We ought to at least change her out of that bloody
gown before Dame Okra comes back.”
   “No, no,” I said, or intended to. Intention and action were curiously
blurred, and judgment seemed to have retired for the night entirely.
Millie had a tall privacy screen, painted with weeping willows and
water lilies, and I let myself be persuaded behind it. “All right, but
just the top gown needs replacing,” I said, my words floating over the
screen like vapid, ineffective bubbles.
   “You bled fearfully,” called Millie. “Surely it soaked straight
through?”
   “No one can see what’s beneath …,” I began, fuzzily.
   Glisselda popped her head around the edge of the lacquered screen;
I gasped and nearly pitched over, even though I was still covered. “I
shall know,” she chirped. “Millie! Top and bottom layers!”
   Millie produced a chemise of the softest, whitest linen I had ever
touched. I wanted to wear it, which addled my judgment still further.
I began to undress. Across the room, the girls bickered over colors for
the gown; apparently accounting for my complexion and my hair
required complicated algebra. I giggled, and began explaining how to
solve a quadratic complexion equation, even though I couldn’t quite
remember.
   I had removed all my clothing—and my good sense along with it—
when Glisselda popped her head around the end of the screen behind
me, saying, “Hold this scarlet up to your chin and let’s see—oh!”
   Her cry snapped the world back into hard focus for a moment. I
whirled to face her, holding Millie’s chemise up in front of me like a
shield, but she’d gone. The room reeled. She’d seen the band of silver
scales across my back. I clapped a hand to my mouth to stop myself
screaming.
   They whispered together urgently, Glisselda’s voice squeaky with
panic, Millie’s calm and reasonable. I yanked Millie’s chemise over my
head, almost tearing a shoulder seam in my rush because I couldn’t
work out where all my limbs were or how to move them. I curled up
on the floor, balling up my own gown, pressing it to my mouth
because I was breathing too hard. I waited in agony for either of them
to say something.
   “Phina?” said Princess Glisselda at long last, rapping upon the
screen as if it were a door. “Was that a … a Saint’s burthen?”
   My foggy brain couldn’t parse her words. What was a Saint’s
burthen? My reflex was to answer no, but mercifully I managed to
hold that in check. She was offering me a way out, if only I could
make sense of it.
   I had managed to stay silent. She couldn’t hear the tears coursing
down my cheeks. I took a deep breath and said shakily, “Is what a
Saint’s burthen?”
   “That silver girdle you wear.”
   I thanked all the Saints in Heaven, and their dogs. She had not
believed her own eyes. How crazy was that, to think you’d seen
dragon scales sprouting out of human flesh? It must have been
something, anything else. I coughed, to clear the tears out of my
voice, and said as casually as I could, “Oh, that. Yes. Saint’s burthen.”
   “For which Saint?”
   Which Saint … which Saint … I could not think of a single Saint.
Luckily, Millie piped up, “My aunt wore an iron anklet for St. Vitt. It
worked: she never doubted again.”
   I closed my eyes; it was easier to produce coherent thoughts
without vision distracting me. I injected some truth: “At my blessing
day, my patron was St. Yirtrudis.”
   “The heretic?” They both gasped. No one ever seemed to know
what Yirtrudis’s heresy had consisted of, but it didn’t seem to matter.
The very idea of heresy was dreadful enough.
   “The priest told us Heaven intended St. Capiti,” I continued, “but
from that day to this, I’ve had to wear a silver girdle to, uh, deflect
heresy.”
   This impressed and apparently satisfied them. They handed me a
gown; scarlet had won the argument. They did my hair and exclaimed
at how lovely I was when I bothered to try. “Keep the gown,” insisted
Millie. “Wear it on Treaty Eve.”
   “You are all generosity, my Millie!” said Glisselda, pinching Millie’s
ear proudly, as if she’d invented her lady-in-waiting herself.
   A rap at the door was Dame Okra, who stood on tiptoe to peer past
Millie’s shoulder. “She’s all patched up? I’ve found just the person to
whisk her away to safety—after which I require a word with you,
Infanta.”
   Millie and the princess helped me to my feet. “I’m so sorry,”
Glisselda whispered warmly in my ear. I looked down at her.
Everything seemed shinier viewed through three brandy glasses, but
the glittering at the corners of her eyes was real enough.
   Dame Okra ushered me out the door, toward my waiting father.
The chill wind in the open sledge did little to sober me up. My father
drove, seated close, sharing the lap rug and foot box. My head bobbed
unsteadily; he let me rest it on his shoulder. If I were to weep, surely
the tears would freeze upon my cheeks.
  “I’m sorry, Papa. I tried to keep to myself; I didn’t mean it to go
wrong,” I muttered into his dark wool cloak. He said nothing, which I
found inexplicably encouraging. I gestured grandly at the dark city, a
suitable backdrop to my drunken sense of epic tragic destiny. “But
they’re sending Orma away, which is my fault, and I played my flute
so beautifully that I fell in love with everyone and now I want
everything. And I can’t have it. And I’m ashamed to be running
away.”
  “You’re not running away,” said Papa, taking the reins in one
gloved hand and hesitantly patting my knee with the other. “At least,
you need not decide until morning.”
  “You’re not going to lock me up for good?” I said, on the verge of
blubbering. Some sober part of my brain seemed to observe
everything I did, clucking disdainfully, informing me that I ought to
be embarrassed, yet making no move to stop me.
  Papa ignored that comment, which was probably wise. Snow
spangled his gray lawyer’s cap; little droplets stuck to his brows and
lashes. He spoke in measured tones. “Did you fall in love with anyone
specific, or simply with the things you cannot have?”
  “Both,” I said, “and Lucian Kiggs.”
  “Ah.” For some time the only sounds were of harness bells, horses
snorting in the cold, and packed snow creaking under the sledge
runners. My head waxed heavy.
  I jerked awake. My father was speaking: “… that she never trusted
me. That cut more deeply than anything else. She believed I would
stop loving her if I knew the truth. All the gambles she took, and she
never took the one that mattered most. One in a thousand is better
odds than zero, but zero is what she settled for. Because how could I
love her if I couldn’t see her? Whom did I love, exactly?”
   I nodded, and jerked awake again. The air was alive, bright with
snowflakes.
   He said: “… time to mull it over, and I am no longer afraid. I am
sickened that you inherited her collapsing house of deceit, and that
instead of tearing it down, I shored it up with more deceit. What price
must be paid is mine to pay. If you are afraid on your own behalf, fair
enough, but do not fear for me—”
   Then he was shaking my shoulder lightly. “Seraphina. We’re home.”
   I threw my arms around him. He lifted me down and led me
through the lighted doorway.



The next morning, I lay a long time, staring at the ceiling of my old
room, wondering whether I’d imagined most of what he’d said. That
didn’t sound like a conversation I could have had with my father,
even if we’d both been drunk as lords.
   The sun was obnoxiously bright and my mouth tasted like death,
but I didn’t feel bad otherwise. I peeked at my garden, which I’d
neglected last night, but everyone was peaceful; even Fruit Bat was up
a tree, not demanding my attention. I rose and dressed in an old gown
I found in my wardrobe; the scarlet I’d arrived in was too fine for
everyday. I descended to the kitchen. Laughter and the smell of
morning bread drifted toward me up the corridor. I paused, my hand
upon the kitchen door, discerning their voices one by one, dreading to
step into that warm room and freeze it up.
   I took a deep breath and opened the door. For the merest moment,
before my presence was noticed, I drank in the cozy domestic scene:
the roaring hearth, the three fine bluestone platters hung above the
mantelpiece, little window altars to St. Loola and St. Yane and a new
one to St. Abaster, hanging herbs and strings of onions. My
stepmother, up to her elbows in the kneading trough, looked up at the
sound of the door and paled. At the heavy kitchen table, Tessie and
Jeanne, the twins, had been peeling apples; they froze, silent and
staring, Tessie with a length of peel dangling from her mouth like a
green tongue. My little half brothers, Paul and Ned, looked to their
mother uncertainly.
   I was a stranger in this family. I always had been.
   Anne-Marie wiped her hands on her apron and tried to smile.
“Seraphina. Welcome. If you’re looking for your father, he’s already
left for the palace.” Her brow crumpled in confusion. “You came from
there? You’d have passed him on the way.”
   I could not remember anyone meeting us at the door last night, now
that I thought of it. Had my father sneaked me into the house and
upstairs without telling her? That sounded more like Papa than a
conversation about love, lies, and fear.
   I tried to smile. It was an unspoken covenant with my stepmother:
we both tried. “I—in fact, I’m home to retrieve something. From my,
uh, room. That I forgot to take with me, and need.”
   Anne-Marie nodded eagerly. Yes, yes, good. The awkward
stepdaughter was leaving soon. “Please, go on up. This is still your
house.”
   I drifted back upstairs, lightly dazed, wishing I had told her the
truth, because what was I going to do for breakfast now?
Astonishingly, my coin purse had made the whole journey and wasn’t
languishing on the floor of Millie’s room. I’d buy myself a bun
somewhere, or … my heart leaped. I could see Orma! He had hoped
I’d come see him today. That was a plan, at least. I would surprise
Orma before he disappeared for good.
   I pushed that latter thought aside.
   I packed the scarlet gown carefully into a satchel and made up the
bed. I could never fluff the tick like Anne-Marie; she was going to
figure out that I’d slept here. Ah, well, let her. It was Papa’s to
explain.
   Anne-Marie required no farewells. She knew what I was, and it
seemed to put her at ease when I behaved like a thoughtless saar. I
opened the front door ready to head into the snowy city when there
came a pattering of slippered feet behind me. I turned to see my half
sisters rushing up. “Did you find what you came for?” asked Jeanne,
her pale brow wrinkled in concern. “Because Papa said to give you
this.”
   Tessie brandished a long, slender box in one hand, a folded letter in
the other.
   “Thanks.” I put both in my satchel, suspecting I should view them
in privacy.
   They bit their lips in exactly the same way, even though they
weren’t identical. Jeanne’s hair was the color of clover honey; Tessie
had Papa’s dark locks, like me. I said, “You turn eleven in a few
months, do you not? Would you—would you like to come see the
palace for your birthday? If it’s all right with your mother, I mean.”
  They nodded, shy of me.
  “All right then. I’ll arrange it. You could meet the princesses.” They
didn’t answer, and I could think of nothing more to say. I’d tried. I
waved a feeble farewell and fled through the snowy streets to my
uncle’s.



Orma’s apartment was a single room above a mapmaker’s, nearer to
my father’s house than St. Ida’s, so I checked there first. Basind
answered the door but had no idea where my uncle had gone. “If I
knew, I’d be there with him,” he explained, his voice like sand in my
stockings. He gazed into space, tugging a hangnail with his teeth,
while I left a message. I had no confidence it would be delivered.
  Anxiety hastened my feet toward St. Ida’s.
  The streets were jammed full of people out for the Golden Plays. I
considered walking down by the river, which was less crowded, but I
hadn’t dressed warmly enough. The crush in the streets stopped the
wind, at least. There were large charcoal braziers set every block or so
to keep playgoers from freezing; I took advantage of these when I
could wedge myself close enough.
  I had not intended to watch the plays, but it was hard not to pause
at the sight of a giant, fire-belching head of St. Vitt outside the Guild
of Glassblowers’ warehouse. A blazing tongue ten yards long roared
forth; everyone shrieked. St. Vitt caught his own eyebrows on fire—
unintentionally, but Heavens, was he fierce with his brow aflame!
  “St. Vitt, snort and spit!” chanted the crowd.
  St. Vitt had not been possessed of such draconian talents in life, of
course. It was a metaphor for his fiery temper or for his judgment
upon unbelievers. Or, as likely as not, somebody at the Guild of
Glassblowers had awakened in the middle of the night with the most
fantastic idea ever, never mind that it was theologically questionable.
  The Golden Plays stretched the hagiographies all round because the
fact was, no one really knew. The Lives of the Saints contained many
contradictions; the psalter’s poems made things no clearer, and then
there was the statuary. St. Polypous in the Lives had three legs, for
example, but country shrines showed as many as twenty. At our
cathedral, St. Gobnait had a hive of blessed bees; at South Forkey, she
was famously depicted as a bee, big as a cow, with a stinger as long as
your forearm. My substitute patroness, St. Capiti, usually carried her
severed head on a plate, but in some tales her head had tiny legs of its
own and skittered around independently, scolding people.
   Delving deeper into the truth, of course, my psalter had originally
coughed up St. Yirtrudis. I had never seen her without her face
blacked out or her head smashed to plaster dust, so surely she had
been the most terrible Saint of all.
   I kept moving, past St. Loola’s apple and St. Kathanda’s colossal
merganser, past St. Ogdo slaying dragons and St. Yane getting up to
his usual shenanigans, which often involved impregnating entire
villages. I passed vendors of chestnuts, pasties, and pie, which made
my stomach rumble. I heard music ahead: syrinx, oud, and drum, a
peculiarly Porphyrian combination. Above the heads of the crowd, I
made out the upper stories of a pyramid of acrobats, Porphyrians, by
the look of them, and …
   No, not acrobats. Pygegyria dancers. The one at the top looked like
Fruit Bat.
   I meant Abdo. Sweet St. Siucre. It was Abdo, in loose trousers of
green sateen, his bare arms snaking sinuously against the winter sky.
   He’d been here all along, trying to find me, and I’d been putting
him off.
   I was still staring at the dancers, openmouthed, when someone
grabbed my arm. I startled and cried out.
   “Hush. Walk,” muttered Orma’s voice in my ear. “I haven’t much
time. I gave Basind the slip; I’m not confident I can do it again. I
suspect the embassy is paying him to watch me.”
   He still held my arm; I covered his hand with my own. The crowd
flowed around us like a river around an island. “I learned something
new about Imlann from one of my maternal memories,” I told him.
“Can we find a quieter place to talk?”
   He dropped my arm and ducked up an alley; I followed him
through a brick-walled maze of barrels and stacked firewood and up
the steps of a little shrine to St. Clare. I balked when I saw her—
thinking of Kiggs, feeling her dyspeptic glare as criticism—but I kissed
my knuckle respectfully and focused on my uncle.
   His false beard had gone missing or he hadn’t bothered with it. He
had deep creases beside his mouth, which made him look
unexpectedly old. “Quickly,” he said. “If I hadn’t spotted you, I’d have
disappeared by now.”
  I took a shaky breath; I’d come so close to missing him. “Your sister
once overheard Imlann consorting with a cabal of treasonous generals,
about a dozen in all. One of them, General Akara, was instrumental in
getting the Goreddi knights banished.”
  “Akara is a familiar name,” said Orma. “He was caught, but the
Ardmagar had his brain pruned too close to the stem; he lost most of
his ability to function.”
  “Does the Queen know?” I asked, shocked. “The knights were
banished under false pretenses, but nothing has been done to correct
this!”
  My uncle shrugged. “I doubt Comonot disapproved of that
consequence.”
  Alas, I believed that; Comonot’s rules were applied inconsistently. I
said, “If the cabal could infiltrate the knights, they really could be
anywhere.”
  Orma stared at St. Clare, pondering. “They couldn’t be quite
anywhere, not easily. There would be a danger of law-abiding dragons
sniffing them out at court. They could count on there being no other
dragons present among the knights.”
  It hit me then, what Imlann might have been doing. “What if your
father has been observing the knights? He might have burned their
barn and shown himself as a final assessment of their capabilities.”
  “A final assessment?” Orma sat down impiously on the altar, deep
in thought. “Meaning Akara didn’t just have the knights banished for
vengeance? Meaning this cabal has been deliberately working toward
the extinction of the dracomachia?”
  There was one clear implication of this; we both knew what it was.
My eyes asked the question, but Orma was already shaking his head
in denial.
  “The peace is not a ruse,” he said. “It is not some ploy to lull
Goredd into false complacency until such time as dragonkind regains
a clear superiority of—”
  “Of course not,” I said quickly. “At least, Comonot did not intend it
that way. I believe that, but is it possible that his generals only
pretended to agree to it, all the while making St. Polypous’s sign
behind their backs—so to speak?”
  Orma fingered the coins in the offering bowl on the altar, letting
the copper pieces dribble through his fingers like water. “Then they
have gravely miscalculated,” he said. “While they sat around waiting
for the knights to grow old, a younger generation has been raised on
peaceful ideals, scholarship, and cooperation.”
   “What if the Ardmagar were dead? If whoever took his place
wanted war? Would this cabal need you and your agemates? Couldn’t
they fight a war without you, especially if there were no dracomachia
against them?”
   Orma rattled coins in his hand and did not answer.
   “Would the younger generation stand against the elder, if it came to
it?” I pressed on, remembering the two saarantrai in the dining hall. I
was being hard on him, but this was a crucial point. “Can the current
batch of scholars and diplomats even fight?”
   He recoiled as if he’d heard that accusation before. “Forgive me,” I
said, “but if war is brewing in the hearts of the old generals, your
generation may have some painful decisions to make.”
   “Generation against generation? Dragon against dragon? Sounds
treasonous to me,” said a grating voice behind me. I turned to see
Basind mounting the steps of the shrine. “What are you doing here,
Orma? Not offering devotions to St. Clare, surely?”
   “Waiting for you,” said Orma lightly. “I only wonder that it took
you so long.”
   “Your wench led me here,” said Basind greasily. If he was hoping to
get a reaction from Orma, he was disappointed. Orma’s face remained
completely empty. “I could report you,” said the newskin. “You’re
having trysts in roadside shrines.”
   “Do,” said Orma, waving a dismissive hand. “Be off. Scamper and
report.”
   Basind looked uncertain how to respond to this bravado. He pushed
his limp hair out of his eyes and sniffed. “I’m charged with seeing you
report to the surgeons in time.”
   “I gathered that,” said Orma. “But you will recall that my niece—
yes, my niece, daughter of my nameless sister—wished to bid me
farewell, and wished to do so in private. She is half human, after all,
and it pains her that I will not recognize her when I see her again. If
you would but give us a few more minutes—”
   “I do not intend to take my eyes off you again.” Basind bugged his
eyes to underscore the point.
   Orma shrugged, looking resigned. “If you can endure human
blubbering, you have a stronger stomach than most.”
   My uncle shot me a sharp look, and for once we were in perfect
understanding. I began to wail noisily, giving it everything I had. I
howled like a banshee, like a gale down the mountainside. I bawled
like a colicky baby. I expected Basind to stubbornly stand his ground
—this seemed a very silly way to drive him off—but he recoiled in
revulsion, saying, “I will stand guard just outside.”
   “As you wish,” said my uncle. He watched until Basind had turned
his back to us, then closed in, speaking directly into my ear:
“Continue to wail, as long as you can.”
   I looked at him, sorrowing in earnest, unable to say any words of
parting because I had to expend all my breath on loud crying. Without
a backward glance, Orma ducked behind the altar and out of sight.
There must have been a crypt under the shrine, as sometimes
happened; the crypt would surely connect with the great warren of
tunnels under the city.
   I wailed, for real and for true, staring down St. Clare, beating on the
hem of her robe with my fist until I was hoarse and coughing. Basind
glanced back, then looked again, startled. I could not let him work out
where Orma had gone. I looked past Basind, over his shoulder,
pretending to see my uncle’s face in the shuttered alley windows
behind him, and I cried, “Orma! Run!”
   Basind whirled, perplexed at how Orma could have reached the
alley without his seeing. I rushed him, shoving him into a pile of
firewood, causing a little avalanche of logs. I took off running as fast
as I could. He recovered far more quickly than anticipated, his flat-
footed gait echoing behind me, his silver bell ringing out a warning.
   I wasn’t much of a runner; each step seemed to drive a spike into
my knees, and the hem of my gown, sodden with dirty snow, clung to
my ankles, nearly tripping me. I ducked left and jogged right, sliding
on bloody ice behind a butcher’s. I climbed a ladder onto someone’s
work shed, hoisted it up after myself, and used it to climb down the
other side. That struck me as clever until I saw Basind’s hands grip the
far edge of the roof. He was strong enough to pull himself up; that
was unexpected. I jumped off the ladder and crash-landed, causing a
ruckus among the chickens in someone’s little yard. I sprinted through
the gate into yet another alley. I turned north, then north again,
making for the crowded river road. Surely the crowd would stop
Basind—not just slow him down, but restrain him. No Goreddi could
stand idly by while a saarantras chased one of their own.
   Basind’s breath rasped close by my neck; his hand hit my swinging
satchel but couldn’t quite get a grip on it. I burst out of the alley into
bright sunlight. People scattered before me, crying out in surprise. It
took a moment for my eyes to adjust, but what I saw then stopped me
short. I heard Basind stop running at almost the same moment,
arrested by exactly the same sight—we’d emerged in the middle of a
cluster of men in black-feathered caps: the Sons of St. Ogdo.
I did the first thing that occurred to me. I pointed at Basind and
cried: “He’s trying to hurt me!”
  It’s possible he was; I’m certain he looked guilty, chasing me out of
an alley like that; and I knew, in my heart, that I was maligning one
dragon to save another. But I should never have said such a thing, not
to the Sons of St. Ogdo, who needed little enough excuse to harm a
saar.
  They mobbed him, slamming him up against the side of a building,
and I knew I had started something far larger than I had intended.
There must have been forty Sons in this cluster alone; their numbers
were growing daily, with the Ardmagar here.
  My eyes met those of one of the Sons, and with a shock, I
recognized the Earl of Apsig.
  He was disguised—homespun clothes, a cobbler’s apron, a squashed
hat holding his black feather—but nothing could alter those arrogant
blue eyes. He’d surely seen me when I dashed from the alley; he tried
to conceal himself now, ducking behind his fellows, averting his face
while they chanted St. Ogdo’s Malediction Against the Worm: Eye of
Heaven, seek out the saar. Let him not lurk among us, but reveal him in his
unholiness. His soulless inhumanity flies like a banner before the discerning
eyes of the righteous. We will cleanse the world of him!
  I looked around desperately for the Guard and spotted them
approaching from the north, riding toward us in a unit.
  They were escorting the royal coaches around to the Golden Plays.
The Sons noticed them too, and called to each other. Leaving just two
men to restrain Basind, who hung limply between them, the rest
spread across the roadway, just the way they’d been standing when I
came crashing out of the alley.
  The Sons had been waiting here for the Ardmagar’s coach.
  Out of the corner of my eye I saw Josef duck up the alley. He had
the right idea. I’d been in riots before; the novelty wore off quickly.
  I shouldered my way through the crowd and reached the alley just
as the Guard reached the front line of Sons. Shouts rang out behind
me, but I didn’t turn to look. I couldn’t. I fled the fighting as fast as
my cold feet would carry me.



The Sons had gangs all over town, I discovered. I had not, in fact,
started the worst day of rioting our city had ever seen, but that was
cold comfort. The Sons had seized the Wolfstoot Bridge; in the
warehouse district, they were throwing bricks. I kept to the alleys but
still had to cross the major arteries of the city without getting my
skull cracked open. Orma was lucky to be underground.
   I had hoped to reach my father’s. I made it as far as the cathedral;
from there, the action in the plaza and upon Cathedral Bridge looked
grim. The Guard had subdued the plaza, but the Sons had erected a
barricade upon the bridge and set it on fire, and they were holding
their ground behind it.
   Someone had vandalized the Countdown Clock, switching the heads
of the Dragon and Queen and posing them suggestively together. A
question was scrawled across the clock face: But how long until the
filthy quigs go home? Another hand had written in answer: Not until we
drive the devils off!
   The cathedral could provide me with refuge until the Guard retook
the bridge. I was not the only one who hoped so. There were about
fifty people in the nave, mostly children and elders. The priests had
corralled them all together and were treating injuries. I didn’t care to
huddle with everyone else. I skirted the eastern side of the Golden
House without the priests noticing and crept quietly toward the south
transept.
   The megaharmonium hulked in its alcove under a tarp, defense
against dust and greasy fingers. I wandered behind it for a closer look
and because the chapel offered a space away from the questioning
eyes of the priests. Behind the megaharmonium were bellows as tall
as my shoulder. Did someone have to sit back here, pumping
endlessly, going slowly deaf? That sounded like unpleasant work.
   The chapel looked like it had stood empty a long time; the walls
were stripped of decoration, leaving only traces of gilt in the cracks of
the wood paneling. I could discern dark shapes that had once been
painted letters. It took some squinting, but I finally read the words No
Heaven but this.
   That was the motto of St. Yirtrudis. I shivered.
   Above me, her outline was just visible beneath layers of whitewash.
There was a rough patch where her face had been chiseled off, but
around it her shadow lingered: her outstretched arms, her billowing
gown, her … hair? I hoped that was her hair and not tentacles or
spider legs or something worse. Nothing was clear but the silhouette.
   I heard muttering out in the transept and poked my nose out of the
chapel. There stood Josef, Earl of Apsig, minus his black-feathered
cap. He talked quietly with a priest. The priest’s back was to me, but
he wore a string of amber prayer beads around his neck. I drew back
quickly and crouched behind the instrument, watching their feet
between the legs of the bench. They conferred, embraced, and then
parted. By the time I felt safe to rise, Josef had departed through the
southern doors.
   I crept back to the great crossing, stood behind the Golden House,
and looked for the priest he’d been speaking with among those
tending injuries in the nave. None of them wore amber beads.
   A peculiar movement in the north aisle of the nave caught my eye. I
thought the figure, cowled and cassocked, was a monk at first, except
for how strangely he was moving. He stood frozen in unnatural
attitudes for long stretches, followed by almost imperceptible motion.
It was like watching the hands of a clock or clouds on a still day, all of
this punctuated by extremely brief bursts of motion. He obviously
intended stealth but seemed unfamiliar with the usual means of
achieving it.
   I suspected a saar.
   I lay low until the figure reached the north transept, where I had a
better viewing angle. I looked full at him, recognized his profile, and
froze.
   It was the Ardmagar.
   I followed him toward the shadowy apse, keeping my distance. The
floor of the apse was marble, so finely polished it looked wet.
Hundreds of tiny candles reflected off the gilded ceiling vaults,
lending a shimmer to the incense-spiced air. Comonot walked more
normally now, past grim St. Vitt and devious St. Polypous. He
proceeded to the chapel at the very end, where St. Gobnait, round-
cheeked and benevolent, sat enthroned, her blessed beehive in her
lap, her head crowned with golden honeycomb. Her eyes shone a
brilliant unearthly blue, the whites a glaring contrast to her burnished
face.
   Comonot paused, lowered his cowl, and turned to face me, smiling.
   The smile took me aback, coming from a dragon, but it evaporated
the instant he recognized me. He turned away from me, back toward
the Holy Skep, which the monks took outside in springtime to be a
dwelling for her blessed bees.
   “What do you want?” said Comonot, addressing St. Gobnait.
   I addressed his plastered-down hair: “You should not be out on your
own.”
   “I crossed the city on foot without incident,” he said, gesturing
grandly. I was hit by a waft of incongruous perfume. “No one looks
twice at a monk.”
   They’d look twice at a scented monk, but no good could come of
arguing the point. I kept on doggedly: “There’s something I must tell
you, about my grandfather.”
   He kept his back to me, pretending to examine the Skep. “We know
all about him. Eskar is probably biting his head off right now.”
   “I have maternal memories—” He scoffed at this, but I persisted.
“Imlann revealed to my mother that he isn’t alone in despising the
peace. There’s a cabal. They’re waiting for Goredd to weaken
sufficiently, at which point I can only guess—”
   “I’m sure you don’t have a single name.”
   “General Akara.”
   “Caught and modified, twenty years ago.”
   I gave up trying not to antagonize him. “You never informed our
Queen.”
   “My generals are loyal,” he sniffed over his shoulder. “If you wish
to convince me of a plot, you’ll have to do better than that.”
   I opened my mouth to argue, but an arm wrapped around my throat
from behind, choking off my voice, and then someone stabbed me in
the back.
Or tried to, anyway.
   My attacker released me with a cry of dismay. His dagger made no
dent in my scaly midriff; he dropped the weapon on the marble floor
with a ringing clang. Comonot whirled at the sound, drawing a sword
concealed in his robes. I ducked; the Ardmagar struck faster than I’d
believed possible in a man of his age and girth—but then, he wasn’t
an ordinary man. By the time I raised my head, there was a dead
priest on the floor of the apse, his robes a tangled mass of black, his
life a wash of crimson pooling before the bishop’s throne. His blood
steamed in the frigid air.
   I glimpsed the string of amber prayer beads at his throat. This was
surely the priest I’d seen speaking with Josef. I rolled him over and
cried out in alarm.
   It was the clothier who’d threatened me. Thomas Broadwick.
   Comonot’s nostrils flared. This could not be good, a saarantras
smelling fresh death. I heard voices and the scuffle of feet rushing up
the apse toward us; the din of our brief battle had not gone unnoted. I
froze in panic, not knowing whether to urge the Ardmagar to run or
to turn him in myself.
   He’d saved my life, or I’d saved his. Not even that was clear.
   Three monks reached us, skidding to a stop at the sight of our
gruesome tableau. I turned to Comonot, intending to follow his lead,
but he was unexpectedly shocked and pale; he looked dumbly at me,
shaking his head. I took a deep breath and said, “There’s been an
assassination attempt.”



Comonot and I were not officially detained, but “voluntarily” confined
to the bishop’s study until the Queen’s Guard arrived. The bishop had
good food and wine sent up from the seminary kitchens, and
welcomed us to peruse his library.
   I would have been happy to make free with the books, but Comonot
would not stop pacing, and anytime I moved at all he flinched, as if
he feared I might come over and touch him. I probably could have
cornered him behind the lectern if I’d had a mind to.
   At last he burst out: “Explain this body to me!”
   He was asking the right person. I had addressed similar questions
from Orma twenty dozen times. “What specifically perturbs you,
Ardmagar?”
   He seated himself across from me, looking directly at me for the
first time. His face was white; sweat plastered his hair to his forehead.
“Why did I do that?” he said. “Why did I reflexively kill that man?”
   “Self-preservation. He’d stabbed me; he was likely to go for you
next.”
   “No,” he said, shaking his jowls. “That is, perhaps he would have
attacked me, but that’s not what went through my mind. I was
protecting you.”
   I almost thanked him, but he seemed so profoundly disturbed by
the whole thing that I hesitated. “Why do you regret protecting me?
Because of what I am?”
   He regained some of his hauteur: his lip curled and his heavy lids
lowered. “What you are is every bit as repulsive to me as it ever was.”
He poured himself a large glass of wine. “However, I am now in your
debt. If I had been alone, I might be dead.”
   “You shouldn’t have come here alone. How did you leave the
entourage without being seen?”
   He took several large gulps and considered the air in front of him.
“I was never in my carriage. I had no intention of viewing the Golden
Plays; I have no interest in your queer religion or the dramas it
spawns.”
   “Then what were you doing in the cathedral? Not finding religion,
one assumes.”
   “Not your concern.” He sipped wine, his eyes narrowing in thought.
“What do you call doing something on behalf of someone else for no
apparent reason? Altruism?”
   “Er, you mean what you did for me?”
   “Of course that’s what I mean.”
   “But you had reason: you were grateful I had saved your life.”
   “No!” he shouted. I jumped, startled. “That didn’t occur to me until
after the deed was done. I defended you without even thinking. For
the merest moment I …” He paused, his breath labored, his eyes
glazed with horror. “I had a strong feeling about what happened to
you. I may have cared! The idea of you hurting made me … hurt!”
  “I suppose I’d call that empathy,” I said, not exactly feeling
empathy myself for how much the idea disgusted him.
  “But it wasn’t me, you understand?” he cried, the wine already
making him histrionic. “It was this infernal body. It fills with a great
surge of feeling before one has a chance to think. It’s a species
preservation instinct, maybe, to defend the young and helpless, but I
care nothing for you. This body wants things I could never want.”
  It was, of course, at that very moment that Captain Kiggs opened
the door.
  He looked embarrassed. I don’t imagine I looked much different.
The last time we’d spoken I’d been under arrest. “Ardmagar. Maid
Dombegh,” he said, nodding. “You’ve left a bit of a mess up by the
Skep. Care to tell me what happened?”
  Comonot did the talking; we’d gone up the apse to speak privately,
in his version. I held my breath, but Comonot let nothing slip about
my background or my maternal memory. He simply claimed I’d had
confidential information for him.
  “Pertaining to what?” asked Kiggs.
  “Pertaining to none of your business,” grumped the Ardmagar. He’d
had enough wine that he could no longer find the door to the mental
room where he was supposed to stow his emotions. If he even had
such a room.
  Kiggs shrugged, and Comonot continued, detailing the swift and
bloody fight. Kiggs pulled Thomas’s dagger out of his belt, turning it
in his fingers. The tip had crumpled grotesquely. “Any idea how this
happened?”
  Comonot frowned. “Could it have hit the floor in such a way as to
—”
  “Not likely, unless he threw it straight at the stones,” said Kiggs,
looking full at me for the first time. “Seraphina?”
  That old, inconvenient feeling bubbled up in response to his using
my first name. “He stabbed me,” I said, staring at my hands.
  “What? No one told me this! Where?” He sounded so alarmed that I
looked up. I wished I hadn’t; it hurt to see him concerned about me.
  I felt around near my right kidney. The hole went through my cloak
and through all my layers of gown, unsurprisingly. Could I refasten
my belt to cover it? I glanced at Kiggs again; his mouth had fallen
open. He had a point: I should be dead.
   “Did Glisselda not tell you? I’ve got a … a Saint’s burthen. A silver
girdle that protects me from heresy. It saved me.”
   Kiggs shook his head in wonder. “It’s always something unexpected
with you, isn’t it. A word to the wise: a blow hard enough to do
this”—he held up the bent dagger—“is going to leave a painful bruise,
or even a laceration. I’d let the palace physicians have a look at it.”
   “I’ll bear that in mind,” I said. My back was sore; I wondered what
bruised scales looked like.
   “Ardmagar, the city is secured,” said Kiggs. “A contingent of
Guardsmen is here to escort you back to Castle Orison. I expect you to
stay there for the rest of your visit.”
   Comonot nodded hastily; if he had once doubted the sense of
remaining under guard, he did no longer.
   “What were you doing here alone?” asked Kiggs. Comonot gave him
almost the same answer he’d given me, his voice now soggy with
melodrama. Kiggs’s brow creased. “I’m going to let you reconsider
that answer. Someone knew you’d be here. You are withholding
information material to this case. We have laws about that; I’m sure
my grandmother would be happy to summarize them for you at
dinner this evening.”
   The Ardmagar puffed up like an angry hedgehog, but Kiggs opened
the door, signaled his men, and had the old saar packed off in a
matter of minutes. He closed the door again and looked at me.
   I stared down at the bishop’s ornate Porphyrian rug, agitated and
anxious.
   “You didn’t help the Ardmagar escape his guard, I suppose?” he
said.
   “No,” I said.
   “Why were you up at the Skep with him?”
   I shook my head, not daring to look at him.
   Kiggs put his hands on his hips and wandered across the room,
pretending to examine the framed calligraphic rendering of St.
Gobnait’s benedictio hung between the bookcases. “Well,” he said, “at
least we know who the would-be assassin was.”
   “Yes,” I said.
   He slowly turned to face me, and I realized “we” hadn’t meant him
and me. It meant him and the Guard. “So you knew him,” he said
lightly. “That rather changes the color of things. Do you know why he
might have tried to kill you?”
   With shaking hands, I rifled through my satchel, underneath the
crimson gown and the gift from my father, until I found my coin
purse. I emptied it onto the seat of the bishop’s lectern, the nearest
horizontal surface; a shadow across my hands was Kiggs stepping into
the window light, drawing near to see. I picked the lizard out of the
heap of coins and handed it to the prince without a word.
   “That’s a little grotesque,” he said, turning it right side up in his
hand and studying its face. He smiled, though, so at least he hadn’t
instantly assumed it was another illegal device. “There’s a story here, I
presume?”
   “I gave coin to a quigutl panhandler, and it gave me this in
exchange.”
   The prince nodded sagely. “Now the quig will think it’s found a
particularly fruitful street corner, the neighbors will get upset, and
we’ll be called in twice a week to escort him back to Quighole. But
what’s the connection to the dead clothier?”
   Ah, now the lying had to start: there was a collapse and vision in
the middle of this story, tangling it up with shame and fear. I said,
“He saw the transaction. He was very upset, and he called me all
kinds of terrible things.”
   “And yet he brought you back to the palace,” said Kiggs quietly.
   I looked up, shocked that he knew, but of course the barbican guard
would keep records and report to him. His eyes were tranquil, but it
was the calm of a cloudy summer sky: it could change to stormy with
little warning. I had to tread carefully: “His brother Silas insisted that
they offer me a ride to make up for Thomas’s rudeness.”
   “He must have been exceedingly rude.”
   I turned away from him, tucking my purse back into my bag. “He
called me a worm-riding quig lover, and told me women like me get
thrown into the river in sacks.”
   Kiggs was silent long enough that I looked up and met his gaze. His
expression was a tangle of shock, concern, and annoyance. He turned
away first, shaking his head and saying, “It’s a pity the Ardmagar
killed him; I’d have liked to discuss these women in sacks. You should
have brought this to my attention, or your father’s.”
   “You’re right. I should have,” I murmured. My need to conceal
myself was a hindrance to doing right, I was beginning to notice.
   He returned his attention to the figurine in his hand. “So what does
it do?”
   “Do?” I hadn’t bothered to check.
   He mistook the question for a deeper ignorance. “We confiscate
demonic devices every week. They all do something, even the legal
ones.”
   He turned it over in his hands, prodding it here and there with
curious fingers. We were both leaning over the thing now, like two
small children who’ve captured a cicada. Like friends. I pointed out a
seam at the base of its neck; Kiggs grasped my meaning at once. He
pulled its head. Nothing. He twisted it.
   “Thluuu-thluuu-thluuuuu!”
   The voice rang out so brightly that Kiggs dropped the figurine. It
did not break, but bounced under the lectern, where it continued to
jabber while Kiggs groped around for it. “That’s quigutl Mootya, isn’t
it? Can you understand it?” he asked, turning his head toward me as
he searched for it by feel.
   I listened carefully. “It seems to be a rant about dragons
transforming into saarantrai. ‘I see you there, impostor! You think
you’ve fooled them, that you pass invisibly in a crowd, but your
elbows stick out funny and you stink. You are a fraud. At least we
quigutl are honest.… ’ It goes on in that vein.”
   Kiggs half smiled. “I had no idea quigs held their cousins in such
contempt.”
   “I doubt they all do,” I said, but realized I didn’t know. I was less
frightened of quigs than most people, but even I had never bothered
to learn what they think.
   He twisted the figurine’s head back, and the grating, lisping speech
ceased. “What horrible tricks one could play with a device like this,”
mused the prince. “Can you imagine setting it off in the Blue Salon?”
   “Half the people would leap up on the furniture, shrieking, and the
other half would draw their daggers,” I said, laughing. “For additional
amusement, you could bet on who would do which.”
   “Which would you do?” he said, and there was suddenly a
sharpness in his tone. “My guess is neither. You’d understand what it
was saying, and you’d be standing stock-still, listening hard. You
wouldn’t want anyone to hurt a quig, not if you could stop that from
happening.”
   He stepped toward me; every inch of me quivered at his proximity.
“However practiced you are at deception, you cannot anticipate every
eventuality,” he said quietly. “Sooner or later, something takes you by
surprise, you react honestly as yourself, and you are caught out.”
   I reeled a bit, in shock. How had he turned interrogator so fast?
“Are you referring to something specific?” I said.
   “I’m just trying to understand what you were doing here with
Ardmagar Comonot, and why you were stabbed. This does not explain
it.” He wagged my figurine, pinched tightly between his thumb and
forefinger. “It was no spur-of-the-moment crime; the man was
disguised as a priest. Who told him Comonot would be here? Did he
expect Comonot to meet someone else—someone he also intended to
kill—or were you just in the wrong place at the wrong time?”
   I stared, openmouthed.
   “Fine,” said Kiggs, his expression closed. “Better silence than a lie.”
   “I have never wanted to lie to you!” I cried.
   “Hm. That must be a wretched existence, forced to lie when you
don’t want to.”
   “Yes!” I could hold back no longer; I wept, hiding my face in my
hands.
   Kiggs stood apart from me, watching me weep. “That all came out
harsher than I intended, Phina,” he said, sounding miserable. “I’m
sorry. But this is two days in a row that someone has stabbed you.” I
looked up sharply; he answered my unasked question. “Aunt Dionne
confessed, or rather lamented Lady Corongi’s faulty intelligence to
anyone who would listen. Selda was heartsick to learn it was her own
mother who cut you.”
   He stepped closer; I kept my eyes on the gold buttons of his
doublet. “Seraphina, if you are in some sort of trouble, if you need
protection from someone, I want to help. And I can’t help if you give
me no indication of what’s going on.”
   “I can’t tell you.” My chin trembled. “I don’t want to lie to you, but
if I don’t, then there’s nothing I can say. My hands are tied.”
   He handed me his handkerchief. I stole a glance at his face; he
looked so worried that I couldn’t bear it. I wanted to take him in my
arms as if he were the one in need of reassurance.
   My father’s words from the night before came back to me. What if
he was right? What if there was a chance, any chance, that Kiggs
wouldn’t despise me if he knew the truth? One chance in a million
was still better than zero. I felt dizzy at the thought of it; it was too
like hanging over the parapet of the bell tower, watching your slipper
spinning through space, falling to the plaza below.
   It wasn’t just my scales between us. He had duties and obligations
and an overweening need to do the right thing. The Kiggs I loved
could not love me the way things stood; if he could have, he would
not have been my Kiggs. I had reached for him once, and he had been
terrified enough that he hadn’t protested, but I couldn’t imagine him
tolerating it again.
  Kiggs cleared his throat. “Selda was beside herself with worry this
morning. I told her you’d be back, no question, that Aunt Dionne
hadn’t frightened you off for good. I sincerely hope that’s true.”
  I nodded shakily. He opened the door for me and held it, but caught
my arm as I passed. “Aunt Dionne is not above the law, first heir or
not. If you wish to pursue justice for your arm, Selda and I would
support you.”
  I took a deep breath. “I’ll consider it. Thank you.”
  He looked pained; something important still had not been said. “I’ve
been angry with you, Phina, but also worried.”
  “Forgive me, Prince—”
  “Kiggs. Please,” he said. “I’ve been angry with myself as well. I
behaved rather foolishly after our encounter with Imlann, as if I could
blithely disregard my obligations and—”
  “No,” I said, shaking my head a bit too vehemently. “Not at all.
People do strange things when they’re terrified. I hadn’t given it a
second thought.”
  “Ah. It is a great relief to hear you say that.” He didn’t look
relieved. “Please know I consider myself your friend, what bumps we
have encountered upon that road notwithstanding. The heart of you is
good. You’re an intelligent and fearless investigator, and a good
teacher too, I hear. Glisselda swears she couldn’t do without you. We
want you to stay.”
  He still had hold of my arm. I extricated myself gently and let him
take me home.
The sky was just growing dark when our carriage rolled into Stone
Court. Princess Glisselda waited to meet us; she fussed over me and
fussed at Kiggs for letting me get hurt once again, as if protecting me
ought to have been his priority when the entire city was up in arms.
Kiggs smiled at what a little mother hen she was. Glisselda placed
herself firmly between us, giving an arm to each, chattering away as
was her wont. I pleaded abject tiredness and broke up our little trio at
the earliest opportunity.
   I was exhausted, though it was not yet five o’clock. I trudged up to
my room and threw myself into a chair, letting my satchel drop to the
floor between my feet.
   I could not continue living in such close proximity to Kiggs if it was
always going to hurt this much. I would stay through Treaty Eve,
tomorrow night, and then I would give Viridius my notice. Maybe not,
even. I would simply disappear, run off to Blystane or Porphyry or
Segosh, one of the big cities, where I could disappear into the crowds
and never be seen again.
   My left wrist itched under its bandage. I just wanted to look at the
scale scab, I told myself. See how it was getting on. I began
unfastening the bandage, pulling at it with my teeth when it was
difficult to undo.
   There was, indeed, a crusted scab where the scale had been; it
squatted malevolently among smooth silver scales to either side. I ran
a finger over it; it felt rough and sore. Compared with that fat black
scab, the scales were not so ugly. Trust me to turn my native
hideousness into something even more hideous. I hated that scab. I
pried up an edge, then had to look away, gritting my teeth and
cringing with revulsion.
   Still, I did not intend to stop until I had torn a hole in myself again.
   The satchel at my feet fell open. I must have kicked it. Out of the
bag fell the long, slender box and the letter, which just this morning—
it seemed longer ago than that—my sisters had handed me on my
father’s behalf. I backed off my wrist for the moment and took up the
box. My heart pounded painfully; the box was the right size and shape
to contain a specific musical instrument. I wasn’t sure I could stand
the heartbreak if it didn’t.
   I fetched the letter and opened it first.

   My daughter,
     I suspect you will remember little of our conversation last night,
   which is just as well. I fear I babbled on foolishly. However: I owe
   you this, at least. Your mother had more than one flute, or I could
   never have borne breaking the other. I still regret that, not least for
   your look of betrayal. I was the monster in our household, not you.
     What comes, comes. I have made my peace with the past and
   with the future. Do what you feel you must, and do not be afraid.

                                           All my love, for good or ill,
                                                                 Papa

   With shaking hands I opened the wooden case. Inside, wrapped in a
long strip of saffron fabric, was a flute of polished ebony, inlaid with
silver and mother-of-pearl. It took my breath away; I knew it at once
for hers.
   I put it to my lips and played a scale, smooth as water. Both my
wrists twinged painfully as my fingers moved. I took the saffron strip
and wound it around my scabby left wrist. It came from both my
parents. Let it remind me I was not alone, and protect me from
myself.
   I rose renewed, and headed for the door. There was work yet to be
done, and I was the only one who could do it.



Comonot was important enough that he had been given a room in the
royal family’s private wing, the most luxurious and heavily guarded
part of the palace. As I approached the guard station, my stomach
fluttered anxiously. I had no clear plan for how to bluff this time, no
lie I could tell them. I would ask to be allowed through to see the
Ardmagar, and see what happened.
   I nearly balked when I recognized Mikey the Fish, one of the guards
from before, but I gripped my saffron-bound wrist, lifted my chin, and
stepped up to him anyway. “I need to speak with the Ardmagar,” I
said. “How do I go about doing that?”
   Mikey the Fish actually smiled at me. “You follow me, Music
Mistress,” he said, opening the heavy double doors for me and
nodding to his fellows.
   He escorted me into the forbidden residential area. Bright tapestries
lined the corridor walls, punctuated by marble statues, portraits, and
pedestals supporting fine porcelain and fragile spun glass. The Queen
was known for loving art; apparently this was where she kept it. I
scarcely dared breathe lest I knock something over.
   “Here’s his suite,” said Mikey, turning to go. “Watch yourself—
Princess Dionne claims the old saar made a pass at her.”
   I found that distressingly easy to believe. I watched the guard
retreat down the hall and noted that he did not turn back toward his
post but went deeper into the residence. He’d been told to let me in,
and was off to report that I’d arrived. Well, I would not question my
good fortune. I knocked on Comonot’s door.
   The Ardmagar’s servant—a human lad, assigned to him from among
the castle page boys—answered the door at once, making a very
peculiar face at the sight of me. Someone else had been expected,
evidently.
   “Is that my dinner? Bring it through,” said the Ardmagar from the
other room.
   “It’s some woman, Your Excellence!” cried the boy as I stepped past
him into what was evidently the study. The boy yapped at my heels
like a terrier: “You’re not to enter unless the Ardmagar says you may!”
   Comonot had been writing at a wide desk; he rose at the sight of me
and stared, speechless. I gave him full courtesy. “Forgive me, sir, but I
was not finished talking to you earlier, when we were so rudely
interrupted by your would-be assassin.”
   He narrowed his eyes shrewdly. “Is this about that cabal theory of
yours?”
   “You disregarded the message out of disgust for the messenger.”
   “Sit down, Seraphina,” he said, gesturing toward an upholstered
chair carved with curlicues and embroidered with elegant, improbable
foliage. His room was all velvet brocade and rich dark oak; the very
ceiling had large carved pinecones protruding from the center of
every coffer, like some giant’s scaly fingertips. This wing of the palace
maintained a more elaborate standard of decor than my own.
   He’d had time to sober up since our talk in the bishop’s library, and
he now held me in a gaze as piercing as Orma’s. He seated himself
across from me, thoughtfully running his tongue over his teeth.
   “You must think me a superstitious fool,” he said, tucking his hands
into the voluminous sleeves of his embroidered houppelande.
   I needed more information before I could reply; it was possible I
did.
   “I admit,” he said, “I have been. You are something that should not
be. Dragons have difficulty with counterfactuals.”
   I almost laughed. “How can I be counterfactual? I’m right here.”
   “If you were a ghost claiming the same, should I believe you?
Should I not rather consider you a symptom of my own madness? You
showed me, at the cathedral, that you have some substance. I wish to
understand the nature of that substance.”
   “All right,” I said, with some apprehension.
   “You have a foot in both worlds: if you have maternal memories,
you’ve seen what it is to be a dragon, contrasted with what it’s like to
be a saarantras, contrasted yet again with what it’s like to be human
—or nearly so.”
   This I was prepared to handle. “I have experienced those states,
yes.”
   He leaned forward. “And what do you think of being a dragon?”
   “I—I find it unpleasant, frankly. And confusing.”
   “Do you? Maybe that’s not unexpected. It’s very different.”
   “I tire of the incessant wind-vector calculations, and the stench of
the entire world.”
   He tented his fat fingers and studied my face. “But you have some
understanding, perhaps, of how alien this shape is to us. The world
around looks different; we easily get lost, both inside ourselves and
out. If I as saarantras react differently than I as dragon would react,
then who am I now, really?
   “Do I love you?” he asked. “It occurs to me that one possible motive
for defending you would be love. Only I’m not sure what that one’s
like. I have no way to measure it.”
   “You don’t love me,” I said flatly.
   “But maybe I did for just a moment? No?”
   “No.”
   He had withdrawn his arm from his sleeve entirely; his hand
emerged from the neck hole of his houppelande and scratched his
jowly chin. I stared, astonished by this maneuver. He said, “Love
requires extreme correction. It’s the emotional state we teach our
students to guard against most carefully. It presents an actual danger
to a saar because, you see, our scholars who fall in love don’t want to
come back. They don’t want to be dragons anymore.”
  “Like my mother,” I said, crossing my arms tightly.
  “Exactly!” he cried, insensible of the fact that I might take offense
at his tone. “My government has clamped down on all
hyperemotionality, but especially love, and it is right that we have
done so. But being here, being this, I find myself curious to feel
everything, once. They’ll mop up my mind when I get home—I won’t
lose myself to it—but I want to measure this danger, stare right into
the fearsome jaws of love, survive its deadly blast, and find better
ways to treat others who suffer this malady.”
  I almost laughed. As much heartache as I’d already endured over
Kiggs, I could not disagree with the words fearsome or malady, but I
couldn’t let him think I approved of his plan, either. “If you ever do
experience love, I hope it generates some sympathy for the
heartbreaking, impossible choices my mother had to make alone,
between her people and the man she loved, between her child and her
very life!”
  Comonot bugged his eyes at me. “She chose wrongly on both
counts.”
  He was making me angry. Unfortunately, I had come here for a
specific purpose I had not yet achieved. “General, about the cabal—”
  “Your obsession?” He replaced his arm in his sleeve and drummed
his fingers on the arm of his chair. “Yes, while we’re contemplating
counterfactuals, let us consider this. If you learned of some cabal from
a maternal memory, then the information is nearly twenty years old.
How do you know they haven’t been caught and disbanded?”
  I folded my hands tightly, trying to contain my irritation. “You
could tell me easily enough.”
  He tugged an earring. “How do you know they didn’t disband
themselves when Imlann was banished?”
  “Imlann still appears to be pursuing their purpose, as if he believes
they still exist,” I said. “They had the knights banished; he’s checking
up on whether the dracomachia is sufficiently dead. If it is, they find a
way to gain power. Having you assassinated would do, or perhaps
they’re leading a coup in the Tanamoot right now.”
  Comonot waved me off; the rings on his thick fingers glinted. “I’d
have heard word of a coup. Imlann could be working alone; he is
delusional enough to believe others are with him. And if a cabal
wished me dead, could they not kill me more easily while I was in the
Tanamoot?”
   “That would only gain them a civil war; they want Goredd dragged
into it,” I said.
   “This is far too speculative,” he said. “Even if a few disgruntled
generals were plotting against me, my loyal generals—to say nothing
of the younger generation, who have benefited most directly from the
peace—would quickly subdue any uprising.”
   “There was just an attempt on your life!” I cried.
   “Which we foiled. It’s over.” He removed one of his rings and
replaced it absently, thinking. “Prince Lucian said the man was one of
the Sons of St. Ogdo. I cannot imagine the Sons collaborating with a
dragon cabal, can you? What kind of dragon would think it a viable
option to make use of them?”
   A fiendishly clever dragon, I suddenly realized. If the Sons started
assassinating people, the Queen would be forced to crack down on
them. Imlann would have his dirty work done for him by anti-dragon
zealots, and then have his anti-dragon zealot problem quashed by the
Crown—all while he watched and waited like the reptile he was.
   “Ardmagar,” I said, rising. “I must bid you good evening.”
   He narrowed his eyes. “I haven’t convinced you you’re wrong, and
you’re too stubborn to give this up. What do you intend?”
   “To talk to someone who will listen,” I said, “and who, when faced
with something previously thought to be counterfactual, adapts his
philosophies to reality and not the other way around.”
   I walked out. He made no attempt to stop me.
   Kiggs waited in the corridor, leaning against the opposite wall, a
little book in his hand. He snapped it shut at the sight of me and
tucked it away in his scarlet doublet.
   “Am I that predictable?” I said.
   “Only when you do exactly what I would have done.”
   “Thank you for telling the guards to let me pass. It saved a lot of
embarrassment on both sides.”
   He bowed, a more exaggerated courtesy than I deserved. “Selda
thinks I ought to ask you, one more time, what the pair of you could
possibly have to discuss. I promised I would, though I expect—”
   “I was just coming to find you both. There are things I should have
told you that I … I haven’t,” I said. “I’m sorry for it. But let’s find your
cousin first; she needs to hear this too.”
   He looked as if he weren’t certain whether to trust my sudden
willingness to talk. I’d earned this skepticism; even now, I had no
intention of telling the truth about myself. I sighed, but tried to smile
at him. He escorted me toward the Blue Salon.
Glisselda spotted us at once across the sparkly crush of courtiers; she
smiled, but something in our expressions rapidly changed hers to
quizzical. “Excuse us,” she said to the bevy of gentlemen surrounding
her. “Important affairs of state, you know.”
  She rose imperiously and led us into a little side room furnished
with a lone Porphyrian couch; she closed the door and gestured for us
to be seated. “What’s the latest from the city?” she asked.
  “Curfew. Lockdown,” said Kiggs, seating himself gingerly, as if he
had an old man’s aches and pains. “I’m not looking forward to
tomorrow if news spreads that Comonot killed a citizen in the
cathedral—never mind that it was self-defense.”
  “You can’t suppress that information?” I asked, lingering near the
door, not wanting to sit beside him, not knowing what to do with
myself if I didn’t sit down.
  “We’re trying,” he snapped, “but the citizenry found out about
Imlann and the petit ard awfully fast. The palace is full of leaks,
apparently.”
  I had an idea who one leak might be. I said, “I have a lot to tell you
both.”
  Glisselda grabbed my arm and wedged me onto the couch between
her and Kiggs, smiling as if we were the happiest, coziest grouping
ever conceived. “Speak, Phina.”
  I took a deep breath. “Before Comonot was attacked, I saw the Earl
of Apsig at the cathedral speaking with a hooded priest who I believe
was Thomas Broadwick,” I began.
  “You believe,” said Kiggs, shifting in his seat, his very posture
skeptical. “Meaning you’re not completely certain. I don’t suppose you
heard what was said?”
  “I also saw Josef in town earlier, reciting St. Ogdo’s Malediction
with a group of the Sons,” I continued stubbornly.
   “If he’s joined the Sons, that’s serious,” said Kiggs, “but here’s the
hole in your reasoning: either he’s a Son of St. Ogdo or he’s a dragon.
You can’t have it both ways.”
   Thanks to my conversation with Comonot, I was ready for this
argument. I explained how fiendishly clever it was to get the Sons
involved, adding, “Orma said Imlann would be where we least expect.
Where less than with the Sons?”
   “I still don’t see how it would be possible for a dragon to live here
at court—for more than two years—and not be sniffed out by other
dragons,” said Kiggs.
   “Obviously he pretends to despise them so that he can quit the
room whenever they enter,” said Glisselda.
   “He could mask his scent with perfume easily enough,” I said,
feeling miserable. Here I was, monstrous and wedged in between the
pair of them, and they had no idea. I squeezed my hands between my
knees to keep myself from fingering my wrist. “But listen,” I said.
“There’s more.”
   I explained what I suspected about Imlann and the cabal, simply
omitting my maternal memory: that Imlann was here to determine
how dysfunctional the dracomachia had become, and that the cabal
surely had an interest in seeing Comonot dead. “Maybe it’s over,
maybe that one attempt was their best, but I don’t think we can
chance it. I think they’ll try again.”
   “ ‘They’ being whom?” asked Kiggs. “This cabal you’ve suddenly
pulled out of thin air? The Sons? Imlann, in a mysterious new
plurality?”
   “Lucian, stop being a pedant,” said Glisselda, putting an arm around
me.
   I continued. “Much of this is extrapolation, but it would be unwise
to ignore the possibility—”
   “Extrapolation from what?” said Kiggs. Glisselda reached around
behind me and smacked the side of his head. “What? It’s an important
question! What’s the source of this information, and how reliable is
it?”
   The princess lifted her chin defiantly. “Phina is the source, and
Phina is reliable.”
   He didn’t argue, although he squirmed, clearly wanting to.
   “I would tell you if I could,” I said. “But I have obligations of my
own, and—”
   “My first obligation is the truth,” he said bitterly. “Always.”
   Glisselda straightened, shifting a little away from me, and I realized
the mention of my “obligations” had brought my own loyalties into
question beyond the point where she could still defend me. She spoke
evenly: “Whether this cabal really exists or not, the fact is that
someone tried to kill the Ardmagar and failed. There isn’t much time
left for another attempt.”
   Kiggs exhaled noisily through his lips in frustration and ran a hand
down his face. “You’re right, Selda. We can’t afford to do nothing.
Better too cautious than not cautious enough.”
   We set aside our quibbles and put our heads together, formulating a
plan, circumventing the Queen and Comonot, taking all the weight of
the peace upon ourselves. We just had to keep the Ardmagar safe for
one more night, to make it through Treaty Eve without anyone dying,
and then Comonot would return home. If this cabal really existed and
killed him in the Tanamoot, well, that would be out of our hands.



Kiggs would tighten palace security, although it was already nearly as
strong as he could make it, unless we intended foreign dignitaries to
dance with members of the Guard at the ball. He would also inform
Ambassador Fulda that he believed real danger to Comonot lurked
here at home, and would request that Eskar and the petit ard be
recalled so they could help. They’d been many miles away at last
report; it was unclear whether they would make it back in time.
Glisselda was to stick to the Ardmagar as best she could; she
complained that she’d have no chance to practice the Tertius before
the concert, but I could tell by the gleam in her eye that intrigue
interested her more than music.
   I had duties, of course, assisting Viridius and preparing the
entertainments. That would be my focus until the ball itself, when I’d
take turns babysitting the Ardmagar.
   Privately, I set a few additional tasks for myself. I wanted all three
of my fellow half-breeds present. We were going to need all the help
we could get.
   I looked for Abdo in the garden of grotesques as soon as I returned
to my rooms. He was hanging upside down in his fig tree, but he
leaped down at my approach and offered me gola nuts.
   “I glimpsed your troupe today from afar,” I said, seating myself
cross-legged on the ground beside him. “I wished I could have
introduced myself because I feel awkward asking for your help when I
haven’t even met you.”
  “Do not say so, madamina! Of course I will help if I can.”
  I told him what was afoot. “Bring your whole troupe. I will make
space for you on the performance docket. Dress … er …”
  “We know what is appropriate for the Goreddi court.”
  “Of course you do. Forgive me. There will be others of our kind
there, other … what was the Porphyrian word you used?”
  “Ityasaari?”
  “Yes. Do you know Loud Lad and Miss Fusspots, from the garden?”
  “Of course,” he said. “I see everything you permit me to see.”
  I suppressed a shudder, wondering whether he could taste my
emotions in the wind as Jannoula had. “I will want you all to help
each other and work together, just as you help me.”
  “Yours are the orders, madamina. Yours the right. I will be there
and ready.”
  I smiled at him and rose to go, dusting off my skirts. “Is madamina
Porphyrian for ‘maidy,’ like grausleine in Samsamese?”
  His eyes widened. “No, indeed! It means ‘general.’ ”
  “Wh-why would you call me that?”
  “Why did you call me Fruit Bat? I had to call you something, and
every day you come here as if reviewing your legions.” He smiled
sheepishly and added: “Once, long ago, you told someone here—that
girl with beautiful green eyes, the one you sent away. You said your
name aloud, but I misheard it.”
  All around us, an astonished wind blew.



I did not know where Lars slept at night, but there had been enough
broad hints from various quarters that I feared I might end up seeing
more of Viridius than I cared to.
   I waited until morning, made myself a fortifying cup of tea, and
went straight to the garden. I took Loud Lad’s hands, whirling out into
a vision. To my astonishment, the whole world seemed spread below
me: the city, glowing pink in the light of dawn; the shining ribbon of
river; the distant rolling farmland. Lars stood upon the crenellations of
the barbican, each foot on a separate merlon, playing his pipes for the
dawn and for the city at his feet. My ethereal presence didn’t stop
him; I let him finish, secretly relishing the feeling that I was flying
above the city, buoyed by his music. It was exhilarating to be so high
up and not fear falling.
  “Is thet you, Seraphina?” he said at last.
  It is. I need your help.
  I told him I feared for the Ardmagar, that I might need him at a
moment’s notice, that others of our kind—Abdo and Dame Okra—
would be there to help, and how to recognize them. If he was
astonished to hear there were other half-dragons, Lars’s Samsamese
stoicism didn’t let it show. He said, “But how will this danger come,
Seraphina? An attack on the castle? A traitor within the walls?”
  I did not know how to tell him whom we suspected. I began
cautiously: I know you don’t like discussing Josef, but—
  He cut me off. “No. I hev nothink to say about him.”
  He may be involved. He may be the one behind everything.
  His face fell, but his resolve did not. “If so, I will standt with you
against him. But I am sworn not to speak of what he is.” He fingered
the chanter of his war pipes absently. “Perheps,” he said at last, “I
come armedt.”
  I don’t think Kiggs will allow anyone but the palace guard to arrive
armed.
  “Always I hev my fists and my war pipes!”
  Er … yes. That’s the spirit, Lars.
  It would be a memorable evening, if nothing else.



I knew better than to contact Dame Okra with my mind. I didn’t need
my nose all black and blue for Treaty Eve.
   I worked fast and crabby all morning, directing the hanging of
garlands, the placing of chandeliers and sideboards, the moving of the
harpsichord—which looked like a coffin as four men carried it
through the door without its legs—and countless other lastminute
details. All the while I conscientiously attempted to get Dame Okra’s
attention without contacting her. My attempts to will her into
appearing, to project fake need—my sighing and fretting and
muttering, “I sure could use Dame Okra’s help!”—met with universal
failure.
   I barely had time to rush to my rooms and dress for dinner; I had
already set out the scarlet gown Millie had given me, so I didn’t have
do any thinking and only had to switch my outer garment. No risky
nakedness for me: a maid might show up any minute to arrange my
hair. Glisselda had insisted upon this point, going so far as to threaten
me with Millie if I didn’t swear not to do my own hair.
  The maid arrived; my hair was beaten into submission. My first
reaction, upon seeing myself in the mirror, was shock at how long my
neck was. My hair usually obscured that fact, but when it was all
piled up on my head, I looked positively camelopardine. The
décolletage of Millie’s gown wasn’t helping matters. Feh.
  I hung Orma’s earring from a golden chain around my neck, more
to settle my nerves with something treasured than because I thought it
could be useful; who knew where he was or whether he could even
receive its signal. It made an intriguing pendant. I no longer feared
the Ardmagar recognizing it. Let him say two words to me about
Orma; let him try. He would get more than he bargained for.
  Surely no one would try to do him in while I was there, excoriating
him.



I’d never attended a feast of such magnitude. I was seated as far as
possible from the high table, of course, but I had an unimpeded view
of it. The Ardmagar sat between the Queen and Princess Dionne;
Kiggs and Glisselda sat on the Queen’s other side, both of them
scanning the room anxiously. I took this as simple vigilance at first,
until Glisselda spotted me, waved eagerly, and pointed me out to her
cousin. It took him a moment to see me, even so, because I didn’t look
quite like myself.
   He did smile eventually, once he stopped looking astonished.
   I can barely recall the kind and number of dishes; I should have
taken notes. We had boar and venison and fowl of all kinds, a peacock
pie with its great tail fanned out, sallats, soft white bread, almond
custard, fish, figs, Zibou dates. My tablemates, distant relations of the
dukes and earls at the other end of the room, laughed gently at my
impulse to try everything. “Can’t be done,” said an elderly fellow with
a goat’s beard. “Not if you hope to walk away from the table under
your own power!”
   The feast ended with a towering, flaming, six-tiered torte
representing the Lighthouse of Ziziba, of all things. Alas, I was truly
too full—and by this point, too anxious—to have any.
  Thank Heaven I could rely absolutely upon my musicians, because I
got caught in the crush of people heading for the great hall and never
could have gotten there fast enough to get everyone in place. By the
time I entered, the symphonia was already scraping out the overture,
one of those infinite-cycle pieces that could be played over and over
until the royal family arrived and the first dance could begin.
  Someone grabbed my upper right arm and whispered in my ear,
“Ready?”
  “As ready as we can be for the unknown,” I replied, not daring to
look at him. He smelled almondy, like the marchpane torte.
  I discerned his nod in my peripheral vision. “Selda’s stowed a flask
of Zibou coffee for you somewhere onstage in case you start getting
drowsy.” Kiggs clapped me on the shoulder and said, “Save me a
pavano.”
  He disappeared into the crowd.
No sooner had he left than Dame Okra was upon me. “What do you
need now?” she asked crabbily.
   I drew her toward the wall of the great hall, away from the mass of
people; we stood by a tall candelabra, like a sheltering tree. “We have
some concern for the Ardmagar’s safety tonight. Can I count on your
help if I need it?”
   She lifted her chin, scanning the crowd for Comonot. “What shall I
do? Tail him?”
   “Observe him discreetly, yes. And keep your stomach, er, focused.”
   Her thick glasses reflected candlelight up at me. “Fair enough.”
   I caught her satin sleeve as she turned to plunge into the party.
“May I contact you with my mind?”
   “Absolutely not!” She headed off my objections: “If you need me,
I’ll be there.”
   I sighed. “Fine. But it’s not just me; one of the others might need
you.”
   The creases beside her mouth deepened. “What others?”
   I opened and shut my mouth, astonished that I could have forgotten
that she did not live inside my head. Only Abdo could see the garden.
“The others … like us,” I whispered urgently.
   Her face underwent a full spectrum of emotion in mere seconds—
astonishment, sorrow, wonderment, joy—ending on one she was
particularly good at: annoyance. She smacked me with her fan. “You
couldn’t tell me this? Do you have any idea how old I am?”
   “Er, no.”
   “One hundred twenty-eight!” she snarled. “I spent that many years
thinking I was alone. Then you prance into my life, nearly giving me a
paroxysm, and now you deign to tell me there are more. How many
are there?”
   “Eighteen, counting you and me,” I said, not daring to keep
anything back from her anymore. “But only two others here: the
bagpiper”—she guffawed, apparently remembering him—“and one of
the pygegyria dancers. A little Porphyrian boy.”
  Her brows shot up. “You invited pygegyria dancers? Tonight?” She
threw back her head and laughed. “Whatever else may be true of you,
you do things your own way, with a refreshingly self-assured
pigheadedness. I like that!”
  She took off into the colorful crowd, leaving me to puzzle out that
compliment.



Speaking of pygegyria, I hadn’t seen the troupe. I reached out: Where
are you?
   The small reception hall. We are too many for your tiny dressing rooms.
   Stay there. I am coming to meet you.
   I slipped into the corridor and found the double doors of the small
hall easily enough. I hesitated, my hands upon the brass door handles.
Abdo was so different from the others I had met—his mind worked
more like mine, or Jannoula’s—that I had some anxiety about meeting
him. Once I’d met him, he was in my life inextricably, for good or ill.
   I took a deep breath and opened the doors.
   Ululations and an explosive burst of drumming greeted me.
   The troupe were all in motion, a circle within a circle, each turning
a different direction. For a moment I could focus on nothing; it was a
blur of colored scarves and shimmering veils, brown hands and
jingling strings of coins.
   The circles opened, dancers spinning off tangentially, revealing
Abdo in the center, in a bright green tunic and trousers, his feet bare,
his arms undulating. The others shimmied at a distance, chains and
coin scarves jingling. He whirled, his arms spread wide, the fringe
upon his belt making a halo at his center.
   For the first time, I understood the point of dancing. I was so used
to music being the vehicle for expression, but here he was speaking to
me not with his mind but with his body: I feel this music in my very
blood. This is what it means to be me, right here, right now, solid flesh,
ethereal air, eternal motion. I feel this, and it is true beyond truth.
   The heavens seemed to turn with him, the sun and moon, time
itself. He whirled so fast he seemed to stand still. I could have sworn I
smelled roses.
  With a crash of drums he froze, still as a statue. I wasn’t certain
whether Porphyrians applauded, but I went ahead and clapped. That
broke the spell; the dancers smiled and broke formation, chattering
among themselves. I approached Abdo, who awaited me with shining
eyes.
  “That was beautiful,” I said. “I think your audience will love you,
whether they want to or not.”
  He smiled.
  “I’ve put you on the program late, when people will need something
to wake them up. There’s food and drink for performers in the little
room off the—”
  “Madamina!” cried an old man. It took me a moment to recognize
him as the one who’d wanted to meet me after Prince Rufus’s funeral;
he was draped with silks now. I assumed he was the grandfather Abdo
had mentioned. “Your pardon!” he said. “You are come to here, try to
speak at Abdo, but he cannot speaking at you without help. Your
pardon.”
  “He—what?” I wasn’t convinced I had understood.
  I looked to Abdo, who looked annoyed. He made a number of hand
gestures at the old man, who gesticulated back urgently. Was
he … deaf? If so, how did he speak such fluent Goreddi in the garden?
He finally convinced the old man to go, which I found astonishing. He
was ten, maybe eleven years old, but the old man was deferential.
  All the dancers were. He was the leader of this troupe.
  He smiled at me apologetically, and I heard his voice in my mind:
Loud Lad and Miss Fusspots. I know what I’m to do. I will not fail you.
  You can’t talk? I thought back, not wanting to blurt out the obvious.
  He gave a pained, small smile, threw back his head, and opened his
mouth as wide as he could. His long tongue, his gums, his palate,
everything, as far into his throat as I could see, gleamed with silver
dragon scales.



That night simultaneously dragged on forever and passed in a
whirlwind blur. Kiggs had stationed the Guard everywhere there was
space; there were a few out of uniform casually assaulting the buffet
table, and one onstage spooking my musicians. The royal cousins and
I spotted each other watching the Ardmagar; Glisselda danced with
him three times, or danced near him with Kiggs. Dame Okra engaged
him in chitchat near the refreshments table; I stood onstage behind
the curtain, scanning the crowd through the gap. Nobody did
anything suspicious—well, Princess Dionne smiled a lot, which was
unusual, and gossiped with Lady Corongi, which was not. The Earl of
Apsig danced with every lady in the room; he seemed never to grow
tired.
   Viridius was there in a wheeled chair, several young men keeping
him supplied with wine and cheese. That much rich food would leave
him foul-tempered and incapacitated for a week; I did not understand
how he calculated that it was worth it.
   The symphonia cleared the stage while Lars and Guntard brought
out the harpsichord for Princess Glisselda’s performance. She was
suddenly beside me in the wings, giggling and clutching at my arm. “I
can’t do this, Phina!”
   “Breathe,” I said, taking her hands to still them. “Don’t speed up
during the arpeggios. Keep the pavano stately. You’re going to be
wonderful.”
   She kissed my cheek and stepped into the light, where she abruptly
transformed from a nervous, squealing little girl into a dignified
young woman. Her gown was the blue of Heaven; her golden hair, the
sun. She held herself poised, raised a hand to the audience, kept her
chin high and proud. I blinked, amazed, but I should not have been
surprised by this calm, commanding presence. She was still growing
into it, but the foundation was something she seemed naturally to
possess.
   Musical ability, on the other hand … well. She was breath-takingly
mediocre, but it didn’t matter. She made up some ground on the
performance end with sheer poise and presence, and she absolutely
put Viridius in his place. I watched him from behind the curtain. His
mouth hung open. That was satisfying on several levels.
   I watched Comonot, too, since no one else seemed to be doing it.
Dame Okra had been distracted by her least favorite person, Lady
Corongi, and was eyeballing her suspiciously. Kiggs, off to the left,
smiled warmly at his cousin’s performance. I felt a pang; I looked
elsewhere. The Ardmagar—whom I was ostensibly watching—stood at
the back with Princess Dionne, not speaking, watching the
performance, a glass in one hand, the other arm around the princess’s
waist.
   She didn’t seem to mind, but … ugh.
   I was shocked at the revulsion I felt. I, of all people, had no business
being disgusted by the idea of a human with a saarantras. No, surely
my squirm had its origin in the noxious personalities involved, and
the fact that I’d just pictured the Ardmagar in a state of undress. I
needed to scrub my mind clean.
   Glisselda finished, to thunderous applause. I expected her to skip
straight off the stage, but she did not. She stepped to the front, raised
a hand for silence, and then said, “Thank you for your generous
applause. I hope you’ve saved some, however, for the person most
deserving of it, my music teacher, Seraphina Dombegh!”
   The applause began again. She gestured for me to join her onstage,
but I balked. She strode over, grabbed my arm, and pulled me out. I
curtsied to the sea of faces, deeply embarrassed. I looked up and saw
Kiggs; he gave me a little wave. I tried to smile back but rather
suspect I missed.
   Glisselda gestured the crowd into silence. “I hope Maid Dombegh
will forgive me for interrupting her careful scheduling, but you all
deserve some excellent music as a reward for sitting through my
paltry offering: a performance from Seraphina herself. And please,
help me petition the Queen to make Phina a court composer, the
equal of Viridius. She’s too good to be merely his assistant!”
   I expected Viridius to scowl, but he threw back his head and
laughed. The audience clapped some more, and I took the opportunity
to say to Glisselda, “I didn’t bring any of my instruments down.”
   “Well, there’s a harpsichord right behind us, silly,” she whispered.
“And I confess: I took the liberty of fetching your flute and your oud.
You choose.”
   She’d brought my mother’s flute. I felt a pang when I saw it: I
wanted to play it, but it was somehow too personal. The oud, a long-
ago gift from Orma, would be easiest on my right wrist; that decided
me. Guntard brought me the instrument and plectrum; Lars brought
me a chair. I cradled the melon-shaped instrument in my lap while I
checked harmonics on all eleven strings, but it had kept good tune. I
cast my gaze out into the audience while I did so. Kiggs watched me;
Glisselda joined him, and he put an arm around her. Nobody was
watching the Ardmagar. I reached for Lars with my mind and sent
him in that direction; once I was satisfied that he had traversed the
crowd, I closed my eyes and began to play.
   I did not set out to play anything in particular; I take the Zibou
approach to oud, improvising, looking for a shape in the sound, like
finding pictures in the clouds, and then solidifying it. My mind kept
returning to Kiggs standing with Glisselda, an ocean of people
between us, and this gave my music-cloud a shape I did not like, sad
and self-absorbed. As I played, however, another shape emerged. The
ocean was still there, but my music was a bridge, a ship, a beacon. It
bound me to everyone here, held us all in its hands, carried us
together to a better place. It modulated (ripples on the sea) and
modulated again (a flight of gulls) and landed squarely upon a mode I
loved (a chalky cliff, a windswept lighthouse). I could make out a
different tune, one of my mother’s, just below the surface; I played a
coy melody, an enigmatic variation, referencing her tune without
bringing it up explicitly. I made a pass at her song, circled, touched it
lightly before swooping past once more. It would draw me back into
its orbit again and again until I gave it its due. I played her melody
out in full, and I sang my father’s lyrics, and for a shining moment we
were all three together:

    A thousand regrets I’ve had in love,
    A thousand times I’ve longed to change the past.
    I know, my love, there is no going back,
    No undoing of our thousand burdens.
    We must go on despite our heavy hearts.
    A thousand regrets I’ve had in love,
    But I shall never regret you.

   The song released me then, and I was free to improvise again, my
circles growing ever wider, until I once again encircled the world with
music.
   I opened my eyes to an audience of open mouths, as if they hoped
to retain the taste of that last ringing note. Nobody clapped until I
stood up all the way, and then it was so loud it drove me back a step.
I curtsied, exhausted and exhilarated.
   When I lifted my eyes, I saw my father. I hadn’t even realized he
was here. He was as pale as he had been after the funeral, but I
understood his expression differently now. He wasn’t furious with me:
his was an expression of pain and of steely determination not to let it
get the best of him. I blew him a kiss.
   Kiggs and Selda stood together on the left, bringing me a little pain
of my own. They smiled and waved; they were my friends, both of
them, however bittersweet I might find that. At the back, Dame Okra
Carmine stood together with Lars and Abdo, who jumped up and
down with glee. They’d found each other; we all had.
  Playing at the funeral had exhausted me, but this time was
different. Friends surrounded me, and the court gave me something
back with their applause. For a lingering moment I felt like I belonged
here. I curtsied again, and quit the stage.



The relentless millstone of night ground our vigilance to dust; by the
third hour after midnight, I found myself hoping someone would knife
Comonot just so we could get it over with and go to bed. It was hard
keeping an eye on him when he seemed not to get tired himself. He
danced, ate, drank, chatted up Princess Dionne, laughed in wonder at
the pygegyria dancers, and still had the energy of three ordinary men.
  I heard the bell chime the fourth hour and had about decided to ask
my comrades whether I couldn’t slip out for a catnap, when Kiggs
himself stepped into the open space beside me and took my hand.
“Pavano!” was all he said, smilingly pulling me into a promenade.
  My weary brain had ceased to process the dances, but the music
snapped into focus, as did the candles, the stately dancers, the entire
room. Kiggs was better than coffee.
  “I’m beginning to think we’ve been all wrought up for nothing,” I
said, stepping with far more energy than I’d had a moment ago.
  “I will merrily consider us mistaken once Comonot is safely home,”
said Kiggs, his eyes tired. “Don’t pay Pau-Henoa until he gets you to
the other side.”
  I looked for the Ardmagar among the dancers, but he was not there
for once. I finally spotted him leaning against a wall, watching,
speaking to no one, a cup of wine in his hand and a glazed look in his
eye. Was he getting tired? That was good news.
  “Where’s Princess Glisselda?” I asked, not seeing her.
  He handed me around. “Either napping or discussing something
with Grandmother. She intended to do both but was unclear on the
order.”
  Maybe I could get a nap after all. Right now I didn’t want one. I
didn’t want this dance to end, or Kiggs to let go of my hand. I didn’t
want him to turn his eyes away, or live any other moment but this
one.
   A feeling rose in me, and I just let it, because what harm could it
do? It only had another thirty-two adagio bars of life in this world.
Twenty-four. Sixteen. Eight more bars in which I love you. Three. Two.
One.
   The music ended and I let him go, but he did not let go of me. “One
minute, Phina. I have something for you.”
   He led me toward the stage, up the steps, and into the wing where I
had already spent much of the evening. In the corner sat Glisselda’s
coffee flask, long empty; beside it was a small bundle wrapped in
cloth that I had not disturbed, not knowing who it belonged to. He
picked it up and handed it to me.
   “What is it?”
   “Obviously, you won’t know until you open it,” he said, his eyes
glittering in the half light. “Happy New Year!”
   It was a slim volume, calf-bound. I opened it and laughed.
“Pontheus?”
   “The one and only.” He was standing right next to me, as if to read
over my shoulder, not quite touching my arm. “It’s his final book,
Love and Work, the one I mentioned before. It is, as you might expect,
about work, but also about thought and self-knowledge and what is
good in life, and …”
   He trailed off. There was, of course, one other word in the title. It
sat between us like a lump.
   “And truth?” I said, thinking it a neutral subject and realizing too
late that it absolutely wasn’t.
   “Well, yes, but I was going to say, er, friendship.” He smiled
apologetically; I looked back at the book. He added: “And happiness.
That’s why he’s considered mad. Porphyrian philosophers all sign a
pact to be miserable.”
   I couldn’t help laughing, and Kiggs laughed too, and Guntard, who
was in the middle of a shawm solo just then, glared at us backstage
gigglers.
   “Now I’m embarrassed,” I said, “because I have nothing for you.”
   “Don’t be ridiculous!” he said vehemently. “You gave us all a gift
tonight.”
   I turned away, my heart pounding painfully, and saw, through the
gap in the curtains, Dame Okra Carmine standing in a doorway across
the hall, urgently waving her long green sleeve. “Something’s
happening,” I said.
   Kiggs did not ask what, but followed me down the steps, through
the whirl of dancers, and out into the corridor. There Dame Okra
Carmine pulled on Comonot’s arm, preventing him from going
anywhere, while bemused guards hesitated nearby, unsure whose side
to take.
   “He claims he’s going for a nap, but I don’t believe him!” she cried.
   “Thank you, Ambassadress,” said Kiggs, unsure why Dame Okra
should be involved in this at all. I’d have to invent some reason. All
the weight of this night came crashing down on me again.
   Comonot, arms crossed and jaw set, watched as Dame Okra gave
sarcastic courtesy and returned to the party. “Now that we’re free of
that madwoman,” he said, “might I be permitted to go about my
business?”
   Kiggs bowed. “Sir, I’m afraid I must insist that you take a guard or
two with you. We have some concerns for your safety this evening,
and …”
   Comonot shook his head. “Still convinced there’s a plot against me,
Seraphina? I wish I could look at that memory of yours. Your
paranoia in this matter is almost enough to have me looking over my
shoulder. That’s another human-body response, isn’t it? Fear of the
dark and the unknown? Fear of dragons?”
   “Ardmagar,” I said, deeply disturbed that he had mentioned my
maternal memory so cavalierly, “please just humor us in this matter.”
   “You have precious little to go on.”
   “The peace depends upon your continued leadership,” I pleaded.
“We have a lot to lose if anything happens to you.”
   His eyes sharpened shrewdly. “Do you know who else it depends
upon? The Royal House of Goredd—one of whose princes, if I recall
correctly, was recently murdered. Are you watching your own as
hawkishly as you’re watching me?”
   “Of course,” said Kiggs, but the question clearly took him aback. I
could see him trying to account for the whereabouts of his
grandmother, aunt, and cousin, and coming to the disturbing
conclusion that he didn’t know where any of them were.
   “I know you don’t know where your auntie is,” said Comonot with a
disconcerting leer.
   Kiggs and I stared at him in horror. “What are you implying,
Ardmagar?” said Kiggs, a tremor in his voice.
   “Merely that you aren’t as observant as you think,” said Comonot,
“and that—” He broke off abruptly; his face paled. “By all that
glitters, I’m as stupid as you are.”
  He took off at a run. Kiggs and I were on his heels, Kiggs crying,
“Where is she?”
  The Ardmagar turned up the grand marble stair. He took the steps
two at a time. “Who did the assassin intend to stab,” cried Comonot,
“before he settled for Seraphina?”
  “Where is Aunt Dionne, Ardmagar?” Kiggs shouted.
  “In my rooms!” said the saar, who was panting now.
  Kiggs sprinted past him up the stairs, toward the royal family’s wing
of the palace.
Comonot and I reached his quarters at the same time; Kiggs had
arrived well before us with a few guards he’d picked up along the
way. We entered just as a guard rushed back out, and we soon saw
why: Kiggs had sent him running for the physician.
   Kiggs and the other guard helped Princess Dionne off the floor,
trying to get her into a semi-upright position on the couch. Kiggs
reached a couple of fingers into her mouth, trying to make her vomit.
She obliged, a sticky purple mess right into the guard’s waiting
helmet, but she didn’t look any better afterward.
   She’d gone green; her eyes showed a disturbing amount of white,
and she couldn’t seem to focus them. “Apsig! Wine!” she croaked. The
guard, taking that as a request, began to pour her a glass from the
bottle on the table, but Kiggs slapped the glass out of his hand. It
shattered across the floor.
   “The wine has made her ill, obviously,” said Kiggs through gritted
teeth, trying to keep his aunt from falling off the couch as she
convulsed. Comonot rushed in to help restrain her. “How long have
you had that bottle, Ardmagar?”
   “That’s not mine. She must have brought it with her.” His eyes grew
wide. “Did she intend to poison me?”
   “Don’t be an idiot!” said Kiggs, letting his anger run roughshod over
his manners. “Why would she have drunk it herself?”
   “Remorse at what she was about to do?”
   “That’s not how it works, you stupid dragon!” cried Kiggs, his voice
choked with tears, wiping foam from her lips. “Why was she meeting
you here? Why was she bringing you wine? Why do you think you
can come to Goredd and playact being human when you know
nothing about it?”
   “Kiggs,” I said, tentatively placing a hand on his arm. He jerked
away from me.
   Comonot leaned against the back of the couch, stunned. “I—I don’t
know nothing, exactly. That is, I’m feeling something. I don’t know
what it is.” He turned pleading eyes toward me, but I did not know
what to tell him.
   The physician arrived with three female assistants. I helped them
carry Dionne to the bed, where they stripped her, sponged her, bled
her, fed her charcoal powder, and examined the wine and vomit
closely for clues to which antidote they should use. Comonot, who
had no business seeing her unclothed, wandered in unchallenged and
stood gaping at her. Kiggs paced the outer room.
   A terrible notion struck me. I turned to rush out, but Comonot
grabbed my sleeve. “Help me,” he said. “I feel something—”
   “Guilt,” I snapped, trying to free myself.
   “Make it go away!” He looked nakedly terrified.
   “I can’t.” I glanced over at the commotion on the bed; Dionne was
convulsing again. I felt a pang of pity for the foolish old saar. We were
all at a loss, dragon and human both, in the face of death. I put a
hand to his fleshy cheek and spoke as to a child: “Stay. Help as you
can; she may yet be saved. I have to make sure no one else dies
tonight.”
   I hurried out to Kiggs. He sat on the couch, elbows on knees, hands
covering his mouth, eyes wide. “Kiggs!” He did not look at me. I knelt
before him. “Get up. This isn’t over.” He looked at me blankly. I let
myself touch his disheveled hair. “Where’s Selda? Where’s your
grandmother? We need to make sure they’re safe.”
   That did it. He leaped to his feet. We rushed to their respective
suites, but neither Queen nor princess was napping in her own bed.
“Glisselda intended to talk to her,” Kiggs said. “They’re probably
together. In the Queen’s study, or …” He shrugged. I turned that
direction, but he grabbed a lantern, caught my arm, and took me
through a concealed door in the wall of the Queen’s bedroom into a
maze of passages.
   The way was narrow; I walked behind him. When I could stand the
silence no longer, I asked, “You heard your aunt say ‘Apsig’?”
   He nodded. “The implication seems clear enough.”
   “That Josef gave her the wine? Was it intended merely for the
Ardmagar, or—”
   “Both, without question.” He looked back at me, his face in shadow:
“Aunt Dionne was supposed to have met Comonot at the cathedral.”
   “Thomas could not have mistaken me for her.”
  “I imagine he recognized you and decided on the spur of the
moment that he may as well kill you instead. But recall: you saw Josef
near the scene.”
  “You thought that was too circumstantial.”
  “I did until his name popped up just now!” he cried, the stress of
the evening overriding his usual circumspection.
  We reached the Queen’s study only to find it empty. Kiggs swore.
  “We should split up,” I said. “I’ll check back at the great hall.”
  He nodded grimly. “I’ll mobilize the Guard. We’ll find them.”
  I was already reaching for Abdo with my mind as I scurried toward
the hall. Abdo, find Lars. Wait for me near the stage. Can you see Dame
Okra?
  Abdo spotted the ambassadress near the desserts, then told me he
was off to the dressing rooms to find Lars. I reached for Lars to let him
know Abdo was coming.
  I considered breaking my word and reaching for Dame Okra, but
she had been cranky enough earlier and I needed her help now. I
needed her power, odd as it was, to live up to its peculiar promise.
When I reached the great hall, she was right where Abdo had
indicated, having a lively conversation with Fulda, the reclusive
dragon ambassador. I skirted the dancing couples, marveling that
anyone still had the energy for a volta when it must be nearly dawn. I
drew up beside Dame Okra and said, “Pardon me, Ambassador Fulda,
but I need to steal Dame Okra for one moment. I fear it’s urgent.”
  The good manners were more for her benefit than his. She drew
herself up importantly—it didn’t make her any taller—and said, “You
heard her, Fulda. Shoo.”
  Ambassador Fulda’s eyes shone as he stared at me. “So you’re Maid
Dombegh. I am intrigued to make your acquaintance at last.”
  I stared back at him, wondering what he’d heard.
  “Oh, fie!” cried Dame Okra, swatting him. “She’s no more special
than I am, and you’ve known me for years. Come, Seraphina!” She
took my arm and hauled me away. “All right, what do you want?” she
said when we were off in a corner by ourselves.
  I took a deep breath. “We need to find the Queen and Glisselda.”
  “They’re not in the study, I suppose?”
  I goggled at her. “What does your stomach tell you?”
  “My stomach does not take requests, little maidy!” she said
haughtily. “It directs me, not the other way around.”
  I leaned down into her froggy face, demonstrating beyond all doubt
that I was not merely her equal in snarling but would surpass her one
day. “You told me your stomach enables you to be in the right place
at the right time. The Queen and Glisselda may be in mortal danger
this very moment, so I’d say the right place is wherever they are, and
the right time is before they come to harm!”
  “Well, thank you for the additional information,” she sniffed. “I do
need something to go on. It’s not magic, you know. It’s more like
indigestion.”
  “Is it pointing you anywhere, or not?”
  She considered a moment, tapping a finger against her lips. “Yes.
Through here.”
  She led me toward one door of the hall just as Kiggs came through
another. I called and waved; he darted straight across the dance floor
toward us, scattering and confounding the dancers. Dame Okra didn’t
wait for him but plunged into the corridor, toward the east wing. I
followed her at a distance until Kiggs caught up.
  “Where are we going?” he asked breathlessly.
  “We’ve worked out the location of Glisselda and the Queen,” I said,
dreading his next question.
  “Where are they?”
  “St. Vitt, how should I know?” growled Dame Okra, increasing her
speed.
  Kiggs turned incredulous eyes on me. “What is this?”
  “She has a hunch. I trust it. Let’s give her a chance.”
  Kiggs grunted skeptically but followed. We arrived at the door to
his beastly tower. Dame Okra rattled the handle, but it was locked.
“Where does this go, and do you have a key, Prince?” asked Dame
Okra.
  “They wouldn’t be up there,” he grumbled, but he fished for his
key.
  “How would they have gotten in?” I asked as the lock clicked.
  “Glisselda has a key. It’s not impossible, but it’s not plausible either
—” He stopped short. Hollow voices echoed down the spiral stair.
“Saints’ bones!”
  Dame Okra made as if to stomp straight up the stairs, but Kiggs
stopped her, staring upward intently. He put a finger to his lips and
moved silently, a hand on the hilt of his sword; we followed his lead.
The door at the top was slightly ajar, letting light and sound drift
down toward us. We heard laughter and three … no, four different
voices. Kiggs motioned us to stay still.
  “That’s plenty. Lovely,” said a voice I took to be the Queen’s.
  “Thank you!” chirped a voice that was clearly Glisselda’s.
“Shouldn’t we wait for my mother and Cousin Lucian?”
  A third voice made a muffled reply, followed by the clink of glass
upon glass as another wine goblet was filled.
  Kiggs turned to us and counted down with his fingers: three, two,
one …
  He threw the door open just as the Queen, Glisselda, and Lady
Corongi toasted the new year with a glass of wine. Josef, Earl of
Apsig, stood a little apart, the wine bottle in his hand.
“Oh, there you are, Lucian!” chirped Glisselda, who stood facing
the door.
  “Don’t!” cried Kiggs, lunging across the room toward his
grandmother, who was the only person who’d put her glass all the
way to her lips.
  “I thought there might be a lovely view of the sunrise from up
here,” continued his cousin, registering his actions but slowly. Her
face fell as Kiggs grabbed the glass from her hand. “What’s going on?”
  “Someone poisoned your mother. Something in the wine. We
shouldn’t trust this wine either: I suspect it’s from the same source.
Your glass, please, Lady Corongi,” said Kiggs. Lady Corongi handed
over her glass, looking scandalized.
  “I hope you’re wrong,” said the Queen, sitting down shakily on a
stool. She leaned her elbow against a nearby table covered with books
and charts. “I fear I had a swallow of mine before you burst through
that door.”
  “We need to get you to the physicians,” said Dame Okra, a certainty
in her voice that no one dared question. She helped the Queen to her
feet and led her to the stair.
  “Dr. Ficus is at the Ardmagar’s suite,” Kiggs called after her, “but
Dr. Johns should be—”
  “I know where we’re going!” cried a cranky voice already halfway
down.
  “Selda, you didn’t drink a drop, I hope?” said Kiggs, turning to his
cousin.
  Selda leaned against the side of a bookcase as if she were dizzy, but
said, “No. You burst in just in time. But what about you, Lady
Corongi?”
  The old woman shook her head curtly. Whatever poison may have
been in the drink, it could not have compared with the poison she
glared at the Earl of Apsig.
   Josef had gone completely white. He handed the bottle to Kiggs and
raised his hands as if in surrender. “Please,” he said, “I know this
looks bad—”
   “I notice you haven’t poured yourself a glass, Earl Josef,” said Kiggs
lightly, setting the bottle on the worktable. “You’re not a saar, are
you?”
   “I am Samsamese!” sputtered Josef. “We do not partake of the
devil’s …” He trailed off, and then turned wide-eyed to Lady Corongi.
“You were counting on that. What was your plan, witch? The Queen
and princess drink, you pretend to drink, you all collapse, and when I
run for the physicians, what? You steal away in secret? You leave me
to take the fall for your crimes?”
   “Are you accusing this noble lady of something, you monster?”
cried Glisselda, putting a protective arm around the petite woman’s
shoulders. “She has been my teacher for almost my entire life!”
   The whites of Josef’s eyes shone; he looked unbalanced. His lips
moved as if he were performing some dread calculus in his head; he
ran both hands through his blond hair. “Prince,” he croaked, “I can
come up with nothing to persuade you. It is my word against hers.”
   “You gave my aunt a bottle of poisoned wine,” said Kiggs. His
earlier ire had turned to ice.
   “I swear to you, I never suspected. Why would I question a gift her
dear friend Lady Corongi told me to deliver?” He was flailing now,
grasping for any argument he could. “You don’t know this wine here
is poisoned—you assume so. What if it’s not?”
   “I know you were in the cathedral the day Seraphina was stabbed,”
said Kiggs, absently rearranging objects on his worktable.
   “I saw you talking to Thomas Broadwick,” I said, folding my arms.
   Josef shook his head vehemently. “I was delivering a message for
the Sons of St. Ogdo. It was coded; I had no idea what it meant,” he
pleaded.
   “Liar!” I cried.
   “Ask her!” he shouted back, pointing toward Lady Corongi. “She’s
the one who put me in touch with the Sons. She’s the one who
supplies them with intelligence from the palace. She is the mother of
all my troubles!”
   “Nonsense,” sniffed Lady Corongi, looking at his pointer finger as if
it offended her more than anything he’d said. “Prince, I fail to see why
you have not bound this miserable creature hand and foot already.”
   Josef opened his mouth to retort, but at that very moment a
horrifying sound—“Thluu-thluu-thluuuu!”—arose from somewhere
near Kiggs. Princess Glisselda leaped onto a stool, crying, “St.
Polypous’s legs, where is it?” Josef drew his dagger and looked
around wildly.
   Only Lady Corongi stood frozen, eyes wide with astonishment, as
the voice lisped, “I see you there, impostor!”
   I looked to Kiggs. He nodded at me and opened his hand behind his
back, revealing my lizard-man figurine.
   He said, “Who is it calling an impostor, Lady?”
   Lady Corongi snapped out of her shock with a shudder. I faced her.
Her fierce blue eyes met mine only for a second, but in that fragile
eternity I glimpsed the mind behind the manners; in that endless
instant, I knew.
   Lady Corongi charged into Glisselda, who still stood on the stool.
Glisselda screamed and folded in half over Corongi’s shoulder. The
venerable lady whirled and bolted down the stairs.
   Shock froze us in place for a heartbeat too long; Kiggs recovered
first, grabbed my arm, and dragged me down into darkness after her.
Josef shouted something after us, but whether he called to us or to
Corongi, I could not discern. At the bottom of the stairs, Kiggs looked
right and I looked left. I saw the edge of Lady Corongi’s skirt
disappearing around a corner. We dashed after, following the faintest
of trails—an open door, the ghost of her perfume, a curtain ruffled by
a nonexistent breeze—until we reached a cabinet that had been pulled
out from the wall, revealing an entrance to the passageways.
   Kiggs broke off pursuit. “That was a mistake, Lady,” he said. He
dashed back into the corridor; three doors along was a guardroom. He
threw open the door, shouted for attention, and made five hand
signals in quick succession. Guards poured out and scattered in all
directions. Kiggs dashed back to the shifted cabinet; there was already
a guard beside it, who saluted and handed us a lantern as we passed.
   “What have you asked them to do?” I said.
   He demonstrated the signs as he spoke: “Spread the word; all hands;
seal the lower tunnels; notify the city garrison; and …” His eyes met
mine. “Dragon.”
   It was an impressive array of signals. “Will they be following us
down?”
   “Soon. It will take time to get everyone in position. There are seven
entrances.”
   “Counting the sally port?”
   He made no reply but plunged onward into darkness. Of course the
palace guard would not be able to reach the sally port in time; that
was why he was sending word to the city, but they would be too late.
My heart sank in despair. Glisselda might be dead before any of us
could reach her.
   I had troops of my own that I could rally. I activated Orma’s earring
on its chain, praying that he would hear it, that he had not already
traveled some ridiculous distance, and that he could reach us in time.
Then I reached for Abdo.
   Where are you? he said. We were getting worried!
   Bad things are happening. I need you and Lars to run, as fast as you
can, to the northwest face of Castle Hill. The sally port in the side of the
hill might have a hostile dragon emerging from it shortly.
   Or it might have a very strong, wickedly fast old woman. There was
still some uncertainty on that point.
   How do we get down the castle wall on that side?
   St. Masha’s stone. You will find a way. I hoped that was true.
   And what are the two of us to do against a hostile dragon?
   I don’t know. All I know is I am in the tunnels right now, behind it, and
if you and Lars show up there will be twice as many people as there would
be otherwise. We don’t have to kill it; we just have to delay it until my
uncle gets here.
   I let him go because I could tell he was going to protest again and
because I kept tripping over the uneven floor when my concentration
was elsewhere.
   We passed the three doors, now unlocked and ajar, and knew that
Lady Corongi had come this way as well. When we reached the
natural cavern area, Kiggs drew his sword. He looked me up and
down. “We should have armed you before coming down here!” His
eyes looked haunted in the lantern light. “I want you to turn back.”
   “Don’t be ridiculous.”
   “Phina, I don’t know what I’d do if you were hurt! Please go back!”
He squared himself as if he intended to block my way.
   “Stop it!” I cried. “You’re wasting time.”
   A veil of grief fell across his face, but he nodded and turned back
toward the job at hand. We set off at a run.
   We reached the mouth of the cave, but there was no one visible,
just women’s clothing scattered all over the floor like a shed skin.
Kiggs and I glanced at each other, remembering the folded gown we’d
found here before. It had been right in front of us, and we hadn’t had
the wit to see it.
   Glisselda had clearly put up a struggle while “Lady Corongi”
undressed, so there was some hope the creature was not yet able to
fly. We dashed out of the cave into the slick, snowy grass, looking
around for the pair of them. Glisselda screamed; we turned toward the
sound of her voice. Above the cave entrance, silhouetted against the
growing pink of the sky, stood a wiry, naked man, Glisselda thrown
over his shoulder.
   He’d been at court disguised as an old woman for almost Glisselda’s
whole lifetime. Doused in perfume, avoiding other saar, worming his
way close to Princess Dionne, he had bided his time with a patience
only reptiles possess.
   For all my exposure to saarantrai I had never before seen one
change from human to dragon. He unfolded himself, stretched,
telescoped, unfurled some more. It seemed logical as it happened, all
his human parts plausibly dragon: his shoulders separating into wings,
his spine extending back to tail, his face lengthening, his skin bursting
out in scales. He managed the entire thing without letting go of
Glisselda; he finished with her clasped firmly in his front talons.
   If we had been smart, we would have charged him while he was
transforming, but we’d stood rooted to the spot, too dumbfounded to
think.
   All doubt was finally removed: it was Imlann.
   He would not be able to fly for several minutes; a newly
transformed saar is soft and weak, like a butterfly fresh from the
chrysalis. His jaw worked; he could still spit fire. I pulled Kiggs back
inside the cave before the fireball hit the dirt at the entrance, sending
up a spray of scorched stones in a burst of brimstone. Imlann couldn’t
work up a very big gobbet yet, but if he craned his neck down into the
cave, he wasn’t going to need full flame, especially if Kiggs refused to
retreat.
   How long would it take Lars and Abdo to get here? And Orma, if he
was even coming? I saw only one course of action, and turned to head
back out of the cave.
   “Are you mad?” cried Kiggs, grabbing my arm.
   I was mad, as it happened. I turned back and kissed him squarely
on the mouth, because this really could be the last thing I ever did,
and I loved him, and it made me desperately sad that he would never
know. The kiss startled him into releasing my arm, and I dashed out
of his reach, out onto the snowy hillside.
   “Imlann!” I cried, jumping and waving my arms like a fool. “Take
me with you!”
   The monster cocked his head and screamed, “You’re not a dragon;
we resolved that in the laundry. What in blazes are you?”
   This was it. I had to be interesting enough that he wouldn’t kill me
out of hand, and there was only one piece of information that could
work: “I’m your granddaughter!”
   “Not possible.”
   “Yes, possible! Linn married the human, Clau—”
   “Do not speak his name. I want to die never having heard it uttered.
He is a nameless thing, antithetical to ard.”
   “Well, your nameless daughter bore a child to her nameless thing
husband.”
   “Orma told us—”
   “Orma lied.”
   “I should kill you.”
   “You’d do better to take me with you. I could be of use in the
coming conflict.” I spread my arms, posing dramatically, my crimson
gown like a gaping wound in the snowy hillside. “Being a half-breed
has given me formidable abilities that neither dragons nor humans
possess. I can contact other half-breeds with my mind; I can direct
them at a distance with a thought. I have visions and maternal
memories. How do you imagine I knew who you were?”
   Imlann’s nostrils flared, though I could not discern whether he was
skeptical or intrigued. Down in the cave, Kiggs stirred, moving himself
slowly and silently into position to attack.
   “I know all about your cabal,” I said, feeling the urgency of keeping
my mouth moving. “I know the coup back home is going forward as
we speak.”
   Imlann raised his spines as if alarmed that I could know that. Had I
guessed right? Despair washed over me, but I kept going: “You’ve
killed the Ardmagar and half the royal family; war is coming. But
Goredd is not sufficiently weak that you will be able to walk right in.
You’re going to need my help.”
   Imlann snorted, smoke curling from his nostrils. “Liar. I know you
bluffed me before. You should not have been so quick to brag. Even if
I believed in your powers, your loyalty lies with the princeling in the
cave. Which of your ‘formidable abilities’ will you use when I lean
down and roast him? I’ve worked up quite a good flame now.”
   I opened my mouth, and there was a sound like the world ending.
   It wasn’t me, although I was ridiculously slow to comprehend that.
Lars, who’d sneaked up on the left, had started up his great war pipes,
brawling and caterwauling and screaming musical obscenities at the
dawn. Imlann jerked his head toward the sound and a shadowy figure
leaped at him from the other side, vaulted up the dragon’s neck, and
clamped arms and legs around his still-soft throat. Imlann thrashed his
neck around, but Abdo held tight—tight enough to prevent Imlann
from spitting fire.
   “Kiggs! Now!” I cried, but he was already there, stabbing at the foot
that held Glisselda. Imlann uttered a gurgle and withdrew his foot
reflexively. I reached Kiggs at just that moment; together we rolled
Glisselda to one side. I helped the sobbing princess down the rocks
toward the cave entrance while Kiggs, unwilling to leave well enough
alone, took a stab at the dragon’s other foot. Imlann lashed at Kiggs,
knocking the prince down to our level. He landed on his back, all the
air slammed out of him. Glisselda ran to his side.
   There was a hot, sulfuric wind, and I looked up to see Imlann
launching himself off the hillside, Abdo still clinging to his neck. I
cried out, but there was nothing I could do. Abdo couldn’t let go while
he was in the air; the fall would kill him. Imlann circled lazily back
toward us. If he was hardened enough to fly, he was too hard for
Abdo to keep squeezing him flameless. He was coming back to torch
us into cinders.
   “Get back!” I cried to Glisselda and Kiggs, shoving them toward the
cave. “As far as you can!”
   “Y-your lying saved us!” gasped Kiggs, still dazed from his fall.
   My lying. Yes. “Hurry! Run!” I urged him.
   Something huge screamed through the sky just above us. I looked
up to see Orma hurtling toward Imlann, and I wept with relief.
Imlann turned tail and fled, or appeared to. He let Orma nearly catch
him before reeling around in the sky and grappling him. They pinned
each other’s wings and plummeted toward the earth but managed to
escape each other’s grasp before they hit the trees. They spiraled
upward again, each looking for an opening. Imlann flamed; Orma,
noticeably, did not.
   He’d spotted Abdo and did not wish to harm him. The humanity of
it took my breath away; the colossal stupidity of it filled me with
despair.
   Abdo, clamped onto Imlann’s neck, would deprive Orma not only of
the use of fire but also of the ability to bite Imlann’s head off easily.
Orma’s only hope would be to successfully drop his father out of the
sky, but his father was longer by a quarter. It was not going to be
easy, and Abdo might still die.
   From the city, something else huge and dark rose into the sky and
approached the fighting pair at speed. It was another dragon, but I
couldn’t tell who. He circled the snarling pair at a safe distance, not
engaging either of them, but watching and waiting.
   Behind me, Kiggs spoke quietly to Glisselda. “Are you hurt?”
   “I believe I may have a cracked rib, Lucian. But—is the Ardmagar
really dead?”
   “It was all a bluff. I’ve seen her do it before. It’s her particular
talent.”
   “Well, go fetch her, would you? She’s standing in the snow in her
ball slippers, and she’s going to freeze.”
   I had not realized until that moment how cold I was. I didn’t even
have a cloak. Kiggs approached me, but I would not tear my eyes
away from the sky battle. Imlann flew a little further east with each
pass; soon they were going to be fighting above the city. If Orma was
unwilling to risk the life of one little boy, was he really going to drop
Imlann onto buildings full of people? My heart sank still lower.
   The cathedral bells began to toll, a pattern not heard in forty years:
the ard-call. Dragons! Take cover!
   “Phina,” said Kiggs. “Come inside.”
   I wouldn’t be able to see the dragons from the cave mouth, the way
they were positioned now. I stepped away from him, into even deeper
snow. Kiggs came after me and put a hand on my arm, as if he’d drag
me back, but his eyes were on the lightening sky as well. “Who is that
third dragon?”
   I suspected I knew, but I did not have the energy to explain.
   “It’s hovering uselessly,” said Kiggs. “If it were an embassy dragon,
I’d expect it to side with your teacher.”
   That last word jarred me. I’d expected him to say “uncle,” truly. I
had told the truth right in front of him, and he could not, or would
not, believe it. He was offering me an easy way back to normal, and I
was sorely tempted. It would have been so simple not to correct him,
to let it go. It would have been effortless.
   But I had kissed him, and I had told the truth, and I was changed.
   “He’s my uncle,” I said, loudly enough to ensure Glisselda heard it
also.
   Kiggs did not let go of my arm, although his hand seemed to turn to
wood. He looked to Glisselda; I did not see what expression she wore.
He said, “Phina, don’t joke. You saved us. It’s over.”
   I stared at him until he met my eye. “If you’re going to demand the
truth from me, you could at least have the courtesy to believe it.”
   “It can’t be true. That doesn’t happen.” His voice caught; he’d gone
pink to his ears. “That is, what Aunt Dionne might have been
planning … I’ll allow that that happens. Maybe, sometimes.”
   It had been about to happen at Lady Corongi’s suggestion, too, I
suddenly realized.
   “But interbreeding is surely impossible,” Kiggs continued
stubbornly. “Cats and dogs, as they say.”
   “Horses and donkeys,” I said. The cold wind made my eyes water.
“It happens.”
   “What did you say about my mother, Lucian?” asked Glisselda, her
voice tremulous.
   Kiggs didn’t answer. He released my arm but didn’t walk away. His
eyes widened. I followed his gaze in time to see Orma pull out of a
drop barely in time, shearing off a chimney and a tavern roof with his
tail. The sound of the crash reached our ears a moment later along
with the screaming of panicked citizens.
   “Saints in Heaven!” cried Glisselda, who had come closer behind us
without my hearing, clutching her side. “Why won’t that one help
him?”
   In fact, “that one” was gliding lazily back toward us. He grew larger
and larger, finally landing just downhill from us; a gust of brimstone
wind forced us back a step. He stretched his snaky neck, and then
proceeded to do the opposite of what Imlann had done, collapsing in
upon himself, cooling and condensing into a man. Basind stood stark
naked in the snow, rubbing his hands together.
   “Saar Basind!” I cried, even though I knew how futile it was to be
furious with him. “You’re leaving Orma to be killed. Change back at
once!”
   Basind’s eyes swiveled toward me, and I stopped short. His gaze
was sharp; his motions were smooth and coordinated as he picked his
way toward me through the snow. He flicked his lank hair out of his
eyes and said, “This fight has nothing to do with me, Seraphina. I’ve
gathered the pertinent data on your uncle, and now I get to go home.”
   I gaped at him. “You’re—you’re from the—”
   “The Board of Censors, yes. We test your uncle regularly, but he’s
been tough to catch. He usually notices and spoils the test. This time
he was experiencing excessive emotionality on several fronts at once;
he could not keep up his vigilance. The Ardmagar has already ordered
Orma’s excision, of course, saving me the trouble of having to argue
the case.”
   “What has Orma done?” asked Glisselda, behind me. I turned; she
stood on a stony outcrop, looking surprisingly regal as the sky turned
pink and gold behind her.
   “He put his half-human niece before his own people multiple
times,” said Basind, sounding bored. “He showed several emotions in
quantities exceeding permissible limits, including love, hatred, and
grief. He is, even now, losing a battle he could easily win, out of
concern for a human boy he doesn’t even know.”
   Orma was thrown against the bell tower of the cathedral while
Basind spoke, crushing the belfry roof with his back. Slate and wood
hit the bells, adding cacophony to the ard-call, which still pealed forth
from churches all over the city.
   “I offer him asylum,” said Glisselda, crossing her arms over her
chest.
   Basind lifted an eyebrow. “He’s ruining your city.”
   “He’s fighting a traitor to his own kind. Imlann tried to kill the
Ardmagar!”
   Basind shrugged his bony shoulders. “Truly, that concerns me not a
bit.”
   “You don’t care whether the peace fails?”
   “We Censors predate the peace; we will be here long after it has
crumbled.” He looked down at himself, seeming to notice for the first
time that he was naked. He made for the mouth of the cave. Kiggs
attempted to block his way; Basind rolled his eyes. “This silly body is
cold. There is clothing on the floor. Hand it to me.”
   Kiggs did as he was told without complaint. I was astonished by his
alacrity until I saw with my own eyes what he had remembered: it
was Lady Corongi’s gown. Basind put it on, grumbling that it was too
tight but noticing nothing else wrong with it. He turned and sauntered
away up the sally port, unchallenged.
   “Lucian!” cried Glisselda. “Don’t let him go. I’m not convinced he’s
friendly.”
   “The tunnels are all blocked. He’ll be apprehended before he can do
any harm.”
   If only that were true. The harm was done. I turned back to the sky,
where my uncle was still getting the worst of it. Even if he survived,
he’d be sent back to the Tanamoot to have his brain pruned. I couldn’t
bear it.
   Imlann got the drop on him again, and this time Orma could not
recover soon enough. He was on fire; he streaked through the sky and
landed hard in the river, taking out the Wolfstoot Bridge. A cloud of
steam billowed up where he had fallen.
   I clamped a hand over my mouth. Imlann swirled the sky,
screaming and flaming triumphantly, the newly risen sun glimmering
upon his skin.
   Treaty Eve was over. Usually we Goreddis toasted the new light and
cried, “The dragon wars are done for good!” This year, however,
everyone had run out into the streets to watch the dragons warring
each other overhead.
   I could still hear screams, but it was not the townspeople; it was the
wrong pitch. Suddenly I realized the dark dots in the southern sky,
which I had taken for a flock of birds, were flying too swiftly and
growing far too large to be birds.
   Eskar and the petit ard were returning.
   The dragon Imlann, my maternal grandfather, did not attempt to
flee and did not bite his own tail and surrender. He flew headlong at
the approaching dragons, flaming and bellowing and utterly doomed.
   As Lady Corongi, he had been devious, ruthless, and calculating. He
had tried to kill the entire royal family and his Ardmagar; he might
have succeeded in killing his own son. His final charge was nothing
short of suicide. And yet, as I watched him in full battle fury, slashing
and snapping as if he would rip the sky itself apart, I felt a terrible
sorrow rising in me. He was my mother’s father. She had ruined his
life as surely as her own by marrying my father, but had her
stubbornness been so different from his doomed charge, in the end?
Hadn’t she too gone up against unbeatable odds?
   Eskar alone could not drop him. Three dragons together finally set
him on fire, and even then he stayed airborne longer than I could
have imagined possible. When Eskar finally decapitated him, it was
more mercy killing than victory. I watched my grandfather’s body
spiral down, bright as a comet, and I wept.
   The church bells changed their pattern to the fire alarm as smoke
began to billow up in the south part of town. Even dead, Imlann did a
lot of damage.
   I turned back toward the cave entrance, my eyes stinging, my hands
and face bitterly cold, a dread emptiness in my chest. Kiggs and
Glisselda stood together, both of them studying me anxiously but
pretending not to. In the shadows behind them stood Lars, whom I’d
all but forgotten. He clutched his pipes, white-knuckled.
   “Phina,” he said when I met his eye, “what hes happendt to Abdo?”
   The dragon Abdo clung to had been set aflame and decapitated. I
saw little hope. “I can’t look for him, Lars,” I said. The idea of
reaching for Abdo’s hand in my mind and coming up empty terrified
me.
   “Candt, or wondt?”
   “I won’t!”
   Lars glowered ferociously. “You will! You owe him thet! He gave
everythink for you, gladtly! He foundt the way down the wall, he
threw himself at thet dragon, he didt all you esked and more. Findt
him.”
   “What if he’s not there?”
   “Then you will findt him in Heaven, but you will findt him.”
   I nodded, picking my way through the snow toward Lars. Kiggs and
Glisselda parted to let me pass, their eyes wide. “Keep me upright,
will you?” I said to Lars, who silently put his bagpipe-free arm around
me and let me lean my head against his chest. I closed my eyes and
reached.
   I found Abdo at once. Conscious, alert, almost unhurt, he was
seated upon what at first appeared to be an island in the middle of the
river. I swooped in with my vision-eye for a closer look. Abdo waved
at me, smiling through tears, and only then did I realize what he was
sitting on.
   It was Orma.
   Abdo, is that dragon alive or dead? I cried, but Abdo didn’t answer.
Maybe he didn’t know. I circled. Orma’s chest rose—was that a
breath? Crowds of people lined the riverbanks, shouting and waving
torches but too frightened to go any closer to him. A shadow crossed
them, and they scattered, screaming. It was Eskar: she landed on the
strand and arched her neck down to my uncle in the river.
   With a tremendous effort, he lifted his head and touched her nose
with his.
   “Abdo lives,” I croaked, bringing myself back. “He’s in the river
with Uncle Orma. He must have switched dragons in mid-flight.”
   Lars squeezed me and kissed the top of my head, then checked his
exuberance. “Your uncle?”
   “Moving. Not well. Eskar’s there; she’ll see to his care.” I hoped she
would. Was she really no longer with the Censors? She was the one
who’d made my uncle look after Basind. Had she known who he was?
I wept into Lars’s jerkin.
   There was another hand on my shoulder. Princess Glisselda was
giving me her handkerchief. “Are these your formidable mental
powers?” she asked softly. “You can see your comrades in your mind?
Is that how you found me?”
   “She can see only other helf-dragons,” said Lars, glaring
unnecessarily.
   “There are more half-dragons?” whispered Glisselda, her blue eyes
wide.
   “Mise,” said Lars. “I, myself.”
   The princess nodded slowly, her brow furrowed in thought. “And
that little Porphyrian boy. That’s who you’re talking about, isn’t it?”
   Kiggs was shaking his head, pacing in a futile circle. “I might
believe there was one in the world, but three?”
   “Four, counting Dame Okra Carmine,” I said wearily. May as well
out the whole bunch, although I had a feeling Dame Okra would be
irked that I had done so. “There could be seventeen of us together, if I
located the rest.” Eighteen, if I found Jannoula, or she found me.
    Glisselda looked awed, but Kiggs set his jaw as if he wasn’t buying
it.
    “You heard Basind call Orma my uncle,” I told him. “Remember
how you thought I loved him, how you were sick of guessing? Here’s
your explanation at last.”
    Kiggs was shaking his head stubbornly. “I just can’t … Your blood
runs red. You laugh and cry the same as anyone—”
    Lars seemed to grow taller, looming protectively over me. I put a
reassuring hand on his arm and told him in my mind: It’s time. I can do
this.
    The prince and princess stared, mesmerized by how many sleeves
and ties I had to undo. I held my bared arm toward them; sunlight
flashed off the spiraling silver scales.
    The icy wind blew. No one spoke.
    Kiggs and Glisselda did not move. I did not look at their faces; I did
not wish to read how many different words for disgust must be
written there. I tugged my garments back into place, cleared the
considerable lump out of my throat, and croaked, “We should get
inside and see who else still lives.”
    The royal cousins started, as if waking from some terrible dream,
and hastened into the cave, ahead of and away from me. Lars put his
arm around my shoulders. I leaned on him all the way into the castle,
weeping half my tears for Orma and half for myself.
All the palace was in an uproar when we got back, searching for
Glisselda; no one but us had known where she’d gone. She stepped
out of the tunnels a tired, cold, frightened girl, but within moments,
before she’d even heard the fates of her mother and grandmother, she
had put her queenliness on and was reassuring panicked courtiers and
terrified heads of state.
   Princess Dionne had not survived the night. The Queen held on, but
barely. Glisselda hurried upstairs to be at her grandmother’s side.
   Kiggs went straight to his guards, demanding reports and making
sure they had shifted smoothly to daytime duties. They had detained
Basind; Kiggs decided he could use a good questioning and hastened
off.
   Lars and I were left to fend for ourselves. Without a word, he took
my arm and led me through twists and turns of the corridors until we
reached a door. Viridius’s manservant, Marius, answered. Viridius was
shouting in the background: “What kind of whoreson dog knocks
before the sun is up?”
   “The sun is up, Master,” said Marius wearily, rolling his eyes and
waving us through. “It’s only Lars and—”
   Viridius darkened the doorway of the bedchamber, hauling himself
forward with two canes. His expression softened at the sight of us.
“Pardon me, my dears. You’ve awakened an old man on the wrong
side of the bed.”
   Lars, who was propping me up, intoned, “She needts a place to
sleep.”
   “She hasn’t a suite of her own anymore?” asked Viridius, clearing
cushions and a robe off his couch for me. “Sit, Seraphina, you look
terrible.”
   “Her true nature is revealedt to the princess and prince,” said Lars,
laying a hand on the old man’s shoulder. “She shouldt not hev to face
the worldt until she rests, quiet, away from peoples.”
   Marius went to the solarium to arrange a makeshift bed for me, but
I fell asleep right there on the couch.
   I dozed on and off all day. Viridius and Lars kept everyone away
and asked no questions.
   The next morning I awoke to Lars sitting at the end of my
impromptu bed. “The princess was here,” he said. “She wants thet we
come to the Queen’s studty when you are dressedt. A lot is
heppenedt.”
   I nodded blearily. He gave me his arm and we went together.
Princess Glisselda had commandeered her grandmother’s massive
desk; eight high-backed chairs, most of them already occupied, had
been placed in a semicircle before her. Kiggs sat behind her to the left
perusing a folded letter; he flicked his eyes toward the door when Lars
and I entered but did not raise his head. To the princess’s right, like a
gray shadow near the windows, stood my father. He smiled wanly. I
nodded at him and followed Lars toward the two empty seats beside
Dame Okra Carmine.
   Abdo peeked out from behind her ample form and waved at me.
   The Regent of Samsam, Count Pesavolta of Ninys, Ambassador
Fulda, and the Ardmagar occupied the other seats. The Regent was
clad all in severe black, his silver hair brushing his shoulders, while
Count Pesavolta was wide, apple-cheeked, and bald; they wore similar
sour expressions, however. Lars slumped beside me as if to make
himself smaller, casting wary glances at the Regent.
   Princess Glisselda folded her small hands on the desk before her and
cleared her throat. She wore a white houppelande and the circlet of
the first heir; golden netting restrained the exuberance of her curls.
Small though she was, she seemed to fill the room with light. She
said, “My mother is dead and my grandmother extremely ill. I am first
heir by rightful succession. The incapacity of the Queen—St. Eustace
leave her lie long as he may—necessitates my speaking, deciding, and
taking action on her behalf.” The Regent and Count Pesavolta shifted
in their seats, grumbling. Glisselda snapped: “Counselor Dombegh!
Precedent!”
   My father cleared his throat. “When Queen Favonia II was
incapacitated by stroke, Princess Annette served as acting Queen until
she recovered. No Goreddi would question your right, Your
Highness.”
   “You are but fifteen years old,” said Count Pesavolta, his round face
smiling but his eyes hard. “No disrespect intended.”
   “Queen Lavonda was but seventeen when she treated with me,” said
Comonot unexpectedly. He rested his hands on his knees, several
quig-made rings on each finger; they gleamed like a miniature hoard
against the dark blue of his houppelande.
   “Her youth did not excuse her foolishness,” said the Regent, glaring
down his narrow nose.
   Comonot did not acknowledge the comment; he was speaking only
to Glisselda. “She was already Queen in her own right. Already a
mother. She climbed Halfheart Pass through a raging snowstorm with
only two goat-girls from Dewcomb’s Outpost to guide her. I had
assumed no rational being would brave that kind of weather, so I was
not even in my saarantras to greet her. My scouts brought her into our
cavern, this tiny, half-frozen girl, snow whirling around her. We all
stared at her, not sure what to think, until she threw back her fur-
lined hood and unwrapped the woolen shawl from over her face. She
looked me in the eye, and I knew.”
   There was a long pause until Glisselda said, “Knew what,
Ardmagar?”
   “That I had met my match,” said Comonot, his face sharp,
remembering.
   Glisselda nodded at the Ardmagar, a small smile on her lips. She
held a hand out to Kiggs, who passed her the folded parchment. “We
received a letter this morning. Ambassador Fulda, would you please
read it aloud?”
   The ambassador fished a pair of spectacles out of his vest and read:

      We the undersigned have seized the Kerama as of yesterday. We
   proclaim ourselves rightful rulers of the Tanamoot, all its lands and
   armies, until we are in turn removed by force.
      The traitor Comonot yet lives. He is wanted for crimes against
   dragonkind, including but not limited to: making treaties and
   alliances against the will of the Ker, detrimental to our values and
   way of life; indulging in excessive emotionality; fraternizing with
   humans; indulging deviants; seeking to alter our fundamental
   dragon nature and make us more human-like.
      We demand his immediate return to the Tanamoot. Failure to
   comply will be tantamount to an act of war. Recognize, Goreddis,
   that you are in no position to fight. We expect you to act in
   accordance with your interests. You have three days.
   “It’s signed by ten generals,” said Ambassador Fulda, refolding the
parchment.
   Comonot opened his mouth, but Glisselda silenced him with a
gesture. “The dragon Imlann, as my governess, taught me that Goredd
is mighty and the dragons are weak and demoralized. I believed it
until I saw for myself how dragons fight. Orma destroyed the
Wolfstoot Bridge and sheared off the top of St. Gobnait’s; where
Imlann fell, an entire city block burned. How much worse if they’d
been fighting us and not each other? The dracomachia is a shambles. I
fear the cabal is right: we would not last alone against dragons. As
much as I admire you, Ardmagar, you’re going to have to persuade me
not to give you back.”
   She turned to Fulda. “Ambassador, will dragonkind stand with their
Ardmagar?”
   Fulda pursed his lips, thinking. “It’s not a legal succession while
Comonot lives. There may be those who reject the cabal for that
reason alone, but I suspect the older generation will largely be in
sympathy with their goals.”
   “I dispute that,” said the Ardmagar.
   “The younger generation,” Fulda said, pressing on, “will likely stand
firm in favor of the peace. This could turn into an inter-generational
war.”
   “Infanta!” said the Regent of Samsam, shaking a bony finger as if to
scold her. “Surely you have no intention of giving this creature
political asylum? It was degrading enough that your noble
grandmother—St. Eustace blindly pass her by—should have
negotiated with it. Do not show it mercy when its own kind wants it
dead.”
   “You would be inserting your country—and the unwilling
Southlands with you—into a dragon civil war,” drawled Count
Pesavolta, drumming his fingers on his ample gut.
   “If I may,” interjected my father. “The treaty contains a clause
forbidding Goredd from interfering in internal dragon affairs. We
could not meddle in a civil war.”
   “You’ve tied our hands, Ardmagar,” said Glisselda, her pretty little
mouth curling sardonically. “We would have to break your own treaty
to save you.”
   “We may have to break the treaty to save the treaty,” said the
Ardmagar.
   Glisselda turned to Ninys and Samsam. “You wish Comonot
returned. I may decide I cannot do that. If it comes to war between
Goredd and the dragons, can I rely on you? If not for help, then at
least not to take arms against us opportunistically?”
   The Regent of Samsam looked pale and peevish; Count Pesavolta
hemmed and hawed. Each finally muttered something close to, if not
exactly, yes.
   “Goredd’s treaty with Ninys and Samsam banished knights across
the Southlands,” continued Glisselda, her blue eyes cold and sternly
fixed upon them. “I will not risk war unless we are free to revive the
dracomachia. It would mean renegotiating that agreement.”
   “Your Highness,” said my father, “many of the Samsamese and
Ninysh knights were rumored to have fled to Fort Oversea, on the isle
of Paola. Their dracomachia may be in healthier condition than ours.
Altering the treaty could allow the knights of all three nations to work
together.”
   The princess nodded thoughtfully. “I’d want your help drafting this
document.”
   “It would be my honor,” said my father, bowing.
   The Regent of Samsam sat up straighter, his skinny neck extending
like a vulture’s. “If it means we might reinstate our valiant exiles,
perhaps Samsam would be willing to negotiate some sort of
nonaggression pact.”
   “Ninys would never side with dragons against Goredd,” Count
Pesavolta announced. “We stand behind you, of course!”
   Glisselda gave an arch nod. Kiggs, behind her, had narrowed his
eyes suspiciously. Ninys and Samsam would have squirmed in their
seats had they realized what intense scrutiny would be upon them.
   “This brings me finally to you,” said the princess, indicating us half-
dragons with an elegant gesture. “We have here a fearless boy who
grappled a dragon in his own version of dracomachia, a man who can
design sophisticated engines of war—”
   “And musical instruments,” mumbled Lars.
   “—a woman who can tell the near future with her stomach, and
another who may be able to find me more people of extraordinary
talent.” Glisselda smiled warmly at me. “At least, you mentioned there
are more. Are they all so talented?”
   I almost said I didn’t know, but it occurred to me suddenly that I
might. If I’d thought about it, I’d have known what to expect from
these first three: Abdo was always climbing and balancing; Lars built
gazebos and bridges; Dame Okra pulled up weeds before they had a
chance to sprout. Every one of my grotesques engaged in idiosyncratic
behaviors. Pelican Man stared at the stars. Pandowdy was a monster
in his own right. Jannoula—if I ever dared to look for her again—
could climb right into my mind, but maybe not just mine.
   “I think we would be something formidable, all together,” I said.
“And I think I could find the rest, if I went looking. I’ve wanted to find
them.”
   “Do it,” said Glisselda. “Whatever you need—horses, guards, money
—speak to Lucian, and Lucian will make it so.” She nodded to her
cousin; he nodded back, although he avoided looking in my direction.
   The Regent could stand it no longer. “Your pardon, Highness, but
who are these people? I know Count Pesavolta’s ambassadress, but the
rest? A highland lout, a Porphyrian child, and this … this woman—”
   “My daughter Seraphina,” said Papa, his face hard.
   “Oh, that explains everything!” cried the Regent. “Princess? What’s
going on?”
   Princess Glisselda opened her mouth, but no words came out.
   In that moment of hesitation, I realized she was embarrassed—for
me, for all of us. We were the punch line of a hundred dirty jokes.
How could she speak of such disgusting things to the leader of a
foreign land?
   I rose, ready to spare her the mortification. My father had the same
idea and found his voice first: “I married a dragon. My daughter,
whom I love, is half dragon.”
   “Papa!” I cried, terrified for him, grateful, sad, and proud.
   “Infanta!” sputtered the Regent, leaping to his feet. “By St. Vitt,
these are unnatural abominations. Soulless beasts!”
   Count Pesavolta snorted. “I can’t believe you were worried about
our loyalty but are ready to trust these things. How can you ever be
sure which side they will take, dragon or human? My ambassadress
already seems determined to choose Goredd over Ninys. Surely this is
only the first wave of her treachery?”
   “I choose what’s right,” snarled Dame Okra, “as I expect you will
too, sir.”
   Comonot turned to Ninys and Samsam, his eyes bright but his voice
filled with calm authority: “Can you not see that it’s no longer a
question of dragon versus human? The division now is between those
who think this peace is worth preserving and those who would keep
us at war until one side or the other is destroyed.
   “There are dragons who see the good of the treaty. They will join
us. The young have been raised with peaceful ideals; they won’t
sympathize with these grizzled generals who want their hoards and
their hunting grounds back.”
  He turned toward Glisselda and gestured toward the sky.
“Something we dragons have learned from you is that we are stronger
together. We need not take on the entire world alone. Let us stand
together now for the peace.”
  Princess Glisselda rose, stepped around the great oaken desk, and
embraced Comonot, removing all doubt. She would not turn him over
to his generals. We would be going to war for peace.
The meeting adjourned; the Regent and Count Pesavolta couldn’t
quit the room fast enough. Glisselda and Kiggs already had their
heads together, planning how best to address the council at noon. The
princess smiled sheepishly at her cousin. “You were right: Ninys and
Samsam took it poorly. I hoped to be efficient, but I should have met
with everyone separately. Gloat, if you must.”
   “Not at all,” said Kiggs gently. “Instinct did not fail you. They’d
have learned of the half-dragons eventually and accused us of
duplicity. They’ll get over it.”
   I stared at the back of the prince’s neck as if it could reveal whether
he himself was used to the idea yet. If his refusal to look at me was
any indication, the answer was no. I tore myself away and left them to
their planning.
   My father waited for me in the corridor, his arms crossed and his
eyes anxious. He held out a hand when he saw me. I took it, and we
stood in silence.
   “I’m sorry,” he said at last. “I have lived in this prison so long, I … I
suddenly found I couldn’t do it anymore.”
   I squeezed his hand and let go. “You only did what I was about to.
What now? There must be repercussions within the lawyers’ guild for
lawyers who break the law.” He had a wife and four other children to
support; I could not bring myself to point that out.
   He smiled mirthlessly. “I’ve been preparing my case for sixteen
years.”
   “Excuse me,” said a voice to my left, and we turned to see Comonot
standing there. He cleared his throat and ran a jeweled hand over his
jowls.     “You     are—were—the        human       involved    with     the
nameless … that is, with Linn, daughter of Imlann?”
   Papa bowed stiffly.
   Comonot stepped closer, cautious as a cat. “She left her home, her
people, her studies, everything. For you.” He touched my father’s face
with his thick fingers: the left cheek, the right, the nose and chin. My
father endured it stonily.
   “What are you?” said the Ardmagar, an unexpected roughness in his
voice. “Not a depraved maniac. You are known in the north as a
dispassionate interpreter of the treaty—you realize that? You’ve
defended dragons in court when no one else would do it; don’t
imagine we haven’t noticed. And yet it was you who lured our
daughter away.”
   “I did not know,” said my father hoarsely.
   “No, but she knew.” Comonot laid a hand atop my father’s balding
head, mystified. “What did she see? And why can’t I see it?”
   Papa extricated himself, bowed, and set off down the hall. For a
fleeting instant, in the sad curve of his shoulders, I saw what Comonot
could not: the core of decency; the weight he had carried so long; the
endless struggle to do right in the wake of this irreversible wrong; the
grieving husband and frightened father; the author of all those love
songs. For the first time, I understood.
   Comonot seemed unfazed by my father’s hasty retreat. He took my
arm and whispered in my ear breathily, like a small child: “Your uncle
is at the seminary infirmary.”
   I goggled at him. “He transformed?”
   The Ardmagar shrugged. “He was adamant that no saar physician
come near him; he seems to believe they’d excise him on the spot.
He’ll be gone tomorrow in any case.”
   I pulled away from him. “Because Basind will take him away to
have his brain pruned?”
   Comonot licked his thick lips, as if he needed to taste my bitterness
to understand it. “Not at all. I’m pardoning Orma—not that the
Censors will obey the edicts of an exiled Ardmagar. At midnight Eskar
squirrels him away, and even I don’t know where. It may be a very
long time before you see him again.”
   “Don’t tell me you’re indulging emotional deviants!”
   His pointed gaze held an intelligence I had not appreciated before.
He said, “Indulging, no, but perhaps comprehending the hidden
complexities better. I thought I knew which things we dragons should
learn and which were unnecessary, but I see now that my opinions
had calcified. I was as set in my thinking as the crusty old generals
who’ve stolen my country.”
   He reached for my hand, lifted it, and clapped it to the side of his
neck. I tried to pull away, but he held firm and said: “Let this signify
my submission to your tutelage, since I doubt you would agree to bite
the back of my neck. You are my teacher. I will listen, and I will try to
learn.”
   “I will try to be worthy of your reverence,” I said, my mother’s
words coming to me from the depths of the memory box. I felt
compelled to add my own: “And I will try to sympathize with your
efforts, even when you fail.”
   “Well put,” he said, releasing me. “Now go. Tell your uncle you love
him. You do love him, don’t you?”
   “Yes,” I said, suddenly hoarse.
   “Go. And Seraphina,” he called after me, “I’m sorry about your
mother. I believe I am.” He gestured toward his stomach. “There, yes?
That’s where one feels it?”
   I gave him full courtesy and hurried away.



An aged monk led me to the infirmary. “He’s got the place to himself.
Once the other invalids learned there was a dragon coming, they
miraculously got well! The lame could walk and the blind decided
they didn’t really need to see. He’s a panacea.”
   I thanked the man and entered quietly in case my uncle was
sleeping. At the far end of the ward, beside the only window, he lay
propped up by pillows, talking to Eskar. I drew closer and realized
they weren’t talking, exactly. Each raised a hand toward the other,
touching just the fingertips together; they took turns running their
fingertips down the other’s palm.
   I cleared my throat. Eskar rose, stone-faced and dignified. “Sorry!” I
said, unsure why I was apologizing. It wasn’t as though I’d caught
them doing something naughty.
   Except maybe I had, from a dragon’s viewpoint. I clamped my
mouth shut to prevent giggling. Eskar did not look like she would
forgive giggling.
   I said, “I wish to speak to my uncle before you take him away.
Thank you for helping him.”
   She stood aside but showed no inclination to leave until Orma said:
“Eskar, go. Come back later.” She nodded curtly, drawing her cloak
around her, and left.
   I looked askance at him. “What were you two—”
   “Stimulating cortical nerve responses,” said my uncle, smiling
eerily. The monks evidently had him on something for the pain. He
seemed loose in the middle and soft around the edges. His right arm
was wrapped and splinted; his jawline was mottled with white, what
passes for bruising when you’ve got silver blood. I could not see
where he’d been burned. His head lolled against the pillows. “She is
rather majestic in her rightful shape. I’d forgotten. It’s been years. She
was Linn’s agemate, you know. Used to come over to my mother’s
nest to gut aurochs.”
   “Do we trust her?” I said, hating to bring it up when he seemed so
unconcerned. “She was responsible for Zeyd and Basind. Are you sure
—”
   “Not for Basind.”
   I frowned but did not pursue it. I tried to lighten my own mood by
teasing him: “So you’re off the hook, you devious old deviant.”
   His brows drew together, and I wondered whether I’d joked a bit
too far. It turned out something else bothered him: “I don’t know
when I’ll see you again.”
   I patted his arm, trying to smile. “At least you’ll know me when you
do see me.”
   “It could be a very long time, Seraphina. You could be middle-aged
and married and have six children by then.”
   He was really out of it if he was talking this kind of nonsense. “I
may be middle-aged, but no one would marry me, and surely I can’t
have children. A mule can’t. Half-breeds are the end of the line.”
   He gazed beatifically into space. “I wonder if that’s really true.”
   “I’m not wondering. I’ve come to say goodbye and wish you good
journey, not speculate about my reproductive capabilities.”
   “You talk like a dragon,” he said dreamily. He was getting drowsier.
   I wiped my eyes. “I’m going to miss you so much!”
   He rolled his head toward me. “I saved the little boy. He leaped
from Imlann’s neck to mine, and then I fell into the river, and he
danced. He danced right on my belly, and I could feel it.”
   “He was dancing on you. Of course you could feel it.”
   “No, not that way. The other way. I wasn’t in my saarantras, but I
was … happy, for all that my legs were broken and the river icy. I was
happy. And then Eskar landed, and I was grateful. And the sun shone,
and I felt sad for my father. And for you.”
   “Why for me?”
   “Because the Censors had finally fooled me, and I was going to be
excised, and you would weep.”
   I was weeping now. “You’ll be safe with Eskar.”
   “I know.” He took my hand, squeezed it. “I can’t bear that you’ll be
alone.”
   “Not alone. There are others of my kind. I’m going to find them.”
   “Who will kiss you? Who will rock you to sleep?” His voice was
slow, drowsy.
   “You never did,” I said, trying to tease him. “You were more father
to me than my father, but you never did that.”
   “Someone should. Someone should love you. I will bite him if he
will not.”
   “Hush. You’re talking nonsense now.”
   “Not nonsense. This is important!” He struggled to sit up straighter
and failed. “Your mother once told me something, and I need to tell
you … because you need … to understand it …”
   His eyes fluttered shut, and he was quiet so long I thought he had
fallen asleep, but then he said, in a voice so soft I could barely hear:
“Love is not a disease.”
   I leaned my forehead on his shoulder, all the words I’d never
spoken to him rushing my throat at once, forming a terrible lump
there. Hesitantly he stroked my hair.
   “I’m not completely certain she was right,” he murmured. “But I
cannot let them cut you out of me, nor her either. I will cling to my
sickness … if it is a sickness … I will hold it close to me like the … the
sun, and the …”
   He faded away again, this time for good. I sat with my arms around
him until Eskar returned. I smoothed his hair off his forehead and
kissed him lightly. Eskar stared. “Take good care of him, or I’ll … I’ll
bite you!” I told her. She looked unconcerned.
   The sky outside was blue, cold, and very far away; the sun was too
bright to look at, let alone hold close to me. “But I will try, uncle,” I
murmured, “though it burns me. I will keep it close.”
   I hurried homeward through the slushy streets. I had a prince to
find.
When I reached the palace, there was a great crush of carriages at
the gates. The city magistrates, the bishop, the Chapter, the guild
leaders, the Queen’s Guard—every important person in the city had
arrived at once. Indoors, I was carried toward the great hall by a
crowd of people, more than would comfortably fit inside, it turned
out. Half of us were diverted back out to Stone Court.
   Apparently the council had been short. We were about to hear the
official results.
   A balcony halfway up the wall was opened up to both the hall and
the courtyard, such that someone with a loud voice could be heard in
both places. Glisselda appeared there, waving to the roaring throng.
She acted on her grandmother’s behalf, but everyone who saw her
that day, clad in white for her mother, her golden hair shining like
any crown, knew they were in the presence of the next Queen. She
awed us into silence.
   She handed a folded letter to a herald, a particularly vociferous
fellow, whose voice rang out clearly over the hushed crowd.

   Generals of the Tanamoot:
      Goredd rejects the legitimacy of your claim to sovereignty over the
   Dragon Lands. Ardmagar Comonot yet lives; petty threats will not
   induce us to turn him over, nor do we recognize the validity of these
   trumped-up charges against him. He is our proven friend and ally,
   author and champion of the peace, and the legitimate ruler of the
   Tanamoot.
      If you push this toward war, do not foolishly imagine we are
   helpless, or that your own people will choose to fight for you rather
   than for continued cooperation between our species. This peace has
   been a true blessing upon the world, which is changed for the better;
   you cannot drag it back into the past.
                Devoutly hoping we may settle this with words, I am,
               Her Highness Princess Glisselda, First Heir of Goredd,
           On behalf of Her Majesty Queen Lavonda the Magnificent

   We applauded with heavy hearts, knowing that this was all the
pretext the generals would need for war. Another conflict was coming,
whether we willed it or not. I saw smirks on faces in the crowd and
feared that some among us willed it in fact.
   It took forever for the crowd to disperse; everyone wanted a chance
to petition the princess or the Ardmagar, swear loyalty, argue. The
palace guard managed the crowds as best they could, but I did not see
Kiggs anywhere. It wasn’t like him not to be right in the thick of
things.
   Princess Glisselda had also contrived to disappear. I suspected Kiggs
might be with her. There were two places outside the royal wing
where someone like me could look. I had just set foot upon the grand
stair, however, when a voice behind me stopped me short: “Tell me it
isn’t true, Seraphina. Tell me they’re lying about you.”
   I looked back. The Earl of Apsig crossed the atrium toward me, his
boots echoing upon the marble floor. I didn’t ask what he meant.
Ninys and Samsam had spread the news to every corner of the court. I
gripped the balustrade tightly, bracing myself. “It’s no lie,” I said. “I
am half dragon—like Lars.”
   He neither flinched nor rushed up to hit me—as I’d half feared he
would. His face went slack with despair; he flopped himself onto the
broad stone steps and sat with his head in his hands. For a moment I
considered sitting beside him—he looked so sad!—but he was too
unpredictable.
   “What are we to do?” he said at last, throwing up his hands and
looking up with red-rimmed eyes. “They’ve won. Nowhere is
exclusively human; no side in this conflict is ours alone. They
infiltrate everything, control everything! I joined the Sons of St. Ogdo
because they seemed to be the only people willing to take action, the
only ones looking the treaty in the eye and calling it what it was: our
ruin.”
   He ran his hands through his hair, as if he might pull it out by the
roots. “But who connected me with the Sons and urged me to get
involved? That dragon, Lady Corongi.”
   “They’re not all out to get us,” I said softly.
   “No? How about the one that tricked your father, or the one that
deceived my mother and made her bear a bastard?”
   I drew a sharp breath, and he glowered at me. “My mother raised
Lars as if he were my equal. One day he began sprouting scales out of
his very flesh. He was only seven; he showed us all, innocently rolled
up his sleeve—” His voice broke; he coughed. “My father stabbed her
right through the neck. It was his right, his injured honor. He might
have killed Lars, too.”
   He stared at the air as if disinclined to speak further. “You didn’t let
him,” I prompted. “You persuaded him otherwise.”
   He looked at me as if I were speaking Mootya. “Persuaded? No. I
killed the old man. Pushed him off the round tower.” He smiled
mirthlessly at my shock. “We live in the remotest highlands. This sort
of thing happens all the time. I took my great-grandmother’s family
name to avoid awkward questions if I went to court in Blystane.
Highland genealogies are complex; none of the coastal Samsamese
keep track of them.”
   So that’s what he was: not a dragon, but a parricide who’d changed
his name. “What about Lars?”
   “I told him I would kill him if I saw him again, and then I set him
loose in the hills. I had no idea where he went until he popped up
here, an avenging ghost sent to haunt me.”
   He glared at me sullenly, hating me for knowing too much, never
mind that he himself had told me. I cleared my throat. “What will you
do now?”
   He rose, straightened the hem of his black doublet, and gave
mocking courtesy. “I am returning to Samsam. I will make the Regent
see sense.”
   His tone chilled me. “What kind of sense?”
   “The only kind there is. The kind that puts humans first over
animals.”
   With those words he stalked away across the atrium. He seemed to
take all the air with him when he left.



I found Glisselda in Millie’s room, weeping, her head in her hands.
Millie, who was rubbing the princess’s shoulders, looked alarmed that
I had entered without knocking. “The princess is tired,” said Millie,
stepping toward me anxiously.
   “It’s all right,” said Glisselda, wiping her eyes. Her hair was loose
around her shoulders, and her blotchy pink cheeks made her look
very young. She tried to smile. “I am always pleased to see you,
Phina.”
   My heart constricted at the sight of her sorrow. She’d just lost her
mother and had the weight of an entire realm thrust onto her
shoulders, and I was a bad friend. I couldn’t ask after Kiggs; I didn’t
know why it had ever seemed like a good idea.
   “How are you holding up?” I said, taking a seat across from her.
   She looked at her hands. “Well enough in public. I was just taking a
little time to … to let myself be a daughter. We have to sit vigil with
St. Eustace tonight, the eyes of the world upon us, and we thought a
quiet, dignified sorrow would be most fitting. That means taking some
time to bawl like a baby now.”
   I thought she was referring to herself in the plural, as was her royal
right, but she continued, “You should have seen us drafting that letter
after council. I would weep, and Lucian would try to console me,
which started him weeping and made me sob the more. I sent him to
his beastly tower, told him to get it all out.”
   “He’s lucky to have you looking out for him,” I said, and meant it,
however torn up I felt.
   “The reverse is true,” she said, her voice breaking. “But it is nearly
sunset, and he has not yet come down.” Her face crumpled; Millie
hastened to her side and put an arm around her. “Would you go fetch
him, Phina? I would take it as a great kindness.”
   It was a rotten time for my lying skills to fail me, but too many
contradictory feelings crowded in on me at once. If I was kind to her
for selfish reasons, was that worse than being virtuously unhelpful?
Was there no course I could take that would not leave me wracked
with guilt?
   Glisselda noticed my hesitation. “I know he’s been a bit
cantankerous since learning you were half dragon,” she said, leaning
in toward me. “You understand, surely, that he might find it difficult
to adjust to the idea.”
   “I think no less of him for it,” I said.
   “And I … I think no less of you,” said Glisselda firmly. She rose; I
rose with her, thinking she intended to dismiss me. She raised her
arms a little and then dropped them—a false start—but then she
steeled herself to it and embraced me. I hugged her back, unable to
stop my own tears or to identify their source as relief or regret.
   She let me go and stood with her chin raised. “It wasn’t so difficult
to accept,” she said stoutly. “It was simply a matter of will.”
  Her protest was too vehement, but I recognized her good intention
and believed utterly in her steely will. She said, “I shall scold Lucian if
he is ever less than courteous to you, Seraphina. You let me know!”
  I nodded, my heart breaking a little, and departed for the East
Tower.



At first I wasn’t sure he was there. The tower door was unlocked, so I
rushed up the stairs with my heart in my throat only to find the top
room empty. Well, not entirely—it was full of books, pens,
palimpsests, geodes and lenses, antique caskets, drawings. The Queen
had her study; this was Prince Lucian’s, charmingly untidy, everything
in use. I hadn’t appreciated the surroundings when we’d been up here
with Lady Corongi. Now, all I saw were more things to love about
him, and it made me sad.
   The wind ran an icy finger up my neck; the door to the outer
walkway was open a crack. I took a deep breath, willed down my
vertigo, and opened the door.
   He leaned upon the parapet, staring out over the sunset city. The
wind tousled his hair; the edge of his cloak danced. I gingerly stepped
out to him, picking my way around patches of ice, pulling my cloak
tight around me for courage and for warmth.
   He looked back at me, his dark eyes distant though not exactly
unwelcoming. I stammered out my message: “Glisselda sent me to
remind you, um, that everyone will be sitting with St. Eustace for her
mother as soon as the sun goes down, and she, uh …”
   “I haven’t forgotten.” He looked away. “The sun is not yet set,
Seraphina. Would you stand with me awhile?”
   I stepped to the parapet and watched the shadows lengthen in the
mountains. Whatever resolve I might have had was setting with that
sun. Maybe it was just as well. Kiggs would go down to his cousin; I
would go traveling in search of the rest of my kind. Everything would
be as it should be, on the surface at least, every untidy and
inconvenient part of myself tucked away where no one would see it.
   Saints’ bones. I was done living like that.
   “The truth of me is out,” I said, my words crystallizing into cloud
upon the icy air.
   “All of it?” he said. He spoke less sharply than when he was truly
interrogating me, but I could tell a lot was hinging on my answer.
   “All the important parts, yes,” I said firmly. “Maybe not all the
eccentric details. Ask, and I will answer. What do you want to know?”
   “Everything.” He had been leaning on his elbows, but he pushed
back now and gripped the balustrade with both hands. “It’s always
this way with me: if it can be known, I want to know it.”
   I did not know where to begin, so I just started talking. I told him
about collapsing under visions, about building the garden, and about
my mother’s memories falling all around me like snow. I told him how
I’d recognized Orma as a dragon, how the scales had erupted forth out
of my skin, how it felt to believe myself utterly disgusting, and how
lying became an unbearable burden.
   It felt good to talk. The words rushed out of me so forcefully that I
fancied myself a jug being poured out. I felt lighter when I had
finished, and for once emptiness was a sweet relief and a condition to
be treasured.
   I glanced at Kiggs; his eyes had not glazed over yet, but I grew
suddenly self-conscious about how long I’d been talking. “I’m sure I’m
forgetting things, but there are things about myself I can’t even
fathom yet.”
   “ ‘The world inside myself is vaster and richer than this paltry
plane, peopled with mere galaxies and gods,’ ” he quoted. “I’m
beginning to understand why you like Necans.”
   I met his gaze, and there was warmth and sympathy in his eyes. I
was forgiven. No, better: understood. The wind rushed between us,
blowing his hair about. Finally I managed to stammer, “There is one
more … one true thing I want you to know, and I … I love you.”
   He looked at me intently but did not speak.
   “I’m so sorry,” I said, despairing. “Everything I do is wrong. You’re
in mourning; Glisselda needs you; you only just learned I’m half
monster—”
   “No part of you is monster,” he said vehemently.
   It took me a moment to find my voice again. “I wanted you to
know. I wanted to go on from here with a clean conscience, knowing
that I told you the truth at the last. I hope that may be worth
something in your eyes.”
   He looked up at the reddening sky and said with a self-deprecating
laugh, “You put me to shame, Seraphina. Your bravery always has.”
   “It’s not bravery; it’s bullheaded bumbling.”
   He shook his head, staring off into the middle distance. “I know
courage when I see it, and when I lack it.”
   “You’re too hard on yourself.”
   “I’m a bastard; it’s what we do,” he said, smiling bitterly. “You, of
all people, understand the burden of having to prove that you are
good enough to exist, that you are worth all the grief your mother
caused everyone. Bastard equals monster in our hearts’ respective
lexicons; that’s why you always had such insight into it.”
   He rubbed his hands together against the cold. “Are you willing to
hear another self-pitying ‘I was a sad, sad bastard child’ story?”
   “I’m happy to hear it; I’ve probably lived it.”
   “Not this story,” he said, picking at a patch of lichen on the
balustrade. “When my parents drowned and I first came here, I was
angry. I did play the bastard, behaving as badly as such a young boy
could contrive to behave. I lied, stole, picked fights with the page
boys, embarrassed my grandmother every chance I got. I kept this up
for years until she sent for Uncle Rufus—”
   “Rest he on Heaven’s hearthstone,” we said together, and Kiggs
smiled ruefully.
   “She brought him all the way back from Samsam, thinking he’d
have a firm enough hand to keep me in line. He did, although it was
months before I would submit. There was an emptiness in me I did
not understand. He saw it, and he named it for me. ‘You’re like your
uncle, lad,’ he said. ‘The world is not enough for us without real work
to do. The Saints mean to put you to some purpose. Pray, walk with
an open heart, and you will hear the call. You will see your task
shining before you, like a star.’
   “So I prayed to St. Clare, but I took it a step further: I made her a
promise. If she showed me the way, I would speak nothing but the
truth from that day forward.”
   “St. Masha and St. Daan!” I blurted out. “I mean, that explains a
lot.”
   He smiled, almost imperceptibly. “St. Clare saved me, and she
bound my hands. But I’m skipping ahead. Uncle Rufus attended a
wedding when I was nine years old, to provide a royal presence. I
went with him. It was the first time they’d trusted me out of the castle
walls in years, and I was anxious to show I could handle it.”
   “My father’s wedding, where I sang,” I said, my voice unexpectedly
hoarse. “You told me. I do vaguely remember seeing the pair of you.”
   “It was a beautiful song,” he said. “I’ve never forgotten. It still gives
me chills to hear it.”
  I stared at his silhouette against the rusty sky, dumbfounded that
this song of my mother’s should be a favorite of his. It glorified
romantic recklessness; it was everything he scorned to be or do. I
could not stop myself. I began to sing, and he joined in:

    Blessed is he who passes, love,
    Beneath your window’s eye
    And does not sigh.
    Gone my heart and gone my soul,
    Look on me love, look down
    Before I die.
    One glimpse, my royal pearl, one smile
    Sufficient to sustain me,
    Grant me this,
    Or take my life and make it yours:
    I’d fight a hundred thousand wars
    For just one kiss.

  “Y-you’re not a bad singer. You could join the castle choir,” I said,
casting about for something neutral to say so I wouldn’t cry. My
mother was as reckless as his, but she’d believed in this; she’d given
everything she had. What if our mothers were not the fools we had
taken them for? What was love really worth? A hundred thousand
wars?
  He smiled at his hands upon the parapet, and continued: “You sang,
and then it hit me like a lightning strike, like the clarion of Heaven:
the voice of St. Clare, saying, The truth will out! You yourself embodied
the truth that could not be concealed or contained—not by a hundred
fathers, or a hundred nursemaids—that would burst forth unbidden
and fill the world with beauty. I knew I was to investigate the truth of
things; I had been called to do this. I fell to my knees, thanked St.
Clare, and swore I would not forget my vow to her.”
  I was staring at him, thunderstruck. “I was the truth, and beautiful?
Heaven has a terrible sense of humor.”
  “I mistook you for a metaphor. But you’re right about Heaven
because otherwise how is it that I am in this position now? I made a
promise and have kept it to the best of my ability—though I have lied
to myself, may St. Clare forgive me. But I hoped to avoid this very
trap where I am caught between my own feeling and the knowledge
that uttering the truth aloud will hurt someone very important to me.”
   I barely dared think which truth he meant; I both hoped and
dreaded that he would tell me.
   His voice grew dense with sorrow. “I have been so preoccupied with
you, Phina. I keep second-guessing myself. Could I have kept Aunt
Dionne from Comonot’s suite if I hadn’t been dancing with you? I was
so intent upon giving you that book. We might never have noticed
Comonot leaving the ball but for Dame Okra.”
   “Or you might have stopped them both, and then gone up and
toasted the New Year with Lady Corongi,” I said, trying to reassure
him. “You might be dead in that other scenario.”
   He threw up his hands, despairing. “I have struggled all my life to
put thought before feeling, not to be as rash and irresponsible as my
mother!”
   “Ah, right, your mother, and her terrible crimes against her family!”
I cried, angry with him now. “If I saw your mother in Heaven, you
know what I would do? I would kiss her right on the mouth! And then
I would drag her to the bottom of the Heavenly Stair and point at you
down here, and say, ‘Look what you did, you archfiend!’ ”
   He looked scandalized, or startled anyway. I could not stop myself.
“What could St. Clare have been thinking, choosing me as her
unworthy instrument? She would have known I couldn’t speak the
truth to you.”
   “Phina, no,” said Kiggs, and at first I thought he was scolding me
for maligning St. Clare. He raised a hand, let it hover a moment, and
then placed it over mine. It was warm, and it stole my breath away.
“St. Clare did not choose wrongly,” he said softly. “I always saw the
truth in you, however much you prevaricated, even as you lied right
to my face. I glimpsed the very heart of you, clear as sunlight, and it
was something extraordinary.”
   He took up my hand between both of his. “Your lies didn’t stop me
loving you; your truth hasn’t stopped me either.”
   I looked down reflexively; he was holding my left hand. He noticed
my discomfiture and with a deft and delicate touch folded back my
sleeve—all four of my sleeves—exposing my forearm to the frigid air,
the fading sunset, and the emerging stars. He ran his thumb along the
silver line of scales, his brow puckering in concern at the scab, and
then, with a sly glance at me, he bowed his head and kissed my scaly
wrist.
  I couldn’t breathe; I was overcome. I didn’t usually feel much
through my scales, but I felt that to the soles of my feet.
  He replaced my sleeves, respectfully, as if draping a Saint’s altar. He
kept my hand between his, warming it. “I was thinking about you,
before you came up. Thinking, praying, and reaching no conclusion. I
was inclined to leave love unspoken. Let us get through this war; let
Glisselda grow into her crown. The day will come, please Heaven,
when I can tell her this without throwing us all into chaos. Maybe she
would release me from my promise, but maybe not. I may have to
marry her in any case, because she must marry, and I remain her best
option. Can you live with that?”
  “I don’t know,” I said. “But you’re right: she needs you.”
  “She needs us both,” he said, “and she needs us not to be so
distracted by each other that we are unable to do our parts in this
war.”
  I nodded. “Crisis first, love later. The day will come, Kiggs. I believe
that.”
  His brow creased fretfully. “I hate keeping this from her; it’s deceit.
Small lies are no better than big ones, but if we could please keep
everything to a minimum until—”
  “Everything?” I said. “Porphyrian philosophy? Amusing tales of
bastardy?”
  He smiled. Ah, I could last a long time on those smiles. I would sow
and reap them like wheat.
  “You know what I mean,” he said.
  “You mean you’re not going to kiss my wrist again,” I said. “But
that’s all right, because I am going to kiss you.”
  And I did.



If I could keep a single moment for all time, that would be the one.
   I became the very air; I was full of stars. I was the soaring spaces
between the spires of the cathedral, the solemn breath of chimneys, a
whispered prayer upon the winter wind. I was silence, and I was
music, one clear transcendent chord rising toward Heaven. I believed,
then, that I would have risen bodily into the sky but for the anchor of
his hand in my hair and his round soft perfect mouth.
   No Heaven but this! I thought, and I knew that it was true to a
standard even St. Clare could not have argued.



Then it was done, and he was holding both my hands between his and
saying, “In some ballad or Porphyrian romance, we would run off
together.”
   I looked quickly at his face, trying to discern whether he was
proposing we do just that. The resolve written in his eyes said no, but
I could see exactly where I would have to push, and how hard, to
break that resolve. It would be shockingly easy, but I found I did not
wish it. My Kiggs could not behave so shabbily and still remain my
Kiggs. Some other part of him would break, along with his resolve,
and I did not see a way to make it whole again. The jagged edge of it
would stab at him all his life.
   If we were to go forward from here, we would proceed not rashly,
not thoughtlessly, but Kiggs-and-Phina fashion. That was the only way
it could work.
   “I think I’ve heard that ballad,” I said. “It’s beautiful but it ends
sadly.”
   He closed his eyes and leaned his forehead against mine. “Is it less
sad that I’m going to ask you not to kiss me again?”
   “Yes. Because it’s just for now. The day will come.”
   “I want to believe that.”
   “Believe it.”
   He took a shaky breath. “I’ve got to go.”
   “I know.”
   I let him go inside first; my presence was not appropriate for
tonight’s ritual. I leaned against the parapet, watching my breath puff
gray against the blackening sky as if I were a dragon whispering
smoke into the wind. The conceit made me smile, and then an idea
caught me. Cautiously, avoiding ice, I hauled myself up onto the
parapet. It had a wide balustrade, adequate for sitting, but I did not
intend merely to sit. With comical slowness, like Comonot attempting
stealth, I drew my feet up onto the railing. I removed my shoes,
wanting to feel the stone beneath my feet. I wanted to feel everything.
   I rose to standing, like Lars upon the barbican, the dark city spread
at my feet. Lights twinkled in tavern windows, bobbed at the
Wolfstoot Bridge construction. Once I had been suspended over this
vast space, hanging and helpless, at a dragon’s mercy. Once I had
feared that telling the truth would be like falling, that love would be
like hitting the ground, but here I was, my feet firmly planted,
standing on my own.
   We were all monsters and bastards, and we were all beautiful.
   I’d had more than my share of beautiful today. Tomorrow I’d give
some back, restore and replenish the world. I’d play at Princess
Dionne’s funeral; I’d put myself on the program this time, on purpose,
since there was no longer any need for me to stay out of the public
eye. I might as well stand up and give what I had to give.
   The wind whipped my skirts around, and I laughed. I stretched my
arm up toward the sky, spreading my fingers, imagining my hand a
nest of stars. On impulse, I threw my shoes as hard as I could at the
night, crying, “Scatter darkness! Scatter silence!” They accelerated at
thirty-two feet per second squared, landing somewhere in Stone
Court, but Zeyd was wrong about the inevitability of hurtling toward
our doom. The future would come, full of war and uncertainty, but I
would not be facing it alone. I had love and work, friends and a
people. I had a place to stand.
                         AT DOMBEGH HOUSE

Seraphina Dombegh—our charming heroine, often called Phina


Claude Dombegh—her father, a lawyer with a secret


Amaline Ducanahan—Phina’s counterfeit mother


Linn—Phina’s real mother, alas


Orma—Phina’s mysterious mentor


Zeyd—Phina’s former tutor, a dragon


Anne-Marie—Phina’s not-so-wicked stepmother


Tessie, Jeanne, Paul, and Nedward—the moderately wicked
stepsiblings


                       THE GOREDDI ROYAL FAMILY

Queen Lavonda—a monarch who faces down dragons


Prince Rufus—the Queen’s only son, inexplicably murdered
Princess Dionne—the Queen’s surly daughter, first heir to the throne


Princess Glisselda—Princess Dionne’s cheerful daughter, second heir
to the throne


Princess Laurel—the Queen’s other daughter, dead of elopement


Prince Lucian Kiggs—Princess Laurel’s embarrassing bastard, fiancé
of Princess Glisselda, Captain of the Queen’s Guard, possessor of too
many descriptors


                              AT COURT

Viridius—the irascible court composer


Guntard—a professional musician


scrawny sackbut player—exactly as you imagine


Lady Miliphrene—Princess Glisselda’s favorite lady-in-waiting, called
Millie


Lady Corongi—Princess Glisselda’s governess, an antique despot


Dame Okra Carmine—the Ninysh ambassador, an antique darling


Josef, Earl of Apsig—a Samsamese lordling


Regent of Samsam—the regent of Samsam


Count Pesavolta—the ruler of Ninys
                        OUR DRACONIC FRIENDS

Ardmagar Comonot—the leader of the dragon world


Ambassador Fulda—the dragon with the best manners


Undersecretary Eskar—Fulda’s laconic second-in-command


Basind—a walleyed newskin


                       NOBLE BANISHED KNIGHTS

Sir Karal Halfholder—obeys the law, even if the infernal fiends do
not


Sir Cuthberte Pettybone—his somewhat less humor-impaired
comrade


Sir James Peascod—once knew General Gann from General Gonn


Squire Maurizio Foughfaugh—one of the last practitioners of
dracomachia


Squire Pender—the other one


                              IN TOWN

Sons of St. Ogdo—unhappy with the treaty


Lars—the genius behind the clock


Thomas Broadwick—a cloth merchant
Silas Broadwick—the reason they call them Broadwick Bros.
Clothiers


Abdo—a dancer in a pygegyria troupe


A pygegyria troupe—and there’s the rest of them now


                            IN PHINA’S HEAD

Fruit Bat—the climber


Pelican Man—putting the grotesque in “grotesque”


Miserere—the feathery one


Newt—the wallowing one


Loud Lad—the noisy one


Jannoula—too curious for her own good


Miss Fusspots—the finicky one


Pandowdy—the swamp thing


Nag and Nagini—the speedy twins


Gargoyella and Finch—mentioned in passing


Five more—to be named in a future publication
                          IN LEGEND AND IN FAITH

Queen Belondweg—the first Queen of united Goredd, subject of the
national epic


Pau-Henoa—her trickster rabbit companion, also called the Mad Bun
and Hen-Wee


St. Capiti—representing the life of the mind, Phina’s patroness


St. Yirtrudis—the spooky heretic, Phina’s other patroness, alas


St. Clare—lady of perspicacity, Prince Lucian Kiggs’s patroness
Allsaints—all the Saints in Heaven, invoked as a unit. Not a deity,
exactly; more like a collective


apse—part of a cathedral behind the quire and altar (and Golden
House, in Goreddi cathedrals), often with radiating chapels


ard—Mootya for “order, correctness”; may also denote a battalion of
dragons


Ardmagar—title held by the leader of dragonkind; translates roughly
to “supreme general”


aurochs—large, wild cattlebeast; extinct in our world, but existed in
Europe until the Renaissance


binou—type of bagpipe, used in traditional Breton music in our world


cloister—peaceful garden surrounded by a colonnade, where monks
may engage in peripatetic meditation


Comonot’s Treaty—agreement that established peace between
Goredd and dragonkind


Daanite—homosexual; named for St. Daan, who was martyred for
that particular quality, along with his lover, St. Masha
dagged—deep scalloping, as of houppelande sleeves


dracomachia—martial art developed specifically for fighting dragons;
according to legend, it was invented by St. Ogdo


Golden House—model of Heaven found in the center of Goreddi
cathedrals and larger churches


Golden Plays—dramas depicting the lives of the Saints, put on by the
guilds of Lavondaville during Golden Week


Golden Week—cluster of Saints’ days at midwinter, bookended by
Speculus and Treaty Eve. It is traditional to see the Golden Plays, walk
circuits around the Golden House, hang Speculus lanterns, throw
parties, give gifts to friends and charities, and make grandiose
pronouncements for the coming year.


Goredd—Seraphina’s homeland (adjective form: Goreddi)


Heaven—Goreddis don’t believe in a singular deity, but they believe
in an afterlife, the dwelling of Allsaints


houppelande—robe of rich material with voluminous sleeves, usually
worn belted; women’s are floor-length; a man’s might be cut at the
knee


ityasaari—Porphyrian for “half-dragon”


Ker—council of dragon generals that advises the Ardmagar


Lavondaville—Seraphina’s hometown and the largest city in Goredd,
named for Queen Lavonda
Mootya—language of dragons, rendered in sounds a human voice can
make


nave—main body of a cathedral, where the congregation gathers for
services


newskin—dragon who is inexperienced at taking human form and
living among humans


Ninys—country southeast of Goredd (adjective form: Ninysh)


oud—lutelike instrument, common in Middle Eastern music in our
world, often played with a pick, or plectrum


Porphyry—small country, almost a city-state, northwest of the
Southlands; originally a colony of dark-skinned people from even
further north


psalter—book of devotional poetry, usually illustrated; in Goreddi
psalters, there’s a poem for each of the major Saints


pygegyria—Porphyrian for “bum-waggling”; an acrobatic variation of
belly dancing


pyria—sticky, flammable substance used in dracomachia for setting
dragons on fire; also called St. Ogdo’s fire


Quighole—dragon and quigutl ghetto in Lavondaville


quigutl—subspecies of dragon, which can’t transform. They are
flightless; they have an extra set of arms and terrible breath. Often
shortened to “quig.”
quire—enclosed area behind the altar of a cathedral (or behind the
Golden House in a Goreddi cathedral), where the choir and clergy sit
facing each other on benches


saar—Porphyrian for “dragon”; often used by Goreddis as a short
form of “saarantras”


saarantras—Porphyrian for “dragon in human form” (plural form:
saarantrai)


sackbut—medieval ancestor of the trombone


St. Bert’s Collegium—once St. Jobertus’s Church, now a school in
Quighole where saarantrai scholars teach mathematics, science, and
medicine to those brave enough to attend


St. Capiti—patroness of scholars; carries her head on a plate


St. Clare—patroness of the perceptive


St. Gobnait’s—cathedral in Lavondaville; St. Gobnait is patroness to
the diligent and persistent. Her symbol is the bee, hence the skep in
her cathedral.


St. Ida’s—music conservatory in Lavondaville; St. Ida is the patroness
of musicians and performers


St. Masha and St. Daan—the lovers; often invoked in anger, perhaps
because it’s safe—it’s hard to imagine paragons of romantic love
actually smiting anyone


St. Ogdo—founder of dracomachia; patron of knights and of all
Goredd
St. Vitt—champion of the faith; this one will smite people,
particularly unbelievers


St. Willibald’s—covered market in Lavondaville; St. Willibald is the
patron of marketplaces and news


St. Yirtrudis—the heretic; it’s an open question how there can be a
heretical Saint


Samsam—country south of Goredd (adjective form: Samsamese)


shawm—medieval instrument similar to an oboe


skep—old-fashioned beehive made of woven straw


Southlands—three nations clustered together at the southern end of
the world: Goredd, Ninys, and Samsam


Speculus—Goreddi holiday on the winter solstice, intended to be a
long night of reflection


Tanamoot—dragons’ country


transept—wings of a cathedral built perpendicular to the nave


Treaty Eve—celebration commemorating the signing of Comonot’s
Treaty, concurrent with New Year’s Eve


Ziziba—very distant land indeed, far to the north; home to many
strange beasts such as crocodiles and camelopards (adjective form:
Zibou)
My heartfelt thanks to: my sisters (including Josh); my parents,
stepparents, and in-laws; Dr. George Pepe; Mac and the Children’s
Book World gang; my intrepid Beta Readers; the Sparkly Capes and
Oolicans; Epicurus; George Eliot; Lois McMaster Bujold; and Arwen,
Els, and Liz.
   Thanks to Dan Lazar, my agent, who has the singular ability to see
things that aren’t there yet. Thanks to Jim Thomas, my editor, who
understands the correlation between laughing at my jokes and getting
me to work hard.
   To Scott and Byron, who made me laugh when I was grumpy and
gave me reasons to keep working. And thanks to Una, whose tiny
whippet bladder ensured that I went for several walks each day.
As a child, RACHEL HARTMAN played cello and lip-synched Mozart operas with her
sisters. The famous Renaissance song “Mille Regretz” first moved Rachel to write a
fantasy novel rooted in music, but her inspiration didn’t end there. She wrote
Seraphina while listening to medieval Italian polyphony, Breton bagpipe rock, prog
metal, Latin American baroque, and Irish sean nós.
  Rachel Hartman lives with her family in Vancouver. To learn more about her, visit
her website at RachelHartmanBooks.com.
          SERAPHINA



         BONUS MATERIAL

  A Q&A with Rachel Hartman

Rachel Hartman’s Favorite Authors

         “The Audition,”
      a Prequel Short Story
               A Q&A with RACHEL HARTMAN



Seraphina is full of remarkable characters and concepts. Where
do you get your ideas?
A better question might be where don’t I get my ideas, they can be so
plentiful. At times, I have even imagined my mind as a fishing net. As
I go about my day, ideas collect in the net, seemingly unbidden. As
you might imagine, most of these ideas don’t turn out to be
productive. But the trick is to entertain all comers—you can never be
sure which idea will turn into something more.
  For example, many years ago, when I was dealing with my parents’
divorce, I had an idea: What if you married someone with a secret,
and you didn’t learn about it until it was too late? Despite how
difficult a time that was for me, I held onto the idea. It turned out to
be the very first inkling of what would eventually grow into
Seraphina.


Is there something that inspires you to turn such ideas into
stories?
In the novel, Seraphina’s mother leaves Seraphina a mind pearl, a
moment from her life so vividly recorded that Seraphina can
experience what her mother was thinking and feeling. Part of what
motivates me as a writer is to do the same for readers. It might be as
simple as the feeling I get walking down the street under wet trees,
the drizzle on my face and my dog tugging the leash, clarinet music
drifting down from a window above. For me, art is the desire to
preserve the intangible feeling of such a moment, hidden in all the
littlest details, and then to communicate that to others.
   I’m also excited by the fantasy genre in general. It can be a terrific
laboratory for thought experiments. For example—what if dragons
could transform into humans? You can entertain the strangest ideas
and then follow them through to their logical conclusions. What could
be more fun?
The world of Seraphina is incredibly well-realized. When did you
first conceive it?
Believe it or not, it was way back in the seventh grade. I had to write
a narrative poem for English class and ended up writing a long (and
silly) one called “The First Adventure of Sir Amy,” about a girl knight.
She lived in a land called Goredd (because it rhymed with Fred, which
was the name of her horse).
   I wrote some myths set in Goredd when I was a teenager, and then
in my twenties I wrote and illustrated a comic book about the girl
from the poem, which really solidified Goredd in my imagination.


Once you decided to write a novel based on Goredd and its
characters, how long did it take? What was that process like?
The creation of Seraphina took many twists and turns. Originally I
wrote the story as a family drama, consisting largely of Phina and her
father keeping secrets from each other.
  It wasn’t long, however, before I realized that the story I’d written
wasn’t taking advantage of this huge world I’d created. Draft after
draft, the story expanded to better fill it. It took several iterations for
me to get to the point where the plot was on a scale comparable to
the larger canvas. The entire process, from inception to publication,
took about nine years. That includes four distinct versions of the book,
two different publishers, and a few years of only being able to write
during my son’s naptimes!


The choice to set the world in a medieval time period is
interesting, especially with all the saints. Are you a student of
the real middle ages?
When I was sixteen I had an opportunity to live in England for a year.
The medieval art, architecture, and literature that I was exposed to
exerted a grip on my imagination that has never let go. I’m also
fascinated by the fact that, even though we tend to think we know
what the middle ages was all about, there’s plenty that would be alien
to us.
  For example, religion pervaded all aspects of medieval life to a
degree we moderns would never understand. Even in a fictional
middle ages, I couldn’t imagine that religion wouldn’t have its fingers
in absolutely everything. I got the idea for the Saint-based religion of
Goredd when traveling in Ireland. There are lots of obscure Irish
saints, and scholars believe that some of them used to be minor pagan
deities who were converted over when the Irish became Christian. In
Goredd, St. Gobnait, the patroness of the cathedral in Lavondaville, is
named for one of these Irish saints—possibly a pagan smith-god—
whose sacred well I visited.


The story features several strong, intelligent, and independent
women. Not only Seraphina but also Princess Glisselda, Dame
Okra Carmine, and even Undersecretary Eskar (though she’s a
dragon, of course!). Is that a realistic reflection of our history’s
medieval past?
I’ve read a lot about the real lives of medieval women. One book I
found particularly inspiring was Women in the Medieval Town, by Erika
Uitz. Using historical records, Uitz shows how medieval women were
actually far more involved in business than is generally supposed.
They weren’t allowed to own businesses, but there were exceptions.
Widows, for example, could inherit their husbands’ business or his
place in a guild. Wherever the law presented a loophole, women took
advantage of it; wherever obstacles could be circumvented,
disregarded, or knocked down, women found the way to do it.


Talk about the dragons in the story. Where did the idea come
from for them to be able to take human form? What about their
struggle with human emotions and sensations?
When I wrote that comic book about Goredd, I planned on having
dragon characters. I quickly discovered, however, that I was bad at
drawing dragons; they came out looking like fanged kangaroos. I
decided that if dragons could take human form, I could just draw
humans, which would be a lot easier. What I didn’t realize until much
later was that this lazy solution was a goldmine of interesting
questions and ideas.
   For example, if dragons could take human shape, just how far
would the transformation go? Would their internal organs be human
as well? They would have a different set of senses, surely. As apex
predators, dragons in their natural state would have excellent eyesight
and a keen sense of smell. Would they find those senses frustratingly
muted while in human form? Conversely, would human skin seem
extra sensitive compared to their usual scaly hides? Would their
clothes itch? As fire-breathers, dragons wouldn’t have much sense of
taste; they’d burn their taste buds right off. So what would it be like,
then, to taste something sweet for the first time?
  From tactile feeling, it was a short hop to emotional feeling.
Reptiles and apex predators tend not to be very social, and dragons
are both. In their natural state they might not have emotions beyond
the relatively straightforward fight or flight response, which in
humans might manifest as anger or fear. The softer emotions—love,
empathy, sorrow—are surely a messy mammalian characteristic that
evolved to help us to bond with our young and to facilitate social
groups. When these reptilian apex predators assumed human form
and their human brains started to process such emotions, what sort of
shock would they experience?
  I decided that most of them would find it overwhelming, and that
dragons would be likely to react with strict rules and repression.
That’s the seed from which all of dragon society grew.


Seraphina’s Garden of Grotesques is another fascinating element
of the story. Where did that idea come from?
The Garden of Grotesques was inspired by an ancient mnemonic
device known as the memory palace. The idea behind a memory
palace is that you memorize the layout of an enormous building with
lots of connected rooms. If you wanted to remember items on a list,
you visualized walking through the palace, leaving one item in each
room. I was struck by how much the concept resembled my writer’s
mind, which is so full of places and people. And I was deeply
intrigued by the idea that the mind might have its own geography.
Phina takes it a bit further and makes it more literal, but it’s the same
idea.


Seraphina is a compelling character. How much of yourself do
you see in her, or in any of the characters? Are any of them
modeled after real people?
  I put a lot of myself into Seraphina but also into all the characters.
Being a writer is something akin to being an actor: you have to dig
deep and find the part of yourself that’s a dragon, a musician, or a
queen. It’s an exercise in radical empathy.
   That said, I also draw from my observations of others. If you put my
friends and family into a big bag and shook them up, you might be
able to piece together a character or two, but there is no one-to-one
correspondence.
   Several of the characters are named after real people who share
common traits with them. Lucian Kiggs is named after Lucian of
Samosata, an ancient Greek satirist. Lars is named after the drummer
of the (very loud) rock band Metallica. Abdo is named for George
Abdo, a popularizer of the classical Egyptian style of belly dancing
known as raqs sharqi. Orma is named after a guy I once met named
Norman. I suspected he was a dragon (don’t ask why), but “Norman
the Dragon” just didn’t have the right ring to it. The obvious solution
was to remove the consonants from each end of his name.


Seraphina and Kiggs talk a lot about philosophy and
philosophers. It’s an important part of their relationship. Is
philosophy important to you in your life?
It is, to a certain extent. I am drawn to the philosophy of Epicurus,
who felt that happiness was the greatest good, and that the only
things we need to be happy are autonomy, friendship, and time to
contemplate our problems. While I’m an artist and not a philosopher,
I’m fascinated by the degree to which the two disciplines intersect.
Both ask the big questions: what is goodness? What is truth? Is there a
point to it all?
   Philosophy and art can sometimes be two sides of the same coin,
like theoretical and experimental physics. (My husband is a physicist,
so forgive me this comparison!) The theorists (like philosophers)
reason themselves into a particular position; the experimentalists (like
artists) run those theories through mazes and hit them with rubber
chickens to see how they hold up.
   Art doesn’t offer definitive answers. It offers possibilities, more
questions, and—at its best—a different lens through which to view the
world. If you find philosophers or anyone else who’s smug about
having found answers, bring them to art. Art, like a rambunctious
toddler, will play with those answers until they break.


What about music? Does it play as large a role in your life as it
does in Seraphina’s?
I love music, but I’m no court composer! When I was about ten, I
started to study the cello. My sisters both played string instruments,
and we had great fun playing and singing together. Our particular
favorite was early music, meaning music that dates from the
Renaissance and before. I modeled the music of Goredd after early
baroque and wrote all the songs in the book, though only “Peaches
and Cheese” has a tune that goes with it.
   I almost always listen to music while I write. I tend to put a song on
endless repeat as a way of sustaining a specific mood for a specific
scene. Italian polyphony, for example, is evocative of majestic
cathedrals, whereas something a touch surreal—a band like YES or an
artist like Frank Zappa—is better suited to writing about the Garden
of Grotesques. I find that a really strong song can handle that many
listens and still be my friend afterward.


Are there any books so influential that they changed your life?
Which ones?
Oh my, yes. I’ll have to limit myself to two, or I could go on all day.
First is Tove Jansson’s Finn Family Moomintroll, which my mother read
to me when I was five. She wouldn’t read it again because she thought
it was creepy; I solved that problem by learning to read. Second is
Mark Alan Stamaty’s Who Needs Donuts? I loved that book intensely as
a child, and it continues to be the most surreal picture book I have
ever read. It taught me that anything, no matter how grotesque or
bizarre, was possible in art.


When did you start writing, and why?
It didn’t cross my mind that writing was something one could do—for
a career or for fun—until I was in the sixth grade. My teacher
introduced the concept of creative writing, and I was instantly in love
with it. I would pursue my creative writing assignments above and
beyond what was required, sometimes to the detriment of my other
homework. One day she returned one of my poems with a note at the
bottom that said, Rachel, you are a real writer! I believed her, because
she was my favorite teacher, and it’s been a part of my identity ever
since.
   It took me a long time to decide to make a career of it, though.
Maybe already believing that I was a writer set me back; I didn’t have
to publish anything to prove it to myself. Then I had a baby and
moved to Canada. In a way, I was starting my life over; it was the
perfect opportunity to get serious about writing.
  I’m really glad I did.
To me, art—whether it’s books or painting or theater—is a
conversation that’s been going on since the beginning of history, with
voices chiming in from every side, saying, “Here’s what I felt, thought,
and saw. Here’s what it meant to be me.”
  Sometimes, those voices are able to bridge time and place to speak
directly to our experiences. At such moments, it’s almost as if the
mind behind the art can be perceived. It’s like meeting a new friend,
one who has the power to change our lives. Sadly, in many cases, we
aren’t able to thank this new and valuable friend.
  That’s one of the reasons why I write. It’s my thanks, and my
casting forward to some young reader of the future who needs to hear
me say, “Others have walked this way. You are not alone.” Here are
some of the authors who are in conversation with
             RACHEL HARTMAN’S FAVORITE AUTHORS



Seraphina.


Terry Pratchett. He asks a lot of the same questions I do, and comes
up with hilarious answers. I love his Discworld books, particularly
Going Postal, Thud!, and his Tiffany Aching series.


Lois McMaster Bujold. Her Miles Vorkosigan books are like Jane
Austen in space, but it was The Curse of Chalion that showed me it was
possible to write a story that was both large and personal.


George Eliot. Middlemarch is my single favorite book of all time. It’s a
model of compelling worldbuilding, exquisite characterization, and
delicately rendered variations on themes.


Diana Wynne Jones. She unabashedly positions her personal
preoccupations at center stage; I aspire to be that transparent and
humane. Howl’s Moving Castle and Fire and Hemlock showcase her
unique magic in all its complexity.


John Green. I had always thought that we wrote the same genre,
“Books Where the Author is Preoccupied with Philosophy,” but I’ve
since been told that that’s not a genre. My favorite book of his is An
Abundance of Katherines, the most nakedly epistemological of his
treatises.


Anne McCaffrey. Her Harpers Hall trilogy was a great favorite of
mine when I was twelve. Like Seraphina, it deals with dragons and
music. I owe it a debt of inspiration, even if we worked the subject
from different angles.


Epicurus. None of his books survive. Most of what we know of his
philosophy, we know from other writers. He’s worth looking for, but
you really have to look. There is joy in the search.
        Before Seraphina was assistant to the court composer,
                     she had to try out for the job!

                   Meet Orma, Glisselda, Viridius,
                 and Seraphina for the first time in—
                           THE AUDITION



I  t is perfectly normal—human, even—to want moral support during
a difficult audition. I couldn’t have taken my father. If he’d had any
inkling that I wished to become the assistant to the court composer,
he’d have tried to stop me, and auditions are arduous enough without
climbing out my bedroom window first. My half siblings would have
told Papa, and I had no friends to ask. So if I wanted a sympathetic
face in the crowd, my only choice was my music teacher, the dragon
Orma.
   He’s better than nothing, I told myself, but that was debatable. He’d
spent years in human shape, but inside he was still a dragon: an
unemotional, hyperrational being who, hard as he tried, could not
quite master manners or understand why blurting out criticisms
during my flute performance was utterly unhelpful. By the final day of
auditions, I regretted having brought him.
   As we climbed Castle Hill that balmy autumn afternoon, I decided
to send him back. It was impossible to hurt a dragon’s feelings, but I
still felt guilty. He’d dressed up for our palace visit in a dark doublet
and hose, and had even slicked down his shrubby hair, though it was
slowly puffing back up as it dried. He sauntered along beneath the
golden linden trees, oblivious to my anxiety, probably solving
equations in his head.
   When we reached the stern shadow of the barbican gate, I stopped
him and said, “Thank you for accompanying me to these difficult
auditions, Orma. Today I have merely to give Princess Glisselda her
music lesson. That won’t interest you. If you’ve been neglecting work
at the conservatory, I shouldn’t keep you from it.”
   “You’re one of three finalists,” he said, pushing his spectacles up his
beaky nose. “You were the most inexperienced and the only female in
a field of twenty-seven. I initially put your odds at one in fifteen
hundred. The lute master and the troubadour are still in it, though—”
   “Get to the point,” I said, glancing over my shoulder at the
helmeted guards in the gatehouse. They watched us with detached
interest. Orma was exempt from the bell most dragons were required
to wear; he looked like nothing more than a tall, gangly scholar. Still,
I always worried that men with swords would use them in preemptive
self-defense if they worked out the truth.
   Orma said loudly, “You have a twelve percent chance of becoming
Master Viridius’s assistant.”
   My shoulders sagged. “Twelve whole percent? Thanks.”
   “You’re welcome.”
   His incomprehension of my tone nettled me. “And you still want to
come?”
   “Of course.” He scratched his beard. “These are the best odds
you’ve faced yet.”
   We walked on. The smile I gave the barbican guards was entirely
fake, but I’d worn my best gown, the dark blue merino, and Orma
managed to keep quiet. We looked respectable enough. The guards
didn’t question us, though their eyes followed Orma. They probably
thought he was bothering me; they weren’t wrong.
   I was the last finalist to arrive at Master Viridius’s office. The aged
composer sat not at his desk but upon a gout couch, with his legs
propped up to keep them comfortable. His clawlike hands were
wrapped in bandages; his knees and feet were grossly swollen. The
sight of him had filled me with horror on the first day of auditions
and pity on the second, but had not diminished my determination to
be his assistant. I had long admired the old composer’s music. His
Fantasias were the first keyboard pieces Orma had taught me, and I’d
instantly loved their liveliness and strength.
   Master Viridius frowned as I came in. “Maid Dombegh! You deign
to join us,” he drawled. “You will go third, as our designated laggard.”
   I curtsied, abashed.
   He waved a hand irritably. “Wait your turns in the antechamber. I
have a fearsome headache and can’t bear the sound of nervous
squirming.”
   The lute master, whose trial was first, followed a page boy out to
wherever Princess Glisselda awaited her lesson. The rest of us filed
into the narrow antechamber. It had a bench along each wall; Orma
and I sat opposite the troubadour. Orma put his feet up on the
troubadour’s bench, rudely blocking the walkway until I swatted his
knees. I kept myself occupied by composing motets in my head and
watching the troubadour. He wore silk hose he probably couldn’t
afford, held his plumed cap in his lap, and looked anxious. Beside me,
Orma jotted notes in a little book. I glanced over. He’d written Books
to Look for in the Queen’s Private Library.
   “You can’t go to the Queen’s private library,” I whispered harshly at
him.
   “Then this list is for you,” he said, not bothering to whisper. “You’ll
have access, surely, when you get the job. I’ll list the books in the
order I’d like to read them.”
   “When I get the job? Twelve percent, Orma!”
   He shrugged. “Twelve percent if you don’t do anything
unpredictable. There’s a sixty-eight percent chance that you will
surprise me. I can show you my work.”
   He turned a page and began calculating. I closed my eyes,
exasperated.
   An hour and six pages of algebra later, the lute master returned,
raging, flailing, and blackened from head to toe. He brushed against
the troubadour’s knee in passing, leaving a dark smudge, marched
into Master Viridius’s office, and slammed the door. Even so, we
heard him plainly: “I will not be humiliated in this manner! I
withdraw my name from your consideration, sir!”
   He burst open the door and stalked out, shedding a cloud of coal
dust behind him. The troubadour, dabbing at his dirtied silk with a
handkerchief, met my eye and smiled weakly. It was down to the two
of us now.
   The page boy returned with the next summons. The troubadour
straightened his doublet, made St. Ida’s sign, and left. The door of
Master Viridius’s office opened; I turned to see the old man standing
there, propped with two canes, staring after the troubadour. He
noticed me watching him and scowled from under his bushy
eyebrows. “The lute master is an idiot,” said the old composer gruffly.
“Never even gave the brat her lesson, because he got lost down a coal
chute. I’m sure you need not worry about a thing.”
   I hadn’t been worried until he said that, of course. He pulled his
head back into his office like some cranky, liver-spotted turtle and
closed the door.
   I turned to my moral support, suddenly needing some—but Orma
was gone.
   Anyone might receive a call of nature, even a dragon; I didn’t
require an elaborate narration of where he was going every time he
left the room. Anyone else, however, might be relied upon to come
straight back. Minutes crawled by, and I grew more convinced that
he’d wandered somewhere he shouldn’t.
   The page boy skipped back into the room. I thought he was
summoning me to the princess’s lesson, but he said impudently, “Are
you here with that beardy villain? The one with the nose?”
   “Yes,” I said, already on my feet.
   “He’s met with a bit of awkwardness; he said you’d help him.”
   “Where is he?” I said.
   The lad gave me directions—up the stairs, to the right—but showed
no inclination to accompany me. I rushed up the corridor as fast as I
dared; the Queen’s council had just been dismissed, and the hallway
was full of my betters. When I reached the grand marble staircase, I
hoisted my skirts and took the steps by twos, earning disapproving
looks from descending ladies-in-waiting. My face grew warm with
embarrassment and exertion, but I didn’t slow down. At the top, I
ducked up the right-hand corridor and ran headlong into a girl
standing on a chair.
   She screamed, but did not fall or drop the bucket she held, which
sloshed alarmingly. “St. Daan in a pan! Are you blind?” she cried.
   It took me a second to catch my breath. “Excuse me,” I said.
   “You are evidently some species of oaf,” she said, sneering at me
from her perch. “I suppose you can’t help it.”
   She was petite but not much younger than me. I guessed fifteen.
Golden curls framed her face like the sun risen above her gown of sky-
blue silk. She’d planted her chair before a set of double doors. She
tapped her foot on the wooden seat, swirling the chunky liquid in her
pail. Whatever it was, it smelled foul.
   “Take this.” She thrust the reeking bucket at me. “You may as well
help. You’re tall; I can’t quite reach, even with the chair.”
   “I’m sorry, I can’t stay,” I said, recoiling from the stench. “My music
teacher—”
   “That beanpole of a scholar?” she said. “He’s fine. He tripped over
me, too, but we made it up and I sent him on his way.”
   I looked past her up the corridor. “Where is he?”
   She scowled and shoved the pail in my face. “He’s fine. Your
assistance, oaf.”
   My hands accepted the bucket over the protestations of my nose,
which had caught an overpowering whiff of fish. I gazed into the
brown ooze. Silver scales winked merrily in the murk; the dark
buttons lurking in the depths were surely eyes. I swallowed my
revulsion. “What do I do with it?”
   “ ‘What do I do with it, Your Highness,‘ “ she corrected, folding her
hands in front of her stomach. Beaded birds frolicked among golden
clouds on her bodice.
   I fell into my deepest curtsy, awkwardly executed thanks to the
bucket in my hands. Your Highness plus her age could only equal the
Queen’s granddaughter, Princess Glisselda, although I did not see how
it was possible. To my knowledge, she ought to have been at a music
lesson with the troubadour at this very moment.
   “Rise,” she said. “I did not catch your name.”
   “Seraphina Dombegh, Your Highness.” I straightened, holding the
fishy ferment away from my body. The smell persisted, undiminished
by distance.
   The princess hopped down, light as a finch. She barely came up to
my shoulder. “Well, Maid Dombegh,” she said, “we are setting a trap
for my last prospective music tutor.”
   My mouth fell open. This bucket of goo was meant for me!
   Clearly, the princess didn’t realize who I was. My voice quavered a
little as I said, “Is there some particular problem with this tutor, that
you feel the need to—”
   “Oh no,” she said breezily. “I’ve not met any of Viridius’s finalists. I
despise them all equally, on principle. I sent the first one—that weedy
lute master—on a wild-goose chase through the cellars, ending with a
special trip down the coal chute.”
   Saints in Heaven.
   I dreaded to ask but had to know: “What did you do to the
troubadour?”
   Her eyes lit up; she hopped on her toes. “I’ll show you!”
   She pushed open the double doors and led me through a small
study, or perhaps a schoolroom, furnished with two tables and a
bookcase. A map spread on one table had been heavily annotated;
pens, books, and wooden markers were scattered across it. She picked
her way across to the windows, which overlooked a walled garden
with a hedge maze at the far end. The princess plopped herself down
on the embrasure seat and opened the casement. She patted the
embroidered cushion beside her. I balanced on its edge, the bucket on
my knees.
   “Observe: the plume of his silly hat,” she said, pointing. A bracelet
of river pearls dangled from her little wrist.
   Indeed, I could tell where my comrade-at-musical-arms stood
among the box hedges. His feather bobbed dubiously in the autumn
sunshine as if he were trying to decide between two directions.
   He chose the left-hand path. “Not much further now!” cried
Princess Glisselda, pounding the casement with her fist.
   “Princess,” I said, my mouth almost too dry to speak, “he sings like
an angel. You should have heard his auditions. He’d make a superb
assistant to Master Viridius, and an excellent tutor for you, if you
would but—”
   “Give him a chance?” she said, looking at me sidelong. “I am. The
music master and I are at war; I am giving this fellow fair warning of
our vendetta, a chance to learn what a morass he’s walking into
before he commits to it. In fact, I’ve had a real morass prepared just
for him. I thought a literal approach would make things clearest.
There he goes.”
   The feather abruptly disappeared. Shouts rose from the center of
the maze. I gaped at her, appalled. “He didn’t deserve that,” I said.
   “All wars have casualties,” she said, her eyes fixed on the scene
below.
   I stared into the brown ooze meant for me. “What do you intend to
do with this, uh, substance?” I said, tipping it, watching how it clung
to the side of the pail.
   “Isn’t it gloriously vile?” she squealed, turning away from the
window and clapping her hands. “It’s fermented fish heads. It
symbolizes how unpalatable I find the idea of music instruction. We
shall spill it upon this final villain and be rid of two noxious things at
once.
   “We must hurry, though,” she fretted, “or it won’t be ready when he
walks in.”
   He. I stared into the mesmerizing ferment and had an inkling of an
idea. Maybe I could still salvage this, giving the princess a lesson by
stealth and revealing my identity only when the thing was done.
   I rose and smiled at her. “If you want to set this up so it falls on his
head when he opens the doors, you’ve been going at it from the
wrong side.”
   She fetched the chair from the hallway; I climbed upon it and
showed her how one might balance the pail on top of the double
doors, slightly ajar. The princess laughed and capered, delighted with
me, and even I could not help taking a sober satisfaction. I felt safer
with the bucket where she couldn’t reach it.
   “Of course, anyone might spot the trap through the crack,” I said,
stepping down and studying the setup from another angle. “You’ll
want to draw your victim’s attention toward something else. What if
you sat in his line of sight, playing your instrument?”
   She made a rude face. “I think not.”
   “You don’t have it with you?” Had I trapped us in here without it?
   She scorned to answer, but turned toward a hanging tapestry and
pulled it aside, revealing a door. She quit the schoolroom; I hesitated,
and then followed her into a much larger salon with tall windows and
chairs grouped into conversational clusters.
   In front of the windows stood a harpsichord, covered against dust.
   “Is that your instrument?” I asked.
   She snorted, an unexpected sound from such a highborn girl. “It’s
Viridius’s. He doesn’t let me touch it. He has not forgiven me for
filling it with frogs.” When I blinked at her uncomprehendingly, she
said, “It has been war, Seraphina.”
   She turned and flounced off toward the windows. I stared after her.
   I was beginning to dread the possibility of getting this job, but it
shamed me to think I might be defeated by fear in this final trial,
which had nothing to do with my musical abilities. I took a deep
breath and whipped the sheet off the harpsichord.
   Princess Glisselda turned at the sound and raised an eyebrow at me.
I sat at the keyboard and let my fingers say hello, thrilling at the
texture of the notes.
   “What instrument does Viridius have you playing?” I said.
“Dulcimer?”
   “How did you know?” she asked.
   “That’s the usual first instrument for fashionable young ladies,” I
said, indulging in a few arpeggios. “But there’s a reason it’s called the
dull-cimer.”
   “That’s what I said! I made that exact joke!” she cried. “And the old
tyrant barked at me that it was the easiest instrument to learn and I
was tone-deaf as a boiled beet.”
   Ouch. Clearly, both sides fired volleys in this war.
   Glisselda crossed the room, her arms folded and a scowl crumpling
her elfin face. “I know what you’re up to, and it isn’t going to work,”
she said.
   I looked up from the keys. “I’m sorry, I don’t—”
   “You’re just like the rest of them,” she cried. “Grandmamma, and
my mother, and everyone. Music is supposed to teach me discipline,
they say! The dullness of the dulcimer will make me mild and discreet
and dispassionate!”
   I put my hands on my knees, facing her. “You’re not interested in
music even a little.”
   “Absolutely not,” she said fiercely.
   I tried to smile, but my heart was sinking. “So what are you
interested in?”
   I had her answer narrowed down to three before she even opened
her rosy mouth. She would say gowns or balls or boys. I was already
thinking of ways to relate any of these three to music—gowns was
hardest—and so I didn’t hear her answer at all. “I’m sorry, what?” I
said stupidly.
   She glared poison at me but repeated her answer: “Statecraft.”
   We stared at each other a long moment, Princess Glisselda’s mouth
a tense line, her fingers worrying a bead on her bodice. I sensed I had
been handed a bright pebble of truth and that she was waiting to see
what I would do with it.
   Statecraft. Statecraft.
   “You know,” I said, speaking slowly so my thoughts could get a
sufficient head start on my speech, “music is not as irrelevant to
statecraft as you might suppose.”
   She rolled her eyes theatrically.
   I pushed on. “No, really. Music teaches you about harmony, about
resolving tension and finding balance—and that’s just the notes. The
kind of negotiation one must undertake with one’s instrument, well. A
diplomat could only hope to listen so closely and respond with such
sensitivity.”
   I turned from her and played a few experimental chords. “If you’re
too timid with your instrument, it takes advantage. The notes will
sound incompetent even if you play them right. If you are too
harsh”—this seemed a likelier problem for our princess; I slammed
out a few samples—”it exacts a subtle revenge in timbre. Sometimes
an unsubtle revenge, depending on the instrument.”
   I looked at her sidelong; she was staring at the harpsichord lid, her
gaze unfocused.
   “Any instrument would wish to be spoken to respectfully,” she said
quietly.
   I nodded. “And authoritatively. It’s a balance. Luckily for the
beginner, the harpsichord is a forgiving, easygoing partner. You may
hit the wrong key, but it won’t be out of tune, and the timbre is fairly
constant no matter how much you bang on it.”
   The princess seated herself beside me on the bench, watching my
hands work, her brows drawn in thought. “Forgiving and easygoing are
qualities one misses in Viridius,” she said at last. “And—and quite
possibly myself.”
   The chords were transposing themselves toward a piece I knew,
though I wasn’t sure of it yet. Princess Glisselda kept watching my
hands as the song revealed itself to be Viridius’s Suite Infanta, which
he’d written in her honor when she was just a toddler. I’d always
thought it a strange piece, all merriment on the surface with a hidden
sharpness underneath, like a knife wrapped in ribbons, but as I played
it now I began to understand. Princess Glisselda recognized it, of
course, and sat up a little straighter.
   At last she interrupted me: “Show me what you’re doing.”
   “Of course,” I said, and began to show her the basic melody with
the right hand. She didn’t catch on right away, but she worked at it,
brow furrowed and tongue protruding in concentration. I’m not even
sure how long we sat there, going over that line, but when she got it,
she looked up at me in triumph.
   And then said, incongruously, “Here he comes.”
   There was a crash and a shout from the next room. The princess
leaped to her feet and bolted through the tapestry into the little
schoolroom; I followed right on her heels. I’d been so engrossed in
teaching that I’d forgotten all about Orma.
   Of course, it wasn’t Orma. It was Master Viridius, red-faced and
shouting. The fermented fish had spattered his bald head, doused his
ample stomach thoroughly, and drenched the bandages on his hands.
In his confusion at being attacked from above, he had landed hard on
the floor. Princess Glisselda was extending her slender hand to him,
trying to help him up, her lips pressed tightly together in a vain
attempt to disguise her amusement. He lashed out with his canes
whenever she got near him. I darted around behind him and propped
him up to sitting.
   “Well?” he sputtered, brushing me off. “How was she?”
   I stammered, “Sh-she—”
   “Superior to you, you old walrus,” Princess Glisselda cut in, as if the
question had been directed at her.
   From the way they were glaring at each other, I suddenly realized it
had.
   “Your exacting standards were met, one hopes?” he sneered at her,
accepting my silently proffered handkerchief and dabbing at his
doublet with it.
  “She let me play your harpsichord,” she said sweetly, batting her
eyes at him. He paused in his dabbing and glowered at me. The little
princess hopped around the puddle of fish ooze on the floor, making
her way toward the door.
  “You knew,” I called after her before she disappeared completely.
“You knew I was the candidate all along.”
  She paused in the doorway and smiled. “Well, of course I did.
Diplomacy is only part of statecraft, Seraphina. There’s also spying.
Besides,” she said, drawing a curlicue in the fish sauce with the toe of
her slipper, “did I ever explicitly state otherwise?” She flashed me an
impish smile and took off down the hall, skipping by the sound of it.
  I helped Master Viridius to a chair, my mind racing. He met my eye,
looking unexpectedly sheepish. “She told me this morning,” he said.
“You were the only one who would be given a chance, and even then
she made no promises. I had no idea what idiocy she had in store for
the others, or what games she would play with you, and I am sorry.
Unfortunately”—he sighed heavily—”she’s part of the job. I can’t
teach her anymore; it raises my pulse and gives me palpitations.”
  “She is a spirited individual,” I said, measuring my words in case
she had tiptoed back and was listening to us. I would have put
nothing past her at that point.
  Master Viridius was trying to stand; I helped haul him to his feet.
He propped himself upon his canes and said, “Congratulations, Maid
Dombegh. Report to me in three days. I shall arrange your quarters by
this evening; move in when you like. We’ll see to it that your door
locks.” He smiled mirthlessly. “That brat once filled my harpsichord
with frogs. You never know what she’s capable of.”
  Capable was an apt description of this princess. I wouldn’t forget.
  I tried to help him to the stairs, but he waved me off. As I watched
him hobble away, I heard steps behind me and turned to see a page
boy—the same impudent rascal who’d directed me upstairs—leading
Orma toward me.
  “Here you go, Scholar,” said the lad, holding out an arm as if
formally presenting me. “Your student, whole and unharmed.”
  “I wasn’t worried,” said Orma.
  The boy laughed. “More fool you,” he said, turning on his heel and
scampering off.
  I met Orma’s eye. “Princess Glisselda sent that page boy to call you
away, didn’t she. And then she lured me up here after you.”
  He raised his eyebrows. “I don’t know what you’re talking about. I
received a personal invitation to the Queen’s private library. It was
quite a fortuitous coincidence.”
   Quite. The princess must have been listening to our conversation in
the antechamber.
   Orma’s nostrils flared; he had a keen nose. “Did your audition
involve fermented fish sauce? That’s quite an expensive delicacy in—”
   “Yes,” I said, laughing at him. “The princess learned so much from
me that she required a light snack.”
   “You got the job, then?”
   I met his eyes. He wasn’t happy—dragons don’t work that way—but
there was something there, something I wasn’t imagining. Some
satisfaction, maybe, that he had taught me well. “I got the job,” I said,
my voice breaking a little.
   If he was surprised by the emotion, he gave no indication. He said,
“I’m perplexed that my calculations were so far off. I’m missing
something obvious. If I can predict that you’ll surprise me with such
consistency, then surely—”
   I felt an unaccountable surge of affection for the old dragon then,
and I threw my arms around him, even though I knew he hated being
touched. He couldn’t quite get used to having non-scaly skin. He
tensed and held very still, waiting for me to release him.
   “Speaking of surprises,” I said, smacking him on the chest where I’d
felt an odd flatness under his doublet, “you’re unexpectedly
rectangular just now.”
   A human might have been sheepish about it, but Orma simply
shrugged. “I didn’t have a chance to finish the book I started. But it’s
not a problem—you got the job. You can bring it back for me when
I’m done.”
   I laughed, disinclined to be cross with him, and together we left the
castle. Golden leaves drifted around us down the long hill into town,
and our shadows stretched before us across the surface of the world.
