Praise	for	THE	OBELISK	GATE
	

“Jemisin’s	follow-up	to	The	Fifth	Season	is	exceptional.	Those	who	anxiously
awaited	this	sequel	will	find	the	only	problem	is	that	the	wait	must	begin

again	once	the	last	page	is	turned”
Library	Journal	(starred	review)

	
“Stunning,	again”

Kirkus	(starred	review)
	

“Compelling,	challenging,	and	utterly	gripping”
Publishers	Weekly	(starred	review)

	
“Beyond	the	meticulous	pacing,	the	thorough	character	work,	and	the

staggering	ambition	and	revelations	of	the	narration,	Jemisin	is	telling	a	story
of	our	present,	our	failures,	our	actions	in	the	face	of	repeated	trauma,	our
responses	to	the	heat	and	pressure	of	our	times.	Her	accomplishment	in	this
series	is	tremendous.	It	pole-vaults	over	the	expectations	I	had	for	what	epic
fantasy	should	be	and	stands	in	magnificent	testimony	to	what	it	could	be”

NPR	Books	
	

“How	can	something	as	large	and	complex	exist	in	[Jemisin’s]	head,	and	how
does	she	manage	to	tell	it	to	me	so	beautifully?	I	can’t	stand	how	much	I	love

the	Broken	Earth	trilogy	so	far”
B&N	Sci-Fi	&	Fantasy	Blog	



Praise	for	THE	FIFTH	SEASON
	

“Intricate	and	extraordinary”
New	York	Times	

	
“Astounding…	Jemisin	maintains	a	gripping	voice	and	an	emotional	core	that
not	only	carries	the	story	through	its	complicated	setting,	but	sets	things	up

for	even	more	staggering	revelations	to	come”
NPR	Books	

	
“Jemisin’s	graceful	prose	and	gritty	setting	provide	the	perfect	backdrop	for
this	fascinating	tale	of	determined	characters	fighting	to	save	a	doomed

world”
Publishers	Weekly	(starred	review)

	
“A	must-buy…	breaks	uncharted	ground”

Library	Journal	(starred	review)
	

“Jemisin	might	just	be	the	best	world-builder	out	there	right	now…	[She]	is	a
master	at	what	she	does”

RT	Book	Reviews	(Top	Pick!)
	

“A	powerful,	epic	novel	of	discovery,	pain,	and	heartbreak”
SFFWorld.com

“Brilliant…	gorgeous	writing	and	unexpected	plot	twists”
Washington	Post	

	
“An	ambitious	book…	Jemisin’s	work	itself	is	part	of	a	slow	but	definite

change	in	sci-fi	and	fantasy”
Guardian	

	
“Angrily,	beautifully	apocalyptic”
B&N	Sci-Fi	&	Fantasy	Blog	



Praise	for	THE	INHERITANCE	TRILOGY
	

“A	complex,	edge-of-your-seat	story	with	plenty	of	funny,	scary,	and
bittersweet	twists”

Publishers	Weekly	(starred	review)
	

“An	offbeat,	engaging	tale	by	a	talented	and	original	newcomer”
Kirkus	

	
“An	astounding	debut	novel…	the	world-building	is	solid,	the

characterization	superb,	the	plot	complicated	but	clear”
RT	Book	Reviews	(Top	Pick!)

	
“A	delight	for	the	fantasy	reader”
Library	Journal	(starred	review)

	
“The	Hundred	Thousand	Kingdoms…	is	an	impressive	debut,	which

revitalizes	the	trope	of	empires	whose	rulers	have	gods	at	their	fingertips”
io9	
	

“N.	K.	Jemisin	has	written	a	fascinating	epic	fantasy	where	the	stakes	are	not
just	the	fate	of	kingdoms	but	of	the	world	and	the	universe”

SFRevu	
	

“Many	books	are	good,	some	are	great,	but	few	are	truly	important.	Add	to
this	last	category	The	Hundred	Thousand	Kingdoms,	N.	K.	Jemisin’s	debut
novel…	In	this	reviewer’s	opinion,	this	is	the	must-read	fantasy	of	the	year”

BookPage	
	

“A	similar	blend	of	inventiveness,	irreverence,	and	sophistication	–	along
with	sensuality	–	brings	vivid	life	to	the	setting	and	other	characters:	human
and	otherwise…	The	Hundred	Thousand	Kingdoms	definitely	leaves	me

wanting	more	of	this	delightful	new	writer”
Locus	

	
“A	compelling	page-turner”

The	A.V.	Club	
	

“An	absorbing	story,	an	intriguing	setting	and	world	mythology,	and	a	likable
narrator	with	a	compelling	voice.	The	next	book	cannot	come	out	soon



enough”
fantasybookcafe.com

	
“The	Broken	Kingdoms…	expands	the	universe	of	the	series	geographically,
historically,	magically	and	in	the	range	of	characters,	while	keeping	the	same
superb	prose	and	gripping	narrative	that	made	the	first	one	such	a	memorable

debut”
Fantasy	Book	Critic	

	
“The	Kingdom	of	Gods	once	again	proves	Jemisin’s	skill	and	consistency	as	a
storyteller,	but	what	sets	her	apart	from	the	crowd	is	her	ability	to	imagine
and	describe	the	mysteries	of	the	universe	in	language	that	is	at	once	elegant

and	profane,	and	thus,	true”
Shelf	Awareness	



Praise	for	THE	DREAMBLOOD	DUOLOGY
	

“Ah,	N.	K.	Jemisin,	you	can	do	no	wrong”
Felicia	Day

	
“The	Killing	Moon	is	a	powerhouse	and,	in	general,	one	hell	of	a	story	to

read.	Jemisin	has	arrived”
Bookworm	Blues	

	
“The	author’s	exceptional	ability	to	tell	a	compelling	story	and	her	talent	for

world-building	have	assured	her	place	at	the	forefront	of	fantasy”
Library	Journal	(starred	review)

	
“Jemisin	excels	at	world-building	and	the	inclusion	of	a	diverse	mix	of

characters	makes	her	settings	feel	even	more	real	and	vivid”
RT	Book	Reviews	(Top	Pick!)

	
“The	novel	also	showcases	some	skillful,	original	world-building.	Like	a
lucid	dreamer,	Jemisin	takes	real-world	influences	as	diverse	as	ancient

Egyptian	culture	and	Freudian/Jungian	dream	theory	and	unites	them	to	craft
a	new	world	that	feels	both	familiar	and	entirely	new.	It’s	all	refreshingly

unique”
Slant	Magazine	

	
“Read	this	or	miss	out	on	one	of	the	best	fantasy	books	of	the	year	so	far”

San	Francisco	Book	Review	
	

“N.	K.	Jemisin	is	playing	with	the	gods	again	–	and	it’s	just	as	good	as	the
first	time”
io9	



BY 	N.	K.	JEMIS IN

	
The	Inheritance	Trilogy

The	Hundred	Thousand	Kingdoms	
The	Broken	Kingdoms	
The	Kingdom	of	Gods

The	Awakened	Kingdom	(novella)
	

Dreamblood
The	Killing	Moon	
The	Shadowed	Sun

	
The	Broken	Earth
The	Fifth	Season	
The	Obelisk	Gate	
The	Stone	Sky	



COPYRIGHT
	

Published	by	Orbit
	

978-0-3565-0490-2
	

All	characters	and	events	in	this	publication,	other	than	those	clearly	in	the
public	domain,	are	fictitious	and	any	resemblance	to	real	persons,	living	or

dead,	is	purely	coincidental.
	

Copyright	©	2017	by	N.	K.	Jemisin
	

The	moral	right	of	the	author	has	been	asserted.
	

Map	©	Tim	Paul
	

Excerpt	from	Provenance	by	Ann	Leckie
Copyright	©	2017	by	Ann	Leckie

	
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	publication	may	be	reproduced,	stored	in	a
retrieval	system,	or	transmitted,	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,	without	the

prior	permission	in	writing	of	the	publisher.
	

The	publisher	is	not	responsible	for	websites	(or	their	content)	that	are	not
owned	by	the	publisher.

	
ORBIT

Little,	Brown	Book	Group
Carmelite	House

50	Victoria	Embankment
London,	EC4Y	0DZ

	
www.littlebrown.co.uk
www.hachette.co.uk



The	Stone	Sky
Table	of	Contents

Praise	for	THE	OBELISK	GATE
Praise	for	THE	FIFTH	SEASON
Praise	for	THE	INHERITANCE	TRILOGY
Praise	for	THE	DREAMBLOOD	DUOLOGY
By	N.	K.	Jemisin
COPYRIGHT
Dedication
prologue:		me,	when	I	was	I
1:		you,	in	waking	and	dreaming
2:		Nassun	feels	like	busting	loose
Syl	Anagist:	Five	
3:		you,	imbalanced
4:		Nassun,	wandering	in	the	wilderness
Syl	Anagist:	Four	
5:		you	are	remembered
6:		Nassun	makes	her	fate
Syl	Anagist:	Three	
7:		you’re	planning	ahead
8:		Nassun	underground
Syl	Anagist:	Two	
9:		the	desert,	briefly,	and	you
10:		Nassun,	through	the	fire
Syl	Anagist:	One	
11:		you’re	almost	home
12:		Nassun,	not	alone
Syl	Anagist:	Zero	
13:		Nassun	and	Essun,	on	the	dark	side	of	the	world



14:		I,	at	the	end	of	days
coda:		me,	and	you
APPENDIX	1	
APPENDIX	2	
Acknowledgments
extras



	
To	those	who’ve	survived:	Breathe.	That’s	it.	Once	more.	Good.	You’re	good.

Even	if	you’re	not,	you’re	alive.	That	is	a	victory.






prologue
me,	when	I	was	I

Time	grows	short,	my	love.	Let’s	end	with	the	beginning	of	the	world,	shall
we?	Yes.	We	shall.



It’s	 strange,	 though.	 My	 memories	 are	 like	 insects	 fossilized	 in	 amber.
They	are	rarely	intact,	these	frozen,	long-lost	lives.	Usually	there’s	just	a	leg,
some	wing-scales,	a	bit	of	 lower	 thorax	–	a	whole	 that	can	only	be	 inferred
from	fragments,	and	everything	blurred	together	through	jagged,	dirty	cracks.
When	I	narrow	my	gaze	and	squint	into	memory,	I	see	faces	and	events	that
should	hold	meaning	for	me,	and	they	do,	but…	they	don’t.	The	person	who
witnessed	these	things	firsthand	is	me,	and	yet	not.



In	 those	 memories	 I	 was	 someone	 else,	 just	 as	 the	 Stillness	 was
someworld	else.	Then,	and	now.	You,	and	you.



Then.	This	land,	then,	was	three	lands	–	though	these	are	in	virtually	the
same	position	as	what	will	someday	be	called	the	Stillness.	Repeated	Seasons
will	eventually	create	more	ice	at	the	poles,	sinking	the	sea	and	making	your
“Arctics”	and	“Antarctics”	larger	and	colder.	Then,	though	—



—	now,	it	feels	of	now	as	I	recall	myself	of	then,	this	is	what	I	mean	when
I	say	that	it	is	strange	—



Now,	 in	 this	 time	before	 the	Stillness,	 the	far	north	and	south	are	decent
farmland.	What	you	 think	of	as	 the	Western	Coastals	 is	mostly	wetland	and
rainforest;	those	will	die	out	in	the	next	millennium.	Some	of	the	Nomidlats
doesn’t	 yet	 exist,	 and	 will	 be	 created	 by	 volcanic	 effusion	 over	 several
thousand	 years	 of	 eruptive	 pulses.	 The	 land	 that	 becomes	 Palela,	 your
hometown?	 Doesn’t	 exist.	 Not	 so	 much	 change,	 all	 things	 considered,	 but
then	now	is	nothing	ago,	tectonically	speaking.	When	we	say	that	“the	world
has	ended,”	remember	–	it	is	usually	a	lie.	The	planet	is	just	fine.



What	do	we	call	this	lost	world,	this	now,	if	not	the	Stillness?



Let	me	tell	you,	first,	of	a	city.



It	is	a	city	built	wrong,	by	your	standards.	This	city	sprawls	in	a	way	that
no	 modern	 comm	 would	 be	 permitted	 to	 do,	 since	 that	 would	 require	 too
many	miles	 of	 walls.	 And	 this	 city’s	 outermost	 sprawls	 have	 branched	 off
along	rivers	and	other	lifelines	to	spawn	additional	cities,	much	in	the	manner
of	mold	forking	and	stretching	along	the	rich	veins	of	a	growth	medium.	Too
close	together,	you	would	think.	Too	much	overlap	of	 territory;	 they	are	 too
connected,	 these	 sprawling	 cities	 and	 their	 snaking	 spawn,	 each	 unable	 to
survive	should	it	be	cut	off	from	the	rest.



Sometimes	 they	 have	 distinct	 local	 nicknames,	 these	 child-cities,
especially	where	they	are	large	or	old	enough	to	have	spawned	child-cities	of
their	 own,	 but	 this	 is	 superficial.	 Your	 perception	 of	 their	 connectedness	 is
correct:	 They	 have	 the	 same	 infrastructure,	 the	 same	 culture,	 the	 same
hungers	 and	 fears.	 Each	 city	 is	 like	 the	 other	 cities.	 All	 of	 the	 cities	 are,
effectively,	one	city.	This	world,	in	this	now,	is	the	city’s	name:	Syl	Anagist.



Can	 you	 truly	 understand	 what	 a	 nation	 is	 capable	 of,	 child	 of	 the
Stillness?	 The	 entirety	 of	 Old	 Sanze,	 once	 it	 finally	 stitches	 itself	 together
from	fragments	of	the	hundred	“civilizations”	that	live	and	die	between	now
and	then,	will	be	nothing	by	comparison.	Merely	a	collection	of	paranoid	city-
states	 and	communes	 agreeing	 to	 share,	 sometimes,	 for	 survival’s	 sake.	Ah,
the	Seasons	will	reduce	the	world	to	such	miserly	dreams.



Here,	 now,	 dreams	 have	 no	 limit.	 The	 people	 of	 Syl	 Anagist	 have
mastered	the	forces	of	matter	and	its	composition;	they	have	shaped	life	itself
to	fit	their	whims;	they	have	so	explored	the	mysteries	of	the	sky	that	they’ve
grown	bored	with	it	and	turned	their	attention	back	toward	the	ground	beneath
their	 feet.	 And	 Syl	 Anagist	 lives,	 oh	 how	 it	 lives,	 in	 bustling	 streets	 and
ceaseless	commerce	and	buildings	that	your	mind	would	struggle	to	define	as
such.	The	buildings	have	walls	of	patterned	cellulose	that	can	barely	be	seen
beneath	 leaves,	moss,	grasses,	and	clusters	of	 fruit	or	 tubers.	Some	rooftops
fly	 banners	 that	 are	 actually	 immense,	 unfurled	 fungus	 flowers.	 The	 streets
teem	 with	 things	 you	 might	 not	 recognize	 as	 vehicles,	 except	 in	 that	 they
travel	 and	 convey.	 Some	 crawl	 on	 legs	 like	 massive	 arthropods.	 Some	 are
little	more	than	open	platforms	that	glide	on	a	cushion	of	resonant	potential	–
ah,	 but	 you	would	 not	 understand	 this.	 Let	me	 say	 only	 that	 these	 vehicles
float	 a	 few	 inches	 off	 the	 ground.	 No	 animals	 draw	 them.	 No	 steam	 or
chemical	 fuels	 them.	 Should	 something,	 a	 pet	 or	 child	 perhaps,	 pass
underneath,	 it	will	 temporarily	cease	to	exist,	 then	resume	on	the	other	side,
with	no	interruption	of	velocity	or	awareness.	No	one	thinks	of	this	as	death.



There	is	one	thing	you	would	recognize	here,	standing	up	from	the	core	of
the	 city.	 It	 is	 the	 tallest,	 brightest	 thing	 for	 miles,	 and	 every	 rail	 and	 path
connects	 to	 it	 in	 some	 way	 or	 another.	 It’s	 your	 old	 friend,	 the	 amethyst
obelisk.	It	isn’t	floating,	not	yet.	It	sits,	not	quite	quiescent,	in	its	socket.	Now
and	again	it	pulses	in	a	way	that	will	be	familiar	to	you	from	Allia.	This	is	a
healthier	pulse	than	that	was;	the	amethyst	is	not	the	damaged,	dying	garnet.
Still,	if	the	similarity	makes	you	shiver,	that’s	not	an	unhealthy	reaction.



All	 over	 the	 three	 lands,	 wherever	 there	 is	 a	 large-enough	 node	 of	 Syl
Anagist,	an	obelisk	sits	at	the	center	of	each.	They	dot	the	face	of	the	world,
two	hundred	and	fifty-six	spiders	in	two	hundred	and	fifty-six	webs,	feeding
each	city	and	being	fed	in	turn.



Webs	of	life,	if	you	want	to	think	of	them	that	way.	Life,	you	see,	is	sacred
in	Syl	Anagist.



Now	imagine,	surrounding	the	base	of	the	amethyst,	a	hexagonal	complex
of	buildings.	Whatever	you	 imagine	will	 look	nothing	 like	 the	actuality,	but
just	imagine	something	pretty	and	that	will	do.	Look	closer	at	this	one	here,
along	 the	 southwestern	 rim	 of	 the	 obelisk	 –	 the	 one	 on	 a	 slanting	 hillock.
There	 are	 no	 bars	 on	 the	 building’s	 crystal	 windows,	 but	 visualize	 a	 faint
darker	lacing	of	tissue	over	the	clear	material.	Nematocysts,	a	popular	method
of	securing	windows	against	unwanted	contact	–	although	these	exist	only	on
the	outward-facing	surface	of	the	windows,	to	keep	intruders	out.	They	sting,
but	do	not	kill.	(Life	is	sacred	in	Syl	Anagist.)	Inside,	there	are	no	guards	on
the	 doors.	 Guards	 are	 inefficient	 in	 any	 case.	 The	 Fulcrum	 is	 not	 the	 first
institution	to	have	learned	an	eternal	truth	of	humankind:	No	need	for	guards
when	you	can	convince	people	to	collaborate	in	their	own	internment.



Here	is	a	cell	within	the	pretty	prison.



It	 doesn’t	 look	 like	 one,	 I	 know.	There’s	 a	 beautifully	 sculpted	 piece	 of
furniture	 that	you	might	call	a	couch,	 though	 it	has	no	back	and	consists	of
several	pieces	arranged	in	clusters.	The	rest	of	the	furniture	is	common	stuff
you	would	recognize;	every	society	needs	tables	and	chairs.	The	view	through
the	window	is	of	a	garden,	on	the	roof	of	one	of	the	other	buildings.	At	this
time	of	day,	the	garden	catches	sunlight	slanting	through	the	great	crystal,	and
the	flowers	growing	in	the	garden	have	been	bred	and	planted	with	this	effect
in	mind.	Purple	light	paints	the	paths	and	beds,	and	the	flowers	seem	to	glow
faintly	 in	 reaction	 to	 the	color.	Some	of	 these	 tiny	white	 flower-lights	wink
out	now	and	again,	which	makes	 the	whole	flower	bed	seem	to	sparkle	 like
the	night	sky.



Here	is	a	boy,	staring	through	the	window	at	the	winking	flowers.



He’s	a	young	man,	really.	Superficially	mature,	in	an	ageless	sort	of	way.
Not	so	much	stocky	as	compact	in	his	design.	His	face	is	wide	and	cheeky,	his
mouth	 small.	 Everything	 about	 him	 is	 white:	 colorless	 skin,	 colorless	 hair,
icewhite	 eyes,	 his	 elegantly	 draped	 clothing.	 Everything	 about	 the	 room	 is
white:	 furniture,	 rugs,	 the	 floor	 under	 the	 rugs.	 The	 walls	 are	 bleached
cellulose,	 and	 nothing	 grows	 on	 them.	 Only	 the	 window	 displays	 color.
Within	this	sterile	space,	in	the	reflected	purple	light	of	the	outside,	only	the
boy	is	obviously	alive.



Yes,	the	boy	is	me.	I	don’t	truly	remember	his	name,	but	I	do	remember
that	 it	had	 too	many	rusting	 letters.	Let	us	 therefore	call	him	Houwha	–	 the
same	 sound,	 just	 padded	 with	 all	 manner	 of	 silent	 letters	 and	 hidden
meanings.	That’s	close	enough,	and	appropriately	symbolic	of	—



Oh.	I	am	angrier	than	I	should	be.	Fascinating.	Let’s	change	tracks,	then,
to	 something	 less	 fraught.	 Let	 us	 return	 to	 the	 now	 that	 will	 be,	 and	 a	 far
different	here.



Now	is	the	now	of	the	Stillness,	 through	which	the	reverberations	of	the
Rifting	 still	 echo.	 The	 here	 is	 not	 the	 Stillness,	 precisely,	 but	 a	 cavern	 just
above	the	main	lava	chamber	of	a	vast,	ancient	shield	volcano.	The	volcano’s
heart,	if	you	prefer	and	have	a	sense	of	metaphor;	if	not,	this	is	a	deep,	dark,
barely	stable	vesicle	amid	rock	that	has	not	cooled	much	in	the	thousands	of
years	since	Father	Earth	first	burped	it	up.	Within	this	cavern	I	stand,	partially
fused	 with	 a	 hump	 of	 rock	 so	 that	 I	 may	 better	 watch	 for	 the	 minute
perturbations	or	major	deformations	that	presage	a	collapse.	I	don’t	need	to	do
this.	 There	 are	 few	 processes	more	 unstoppable	 than	 the	 one	 I	 have	 set	 in
motion	here.	Still,	I	understand	what	it	is	to	be	alone	when	you	are	confused
and	afraid	and	unsure	of	what	will	happen	next.



You	are	not	alone.	You	will	never	be,	unless	you	so	choose.	I	know	what
matters,	here	at	the	world’s	end.



Ah,	my	 love.	An	apocalypse	 is	a	 relative	 thing,	 isn’t	 it?	When	 the	earth
shatters,	 it	 is	 a	disaster	 to	 the	 life	 that	depends	on	 it	–	but	nothing	much	 to
Father	Earth.	When	a	man	dies,	 it	 should	be	devastating	 to	a	girl	who	once
called	 him	 Father,	 but	 this	 becomes	 as	 nothing	 when	 she	 has	 been	 called
monster	 so	 many	 times	 that	 she	 finally	 embraces	 the	 label.	 When	 a	 slave
rebels,	it	is	nothing	much	to	the	people	who	read	about	it	later.	Just	thin	words
on	thinner	paper	worn	finer	by	the	friction	of	history.	(“So	you	were	slaves,	so
what?”	they	whisper.	Like	it’s	nothing.)	But	to	the	people	who	live	through	a
slave	 rebellion,	 both	 those	 who	 take	 their	 dominance	 for	 granted	 until	 it
comes	for	them	in	the	dark,	and	those	who	would	see	the	world	burn	before
enduring	one	moment	longer	in	“their	place”	—



That	is	not	a	metaphor,	Essun.	Not	hyperbole.	I	did	watch	the	world	burn.
Say	 nothing	 to	 me	 of	 innocent	 bystanders,	 unearned	 suffering,	 heartless
vengeance.	When	 a	 comm	 builds	 atop	 a	 fault	 line,	 do	 you	 blame	 its	 walls
when	 they	 inevitably	 crush	 the	people	 inside?	No;	you	blame	whoever	was
stupid	enough	to	think	they	could	defy	the	laws	of	nature	forever.	Well,	some
worlds	are	built	on	a	fault	line	of	pain,	held	up	by	nightmares.	Don’t	lament
when	those	worlds	fall.	Rage	that	they	were	built	doomed	in	the	first	place.



So	now	I	will	tell	you	the	way	that	world,	Syl	Anagist,	ended.	I	will	tell
you	how	I	ended	it,	or	at	least	enough	of	it	that	it	had	to	start	over	and	rebuild
itself	from	scratch.



I	 will	 tell	 you	 how	 I	 opened	 the	 Gate,	 and	 flung	 away	 the	Moon,	 and
smiled	as	I	did	it.



And	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 everything	 of	 how,	 later,	 as	 the	 quiet	 of	 death
descended,	I	whispered:



Right	now.



Right	now.



And	the	Earth	whispered	back:



Burn.	



1
you,	in	waking	and	dreaming

Now.	Let’s	review.



You	are	Essun,	the	sole	surviving	orogene	in	all	the	world	who	has	opened
the	Obelisk	Gate.	No	one	expected	this	grand	destiny	of	you.	You	were	once
of	the	Fulcrum,	but	not	a	rising	star	like	Alabaster.	You	were	a	feral,	found	in
the	wild,	 unique	 only	 in	 that	 you	 had	more	 innate	 ability	 than	 the	 average
rogga	born	by	random	chance.	Though	you	started	well,	you	plateaued	early	–
not	for	any	clear	reason.	You	simply	lacked	the	urge	to	innovate	or	the	desire
to	 excel,	 or	 so	 the	 seniors	 lamented	 behind	 closed	 doors.	 Too	 quick	 to
conform	to	the	Fulcrum’s	system.	It	limited	you.



Good	thing,	because	otherwise	they’d	never	have	loosened	your	leash	the
way	they	did,	sending	you	forth	on	that	mission	with	Alabaster.	He	scared	the
rust	out	of	them.	You,	though…	they	thought	you	were	one	of	the	safe	ones,
properly	 broken	 in	 and	 trained	 to	 obey,	 unlikely	 to	 wipe	 out	 a	 town	 by
accident.	 Joke’s	 on	 them;	 how	many	 towns	 have	 you	wiped	 out	 now?	One
semi-intentionally.	 The	 other	 three	 were	 accidents,	 but	 really,	 does	 that
matter?	Not	to	the	dead.



Sometimes	you	dream	of	undoing	it	all.	Not	flailing	for	the	garnet	obelisk
in	 Allia,	 and	 instead	 watching	 happy	 black	 children	 play	 in	 the	 surf	 of	 a
black-sand	 beach	while	 you	 bled	 out	 around	 a	Guardian’s	 black	 knife.	Not
being	 taken	 to	 Meov	 by	 Antimony;	 instead,	 you	 would’ve	 returned	 to	 the
Fulcrum	to	give	birth	to	Corundum.	You’d	have	lost	him	after	that	birth,	and
you	would	never	have	had	 Innon,	but	both	of	 them	would	probably	 still	 be
alive.	(Well.	For	values	of	“alive,”	if	they’d	put	Coru	in	a	node.)	But	then	you
would	never	have	lived	in	Tirimo,	never	have	borne	Uche	to	die	beneath	his
father’s	fists,	never	have	raised	Nassun	to	be	stolen	by	her	father,	never	have
crushed	 your	 once-neighbors	 when	 they	 tried	 to	 kill	 you.	 So	 many	 lives
saved,	if	only	you	had	stayed	in	your	cage.	Or	died	on	demand.



And	here,	now,	long	free	from	the	ordered,	staid	strictures	of	the	Fulcrum,
you	have	become	mighty.	You	saved	the	community	of	Castrima	at	the	cost	of
Castrima	itself;	 this	was	a	small	price	 to	pay,	compared	 to	 the	cost	 in	blood
that	 the	 enemy	 army	 would	 have	 extracted	 if	 they’d	 won.	 You	 achieved
victory	by	unleashing	the	concatenated	power	of	an	arcane	mechanism	older
than	(your)	written	history	–	and	because	you	are	who	you	are,	while	learning
to	master	 this	power,	you	murdered	Alabaster	Tenring.	You	didn’t	mean	 to.
You	actually	suspect	he	wanted	you	to	do	it.	Either	way,	he’s	dead,	and	this
sequence	of	events	has	left	you	the	most	powerful	orogene	on	the	planet.



It	 also	 means	 that	 your	 tenure	 as	 most	 powerful	 has	 just	 acquired	 an
expiration	date,	because	the	same	thing	is	happening	to	you	that	happened	to
Alabaster:	 You’re	 turning	 to	 stone.	 Just	 your	 right	 arm,	 for	 now.	 Could	 be
worse.	Will	be	worse,	the	next	time	you	open	the	Gate,	or	even	the	next	time
you	wield	enough	of	that	strange	silvery	not-orogeny,	which	Alabaster	called
magic.	You	don’t	have	a	choice,	though.	You’ve	got	a	job	to	do,	courtesy	of
Alabaster	and	the	nebulous	faction	of	stone	eaters	who’ve	been	quietly	trying
to	end	the	ancient	war	between	life	and	Father	Earth.	The	job	you	have	to	do
is	 the	 easier	 of	 the	 two,	 you	 think.	 Just	 catch	 the	Moon.	 Seal	 the	Yumenes
Rifting.	 Reduce	 the	 current	 Season’s	 predicted	 impact	 from	 thousands	 or
millions	 of	 years	 back	 down	 to	 something	 manageable	 –	 something	 the
human	race	has	a	chance	of	surviving.	End	the	Fifth	Seasons	for	all	time.



The	 job	you	want	 to	 do,	 though?	Find	Nassun,	 your	 daughter.	Take	 her
back	from	the	man	who	murdered	your	son	and	dragged	her	halfway	across
the	world	in	the	middle	of	the	apocalypse.



About	 that:	 I	 have	 good	 news,	 and	 bad	 news.	 But	 we’ll	 get	 to	 Jija
presently.



You’re	 not	 really	 in	 a	 coma.	 You	 are	 a	 key	 component	 of	 a	 complex
system,	the	whole	of	which	has	just	experienced	a	massive,	poorly	controlled
start-up	 flux	 and	 emergency	 shutoff	 with	 insufficient	 cooldown	 time,
expressing	 itself	 as	 arcanochemical	 phase-state	 resistance	 and	 mutagenic
feedback.	You	need	time	to…	reboot.



This	means	you’re	not	unconscious.	It’s	more	like	periods	of	half-waking
and	half-sleeping,	if	that	makes	sense.	You’re	aware	of	things,	somewhat.	The
bobbing	of	movement,	occasional	jostling.	Someone	puts	food	and	water	into
your	mouth.	Fortunately	you	have	the	presence	of	mind	to	chew	and	swallow,
because	the	end	of	the	world	on	the	ash-strewn	road	is	a	bad	time	and	place	to
need	a	 feeding	 tube.	Hands	pull	on	your	clothing	and	something	girds	your
hips	–	a	diaper.	Bad	time	and	place	for	that,	too,	but	someone’s	willing	to	tend
you	this	way,	and	you	don’t	mind.	You	barely	notice.	You	feel	no	hunger	or
thirst	 before	 they	give	you	 sustenance;	your	 evacuations	bring	no	particular
relief.	Life	endures.	It	doesn’t	need	to	do	so	enthusiastically.



Eventually	 the	 periods	 of	 waking	 and	 sleep	 become	 more	 pronounced
things.	Then	one	day	you	open	your	 eyes	 to	 see	 the	 clouded	 sky	overhead.
Swaying	 back	 and	 forth.	 Skeletal	 branches	 occasionally	 occlude	 it.	 Faint
shadow	 of	 an	 obelisk	 through	 the	 clouds:	 That’s	 the	 spinel,	 you	 suspect.
Reverted	to	its	usual	shape	and	immensity,	ah,	and	following	you	like	a	lonely
puppy,	now	that	Alabaster	is	dead.



Staring	at	the	sky	gets	boring	after	a	while,	so	you	turn	your	head	and	try
to	 understand	 what’s	 going	 on.	 Figures	 move	 around	 you,	 dreamlike	 and
swathed	 in	gray-white…	no.	No,	 they’re	wearing	ordinary	clothing;	 it’s	 just
covered	with	pale	ash.	And	they’re	wearing	a	lot	of	clothes	because	it’s	cold	–
not	enough	 to	 freeze	water,	but	close.	 It’s	nearly	 two	years	 into	 the	Season;
two	years	without	 the	sun.	The	Rifting’s	putting	out	a	 lot	of	heat	up	around
the	equator,	but	 that’s	not	nearly	enough	 to	make	up	 for	 the	 lack	of	a	giant
fireball	in	the	sky.	Still,	without	the	Rifting,	the	cold	would	be	worse	–	well
below	freezing,	instead	of	nearly	freezing.	Small	favors.



In	 any	 case,	 one	 of	 the	 ash-swathed	 figures	 seems	 to	 notice	 that	 you’re
awake,	or	to	feel	the	shift	of	your	weight.	A	head	wrapped	in	face	mask	and
goggles	 swivels	 back	 to	 consider	 you,	 then	 faces	 ahead	 again.	 There	 are
murmured	words	 between	 the	 two	 people	 in	 front	 of	 you,	which	 you	 don’t
understand.	They’re	not	in	another	language.	You’re	just	half	out	of	it	and	the
words	are	partially	absorbed	by	the	ash	falling	around	you.



Someone	 speaks	 behind	 you.	 You	 start	 and	 look	 back	 to	 see	 another
goggled,	masked	face.	Who	are	these	people?	(It	does	not	occur	to	you	to	be
afraid.	Like	hunger,	 such	visceral	 things	 are	more	detached	 from	you	now.)
Then	 something	 clicks	 and	 you	 understand.	You’re	 on	 a	 stretcher,	 just	 two
poles	with	 some	 stitched	 hide	 between	 them,	 being	 carried	 by	 four	 people.
One	 of	 them	 calls	 out,	 and	 other	 calls	 respond	 from	 farther	 away.	 Lots	 of
calls.	Lots	of	people.



Another	call	from	somewhere	far	away,	and	the	people	carrying	you	come
to	 a	 halt.	 They	 glance	 at	 each	 other	 and	 set	 you	 down	 with	 the	 ease	 and
uniformity	 of	 people	who’ve	 practiced	 doing	 the	 same	maneuver	 in	 unison
many	 times.	You	 feel	 the	 stretcher	 settle	 onto	 a	 soft,	 powdery	 layer	 of	 ash,
over	a	 thicker	 layer	of	ash,	over	what	might	be	a	road.	Then	your	stretcher-
bearers	 move	 away,	 opening	 packs	 and	 settling	 down	 in	 a	 ritual	 that	 is
familiar	from	your	own	months	on	the	road.	Breaktime.



You	know	this	ritual.	You	should	get	up.	Eat	something.	Check	your	boots
for	holes	or	stones,	your	feet	for	unnoticed	sores,	make	sure	your	mask	–	wait,
are	you	wearing	one?	If	everyone	else	is…	You	kept	that	in	your	runny-sack,
didn’t	you?	Where	is	your	runny-sack?



Someone	walks	out	of	the	gloom	and	ashfall.	Tall,	plateau-broad,	identity
stripped	by	the	clothes	and	mask	but	restored	by	the	familiar	frizzy	texture	of
the	 ashblow	mane.	She	 crouches	near	 your	 head.	 “Hnh.	Not	 dead,	 after	 all.
Guess	I	lose	that	bet	with	Tonkee.”



“Hjarka,”	you	say.	Your	voice	rasps	worse	than	hers	does.



You	 guess	 by	 the	 flexing	 of	 her	 mask	 that	 she	 grins.	 It	 feels	 odd	 to
perceive	her	smile	without	the	usual	undercurrent	of	menace	from	her	sharp-
filed	teeth.	“And	your	brains	are	probably	still	intact.	I	win	the	bet	with	Ykka,
at	least.”	She	glances	around	and	bellows,	“Lerna!”



You	try	to	lift	a	hand	to	grab	her	pants	leg.	It	feels	like	trying	to	move	a
mountain.	You	ought	 to	be	able	 to	move	mountains,	so	you	concentrate	and
get	 it	halfway	up	–	and	 then	forget	why	you	wanted	Hjarka’s	attention.	She
glances	 around	 then,	 fortunately,	 and	 eyes	 your	 upraised	 hand.	 It’s	 shaking
with	 the	 effort.	 After	 a	 moment’s	 consideration,	 she	 sighs	 and	 takes	 your
hand,	then	looks	away	as	if	embarrassed.



“Happening,”	you	manage.



“Rust	if	I	know.	We	didn’t	need	another	break	this	soon.”



Not	what	you	meant,	but	 it	 takes	 too	much	of	an	effort	 to	 try	 to	say	 the
rest.	 So	 you	 lie	 there,	with	 your	 hand	 being	 held	 by	 a	woman	who	 clearly
would	 rather	 be	 doing	 anything	 else,	 but	 who’s	 deigning	 to	 show	 you
compassion	because	she	thinks	you	need	it.	You	don’t,	but	you’re	glad	she’s
trying.



Two	 more	 forms	 resolve	 out	 of	 the	 swirl,	 both	 recognizable	 by	 their
familiar	 shapes.	 One	 is	male	 and	 slight,	 the	 other	 female	 and	 pillowy.	 The
narrow	one	displaces	Hjarka	at	your	head	and	leans	in	to	pull	off	the	goggles
that	 you	 hadn’t	 realized	 you	were	wearing.	 “Give	me	 a	 rock,”	 he	 says.	 It’s
Lerna,	making	no	sense.



“What?”	you	say.



He	ignores	you.	Tonkee,	the	other	person,	elbows	Hjarka,	who	sighs	and
rummages	 through	her	bag	until	 she	 finds	 something	 small.	She	offers	 it	 to
Lerna.



He	lays	a	hand	on	your	cheek	while	holding	the	object	up.	The	thing	starts
to	 glow	 with	 a	 familiar	 tone	 of	 white	 light.	 You	 realize	 it’s	 a	 piece	 of	 a
Castrima-under	 crystal	 –	 lighting	 up	 because	 they	 do	 that	 in	 contact	 with
orogenes,	as	Lerna	is	now	in	contact	with	you.	Ingenious.	Using	this	light,	he
leans	 in	 and	 peers	 closely	 at	 your	 eyes.	 “Pupils	 contracting	 normally,”	 he
murmurs	to	himself.	His	hand	twitches	on	your	cheek.	“No	fever.”



“I	feel	heavy,”	you	say.



“You’re	alive,”	he	says,	as	if	this	is	a	completely	reasonable	response.	No
one	is	speaking	a	language	you	can	understand	today.	“Motor	skills	sluggish.
Cognition…?”



Tonkee	leans	in.	“What	did	you	dream?”



It	makes	as	much	sense	as	Give	me	a	rock,	but	you	try	to	answer	because
you’re	too	out	of	it	to	realize	you	shouldn’t.	“There	was	a	city,”	you	murmur.
A	bit	of	ash	 falls	onto	your	 lashes	and	you	 twitch.	Lerna	puts	your	goggles
back	 on.	 “It	 was	 alive.	 There	 was	 an	 obelisk	 above	 it.”	 Above	 it?	 “In	 it,
maybe.	I	think.”



Tonkee	 nods.	 “Obelisks	 rarely	 linger	 directly	 over	 human	 habitations.	 I
had	a	friend	back	at	Seventh	who	had	some	theories	about	that.	Want	to	hear
them?”



Finally	 it	 sinks	 in	 that	 you’re	 doing	 something	 stupid:	 encouraging
Tonkee.	You	put	a	mighty	effort	into	glaring	at	her.	“No.”



Tonkee	 glances	 at	 Lerna.	 “Her	 faculties	 seem	 intact.	 Little	 sluggish,
maybe,	but	then	she	always	is.”



“Yes,	thank	you	for	confirming	that.”	Lerna	finishes	doing	whatever	he’s
doing,	and	sits	back	on	his	heels.	“Want	to	try	walking,	Essun?”



“Isn’t	that	kind	of	sudden?”	asks	Tonkee.	She’s	frowning,	which	is	visible
even	around	her	goggles.	“What	with	the	coma	and	all.”



“You	know	as	well	as	I	do	that	Ykka’s	not	going	to	give	her	much	more
recovery	time.	It	might	even	be	good	for	her.”



Tonkee	sighs.	But	she’s	 the	one	to	help	when	Lerna	slides	an	arm	under
you,	levering	you	up	from	prone	to	sitting.	Even	this	takes	an	effort	of	ages.
You	 get	 dizzy	 the	 instant	 you’re	 upright,	 but	 it	 passes.	 Something’s	wrong,
though.	It’s	a	 testament	 to	how	much	you’ve	been	through,	maybe,	 that	you
seem	to	have	developed	a	permanently	crooked	posture,	your	 right	shoulder
sagging	and	arm	dragging	as	if



as	if	it	is	made	of



Oh.	Oh.



The	 others	 stop	 bothering	 you	 as	 you	 realize	 what’s	 happened.	 They
watch	you	heft	the	shoulder,	as	much	as	you	can,	to	try	to	drag	your	right	arm
more	into	view.	It’s	heavy.	Your	shoulder	hurts	when	you	do	this,	even	though
most	 of	 the	 joint	 is	 still	 flesh,	 because	 the	 weight	 pulls	 against	 that	 flesh.
Some	 of	 the	 tendons	 have	 transformed,	 but	 they’re	 still	 attached	 to	 living
bone.	Gritty	bits	of	something	chafe	within	what	should	be	a	smooth	ball-and-
socket.	 It	 doesn’t	 hurt	 as	 much	 as	 you	 thought	 it	 would,	 though,	 after
watching	Alabaster	go	through	this.	So	that’s	something.



The	 rest	 of	 the	 arm,	 from	 which	 someone	 has	 stripped	 your	 shirt	 and
jacket	 sleeves	 in	 order	 to	 bare	 it,	 has	 changed	 nearly	 past	 recognition.	 It’s
your	 arm,	you’re	pretty	 sure.	Beyond	 the	 fact	 that	 it’s	 still	 attached	 to	your
body,	it’s	got	the	shape	you	know	like	your	own	–	well.	Not	as	graceful	and
tapered	as	it	used	to	be	when	you	were	young.	You	were	heavyset	for	a	while,
and	that	still	shows	along	the	plush-looking	forearm	and	slight	sag	under	your
upper	 arm.	 The	 bicep	 is	 more	 defined	 than	 it	 used	 to	 be;	 two	 years	 of
surviving.	The	hand	is	clamped	into	a	fist,	 the	whole	arm	slightly	cocked	at
the	elbow.	You	always	did	tend	to	make	fists	while	you	were	wrestling	with	a
particularly	difficult	bit	of	orogeny.



But	 the	mole,	which	 once	 sat	 in	 the	middle	 of	 your	 forearm	 like	 a	 tiny
black	target,	is	gone.	You	can’t	turn	the	arm	over	for	a	look	at	your	elbow,	so
you	touch	it.	The	keloid	scar	from	where	you	once	fell	 is	 impossible	to	feel
anymore,	 though	it	should	be	slightly	raised	compared	to	the	skin	around	it.
That	 level	 of	 fine	 definition	 has	 vanished	 into	 a	 texture	 that	 is	 gritty	 and
dense,	like	unpolished	sandstone.	Perhaps	self-destructively	you	rub	it,	but	no
particles	break	off	beneath	your	fingertips;	 it’s	more	solid	than	it	 looks.	The
color	is	an	even,	allover	grayish	tan	that	looks	nothing	like	your	skin.



“It	was	like	this	when	Hoa	brought	you	back.”	Lerna,	who	has	been	silent
throughout	 your	 examination.	His	 voice	 is	 neutral.	 “He	 says	 he	 needs	 your
permission	to,	ah…”



You	stop	trying	to	rub	your	stone	skin	off.	Maybe	it’s	shock,	maybe	fear
has	robbed	you	of	shock,	maybe	you’re	really	not	feeling	anything.



“So	tell	me,”	you	say	to	Lerna.	The	effort	of	sitting	up,	and	seeing	your
arm,	have	restored	your	wits	a	little.	“In	your,	uh,	professional	opinion,	what
should	I	do	about	this?”



“I	 think	 you	 should	 either	 let	 Hoa	 eat	 it	 off,	 or	 let	 one	 of	 us	 take	 a
sledgehammer	to	it.”



You	wince.	“That’s	a	little	dramatic,	don’t	you	think?”



“I	 don’t	 think	 anything	 lighter	would	 put	 a	 dent	 in	 it.	You	 forget	 I	 had
plenty	of	chances	to	examine	Alabaster	when	this	was	happening	to	him.”



Out	 of	 nowhere,	 you	 think	 of	 Alabaster	 having	 to	 be	 reminded	 to	 eat
because	he	no	longer	felt	hunger.	It’s	not	relevant,	but	the	thought	just	pops	in
there.	“He	let	you?”



“I	didn’t	give	him	a	choice.	I	needed	to	know	if	it	was	contagious,	since	it
seemed	 to	 be	 spreading	 on	 him.	 I	 took	 a	 sample	 once,	 and	 he	 joked	 that
Antimony	–	the	stone	eater	–	would	want	it	back.”



It	wouldn’t	have	been	a	joke.	Alabaster	always	smiled	when	he	spoke	the
rawest	truths.	“And	did	you	give	it	back?”



“You	better	believe	 I	did.”	Lerna	 runs	a	hand	over	his	hair,	displacing	a
small	pile	of	ash.	“Listen,	we	have	to	wrap	the	arm	at	night	so	that	the	chill	of
it	 doesn’t	 depress	 your	 body	 temperature.	 You’ve	 got	 stretch	marks	 on	 the
shoulder	 where	 it	 pulls	 your	 skin.	 I	 suspect	 it’s	 deforming	 the	 bones	 and
straining	 the	 tendons;	 the	 joint	 isn’t	 built	 to	 carry	 this	 kind	 of	weight.”	He
hesitates.	“We	can	take	it	off	now	and	give	it	to	Hoa	later,	if	you	like.	I	don’t
see	any	reason	why	you	have	to…	to	do	it	his	way.”



You	 think	 Hoa	 is	 probably	 somewhere	 below	 your	 feet	 at	 this	 very
moment,	listening.	But	Lerna	is	being	oddly	squeamish	about	this.	Why?	You
take	a	guess.	“I	don’t	mind	if	Hoa	eats	it,”	you	say.	You	aren’t	saying	it	just
for	Hoa.	You	really	mean	it.	“If	it	will	do	him	good,	and	get	the	thing	off	me
in	the	process,	why	not?”



Something	flickers	in	Lerna’s	expression.	His	emotionless	mask	slips,	and
you	see	all	of	a	sudden	that	he’s	revolted	by	the	idea	of	Hoa	chewing	the	arm
off	your	body.	Well,	put	like	that,	the	concept	is	inherently	revolting.	It’s	too
utilitarian	 a	 way	 of	 thinking	 about	 it,	 though.	 Too	 atavistic.	 You	 know
intimately,	 from	 hours	 spent	 delving	 between	 the	 cells	 and	 particles	 of
Alabaster’s	transforming	body,	what’s	happening	in	your	arm.	Looking	at	it,
you	can	all	but	see	the	silvery	lines	of	magic	realigning	infinitesimal	particles
and	energies	of	your	substance,	moving	this	bit	so	that	it’s	oriented	along	the
same	path	as	 that	bit,	carefully	 tightening	 into	a	 lattice	 that	binds	 the	whole
together.	Whatever	this	process	is,	it’s	simply	too	precise,	too	powerful,	to	be
chance	–	or	for	Hoa’s	ingestion	of	it	to	be	the	grotesquerie	that	Lerna	plainly
sees.	But	you	don’t	know	how	to	explain	that	to	him,	and	you	wouldn’t	have
the	energy	to	try	even	if	you	did.



“Help	me	up,”	you	say.



Tonkee	 gingerly	 takes	 hold	 of	 the	 stone	 arm,	 helping	 to	 support	 it	 so	 it
doesn’t	 shift	or	 flop	and	wrench	your	shoulder.	She	 throws	a	glare	at	Lerna
until	he	finally	gets	over	himself	and	slides	an	arm	under	you	again.	Between
the	 two	of	 them,	 you	manage	 to	 gain	 your	 feet,	 but	 it’s	 hard	 going.	You’re
panting	by	the	end,	and	your	knees	are	distinctly	wobbly.	The	blood	in	your
body	 is	 less	 committed	 to	 the	 cause,	 and	momentarily	 you	 sway,	 dizzy	 and
light-headed.	 Lerna	 immediately	 says,	 “All	 right,	 let’s	 get	 her	 back	 down.”
Abruptly	 you’re	 sitting	 down	 again,	 out	 of	 breath	 this	 time,	 the	 arm
awkwardly	jacking	up	your	shoulder	until	Tonkee	adjusts	it.	The	thing	really
is	heavy.



(Your	 arm.	 Not	 “the	 thing.”	 It’s	 your	 right	 arm.	 You’ve	 lost	 your	 right
arm.	You’re	aware	of	that,	and	soon	you’ll	mourn	it,	but	for	now	it’s	easier	to
think	of	it	as	a	thing	separate	from	yourself.	An	especially	useless	prosthesis.
A	benign	tumor	that	needs	to	be	removed.	These	things	are	all	true.	It’s	also
your	rusting	arm.)



You’re	sitting	there,	panting	and	willing	the	world	to	stop	spinning,	when
you	 hear	 someone	 else	 approach.	 This	 one’s	 speaking	 loudly,	 calling	 for
everyone	to	pack	up,	break’s	over,	they	need	to	do	another	five	miles	before
dark.	 Ykka.	 You	 lift	 your	 head	 as	 she	 gets	 close	 enough,	 and	 it’s	 in	 this
moment	that	you	realize	you	think	of	her	as	a	friend.	You	realize	it	because	it
feels	good	 to	hear	her	voice,	and	 to	 see	her	 resolve	out	of	 the	 swirling	ash.
Last	time	you	saw	her,	she	was	in	serious	danger	of	being	murdered	by	hostile
stone	 eaters	 attacking	Castrima-under.	That’s	one	of	 the	 reasons	you	 fought
back,	 using	 the	 crystals	 of	 Castrima-under	 to	 ensnare	 the	 attackers;	 you
wanted	her,	and	all	 the	other	orogenes	of	Castrima,	and	by	extension	all	 the
people	of	Castrima	who	depended	on	those	orogenes,	to	live.



So	 you	 smile.	 It’s	 weak.	 You’re	 weak.	 Which	 is	 why	 it	 actually	 hurts
when	Ykka	turns	to	you	and	her	lips	tighten	in	what	is	unmistakably	disgust.



She’s	pulled	the	cloth	wrapping	off	the	lower	half	of	her	face.	Beyond	her
gray-and-kohl	eye	makeup,	which	not	even	the	end	of	the	world	will	stop	her
from	wearing,	you	can’t	make	out	her	eyes	behind	her	makeshift	goggles	–	a
pair	of	spectacles	that	she’s	wrapped	rags	around	to	keep	ash	out.	“Shit,”	she
says	to	Hjarka.	“You’re	never	going	to	let	me	hear	the	end	of	it,	are	you?”



Hjarka	shrugs.	“Not	till	you	pay	up,	no.”



You’re	staring	at	Ykka,	the	tentative	little	smile	freezing	off	your	face.



“She’ll	probably	make	a	full	recovery,”	Lerna	says.	His	voice	is	neutral	in
a	 way	 that	 you	 immediately	 sense	 is	 careful.	 Walking-over-a-lava-tube
careful.	“It’ll	be	a	few	days	before	she	can	keep	up	on	foot,	though.”



Ykka	sighs,	putting	a	hand	on	her	hip	and	very	obviously	rifling	through	a
series	of	 things	 to	say.	What	she	 finally	settles	on	 is	neutral,	 too.	“Fine.	 I’ll
extend	the	rotation	of	people	carrying	the	stretcher.	Get	her	walking	as	soon
as	possible,	though.	Everyone	carries	their	own	weight	in	this	comm,	or	gets
left	behind.”	She	turns	and	heads	off.



“Yeah,	 so,”	 Tonkee	 says	 in	 a	 low	 voice,	 once	 Ykka’s	 out	 of	 earshot.
“She’s	a	little	pissed	about	you	destroying	the	geode.”



You	flinch.	“Destroying	—”	Oh,	but.	Locking	all	 those	stone	eaters	 into
the	 crystals.	You	meant	 to	 save	 everyone,	 but	Castrima	was	 a	machine	 –	 a
very	old,	very	delicate	machine	that	you	didn’t	understand.	And	now	you’re
topside,	traipsing	through	the	ashfall…	“Oh,	rusting	Earth,	I	did.”



“What,	 you	didn’t	 realize?”	Hjarka	 laughs	 a	 little.	 It’s	 got	 a	bitter	 edge.
“You	actually	 thought	we	were	all	up	here	 topside,	 the	whole	rusting	comm
traveling	north	 in	 the	 ash	 and	cold,	 for	 fun?”	She	 strides	 away,	 shaking	her
head.	Ykka’s	not	the	only	one	pissed	about	it.



“I	 didn’t…”	 You	 start	 to	 say,	 I	 didn’t	 mean	 to,	 and	 stop.	 Because	 you
never	mean	it,	and	it	never	matters	in	the	end.



Watching	your	face,	Lerna	lets	out	a	small	sigh.	“Rennanis	destroyed	the
comm,	 Essun.	 Not	 you.”	 He’s	 helping	 you	 shift	 back	 down	 into	 a	 prone
position,	 but	 not	 meeting	 your	 eyes.	 “We	 lost	 it	 the	 minute	 we	 infested
Castrima-over	with	boilbugs	to	save	ourselves.	It’s	not	like	they	would’ve	just
gone	away,	or	left	anything	in	the	territory	to	eat.	If	we’d	stayed	in	the	geode,
we’d	have	been	doomed,	one	way	or	another.”



It’s	true,	and	perfectly	rational.	Ykka’s	reaction,	though,	proves	that	some
things	aren’t	about	rationality.	You	can’t	take	away	people’s	homes	and	sense
of	security	in	such	an	immediate,	dramatic	way,	and	expect	them	to	consider
extended	chains	of	culpability	before	they	get	angry	about	it.



“They’ll	get	over	it.”	You	blink	to	find	Lerna	looking	at	you	now,	his	gaze
clear	and	expression	frank.	“If	I	could,	they	can.	It’ll	just	take	a	while.”



You	hadn’t	realized	he	had	gotten	over	Tirimo.



He	 ignores	 your	 staring,	 then	 gestures	 to	 the	 four	 people	 who	 have
gathered	 nearby.	You’re	 lying	 down	 already,	 so	 he	 tucks	 your	 stone	 arm	 in
beside	you,	making	sure	 the	blankets	cover	 it.	The	stretcher-bearers	 take	up
their	task	again,	and	you	have	to	clamp	down	on	your	orogeny,	which	–	now
that	 you’re	 awake	 –	 insists	 upon	 reacting	 to	 every	 lurch	 as	 if	 it’s	 a	 shake.
Tonkee’s	head	pokes	into	view	as	they	start	to	carry	you	along.	“Hey,	it’ll	be
all	right.	Lots	of	people	hate	me.”



That	 is	 entirely	unreassuring.	 It’s	 also	 frustrating	 that	you	care,	 and	 that
others	can	tell	you	care.	You	used	to	be	such	a	steelheart.



But	you	know	why	you	aren’t,	all	of	a	sudden.



“Nassun,”	you	say	to	Tonkee.



“What?”



“Nassun.	I	know	where	she	is,	Tonkee.”	You	try	to	raise	your	right	hand	to
catch	 hers,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 sensation	 that	 thrums	 through	 your	 shoulder	 like
aching	 and	 floating.	 You	 hear	 a	 ringing	 sound.	 It	 doesn’t	 hurt,	 but	 you
privately	curse	yourself	for	forgetting.	“I	have	to	go	find	her.”



Tonkee	 darts	 a	 look	 at	 your	 stretcher-bearers,	 and	 then	 in	 the	 direction
Ykka	went.	“Speak	softer.”



“What?”	 Ykka	 knows	 full	 well	 you’re	 going	 to	 want	 to	 go	 find	 your
daughter.	That	was	practically	the	first	thing	you	ever	said	to	her.



“If	you	want	to	be	dumped	on	the	side	of	the	rusting	road,	keep	talking.”



That	 shuts	 you	 up,	 along	 with	 the	 continued	 effort	 of	 restraining	 your
orogeny.	Oh.	So	Ykka’s	that	pissed.



The	 ash	 keeps	 falling,	 eventually	 obscuring	 your	 goggles	 because	 you
don’t	have	the	energy	to	brush	it	away.	In	the	gray	dimness	that	results,	your
body’s	need	to	recover	takes	precedence;	you	fall	asleep	again.	The	next	time
you	wake	and	brush	the	ash	off	your	face,	it’s	because	you’ve	been	put	down
again,	and	there’s	a	rock	or	branch	or	something	poking	you	in	the	small	of
the	back.	You	struggle	to	sit	up	on	one	elbow	and	it’s	easier,	though	you	still
can’t	manage	much	else.



Night	has	fallen.	Several	dozen	people	are	settling	onto	some	kind	of	rock
outcropping	amid	a	scraggly	not-quite	forest.	The	outcropping	sesses	familiar
from	your	orogenic	explorations	of	Castrima’s	surroundings,	and	it	helps	you
place	yourself:	a	bit	of	 fresh	 tectonic	uplift	 that’s	about	a	hundred	and	sixty
miles	 north	 of	 the	 Castrima	 geode.	 That	 tells	 you	 that	 the	 journey	 from
Castrima	must	 have	only	 just	 begun	 a	 few	days	before,	 since	 a	 large	group
can	only	walk	so	fast;	and	that	there’s	only	one	place	you	could	be	going,	if
you’re	headed	north.	Rennanis.	Somehow	everyone	must	know	that	it’s	empty
and	habitable.	Or	maybe	they’re	just	hoping	that	it	is,	and	they’ve	got	nothing
else	to	hope	for.	Well,	at	least	on	that	point,	you	can	reassure	them…	if	they’ll
listen	to	you.



The	 people	 around	 you	 are	 setting	 up	 campfire	 circles,	 cooking	 spits,
latrines.	 In	 a	 few	 spots	 throughout	 the	 camp,	 little	 piles	 of	 broken,	 lumpy
Castrima	crystals	provide	additional	illumination;	good	to	know	there	must	be
enough	orogenes	left	to	keep	them	working.	Some	of	the	activity	is	inefficient
where	people	are	unused	to	it,	but	for	the	most	part	it’s	well-ordered.	Castrima
having	more	than	its	share	of	members	who	know	how	to	live	on	the	road	is
turning	 out	 to	 be	 a	 boon.	 Your	 stretcher-bearers	 have	 left	 you	 where	 they
dumped	you,	 though,	and	 if	anyone’s	going	 to	build	you	a	fire	or	bring	you
food,	they	haven’t	started	yet.	You	spot	Lerna	crouching	amid	a	small	group
of	people	who	are	also	prone,	but	he’s	busy.	Ah,	yes;	there	must	have	been	a
lot	of	wounded	after	Rennanis’s	soldiers	got	into	the	geode.



Well,	 you	 don’t	 need	 a	 fire,	 and	 you’re	 not	 hungry,	 so	 the	 others’
indifference	 doesn’t	 trouble	 you	 for	 the	moment,	 except	 emotionally.	What
does	 bother	 you	 is	 that	 your	 runny-sack	 is	 gone.	 You	 carried	 that	 thing
halfway	across	 the	Stillness,	 stashed	your	old	 rank-rings	 in	 it,	 even	saved	 it
from	getting	 scorched	 to	powder	when	a	 stone	eater	 transformed	himself	 in
your	quarters.	There	wasn’t	much	in	it	that	still	mattered	to	you,	but	the	bag
itself	holds	a	certain	sentimental	value,	at	this	point.



Well.	Everyone’s	lost	something.



A	mountain	 suddenly	 weighs	 down	 your	 nearby	 perception.	 In	 spite	 of
everything,	 you	 find	 yourself	 smiling.	 “I	 wondered	 when	 you	 would	 show
up.”



Hoa	 stands	 over	 you.	 It’s	 still	 a	 shock	 to	 see	 him	 like	 this:	 a	mid-sized
adult	 rather	 than	 a	 small	 child,	 veined	 black	marble	 instead	 of	white	 flesh.
Somehow,	though,	it’s	easy	to	perceive	him	as	the	same	person	–	same	face
shape,	 same	haunting	 icewhite	eyes,	 same	 ineffable	strangeness,	 same	whiff
of	 lurking	 whimsy	 –	 as	 the	 Hoa	 you’ve	 known	 for	 the	 past	 year.	 What’s
changed,	 that	 a	 stone	 eater	 no	 longer	 seems	 alien	 to	 you?	Only	 superficial
things	about	him.	Everything	about	you.



“How	do	you	feel?”	he	asks.



“Better.”	 The	 arm	 pulls	 when	 you	 shift	 to	 look	 up	 at	 him,	 a	 constant
reminder	of	the	unwritten	contract	between	you.	“Were	you	the	one	who	told
them	about	Rennanis?”



“Yes.	And	I’m	guiding	them	there.”



“You?”



“To	 the	 degree	 that	Ykka	 listens.	 I	 think	 she	 prefers	 her	 stone	 eaters	 as
silent	menaces	rather	than	active	allies.”



This	pulls	a	weary	laugh	out	of	you.	But.	“Are	you	an	ally,	Hoa?”



“Not	to	them.	Ykka	understands	that,	too,	though.”



Yes.	This	 is	probably	why	you’re	still	alive.	As	long	as	Ykka	keeps	you
safe	 and	 fed,	 Hoa	 will	 help.	 You’re	 back	 on	 the	 road	 and	 everything’s	 a
rusting	transaction	again.	The	comm	that	was	Castrima	lives,	but	it	isn’t	really
a	community	anymore,	just	a	group	of	like-minded	travelers	collaborating	to
survive.	Maybe	it	can	become	a	true	comm	again	later,	once	it’s	got	another
home	to	defend,	but	for	now,	you	get	why	Ykka’s	angry.	Something	beautiful
and	wholesome	has	been	lost.



Well.	 You	 look	 down	 at	 yourself.	 You’re	 not	 wholesome	 anymore,	 but
what’s	left	of	you	can	be	strengthened;	you’ll	be	able	to	go	after	Nassun	soon.
First	things	first,	though.	“We	going	to	do	this?”



Hoa	does	not	speak	for	a	moment.	“Are	you	certain?”



“The	arm’s	not	doing	me	any	good,	as	it	is.”



There	 is	 the	 faintest	 of	 sounds.	 Stone	 grinding	 on	 stone,	 slow	 and
inexorable.	 A	 very	 heavy	 hand	 comes	 to	 rest	 on	 your	 half-transformed
shoulder.	You	have	the	sense	that,	despite	the	weight,	it	is	a	delicate	touch	by
stone	eater	standards.	Hoa’s	being	careful	with	you.



“Not	here,”	he	says,	and	pulls	you	down	into	the	earth.



It’s	 only	 for	 an	 instant.	 He	 always	 keeps	 these	 trips	 through	 the	 earth
quick,	 probably	 because	 longer	 would	 make	 it	 hard	 to	 breathe…	 and	 stay
sane.	This	time	is	little	more	than	a	blurring	sensation	of	movement,	a	flicker
of	darkness,	a	whiff	of	 loam	richer	 than	the	acrid	ash.	Then	you’re	lying	on
another	rocky	outcropping	–	probably	the	same	one	that	the	rest	of	Castrima
is	settling	on,	just	away	from	the	encampment.	There	are	no	campfires	here;
the	 only	 light	 is	 the	 ruddy	 reflection	 of	 the	 Rifting	 off	 the	 thick	 clouds
overhead.	Your	eyes	adjust	quickly,	though	there’s	little	to	see	but	rocks	and
the	 shadows	 of	 nearby	 trees.	And	 a	 human	 silhouette,	which	 now	 crouches
beside	you.



Hoa	holds	your	stone	arm	in	his	hands	gently,	almost	reverently.	In	spite
of	yourself,	you	sense	the	solemnity	of	the	moment.	And	why	shouldn’t	it	be
solemn?	This	is	the	sacrifice	demanded	by	the	obelisks.	This	is	the	pound	of
flesh	you	must	pay	for	the	blood-debt	of	your	daughter.



“This	isn’t	what	you	think	of	it,”	Hoa	says,	and	for	an	instant	you	worry
that	he	can	read	your	mind.	More	likely	it’s	just	the	fact	that	he’s	as	old	as	the
literal	hills,	and	he	can	read	your	face.	“You	see	what	was	lost	in	us,	but	we
gained,	too.	This	is	not	the	ugly	thing	it	seems.”



It	seems	like	he’s	going	to	eat	your	arm.	You’re	okay	with	it,	but	you	want
to	 understand.	 “What	 is	 it,	 then?	Why…”	You	 shake	 your	 head,	 unsure	 of
even	 what	 question	 to	 ask.	 Maybe	 why	 doesn’t	 matter.	 Maybe	 you	 can’t
understand.	Maybe	this	isn’t	meant	for	you.



“This	is	not	sustenance.	We	need	only	life,	to	live.”



The	latter	half	of	that	was	nonsensical,	so	you	latch	onto	the	former	half.
“If	it	isn’t	sustenance,	then…?”



Hoa	 moves	 slowly	 again.	 They	 don’t	 do	 this	 often,	 stone	 eaters.
Movement	is	the	thing	that	emphasizes	their	uncanny	nature,	so	like	humanity
and	yet	so	wildly	different.	It	would	be	easier	if	they	were	more	alien.	When
they	move	like	this,	you	can	see	what	they	once	were,	and	the	knowledge	is	a
threat	and	warning	to	all	that	is	human	within	you.



And	yet.	You	see	what	was	lost	in	us,	but	we	gained,	too.



He	 lifts	your	hand	with	both	his	own,	one	positioned	under	your	elbow,
his	 fingers	 lightly	braced	under	your	 closed,	 cracked	 fist.	Slowly,	 slowly.	 It
doesn’t	hurt	your	shoulder	 this	way.	Halfway	to	his	face	he	moves	the	hand
that	had	been	under	your	elbow,	shifting	it	to	cup	the	underside	of	your	upper
arm.	 His	 stone	 slides	 against	 yours	 with	 a	 faint	 grinding	 sound.	 It	 is
surprisingly	sensual,	even	though	you	can’t	feel	a	thing.



Then	your	fist	rests	against	his	lips.	The	lips	don’t	move	as	he	says,	from
within	his	chest,	“Are	you	afraid?”



You	consider	this	for	a	long	moment.	Shouldn’t	you	be?	But…	“No.”



“Good,”	he	 replies.	“I	do	 this	 for	you,	Essun.	Everything	 is	 for	you.	Do
you	believe	that?”



You	 don’t	 know,	 at	 first.	 On	 impulse	 you	 lift	 your	 good	 hand,	 smooth
fingers	over	his	hard,	cool,	polished	cheek.	It’s	hard	to	see	him,	black	against
the	 dark,	 but	 your	 thumb	 finds	 his	 brows	 and	 traces	 out	 his	 nose,	which	 is
longer	in	its	adult	shape.	He	told	you	once	that	he	thinks	of	himself	as	human
in	spite	of	his	strange	body.	You	belatedly	realize	 that	you’ve	chosen	 to	see
him	as	human,	too.	That	makes	this	something	other	than	an	act	of	predation.
You’re	not	sure	what	it	is	instead,	but…	it	feels	like	a	gift.



“Yes,”	you	say.	“I	believe	you.”



His	mouth	opens.	Wide,	wider,	wider	 than	 any	human	mouth	 can	open.
Once	you	worried	his	mouth	was	too	small;	now	it’s	wide	enough	to	fit	a	fist.
And	such	teeth	he	has,	small	and	even	and	diamond-clear,	glinting	prettily	in
the	red	evening	light.	There	is	only	darkness	beyond	those	teeth.



You	shut	your	eyes.
***

She	was	in	a	foul	mood.	Old	age,	one	of	her	children	told	me.	She	said
it	was	just	the	stress	of	trying	to	warn	people	who	didn’t	want	to	hear
that	bad	times	were	coming.	It	wasn’t	a	foul	mood,	it	was	the	privilege
that	age	had	bought	her,	to	dispense	with	the	lie	of	politeness.

“There	isn’t	a	villain	in	this	story,”	she	said.	We	sat	in	the	garden
dome,	which	was	only	a	dome	because	she’d	insisted.	The	Syl
Skeptics	still	claim	there’s	no	proof	things	will	happen	the	way	she
said,	but	she’s	never	been	wrong	in	one	of	her	predictions,	and	she’s
more	Syl	than	they	are,	so.	She	was	drinking	sef,	as	if	to	mark	a	truth
in	chemicals.

“There	isn’t	a	single	evil	to	point	to,	a	single	moment	when
everything	changed,”	she	went	on.	“Things	were	bad	and	then	terrible
and	then	better	and	then	bad	again,	and	then	they	happened	again,	and
again,	because	no	one	stopped	it.	Things	can	be…	adjusted.	Lengthen
the	better,	predict	and	shorten	the	terrible.	Sometimes	prevent	the
terrible	by	settling	for	the	merely	bad.	I’ve	given	up	on	trying	to	stop
you	people.	Just	taught	my	children	to	remember	and	learn	and
survive…	until	someone	finally	breaks	the	cycle	for	good.”

I	was	confused.	“Are	you	talking	about	Burndown?”	That	was
what	I’d	come	to	talk	about,	after	all.	One	hundred	years,	she
predicted,	fifty	years	ago.	What	else	mattered?

She	only	smiled.
—	Transcribed	interview,	translated	from	Obelisk-Builder	C,	found
in	Tapita	Plateau	Ruin	#723	by	Shinash	Innovator	Dibars.	Date

unknown,	transcriber	unknown.	Speculation:	the	first	lorist?
Personal:	’Baster,	you	should	see	this	place.	Treasures	of	history

everywhere,	most	of	them	too	degraded	to	decipher,	but	still…	Wish
you	were	here.



2
Nassun	feels	like	busting	loose

Nassun	stands	over	the	body	of	her	father,	if	one	can	call	a	tumbled	mass	of
broken	jewels	a	body.	She’s	swaying	a	little,	light-headed	because	the	wound
in	her	shoulder	–	where	her	father	has	stabbed	her	–	is	bleeding	profusely.	The
stabbing	 is	 the	outcome	of	 an	 impossible	choice	he	demanded	of	her:	 to	be
either	his	daughter	or	an	orogene.	She	refused	to	commit	existential	suicide.
He	refused	to	suffer	an	orogene	to	live.	There	was	no	malice	in	either	of	them
in	that	final	moment,	only	the	grim	violence	of	inevitability.



To	one	side	of	this	tableau	stands	Schaffa,	Nassun’s	Guardian,	who	stares
down	at	what	is	left	of	Jija	Resistant	Jekity	in	a	combination	of	wonder	and
cold	 satisfaction.	 At	 Nassun’s	 other	 side	 is	 Steel,	 her	 stone	 eater.	 It	 is
appropriate	 to	 call	 him	 that	 now,	 hers,	 because	 he	 has	 come	 in	 her	 hour	 of
need	–	not	to	help,	never	that,	but	to	provide	her	with	something	nevertheless.
What	he	offers,	and	what	she	has	finally	realized	she	needs,	is	purpose.	Not
even	 Schaffa	 has	 given	 her	 this,	 but	 that’s	 because	 Schaffa	 loves	 her
unconditionally.	 She	 needs	 that	 love,	 too,	 oh	 how	 she	 needs	 it,	 but	 in	 this
moment	when	her	heart	has	been	most	thoroughly	broken,	when	her	thoughts
are	at	their	least	focused,	she	craves	something	more…	solid.



She	will	have	the	solidity	that	she	wants.	She	will	fight	for	it	and	kill	for
it,	because	she’s	had	to	do	that	again	and	again	and	it	is	habit	now,	and	if	she
is	successful	she	will	die	for	it.	After	all,	she	is	her	mother’s	daughter	–	and
only	people	who	think	they	have	a	future	fear	death.



In	Nassun’s	good	hand	thrums	a	three-foot-long,	tapering	shard	of	crystal,
deep	blue	and	 finely	 faceted,	 though	with	 some	slight	deformations	near	 its
base	 that	have	 resulted	 in	 something	 like	a	hilt.	Now	and	again	 this	 strange
longknife	flickers	into	a	translucent,	intangible,	debatably	real	state.	It’s	very
real;	only	Nassun’s	attention	keeps	the	thing	in	her	hands	from	turning	her	to
colored	stone	the	way	it	did	her	father.	She’s	afraid	of	what	might	happen	if
she	passes	out	from	blood	loss,	so	she	would	really	like	to	send	the	sapphire
back	up	into	the	sky	to	resume	its	default	shape	and	immense	size	–	but	she
can’t.	Not	yet.



There,	by	the	dormitory,	are	the	two	reasons:	Umber	and	Nida,	the	other
two	 Guardians	 of	 Found	Moon.	 They’re	 watching	 her,	 and	 when	 her	 gaze
lands	 on	 them,	 there	 is	 a	 flicker	 in	 the	 lacing	 tendrils	 of	 silver	 that	 drift
between	 the	pair.	No	exchanged	words	or	 looks,	 just	 that	 silent	communion
which	would	 have	been	 imperceptible,	 if	Nassun	were	 anyone	but	who	 she
was.	Beneath	each	Guardian,	delicate	silvery	tethers	wend	up	from	the	ground
into	 their	 feet,	 connected	 by	 the	 nerve-and-vein	 glimmer	 of	 their	 bodies	 to
tiny	shards	of	 iron	embedded	in	 their	brains.	These	taproot-like	tethers	have
always	 been	 there,	 but	 maybe	 it’s	 the	 tension	 of	 the	 moment	 that	 makes
Nassun	finally	notice	how	 thick	 those	 lines	of	 light	are	 for	each	Guardian	–
much	 thicker	 than	 the	 one	 linking	 the	 ground	 to	 Schaffa.	 And	 at	 last	 she
understands	what	 that	means:	Umber	and	Nida	are	 just	puppets	of	a	greater
will.	Nassun	has	tried	to	believe	better	of	them,	that	they	are	their	own	people,
but	here,	now,	with	the	sapphire	in	her	hands	and	her	father	dead	at	her	feet…
some	maturations	cannot	wait	for	a	more	convenient	season.



So	Nassun	 roots	 a	 torus	 deep	within	 the	 earth,	 because	 she	 knows	 that
Umber	and	Nida	will	sense	this.	It’s	a	feint;	she	doesn’t	need	the	power	of	the
earth,	 and	 she	 suspects	 they	 know	 it.	 Still,	 they	 react,	Umber	 unfolding	 his
arms	 and	 Nida	 straightening	 from	 where	 she’d	 been	 leaning	 on	 the	 porch
railing.	 Schaffa	 reacts,	 too,	 his	 eyes	 shifting	 sideways	 to	meet	 hers.	 It’s	 an
unavoidable	 tell	 that	 Umber	 and	Nida	will	 notice,	 but	 it	 cannot	 be	 helped;
Nassun	 has	 no	 piece	 of	 the	 Evil	 Earth	 lodged	 in	 her	 brain	 to	 facilitate
communication.	Where	matter	fails,	care	makes	do.	He	says,	“Nida,”	and	that
is	all	she	needs.



Umber	and	Nida	move.	It’s	fast	–	so	fast	–	because	the	silver	lattice	within
each	has	strengthened	their	bones	and	tightened	the	cords	of	their	muscles	so
that	 they	 can	 do	 what	 ordinary	 human	 flesh	 cannot.	 A	 pulse	 of	 negation
moves	 before	 them	with	 storm-surge	 inexorability,	 immediately	 striking	 the
major	 lobes	 of	 Nassun’s	 sessapinae	 numb,	 but	 Nassun	 is	 already	 on	 the
offensive.	Not	physically;	she	cannot	contest	them	in	that	sphere	of	battle,	and
besides	she	can	barely	stand.	Will	and	the	silver	are	all	she’s	got	left.



So	 Nassun	 –	 her	 body	 still,	 her	 mind	 violent	 –	 snatches	 at	 the	 silver
threads	 of	 the	 air	 around	 her,	 weaving	 them	 into	 a	 crude	 but	 efficient	 net.
(She’s	 never	 done	 this	 before,	 but	 no	 one	 has	 ever	 told	 her	 that	 it	 can’t	 be
done.)	She	wraps	part	of	 this	around	Nida,	 ignoring	Umber	because	Schaffa
told	her	to.	And	indeed,	she	understands	in	the	next	instant	why	he	told	her	to
concentrate	 on	 only	 one	 of	 the	 enemy	 Guardians.	 The	 silver	 she’s	 woven
around	Nida	should	catch	the	woman	up	fast,	like	an	insect	slamming	into	a
spiderweb.	 Instead,	 Nida	 stumbles	 to	 a	 halt,	 then	 laughs	 while	 threads	 of
something	else	curl	 forth	from	within	her	and	lash	 the	air,	shredding	 the	net
around	her.	She	lunges	for	Nassun	again,	but	Nassun	–	after	boggling	at	 the
speed	 and	 efficacy	 of	 the	 Guardian’s	 retaliation	 –	 snatches	 stone	 up	 from
within	the	earth	to	spear	Nida’s	feet.	This	impedes	Nida	only	a	little.	She	bulls
forward,	 breaking	 the	 rock	 shards	 off	 and	 charging	 with	 them	 still	 jutting
through	her	boots.	One	of	her	hands	is	held	like	a	claw,	the	other	a	flat,	finger-
stiffened	blade.	Whichever	of	them	reaches	Nassun	first	will	dictate	how	she
begins	tearing	Nassun	apart	with	her	bare	hands.



Here	Nassun	panics.	 Just	 a	 little,	 because	 she	would	 lose	 control	 of	 the
sapphire	 otherwise	 –	 but	 some.	 She	 can	 sense	 a	 raw,	 hungry,	 chaotic
reverberation	to	the	silver	threads	thrumming	through	Nida,	like	nothing	she’s
ever	 perceived	 before,	 and	 it	 is	 somehow,	 suddenly,	 terrifying.	 She	 doesn’t
know	what	that	strange	reverberation	will	do	to	her,	if	any	part	of	Nida	should
touch	Nassun’s	bare	skin.	(Her	mother	knows,	though.)	She	takes	a	step	back,
willing	the	sapphire	longknife	to	move	between	her	and	Nida	in	a	defensive
position.	Her	good	hand	 is	 still	on	 the	sapphire’s	hilt,	 so	 it	 looks	as	 if	 she’s
brandishing	 a	 weapon	 with	 a	 shaking	 and	 far-too-slow	 hand.	 Nida	 laughs
again,	 high	 and	 delighted,	 because	 they	 can	 both	 see	 that	 not	 even	 the
sapphire	 will	 be	 enough	 to	 stop	 her.	 Nida’s	 claw-hand	 flails	 out,	 fingers
splaying	 and	 reaching	 for	Nassun’s	 cheek	 even	 as	 she	weaves	 like	 a	 snake
around	Nassun’s	wild	slash	—



Nassun	 drops	 the	 sapphire	 and	 screams,	 her	 dulled	 sessapinae	 flexing
desperately,	helplessly	—



But	all	of	the	Guardians	have	forgotten	Nassun’s	other	guardian.



Steel	does	not	appear	to	move.	In	one	instant	he	stands	as	he	has	for	the
past	few	minutes,	with	his	back	to	the	tumbled	pile	of	Jija,	expression	serene,
posture	languid	as	he	faces	the	northern	horizon.	In	the	next	he	is	closer,	right
beside	 Nassun,	 having	 transported	 himself	 so	 quickly	 that	 Nassun	 hears	 a
sharp	clap	of	displaced	air.	And	Nida’s	forward	momentum	abruptly	stops	as
her	throat	is	caught	tight	within	the	circle	of	Steel’s	upraised	hand.



She	shrieks.	Nassun	has	heard	Nida	ramble	for	hours	in	her	fluttery	voice,
and	 perhaps	 that’s	 made	 her	 think	 of	 Nida	 as	 a	 songbird,	 chattery	 and
chirruping	and	harmless.	This	shriek	is	the	cry	of	a	raptor,	savagery	turning	to
fury	as	she	is	thwarted	from	stooping	on	her	prey.	She	tries	to	wrench	herself
back,	risking	skin	and	tendon	to	get	loose,	but	Steel’s	grip	is	as	firm	as	stone.
She’s	caught.



A	sound	behind	Nassun	makes	her	jerk	around.	Ten	feet	from	where	she
stands,	 Umber	 and	 Schaffa	 have	 blurred	 together	 in	 hand-to-hand	 combat.
She	 can’t	 see	what’s	 happening.	They’re	 both	moving	 too	 fast,	 their	 strikes
swift	and	vicious.	By	the	time	her	ears	process	the	sounds	of	a	blow,	they’ve
already	shifted	to	a	different	position.	She	can’t	even	tell	what	they’re	doing	–
but	she	is	afraid,	so	afraid,	for	Schaffa.	The	silver	in	Umber	flows	like	rivers,
power	being	steadily	fed	to	him	through	that	glimmering	taproot.	The	thinner
streams	in	Schaffa,	however,	are	a	wild	chain	of	rapids	and	clogs,	yanking	at
his	nerves	and	muscles	and	flaring	unpredictably	in	an	attempt	to	distract	him.
Nassun	 can	 see	 by	 the	 concentration	 in	 Schaffa’s	 face	 that	 he	 is	 still	 in
control,	and	that	this	is	what	has	saved	him;	his	movements	are	unpredictable,
strategic,	considered.	Still.	That	he	can	fight	at	all	is	astonishing.



How	he	 ends	 the	 fight,	 by	 driving	 his	 hand	 up	 to	 the	wrist	 through	 the
underside	of	Umber’s	jaw,	is	horrifying.



Umber	makes	an	awful	sound,	jerking	to	a	halt	–	but	an	instant	later,	his
hand	lunges	for	Schaffa’s	throat	again,	blurring	in	its	speed.	Schaffa	gasps	–
so	quickly	that	it	might	be	just	a	breath,	but	Nassun	hears	the	alarm	in	it	–	and
shunts	away	the	strike,	but	Umber’s	still	moving,	even	though	his	eyes	have
rolled	 back	 in	 his	 head	 and	 the	 movements	 are	 twitchy,	 clumsy.	 Nassun
understands	then:	Umber’s	not	home	anymore.	Something	else	is,	working	his
limbs	 and	 reflexes	 for	 as	 long	 as	 crucial	 connections	 remain	 in	 place.	And
yes:	 In	 the	 next	 breath,	 Schaffa	 flings	 Umber	 to	 the	 ground,	 wrenches	 his
hand	free,	and	stomps	on	his	opponent’s	head.



Nassun	can’t	look.	She	hears	the	crunch;	that’s	enough.	She	hears	Umber
actually	 continue	 twitching,	 his	movements	more	 feeble	 but	 persistent,	 and
she	 hears	 the	 faint	 rustle	 of	 Schaffa’s	 clothes	 as	 he	 bends.	 Then	 she	 hears
something	that	her	mother	last	heard	in	a	little	room	in	the	Guardians’	wing	of
the	Fulcrum,	 some	 thirty	years	before:	bone	cracking	and	gristle	 tearing,	 as
Schaffa	works	his	fingers	into	the	base	of	Umber’s	broken	skull.



Nassun	 can’t	 close	 her	 ears,	 so	 instead	 she	 focuses	 on	Nida,	who’s	 still
fighting	to	get	free	from	Steel’s	unbreakable	grip.



“I	–	I	—”	Nassun	attempts.	Her	heart’s	slowed	only	a	little.	The	sapphire
shakes	 harder	 in	 her	 hands.	 Nida	 still	 wants	 to	 kill	 her.	 Steel,	 who	 has
established	himself	as	merely	a	possible	ally	and	not	a	definite	one,	need	only
loosen	his	 grip,	 and	Nassun	will	 die.	But.	 “I	 d-don’t	want	 to	 kill	 you,”	 she
manages.	It’s	even	true.



Nida	abruptly	goes	 still	 and	 silent.	The	 fury	 in	her	 expression	gradually
fades	to	no	expression	at	all.	“It	did	what	it	had	to	do,	last	time,”	she	says.



Nassun’s	skin	prickles	with	 the	 realization	 that	 something	 intangible	has
changed.	 She’s	 not	 sure	 what,	 but	 she	 doesn’t	 think	 this	 is	 quite	 Nida
anymore.	She	swallows.	“Did	what?	Who?”



Nida’s	gaze	falls	on	Steel.	There	is	a	faint	grinding	sound	as	Steel’s	mouth
curves	 into	 a	wide,	 toothy	 smile.	Then,	 before	Nassun	 can	 think	of	 another
question	 to	 ask,	 Steel’s	 grip	 shifts.	 Not	 loosening;	 turning,	 with	 that
unnaturally	slow	motion	which	perhaps	is	meant	to	imitate	human	movement.
(Or	mock	it.)	He	draws	in	his	arm	and	pivots	his	wrist	 to	 turn	Nida	around,
her	back	to	his	front.	The	nape	of	her	neck	to	his	mouth.



“It’s	angry,”	Nida	continues	calmly,	though	now	she	faces	away	from	both
Steel	and	Nassun.	“Yet	even	now	it	may	be	willing	to	compromise,	to	forgive.
It	demands	justice,	but	—”



“It	 has	 had	 its	 justice	 a	 thousand	 times	 over,”	 says	 Steel.	 “I	 owe	 it	 no
more.”	Then	he	opens	his	mouth	wide.



Nassun	turns	away,	again.	On	a	morning	when	she	has	rent	her	father	to
pieces,	 some	 things	 remain	 too	 obscene	 for	 her	 child’s	 eyes.	 At	 least	 Nida
does	not	move	again	once	Steel	has	dropped	her	body	to	the	ground.



“We	cannot	remain	here,”	Schaffa	says.	When	Nassun	swallows	hard	and
focuses	 on	 him,	 she	 sees	 that	 he	 stands	 over	 Umber’s	 corpse,	 holding
something	small	and	sharp	in	one	gore-flecked	hand.	He	gazes	at	this	object
with	 the	 same	detached	 coldness	 that	 he	 turns	upon	 those	he	means	 to	kill.
“Others	will	come.”



Through	the	clarity	of	near-death	adrenaline,	Nassun	knows	that	he	means
other	contaminated	Guardians	–	and	not	half-contaminated	ones	like	Schaffa
himself,	who	 have	 somehow	managed	 to	 retain	 some	measure	 of	 free	will.
Nassun	swallows	and	nods,	feeling	calmer	now	that	no	one	is	actively	trying
to	kill	her	anymore.	“Wh-what	about	the	other	kids?”



Some	 of	 the	 children	 in	 question	 are	 standing	 on	 the	 porch	 of	 the
dormitory,	 awakened	 by	 the	 concussion	 of	 the	 sapphire	 when	 Nassun
summoned	 it	 into	 longknife	 form.	They	 have	witnessed	 everything,	Nassun
sees.	A	couple	are	weeping	at	the	sight	of	their	Guardians	dead,	but	most	just
stare	 at	 her	 and	 Schaffa	 in	 silent	 shock.	 One	 of	 the	 smaller	 children	 is
vomiting	off	the	side	of	the	steps.



Schaffa	 gazes	 at	 them	 for	 a	 long	moment,	 and	 then	 glances	 sidelong	 at
her.	 Some	 of	 the	 coldness	 is	 still	 there,	 saying	 what	 his	 voice	 does	 not.
“They’ll	need	to	leave	Jekity,	quickly.	Without	Guardians,	the	commfolk	are
unlikely	to	tolerate	their	presence.”	Or	Schaffa	can	kill	them.	That’s	what	he’s
done	with	every	other	orogene	they’ve	met	who	isn’t	under	his	control.	They
are	either	his,	or	they	are	a	threat.



“No,”	 Nassun	 blurts.	 Speaking	 to	 that	 silent	 coldness,	 not	 to	 what	 he’s
said.	The	coldness	increases	fractionally.	Schaffa	never	likes	it	when	she	says
no.	 She	 takes	 a	 deep	 breath,	 marshaling	 a	 little	 more	 calm,	 and	 corrects
herself.	“Please,	Schaffa.	I	just…	I	can’t	take	any	more.”



This	 is	 rank	hypocrisy.	The	decision	Nassun	has	 recently	made,	 a	 silent
promise	over	her	father’s	corpse,	belies	it.	Schaffa	cannot	know	what	she	has
chosen,	 but	 at	 the	 corner	 of	 her	 vision,	 she	 is	 painfully	 aware	 of	 Steel’s
lingering,	blood-painted	smile.



She	presses	her	lips	together	and	means	it	anyway.	It	isn’t	a	lie.	She	can’t
take	the	cruelty,	the	endless	suffering;	that’s	the	whole	point.	What	she	means
to	do	will	be,	if	nothing	else,	quick	and	merciful.



Schaffa	regards	her	for	a	moment.	Then	he	 twitch-winces	a	 little,	as	she
has	seen	him	do	often	in	the	past	few	weeks.	When	the	spasm	passes,	he	puts
on	 a	 smile	 and	 comes	 over	 to	 her,	 though	 first	 he	 closes	 his	 hand	 firmly
around	the	metal	bit	he’s	taken	from	Umber.	“How	is	your	shoulder?”



She	reaches	up	to	touch	it.	The	cloth	of	her	sleep-shirt	is	wet	with	blood,
but	not	sodden,	and	she	can	still	use	the	arm.	“It	hurts.”



“That	will	 last	 for	 a	 time,	 I’m	 afraid.”	He	 looks	 around,	 then	 rises	 and
goes	 to	Umber’s	corpse.	Ripping	off	one	of	Umber’s	shirtsleeves	–	one	 that
isn’t	as	splattered	with	blood	as	the	other,	Nassun	notes	with	distant	relief	–
he	comes	over	and	pushes	up	her	sleeve,	then	helps	her	tie	the	strip	of	cloth
around	 her	 shoulder.	 He	 ties	 it	 tight.	 Nassun	 knows	 this	 is	 good	 and	 will
possibly	 prevent	 her	 from	 needing	 to	 have	 the	 wound	 sewn	 up,	 but	 for	 a
moment	 the	pain	 is	worse	and	she	 leans	against	him	briefly.	He	allows	 this,
stroking	 her	 hair	 with	 his	 free	 hand.	 The	 gore-flecked	 other	 hand,	 Nassun
notes,	stays	clenched	tight	around	that	metal	shard.



“What	will	 you	 do	with	 it?”	Nassun	 asks,	 staring	 at	 the	 clenched	 hand.
She	 cannot	 help	 imagining	 something	malevolent	 there,	 snaking	 its	 tendrils
forth	and	looking	for	another	person	to	infect	with	the	Evil	Earth’s	will.



“I	don’t	know,”	Schaffa	says	in	a	heavy	voice.	“It’s	no	danger	to	me,	but	I
remember	that	in…”	He	frowns	for	a	moment,	visibly	groping	for	a	memory
that	is	gone.	“That	once,	elsewhere,	we	simply	recycled	them.	Here,	I	suppose
I’ll	 have	 to	 find	 somewhere	 isolated	 to	 drop	 it,	 and	 hope	 no	 one	 stumbles
across	it	anytime	soon.	What	will	you	do	with	that?”



Nassun	 follows	his	 gaze	 to	where	 the	 sapphire	 longknife,	 untended,	 has
floated	around	behind	her	and	positioned	itself	in	the	air,	hovering	precisely	a
foot	 away	 from	 her	 back.	 It	moves	 slightly	with	 her	movements,	 humming
faintly.	 She	 doesn’t	 understand	why	 it’s	 doing	 that,	 though	 she	 takes	 some
comfort	from	its	looming,	quiescent	strength.	“I	guess	I	should	put	it	back.”



“How	did	you…?”



“I	 just	 needed	 it.	 It	 knew	what	 I	 needed	 and	 changed	 for	me.”	Nassun
shrugs	a	little.	It’s	so	hard	to	explain	these	things	in	words.	Then	she	clutches
at	 his	 shirt	with	 her	 uninjured	 hand,	 because	 she	 knows	 that	when	 Schaffa
doesn’t	answer	a	question,	it	isn’t	a	good	thing.	“The	others,	Schaffa.”



He	sighs	finally.	“I’ll	help	them	prepare	packs.	Can	you	walk?”



Nassun’s	so	relieved	that	for	the	moment	she	feels	like	she	can	fly.	“Yes.
Thank	you.	Thank	you,	Schaffa!”



He	shakes	his	head,	 clearly	 rueful,	 though	he	 smiles	again.	 “Go	 to	your
father’s	house	and	take	anything	useful	and	portable,	little	one.	I’ll	meet	you
there.”



She	 hesitates.	 If	 Schaffa	 decides	 to	 kill	 the	 other	 children	 of	 Found
Moon…	He	won’t,	will	he?	He’s	said	he	won’t.



Schaffa	pauses,	raising	an	eyebrow	above	his	smile,	the	picture	of	polite,
calm	inquiry.	It’s	an	illusion.	The	silver	is	still	a	lashing	whip	within	Schaffa,
trying	to	goad	him	into	killing	her.	He	must	be	in	astonishing	pain.	He	resists
the	goad,	however,	as	he	has	for	weeks.	He	does	not	kill	her,	because	he	loves
her.	And	she	can	trust	nothing,	no	one,	if	she	does	not	trust	him.



“Okay,”	Nassun	says.	“I’ll	see	you	at	Daddy’s.”



As	she	pulls	away	from	him,	she	glances	at	Steel,	who	has	turned	to	face
Schaffa	 as	 well.	 Somewhere	 in	 the	 past	 few	 breaths,	 Steel	 has	 gotten	 the
blood	off	his	lips.	She	doesn’t	know	how.	But	he	has	held	out	one	gray	hand
toward	them	–	no.	Toward	Schaffa.	Schaffa	tilts	his	head	at	this	for	a	moment,
considering,	and	 then	after	a	moment	he	deposits	 the	bloody	iron	shard	 into
Steel’s	 hand.	 Steel’s	 hand	 flicks	 closed,	 then	 uncurls	 again,	 slowly,	 as	 if
performing	a	sleight-of-hand	trick.	But	the	iron	shard	is	gone.	Schaffa	inclines
his	head	in	polite	thanks.



Her	 two	monstrous	 protectors,	 who	must	 cooperate	 on	 her	 care.	 Yet	 is
Nassun	not	a	monster,	too?	Because	the	thing	that	she	sensed	just	before	Jija
came	 to	kill	her	–	 that	spike	of	 immense	power,	concentrated	and	amplified
by	dozens	of	obelisks	working	 in	 tandem?	Steel	 has	 called	 this	 the	Obelisk
Gate:	 a	 vast	 and	 complex	mechanism	 created	 by	 the	 deadciv	 that	 built	 the
obelisks,	 for	 some	 unfathomable	 purpose.	 Steel	 has	 also	mentioned	 a	 thing
called	 the	Moon.	Nassun	has	heard	 the	stories;	once,	 long	ago,	Father	Earth
had	 a	 child.	 That	 child’s	 loss	 is	 what	 angered	 him	 and	 brought	 about	 the
Seasons.



The	tales	offer	a	message	of	impossible	hope,	and	a	mindless	expression
that	lorists	use	to	intrigue	restless	audiences.	One	day,	if	the	Earth’s	child	ever
returns…	The	implication	is	that,	someday,	Father	Earth	might	be	appeased	at
last.	 Someday,	 the	 Seasons	might	 end	 and	 all	 could	 become	 right	 with	 the
world.



Except	fathers	will	still	try	to	murder	their	orogene	children,	won’t	they?
Even	if	the	Moon	comes	back.	Nothing	will	ever	stop	that.



Bring	home	the	Moon,	Steel	has	said.	End	the	world’s	pain.



Some	choices	aren’t	choices	at	all,	really.



Nassun	wills	 the	 sapphire	 to	come	hover	before	her	again.	She	can	 sess
nothing	in	the	wake	of	Umber	and	Nida’s	negation,	but	there	are	other	ways
to	perceive	the	world.	And	amid	the	flickering	un-water	of	the	sapphire,	as	it
unmakes	and	 remakes	 itself	 from	 the	concentrated	 immensity	of	 silver	 light
stored	within	its	crystal	lattice,	there	is	a	subtle	message	written	in	equations
of	 force	 and	 balance	 that	Nassun	 solves	 instinctively,	with	 something	 other
than	math.



Far	 away.	 Across	 the	 unknown	 sea.	 Her	 mother	 may	 hold	 the	 Obelisk
Gate’s	key,	but	Nassun	learned	on	the	ash	roads	that	there	are	other	ways	to
open	any	gate	–	hinges	to	pop,	ways	to	climb	over	or	dig	under.	And	far	away,
on	the	other	side	of	the	world,	is	a	place	where	Essun’s	control	over	the	Gate
can	be	subverted.



“I	know	where	we	need	to	go,	Schaffa,”	Nassun	says.



He	eyes	her	for	a	moment,	his	gaze	flicking	to	Steel	and	back.	“Do	you,
now?”



“Yes.	It’s	a	really	long	way,	though.”	She	bites	her	lip.	“Will	you	go	with
me?”



He	 inclines	 his	 head,	 his	 smile	 wide	 and	 warm.	 “Anywhere,	 my	 little
one.”



Nassun	lets	out	a	long	breath	of	relief,	smiling	up	at	him	tentatively.	Then
she	 deliberately	 turns	 her	 back	 on	 Found	Moon	 and	 its	 corpses,	 and	walks
down	the	hill	without	ever	once	looking	back.

***
2729	Imperial:	Witnesses	in	the	comm	of	Amand	(Dibba	Quartent,
western	Nomidlats)	report	an	unregistered	rogga	female	opening	up	a
gas	pocket	near	the	town.	Unclear	what	gas	was;	killed	in	seconds,
purpling	of	tongue,	suffocation	rather	than	toxicity?	Both?	Another
rogga	female	reportedly	stopped	the	first	one’s	effort,	somehow,	and
shunted	the	gas	back	into	the	vent	before	sealing	it.	Amand	citizens
shot	both	as	soon	as	possible	to	prevent	further	incidents.	Gas	pocket
assessed	by	Fulcrum	as	substantial	–	enough	to	have	killed	most
people	and	livestock	in	western	half	of	Nomidlats,	with	follow-up
topsoil	contamination.	Initiating	female	age	seventeen,	reacting	to
reported	molester	of	younger	sister.	Quelling	female	age	seven,	sister
of	first.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



Syl	Anagist:	Five
	

“Houwha,”	says	a	voice	behind	me.



(Me?	Me.)



I	 turn	 from	 the	 stinging	window	 and	 the	 garden	 of	winking	 flowers.	A
woman	stands	with	Gaewha	and	one	of	the	conductors,	and	I	do	not	know	her.
To	 the	eyes,	 she	 is	one	of	 them	–	 skin	a	 soft	 allover	brown,	eyes	gray,	hair
black-brown	and	curling	in	ropes,	tall.	There	are	hints	of	other	in	the	breadth
of	 her	 face	 –	 or	 perhaps,	 viewing	 this	 memory	 now	 through	 the	 lens	 of
millennia,	I	see	what	I	want	to	see.	What	she	looks	like	is	irrelevant.	To	my
sessapinae,	her	kinship	to	us	is	as	obvious	as	Gaewha’s	puffy	white	hair.	She
exerts	 a	 pressure	 upon	 the	 ambient	 that	 is	 a	 churning,	 impossibly	 heavy,
irresistible	force.	This	makes	her	as	much	one	of	us	as	if	she’d	been	decanted
from	the	same	biomagestric	mix.



(You	look	like	her.	No.	I	want	you	to	look	like	her.	That	is	unfair,	even	if
it’s	 true;	 you	 are	 like	 her,	 but	 in	 other	 ways	 than	 mere	 appearance.	 My
apologies	for	reducing	you	in	such	a	way.)



The	conductor	speaks	as	her	kind	do,	in	thin	vibrations	that	only	ripple	the
air	 and	 barely	 stir	 the	 ground.	Words.	 I	 know	 this	 conductor’s	 name-word,
Pheylen,	and	I	know	too	that	she	is	one	of	the	nicer	ones,	but	this	knowledge
is	still	and	indistinct,	like	so	much	about	them.	For	a	very	long	time	I	could
not	 tell	 the	difference	between	one	of	 their	 kind	 and	 another.	They	 all	 look
different,	but	they	have	the	same	non-presence	within	the	ambient.	I	still	have
to	 remind	myself	 that	 hair	 textures	 and	 eye	 shapes	 and	 unique	 body	 odors
each	 have	 as	much	meaning	 to	 them	 as	 the	 perturbations	 of	 tectonic	 plates
have	to	me.



I	must	be	respectful	of	their	difference.	We	are	the	deficient	ones,	after	all,
stripped	of	much	that	would’ve	made	us	human.	This	was	necessary	and	I	do
not	mind	what	I	am.	I	like	being	useful.	But	many	things	would	be	easier	if	I
could	understand	our	creators	better.



So	I	stare	at	the	new	woman,	the	us-woman,	and	try	to	pay	attention	while
the	 conductor	 introduces	 her.	 Introduction	 is	 a	 ritual	 that	 consists	 of
explaining	 the	 sounds	 of	 names	 and	 the	 relationships	 of	 the…	 families?
Professions?	Honestly,	I	don’t	know.	I	stand	where	I	am	supposed	to	and	say
the	things	I	should.	The	conductor	tells	the	new	woman	that	I	am	Houwha	and
that	Gaewha	is	Gaewha,	which	are	the	name-words	they	use	for	us.	The	new
woman,	 the	 conductor	 says,	 is	 Kelenli.	 That’s	 wrong,	 too.	 Her	 name	 is
actually	 deep	 stab,	 breach	 of	 clay	 sweetburst,	 soft	 silicate	 underlayer,
reverberation,	 but	 I	 will	 try	 to	 remember	 “Kelenli”	 when	 I	 use	 words	 to
speak.



The	 conductor	 seems	 pleased	 that	 I	 say	 “How	 do	 you	 do”	 when	 I’m
supposed	to.	I’m	glad;	introduction	is	very	difficult,	but	I’ve	worked	hard	to
become	good	at	it.	After	this	she	starts	speaking	to	Kelenli.	When	it	becomes
clear	 that	 the	 conductor	 has	 nothing	 more	 to	 say	 to	 me,	 I	 move	 behind
Gaewha	 and	 begin	 plaiting	 some	 of	 her	 thick,	 poufy	 mane	 of	 hair.	 The
conductors	seem	to	like	it	when	we	do	this,	though	I	don’t	really	know	why.
One	of	them	said	that	it	was	“cute”	to	see	us	taking	care	of	one	another,	just
like	people.	I’m	not	sure	what	cute	means.



Meanwhile,	I	listen.



“Just	 doesn’t	make	 sense,”	 Pheylen	 is	 saying,	with	 a	 sigh.	 “I	mean,	 the
numbers	don’t	lie,	but…”



“If	 you’d	 like	 to	 register	 an	 objection,”	 begins	 Kelenli.	 Her	 words
fascinate	me	in	a	way	that	words	never	have	before.	Unlike	the	conductor,	her
voice	 has	weight	 and	 texture,	 strata-deep	 and	 layered.	 She	 sends	 the	words
into	the	ground	while	she	speaks,	as	a	kind	of	subvocalization.	It	makes	them
feel	 more	 real.	 Pheylen,	 who	 doesn’t	 seem	 to	 notice	 how	 much	 deeper
Kelenli’s	 words	 are	 –	 or	 maybe	 she	 just	 doesn’t	 care	 –	 makes	 an
uncomfortable	 face	 in	 reaction	 to	what	she’s	said.	Kelenli	 repeats,	“If	you’d
like	to,	I	can	ask	Gallat	to	take	me	off	the	roster.”



“And	 listen	 to	his	 shouting?	Evil	Death,	he’d	never	 stop.	Such	a	 savage
temper	he	has.”	Pheylen	smiles.	It’s	not	an	amused	smile.	“It	must	be	hard	for
him,	wanting	 the	 project	 to	 succeed,	 but	 also	wanting	 you	 kept	 –	well.	 I’m
fine	with	you	on	standby-only,	but	then	I	haven’t	seen	the	simulation	data.”



“I	 have.”	Kelenli’s	 tone	 is	 grave.	 “The	delay-failure	 risk	was	 small,	 but
significant.”



“Well,	 there	 you	 are.	 Even	 a	 small	 risk	 is	 too	 much,	 if	 we	 can	 do
something	about	it.	I	think	they	must	be	more	anxious	than	they’re	letting	on,
though,	 to	 involve	 you	 —”	 Abruptly,	 Pheylen	 looks	 embarrassed.	 “Ah…
sorry.	No	offense	meant.”



Kelenli	 smiles.	 Both	 I	 and	 Gaewha	 can	 see	 that	 it	 is	 only	 a	 surface
layering,	not	a	real	expression.	“None	taken.”



Pheylen	 exhales	 in	 relief.	 “Well,	 then,	 I’ll	 just	withdraw	 to	Observation
and	let	you	three	get	to	know	each	other.	Knock	when	you’re	done.”



With	 that,	 Conductor	 Pheylen	 leaves	 the	 room.	 This	 is	 a	 good	 thing,
because	when	conductors	are	not	around,	we	can	speak	more	easily.	The	door
closes	 and	 I	move	 to	 face	Gaewha	 (who	 is	 actually	 cracked	 geode	 taste	 of
adularescent	salts,	fading	echo).	She	nods	minutely	because	I	have	correctly
guessed	that	she	has	something	important	to	tell	me.	We	are	always	watched.
A	certain	amount	of	performance	is	essential.



Gaewha	 says	 with	 her	 mouth,	 “Coordinator	 Pheylen	 told	 me	 they’re
making	 a	 change	 to	 our	 configuration.”	 With	 the	 rest	 of	 her	 she	 says,	 in
atmospheric	 perturbations	 and	 anxious	 plucking	 of	 the	 silver	 threads,
Tetlewha	has	been	moved	to	the	briar	patch.



“A	change	at	this	late	date?”	I	glance	at	the	us-woman,	Kelenli,	to	see	if
she	is	following	the	whole	conversation.	She	looks	so	much	like	one	of	them,
all	that	surface	coloring	and	those	long	bones	that	make	her	a	head	taller	than
both	of	us.	“Do	you	have	something	to	do	with	the	project?”	I	ask	her,	while
also	responding	to	Gaewha’s	news	about	Tetlewha.	No.



My	 “no”	 is	 not	 denial,	 just	 a	 statement	 of	 fact.	 We	 can	 still	 detect
Tetlewha’s	familiar	hot	spot	roil	and	strata	uplift,	grind	of	subsidence,	but…
something	is	different.	He’s	not	nearby	anymore,	or	at	least	he’s	not	anywhere
that	is	in	range	of	our	seismic	questings.	And	the	roil	and	grind	of	him	have
gone	nearly	still.



Decommissioned	is	the	word	the	conductors	prefer	to	use,	when	one	of	us
is	removed	from	service.	They	have	asked	us,	 individually,	 to	describe	what
we	feel	when	the	change	happens,	because	it	 is	a	disruption	of	our	network.
By	unspoken	agreement	each	of	us	speaks	of	the	sensation	of	loss	–	a	pulling
away,	a	draining,	a	thinning	of	signal	strength.	By	unspoken	agreement	none
of	 us	mentions	 the	 rest,	which	 in	 any	 case	 is	 indescribable	 using	 conductor
words.	What	we	experience	is	a	searing	sensation,	and	prickling	all	over,	and
the	 tumbledown	 resistance	 tangle	 of	 ancient	 pre-Sylanagistine	wire	 such	 as
we	 sometimes	 encounter	 in	 our	 explorations	 of	 the	 earth,	 gone	 rusted	 and
sharp	in	its	decay	and	wasted	potential.	Something	like	that.



Who	gave	the	order?	I	want	to	know.



Gaewha	 has	 become	 a	 slow	 fault	 ripple	 of	 stark,	 frustrated,	 confused
patterns.	Conductor	 Gallat.	 The	 other	 conductors	 are	 angry	 about	 it	 and
someone	reported	 it	 to	 the	higher-ups	and	 that’s	why	 they	have	sent	Kelenli
here.	It	took	all	of	us	together	to	hold	the	onyx	and	the	moonstone.	They	are
concerned	about	our	stability.



Annoyed,	I	return,	Perhaps	they	should	have	thought	of	that	before	—



“I	 do	 have	 something	 to	 do	 with	 the	 project,	 yes,”	 interrupts	 Kelenli,
though	 there	 has	 been	 no	 break	 or	 disruption	 of	 the	 verbal	 conversation.
Words	are	very	slow	compared	to	earthtalk.	“I	have	some	arcane	awareness,
you	see,	and	similar	abilities	to	yours.”	Then	she	adds,	I’m	here	to	teach	you.



She	switches	as	easily	as	we	do	between	the	words	of	the	conductors	and
our	 language,	 the	 language	 of	 the	 earth.	 Her	 communicative	 presence	 is
radiant	heavy	metal,	searing	crystallized	magnetic	lines	of	meteoric	iron,	and
more	 complex	 layers	 underneath	 this,	 all	 so	 sharp-edged	 and	 powerful	 that
Gaewha	and	I	both	inhale	in	wonder.



But	what	is	she	saying?	Teach	us?	We	don’t	need	to	be	taught.	We	were
decanted	knowing	nearly	everything	we	needed	to	know	already,	and	the	rest
we	learned	in	the	first	few	weeks	of	life	with	our	fellow	tuners.	If	we	hadn’t,
we	would	be	in	the	briar	patch,	too.



I	make	 sure	 to	 frown.	 “How	 can	 you	 be	 a	 tuner	 like	 us?”	 This	 is	 a	 lie
spoken	for	our	observers,	who	see	only	the	surface	of	things	and	think	we	do,
too.	She	is	not	white	like	us,	not	short	or	strange,	but	we	have	known	her	for
one	of	ours	 since	we	 felt	 the	cataclysm	of	her	presence.	 I	do	not	disbelieve
that	she	is	one	of	us.	I	can’t	disbelieve	the	incontrovertible.



Kelenli	smiles,	with	a	wryness	that	acknowledges	the	lie.	“Not	quite	like
you,	but	close	enough.	You’re	the	finished	artwork,	I’m	the	model.”	Threads
of	magic	in	the	earth	heat	and	reverberate	and	add	other	meanings.	Prototype.
A	control	to	our	experiment,	made	earlier	to	see	how	we	should	be	done.	She
has	 only	 one	 difference,	 instead	 of	 the	many	 that	 we	 possess.	 She	 has	 our
carefully	designed	sessapinae.	Is	that	enough	to	help	us	accomplish	the	task?
The	certainty	in	her	earth-presence	says	yes.	She	continues	in	words:	“I’m	not
the	first	that	was	made.	Just	the	first	to	survive.”



We	all	push	a	hand	at	the	air	to	ward	off	Evil	Death.	But	I	allow	myself	to
look	like	I	don’t	understand	as	I	wonder	 if	we	dare	 trust	her.	 I	saw	how	the
conductor	relaxed	around	her.	Pheylen	 is	one	of	 the	nice	ones,	but	even	she
never	 forgets	 what	 we	 are.	 She	 forgot	 with	 Kelenli,	 though.	 Perhaps	 all
humans	think	she	is	one	of	them,	until	someone	tells	them	otherwise.	What	is
that	 like,	being	treated	as	human	when	one	is	not?	And	then	there’s	 the	fact
that	 they’ve	 left	 her	 alone	 with	 us.	We	 they	 treat	 like	 weapons	 that	 might
misfire	at	any	moment…	but	they	trust	her.



“How	many	 fragments	have	you	attuned	 to	yourself?”	 I	 ask	aloud,	as	 if
this	is	a	thing	that	matters.	It	is	also	a	challenge.



“Only	one,”	Kelenli	says.	But	she’s	still	smiling.	“The	onyx.”



Oh.	Oh,	that	does	matter.	Gaewha	and	I	exchange	a	 look	of	wonder	and
concern	before	facing	her	again.



“And	 the	 reason	 I’m	 here,”	 Kelenli	 continues,	 abruptly	 insistent	 upon
delivering	 this	 important	 information	 with	 mere	 words,	 which	 somehow
perversely	serves	 to	emphasize	 them,	“is	because	 the	order	has	been	 issued.
The	 fragments	 are	 at	 optimum	 storage	 capacity	 and	 are	 ready	 for	 the
generative	cycle.	Corepoint	and	Zero	Site	go	live	in	twenty-eight	days.	We’re
finally	starting	up	the	Plutonic	Engine.”



(In	tens	of	thousands	of	years,	after	people	have	repeatedly	forgotten	what
“engines”	are	and	know	the	fragments	as	nothing	but	“obelisks,”	there	will	be
a	different	name	 for	 the	 thing	 that	 rules	our	 lives	now.	 It	will	 be	 called	 the
Obelisk	Gate,	 which	 is	 both	more	 poetic	 and	 quaintly	 primitive.	 I	 like	 that
name	better.)



In	the	present,	while	Gaewha	and	I	stand	there	staring,	Kelenli	drops	one
last	shocker	into	the	vibrations	between	our	cells:



That	means	I	have	less	than	a	month	to	show	you	who	you	really	are.	



Gaewha	frowns.	I	manage	not	to	react	because	the	conductors	watch	our
bodies	as	well	as	our	faces,	but	 it	 is	a	narrow	thing.	I’m	very	confused,	and
not	a	little	unnerved.	I	have	no	idea,	in	the	present	of	this	conversation,	that	it
is	the	beginning	of	the	end.



Because	 we	 tuners	 are	 not	 orogenes,	 you	 see.	 Orogeny	 is	 what	 the
difference	 of	 us	 will	 become	 over	 generations	 of	 adaptation	 to	 a	 changed
world.	You	 are	 the	 shallower,	more	 specialized,	more	 natural	 distillation	 of
our	 so-unnatural	 strangeness.	 Only	 a	 few	 of	 you,	 like	 Alabaster,	 will	 ever
come	close	to	the	power	and	versatility	we	hold,	but	that	is	because	we	were
constructed	as	intentionally	and	artificially	as	the	fragments	you	call	obelisks.
We	 are	 fragments	 of	 the	 great	 machine,	 too	 –	 just	 as	 much	 a	 triumph	 of
genegineering	 and	 biomagestry	 and	 geomagestry	 and	 other	 disciplines	 for
which	 the	 future	will	have	no	name.	By	our	 existence	we	glorify	 the	world
that	made	us,	like	any	statue	or	scepter	or	other	precious	object.



We	 do	 not	 resent	 this,	 for	 our	 opinions	 and	 experiences	 have	 been
carefully	constructed,	too.	We	do	not	understand	that	what	Kelenli	has	come
to	give	us	is	a	sense	of	peoplehood.	We	do	not	understand	why	we	have	been
forbidden	this	self-concept	before	now…	but	we	will.



And	 then	 we	 will	 understand	 that	 people	 cannot	 be	 possessions.	 And
because	we	 are	 both	 and	 this	 should	not	 be,	 a	 new	concept	will	 take	 shape
within	us,	though	we	have	never	heard	the	word	for	it	because	the	conductors
are	forbidden	to	even	mention	it	in	our	presence.	Revolution.



Well.	We	don’t	have	much	use	for	words,	anyway.	But	that’s	what	this	is.
The	beginning.	You,	Essun,	will	see	the	end.



3
you,	imbalanced

It	takes	a	few	days	for	you	to	recover	enough	to	walk	on	your	own.	As	soon
as	you	can,	Ykka	reappropriates	your	stretcher-bearers	to	perform	other	tasks,
which	leaves	you	to	hobble	along,	weak	and	made	clumsy	by	the	loss	of	your
arm.	The	first	few	days	you	lag	well	behind	the	bulk	of	the	group,	catching	up
to	camp	with	them	only	hours	after	 they’ve	settled	for	the	night.	There	isn’t
much	left	of	the	communal	food	by	the	time	you	go	to	take	your	share.	Good
thing	you	don’t	feel	hunger	anymore.	There	aren’t	many	spaces	left	to	lay	out
your	 bedroll,	 either	 –	 though	 they	 did	 at	 least	 give	 you	 a	 basic	 pack	 and
supplies	 to	make	 up	 for	 your	 lost	 runny-sack.	What	 spaces	 there	 are	 aren’t
good,	located	near	the	edges	of	the	camp	or	off	the	road	altogether,	where	the
danger	of	attack	by	wildlife	or	commless	is	greater.	You	sleep	there	anyway
because	you’re	 exhausted.	You	 suppose	 that	 if	 there’s	 any	 real	 danger,	Hoa
will	 carry	 you	off	 again;	 he	 seems	 able	 to	 transport	 you	 for	 short	 distances
through	the	earth	with	no	trouble.	Still,	Ykka’s	anger	is	a	hard	thing	to	bear,	in
more	ways	than	one.



Tonkee	and	Hoa	lag	behind	with	you.	It’s	almost	like	the	old	days,	except
that	now	Hoa	appears	as	you	walk,	gets	left	behind	as	you	keep	walking,	then
appears	 again	 somewhere	 ahead	 of	 you.	 Most	 times	 he	 adopts	 a	 neutral
posture,	but	occasionally	he’s	doing	something	 ridiculous,	 like	 the	 time	you
find	 him	 in	 a	 running	 pose.	Apparently	 stone	 eaters	 get	 bored,	 too.	Hjarka
stays	with	Tonkee,	so	that’s	four	of	you.	Well,	five:	Lerna	lingers	to	walk	with
you,	too,	angry	at	what	he	perceives	as	the	mistreatment	of	one	of	his	patients.
He	didn’t	think	a	recently	comatose	woman	should	be	made	to	walk	at	all,	let
alone	left	to	fall	behind.	You	try	to	tell	him	not	to	stick	with	you,	not	to	draw
Castrima’s	wrath	upon	himself,	but	he	snorts	and	says	that	if	Castrima	really
wants	to	antagonize	the	only	person	in	the	comm	who’s	formally	trained	to	do
surgery,	 they	 don’t	 deserve	 to	 keep	 him.	Which	 is…	well,	 it’s	 a	 very	 good
point.	You	shut	up.



You’re	 managing	 better	 than	 Lerna	 expected,	 at	 least.	 That’s	 mostly
because	it	wasn’t	really	a	coma,	and	also	because	you	hadn’t	lost	all	of	your
road	conditioning	during	the	seven	or	eight	months	that	you	lived	in	Castrima.
The	old	 habits	 come	back	 easily,	 really:	 finding	 a	 steady,	 if	 slow,	 pace	 that
nevertheless	eats	up	the	miles;	wearing	your	pack	low	so	that	the	bulk	of	its
weight	braces	against	your	butt	rather	than	pulling	on	your	shoulders;	keeping
your	 head	 down	 as	 you	 walk	 so	 that	 the	 falling	 ash	 doesn’t	 cover	 your
goggles.	The	loss	of	the	arm	is	more	a	nuisance	than	a	real	hardship,	at	least
with	so	many	willing	helpers	around.	Aside	from	throwing	off	your	balance
and	plaguing	you	with	phantom	itches	or	aches	from	fingers	or	an	elbow	that
doesn’t	exist,	the	hardest	part	is	getting	dressed	in	the	morning.	It’s	surprising
how	quickly	you	master	squatting	to	piss	or	defecate	without	falling	over,	but
maybe	you’re	just	more	motivated	after	days	in	a	diaper.



So	you’re	holding	your	own,	just	slowly	at	first,	and	you’re	getting	faster
as	 the	days	go	by.	But	here’s	 the	problem	with	all	of	 this:	You’re	going	 the
wrong	way.



Tonkee	comes	over	to	sit	by	you	one	evening.	“You	can’t	leave	until	we’re
a	 lot	 further	 west,”	 she	 says	 without	 preamble.	 “Almost	 to	 the	 Merz,	 I’m
thinking.	If	you	want	to	make	it	that	far,	you’re	going	to	have	to	patch	things
up	with	Ykka.”



You	 glare	 at	 her,	 though	 for	 Tonkee,	 this	 is	 discreet.	 She’s	 waited	 till
Hjarka	is	snoring	in	her	bedroll	and	Lerna’s	gone	off	to	use	the	camp	latrine.
Hoa	is	still	nearby,	standing	unsubtle	guard	over	your	small	group	within	the
comm	encampment,	the	curves	of	his	black	marble	face	underlit	by	your	fire.
Tonkee	 knows	 he’s	 loyal	 to	 you,	 though,	 to	 the	 degree	 that	 loyalty	 means
anything	to	him.



“Ykka	hates	me,”	you	finally	say,	after	glaring	fails	 to	produce	anything
like	chagrin	or	regret	in	Tonkee.



She	rolls	her	eyes.	“Trust	me,	I	know	hate.	What	Ykka’s	got	is…	scared,
and	a	good	bit	of	mad,	but	some	of	that	you	deserve.	You’ve	put	her	people	in
danger.”



“I	saved	her	people	from	danger.”



Across	the	encampment,	as	if	to	illustrate	your	point,	you	notice	someone
moving	about	clunkily.	It’s	one	of	the	Rennanis	soldiers,	a	few	of	whom	were
captured	alive	after	 the	 last	battle.	They’ve	put	a	pranger	on	her	–	a	hinged
wooden	collar	round	her	neck,	with	holes	in	the	planks	holding	her	arms	up
and	 apart,	 linked	 by	 two	 chains	 to	 manacles	 on	 her	 ankles.	 Primitive	 but
effective.	 Lerna’s	 been	 tending	 the	 prisoners’	 chafing	 sores,	 and	 you
understand	 they’re	 allowed	 to	 put	 the	 prangers	 aside	 at	 night.	 It’s	 better
treatment	than	Castrimans	would	have	gotten	from	Rennanis	if	the	situations
were	 reversed,	 but	 still,	 it	 makes	 everything	 awkward.	 It’s	 not	 like	 the
Rennies	 can	 leave,	 after	 all.	Even	without	 the	 prangers,	 if	 any	 one	 of	 them
escapes	 now,	with	 no	 supplies	 and	 lacking	 the	 protection	 of	 a	 large	 group,
they’ll	be	meat	within	days.	The	prangers	are	just	insult	on	top	of	injury,	and	a
disquieting	reminder	to	all	that	things	could	be	worse.	You	look	away.



Tonkee	sees	you	looking.	“Yeah,	you	saved	Castrima	from	one	danger	and
then	delivered	 them	 into	 something	 just	 as	 bad.	Ykka	 only	wanted	 the	 first
half	of	that.”



“I	couldn’t	have	avoided	the	second	half.	Should	I	have	just	let	the	stone
eaters	kill	all	 the	roggas?	Kill	her?	If	 they’d	succeeded,	none	of	the	geode’s
mechanisms	would’ve	worked	anyway!”



“She	knows	that.	That’s	why	I	said	it	wasn’t	hate.	But…”	Tonkee	sighs	as
if	you’re	being	especially	stupid.	“Look.	Castrima	was	–	is	–	an	experiment.
Not	 the	geode,	 the	people.	She’s	 always	known	 it	was	precarious,	 trying	 to
make	a	comm	out	of	strays	and	roggas,	but	it	was	working.	She	made	the	old-
timers	understand	that	we	needed	the	newcommers.	Got	everybody	to	think	of
roggas	 as	 people.	Got	 them	 to	 agree	 to	 live	 underground,	 in	 a	 deadciv	 ruin
that	 could’ve	killed	us	 all	 at	 any	moment.	Even	kept	 them	 from	 turning	on
each	other	when	that	gray	stone	eater	gave	them	a	reason	—”



“I	stopped	that,”	you	mutter.	But	you’re	listening.



“You	helped,”	Tonkee	concedes,	“but	 if	 it	had	just	been	you?	You	know
full	well	it	wouldn’t	have	worked.	Castrima	works	because	of	Ykka.	Because
they	know	she’ll	die	to	keep	this	comm	going.	Help	Castrima,	and	Ykka	will
be	on	your	side	again.”



It	will	 be	weeks,	maybe	 even	months,	 before	you	 reach	 the	now-vacant
Equatorial	 city	 of	 Rennanis.	 “I	 know	 where	 Nassun	 is	 now,”	 you	 say,
seething.	 “By	 the	 time	Castrima	gets	 to	Rennanis,	 she	might	be	 somewhere
else!”



Tonkee	sighs.	“It’s	been	a	few	weeks	already,	Essun.”



And	 Nassun	 was	 probably	 somewhere	 else	 before	 you	 even	 woke	 up.
You’re	shaking.	It’s	not	rational	and	you	know	it,	but	you	blurt,	“But	if	I	go
now,	maybe	–	maybe	 I	 can	 catch	up,	maybe	Hoa	 can	 tune	 in	on	her	 again,
maybe	 I	 can	—”	 Then	 you	 falter	 silent	 because	 you	 hear	 the	 shaky,	 high-
pitched	note	of	your	own	voice	and	your	mother	instincts	kick	back	in,	rusty
but	unblunted,	to	chide	you:	Stop	whining.	Which	you	are.	So	you	bite	back
more	words,	but	you’re	still	shaking,	a	little.



Tonkee	 shakes	 her	 head,	 an	 expression	 on	 her	 face	 that	 might	 be
sympathy,	 or	 maybe	 it’s	 just	 rueful	 acknowledgment	 of	 how	 pathetic	 you
sound.	“Well,	at	least	you	know	it’s	a	bad	idea.	But	if	you’re	that	determined,
then	 you’d	 better	 get	 started	 now.”	She	 turns	 away.	Can’t	 really	 blame	her,
can	 you?	Venture	 into	 the	 almost	 certainly	 deadly	 unknown	with	 a	woman
who’s	 destroyed	 multiple	 communities,	 or	 stay	 with	 a	 comm	 that	 at	 least
theoretically	will	soon	have	a	home	again?	That’s	barely	even	a	question.



But	you	should	really	know	better	than	to	try	to	predict	what	Tonkee	will
do.	She	sighs,	after	you	subside	and	sit	back	on	 the	rock	you’ve	been	using
for	 a	 chair.	 “I	 can	 probably	 wrangle	 some	 extra	 supplies	 out	 of	 the
quartermaster,	if	I	tell	them	I	need	to	go	scout	something	for	the	Innovators.
They’re	used	to	me	doing	that.	But	I’m	not	sure	I	can	convince	them	to	give
me	enough	for	two.”



It’s	a	surprise	to	realize	how	grateful	you	are,	for	her	–	hmm.	Loyalty	isn’t
the	 word	 for	 it.	 Attachment?	Maybe.	Maybe	 it’s	 just	 that	 you’ve	 been	 her
research	subject	 for	all	 this	 time	already,	 so	of	course	she’s	not	going	 to	 let
you	slip	away	when	she’s	followed	you	across	decades	and	half	the	Stillness.



But	then	you	frown.	“Two?	Not	three?”	You	thought	things	were	working
out	with	her	and	Hjarka.



Tonkee	shrugs,	 then	awkwardly	bends	to	 tuck	into	the	little	bowl	of	rice
and	beans	she	has	 from	the	communal	pot.	After	she	swallows,	she	says,	“I
prefer	to	make	conservative	estimates.	You’d	better,	too.”



She	means	Lerna,	who	seems	to	be	in	the	process	of	attaching	himself	to
you.	You	don’t	know	why.	You’re	not	exactly	a	prize,	dressed	in	ash	and	with
no	 arm,	 and	 half	 the	 time	 he	 seems	 to	 be	 furious	 with	 you.	 You’re	 still
surprised	it’s	not	all	the	time.	He	always	was	a	strange	boy.



“Anyway,	 here’s	 a	 thing	 I	want	 you	 to	 think	 about,”	 Tonkee	 continues.
“What	was	Nassun	doing	when	you	found	her?”



And	 you	 flinch.	 Because,	 damn	 it,	 Tonkee	 has	 once	 again	 said	 aloud	 a
thing	that	you	would	have	preferred	to	leave	unsaid,	and	unconsidered.



And	 because	 you	 remember	 that	 moment,	 with	 the	 power	 of	 the	 Gate
sluicing	 through	 you,	 when	 you	 reached	 and	 touched	 and	 felt	 a	 familiar
resonance	touch	back.	A	resonance	backed,	and	amplified,	by	something	blue
and	deep	and	 strangely	 resistant	 to	 the	Gate’s	 linkage.	The	Gate	 told	you	–
somehow	–	that	it	was	the	sapphire.



What	is	your	ten-year-old	daughter	doing	playing	with	an	obelisk?



How	is	your	ten-year-old	daughter	alive	after	playing	with	an	obelisk?



You	think	of	how	that	momentary	contact	felt.	Familiar	vibration-taste	of
an	 orogeny	 which	 you’ve	 been	 quelling	 since	 before	 she	 was	 born	 and
training	since	she	was	two	–	but	so	much	sharper	and	more	intense	now.	You
weren’t	trying	to	take	the	sapphire	from	Nassun,	but	the	Gate	was,	following
instructions	 that	 long-dead	builders	 somehow	wrote	 into	 the	 layered	 lattices
of	 the	 onyx.	Nassun	 kept	 the	 sapphire,	 though.	 She	 actually	 fought	 off	 the
Obelisk	Gate.



What	has	your	little	girl	been	doing,	this	long	dark	year,	to	develop	such
skill?



“You	don’t	know	what	her	situation	is,”	Tonkee	continues,	which	makes
you	blink	out	of	this	terrible	reverie	and	focus	on	her.	“You	don’t	know	what
kind	of	people	she’s	living	with.	You	said	she’s	in	the	Antarctics,	somewhere
near	the	eastern	coast?	That	part	of	the	world	shouldn’t	be	feeling	the	Season
much	yet.	So	what	are	you	going	to	do,	then,	snatch	her	out	of	a	comm	where
she’s	safe	and	has	enough	to	eat	and	can	still	see	the	sky,	and	drag	her	north	to
a	comm	sitting	on	the	Rifting,	where	the	shakes	will	be	constant	and	the	next
gas	vent	might	kill	everyone?”	She	looks	hard	at	you.	“Do	you	want	to	help
her?	Or	just	have	her	with	you	again?	Those	two	things	aren’t	the	same.”



“Jija	killed	Uche,”	you	snap.	The	words	don’t	hurt,	unless	you	think	about
them	as	you	speak.	Unless	you	remember	your	son’s	smell	or	his	little	laugh
or	the	sight	of	his	body	under	a	blanket.	Unless	you	think	of	Corundum	–	you
use	anger	to	press	down	the	twin	throbs	of	grief	and	guilt.	“I	have	to	get	her
away	from	him.	He	killed	my	son!”



“He	 hasn’t	 killed	 your	 daughter	 yet.	 He’s	 had,	 what,	 twenty	 months?
Twenty-one?	 That	 means	 something.”	 Tonkee	 spies	 Lerna	 coming	 back
toward	you	through	the	crowd,	and	sighs.	“There	are	just	things	you	ought	to
think	about,	 is	all	 I’m	saying.	And	 I	can’t	even	believe	 I’m	saying	 it.	She’s
another	 obelisk-user,	 and	 I	 can’t	 even	 go	 investigate	 it.”	 Tonkee	 utters	 a
frustrated	grumbly	sound.	“I	hate	 this	damn	Season.	 I	have	 to	be	so	 rusting
practical	now.”



You’re	 surprised	 into	 a	 chuckle,	 but	 it’s	 weak.	 The	 questions	 Tonkee’s
raised	 are	 good	 ones,	 of	 course,	 and	 some	 of	 them	 you	 can’t	 answer.	 You
think	about	them	for	a	long	time	that	night,	and	in	the	days	thereafter.



Rennanis	 is	nearly	 into	 the	Western	Coastals,	 just	past	 the	Merz	Desert.
Castrima	 is	 going	 to	 have	 to	 go	 through	 the	 desert	 to	 get	 there,	 because
skirting	 around	 it	would	 drastically	 increase	 the	 length	 of	 your	 journey	 –	 a
difference	of	months	versus	years.	But	you’re	making	good	time	through	the
central	Somidlats,	where	the	roads	are	decently	passable	and	you	haven’t	been
bothered	by	many	raiders	or	significant	wildlife.	The	Hunters	have	been	able
to	find	a	lot	of	forage	to	supplement	the	comm’s	stores,	including	a	little	more
game	 than	 before.	 Unsurprising,	 since	 they’re	 no	 longer	 competing	 against
hordes	of	insects.	It’s	not	enough	–	small	voles	and	birds	just	aren’t	going	to
hold	a	comm	of	a	thousand-plus	people	for	long.	But	it’s	better	than	nothing.



When	you	start	noticing	changes	in	the	land	that	presage	desert	–	thinning
of	the	skeletal	forest,	flattening	of	the	topography,	a	gradual	drawing	away	of
the	water	table	amid	the	strata	–	you	decide	that	it’s	time	to	finally	try	to	talk
to	Ykka.



By	now	you’ve	entered	a	stone	forest:	a	place	of	 tall,	sharp-edged	black
spires	 that	 claw	 irregularly	 at	 the	 sky	 above	 and	 around	 you	 as	 the	 group
edges	 through	 its	depths.	There	aren’t	many	of	 these	 in	 the	world.	Most	get
shattered	 by	 shakes,	 or	 –	 back	 when	 there	 was	 a	 Fulcrum	 –	 deliberately
destroyed	 by	 Fulcrum	 blackjackets	 at	 local	 comms’	 commissioned	 request.
No	 comm	 lives	 in	 a	 stone	 forest,	 see,	 and	 no	 well-run	 comm	 wants	 one
nearby.	Apart	 from	stone	 forests’	 tendency	 to	collapse	and	crush	everything
within,	 they	 tend	 to	 be	 riddled	 with	 wet	 caves	 and	 other	 water-hewn
formations	 that	 make	 marvelous	 homes	 for	 dangerous	 flora	 and	 fauna.	 Or
people.



The	road	runs	straight	through	this	stone	forest,	which	is	bullshit.	That	is
to	say,	no	one	in	their	right	mind	would	have	built	a	road	through	a	place	like
this.	 If	 a	 quartent	 governor	 had	 proposed	 using	 people’s	 taxes	 on	 this
dangerous	bit	of	bandit-bait,	that	governor	would’ve	been	replaced	in	the	next
election…	or	shanked	in	 the	night.	So	that’s	your	first	clue	that	something’s
off	 about	 the	 place.	 The	 second	 is	 that	 there’s	 not	 much	 vegetation	 in	 the
forest.	Not	much	anywhere	this	far	into	the	Season,	but	also	no	sign	that	there
was	ever	any	vegetation	here	in	the	first	place.	That	means	this	stone	forest	is
recent	–	so	recent	that	there’s	been	no	time	for	wind	or	rain	to	erode	the	stone
and	permit	plant	growth.	So	recent	that	it	didn’t	exist	before	the	Season.



Clue	 number	 three	 is	 what	 your	 own	 sessapinae	 tell	 you.	 Most	 stone
forests	 are	 limestone,	 made	 by	 water	 erosion	 over	 hundreds	 of	 millions	 of
years.	This	one	is	obsidian	–	volcanic	glass.	Its	 jagged	spikes	aren’t	straight
up	and	down,	but	more	inwardly	curved;	there	are	even	a	few	unbroken	arcs
stretching	 over	 the	 road.	 Impossible	 to	 see	 up	 close,	 but	 you	 can	 sess	 the
overall	 pattern:	The	whole	 forest	 is	 a	 blossom	of	 lava,	 solidified	mid-blast.
Not	a	line	of	the	road	has	been	knocked	out	of	place	by	the	tectonic	explosion
around	it.	Beautiful	work,	really.



Ykka’s	 in	 the	middle	of	an	argument	with	another	comm	member	when
you	find	her.	She’s	called	for	a	halt	about	a	hundred	feet	away	from	the	forest,
and	 people	 are	milling	 about,	 looking	 confused	 about	whether	 this	 is	 just	 a
rest	stop	or	whether	they	should	be	making	camp	since	it’s	relatively	late	in
the	day.	The	comm	member	is	one	you	finally	recognize	as	Esni	Strongback
Castrima,	 the	use-caste’s	spokesperson.	She	throws	you	an	uneasy	glance	as
you	come	to	a	halt	beside	them,	but	then	you	take	off	your	goggles	and	mask,
and	her	expression	softens.	She	didn’t	 recognize	you	before	because	you’ve
stuffed	rags	into	the	sleeve	of	your	missing	arm	to	keep	warm.	Her	reaction	is
a	welcome	reminder	that	not	everybody	in	Castrima	is	angry	with	you.	Esni	is
alive	because	the	worst	part	of	the	attack	–	Rennanis	soldiers	trying	to	carve	a
bloody	path	through	the	Strongbacks	holding	Scenic	Overlook	–	ended	when
you	locked	the	enemy	stone	eaters	into	crystals.



Ykka,	 though,	 doesn’t	 turn,	 although	 she	 should	 easily	 be	 able	 to	 sess
your	presence.	She	says,	you	think	to	Esni,	though	it	works	for	you	as	well,	“I
really	don’t	want	to	hear	any	more	arguments	right	now.”



“That’s	 good,”	 you	 say.	 “Because	 I	 understand	 exactly	 why	 you’ve
stopped	here,	and	I	think	it’s	a	good	idea.”	It’s	a	bit	louder	than	it	needs	to	be.
You	eyeball	Esni	so	she’ll	know	you	mean	to	have	it	out	with	Ykka	right	now,
and	maybe	Esni	doesn’t	want	to	be	here	for	that.	But	a	woman	who	leads	the
comm’s	defenders	isn’t	going	to	scare	easily,	so	you’re	not	entirely	surprised
when	Esni	looks	amused	and	folds	her	arms,	ready	to	enjoy	the	show.



Ykka	 turns	 to	you,	 slowly,	a	 look	of	mingled	annoyance	and	 incredulity
on	 her	 face.	 She	 says,	 “Nice	 to	 know	 you	 approve,”	 in	 a	 tone	 that	 sounds
anything	but	pleased.	“Not	that	I	actually	care	if	you	do.”



You	set	your	jaw.	“You	sess	it,	right?	I’d	call	it	the	work	of	a	four-	or	five-
ringer,	except	I	know	now	that	ferals	can	have	unusual	skill.”	You	mean	her.
It’s	an	olive	branch.	Or	maybe	just	flattery.



She	doesn’t	fall	for	it.	“We’re	going	as	far	as	we	can	before	nightfall,	and
setting	 up	 camp	 in	 there.”	 She	 nods	 toward	 the	 forest.	 “It’s	 too	 big	 to	 get
through	in	a	day.	Maybe	we	could	go	around,	but	 there’s	something…”	Her
eyes	 unfocus,	 and	 then	 she	 frowns	 and	 turns	 away,	 grimacing	 at	 having
revealed	a	weakness	to	you.	She’s	sensitive	enough	to	sess	the	something,	but
not	to	know	exactly	what	she’s	sessing.



You’re	the	one	who	spent	years	learning	to	read	underground	rocks	with
orogeny,	 so	 you	 fill	 in	 the	 detail.	 “There’s	 a	 leaf-covered	 spike	 trap	 in	 that
direction,”	 you	 say,	 nodding	 toward	 the	 long-dead	 grass	 edging	 the	 stone
forest	on	one	side.	“Beyond	it	is	an	area	of	snares;	I	can’t	tell	how	many,	but	I
can	sess	a	lot	of	kinetic	tension	from	wire	or	rope.	If	we	go	around	the	other
way,	 though,	 there	 are	 partially	 sheared-off	 stone	 columns	 and	 boulders
positioned	 at	 points	 along	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 stone	 forest.	 Easy	 to	 start	 a
rockslide.	And	I	can	sess	holes	positioned	at	strategic	points	along	the	outer
columns.	A	crossbow,	or	even	an	ordinary	bow	and	arrow,	could	do	a	lot	of
damage	from	there.”



Ykka	sighs.	“Yeah.	So	through	really	is	the	best	way.”	She	eyes	Esni,	who
must	 have	 been	 arguing	 for	 around.	 Esni	 sighs,	 too,	 and	 then	 shrugs,
conceding	the	argument.



You	face	Ykka.	“Whoever	made	 this	 forest,	 if	 they’re	still	alive,	has	 the
skill	to	precision-ice	half	the	comm	in	seconds,	with	little	warning.	If	you’re
determined	 to	 go	 through,	 we’re	 going	 to	 have	 to	 set	 up	 a	 watch/chore
rotation	–	the	orogenes	with	better	control,	I	mean,	when	I	say	‘we.’	You	need
to	keep	us	all	awake	tonight.”



She	narrows	her	eyes.	“Why?”



“Because	if	any	of	us	are	asleep	when	the	attack	comes”	–	you’re	pretty
sure	there’ll	be	an	attack	–	“we’ll	react	instinctively.”



Ykka	 grimaces.	 She’s	 not	 the	 average	 feral,	 but	 she’s	 feral	 enough	 to
know	what	will	likely	happen	if	something	causes	her	to	react	orogenically	in
her	sleep.	Whoever	the	attacker	doesn’t	kill,	she	very	well	might,	completely
by	 accident.	 “Shit.”	 She	 looks	 away	 for	 a	moment,	 and	 you	wonder	 if	 she
doesn’t	 believe	 you,	 but	 apparently	 she’s	 just	 thinking.	 “Fine.	 We’ll	 split
watches,	 then.	Put	 the	 roggas	not	on	watch	 to	work,	oh,	 shelling	 those	wild
peas	we	found	a	 few	days	back.	Or	 repairing	 the	harnesses	 the	Strongbacks
use	for	hauling.	Since	we’ll	have	to	be	carried	on	the	wagons	tomorrow,	when
we’re	too	sleepy	and	useless	to	walk	on	our	own.”



“Right.	And	—”	You	hesitate.	Not	yet.	You	can’t	admit	your	weakness	to
these	women,	not	yet.	But.	“Not	me.”



Ykka’s	eyes	narrow	immediately.	Esni	 throws	you	a	skeptical	 look,	as	 if
to	say,	And	you	were	doing	so	well.	Quickly	you	add,	“I	don’t	know	what	I’m
capable	of	now.	After	what	I	did	back	in	Castrima-under…	I’m	different.”



It’s	 not	 even	 a	 lie.	Without	 really	 thinking	 about	 it,	 you	 reach	 for	 your
missing	 arm,	your	hand	 fumbling	 against	 the	 sleeve	of	your	 jacket.	No	one
can	 see	 the	 stump,	 but	 you’re	 hyperaware	 of	 it	 all	 of	 a	 sudden.	Hoa	 didn’t
think	 much	 of	 the	 way	 Antimony	 left	 visible	 tooth-marks	 on	 Alabaster’s
stumps,	 it	 turns	 out.	 Yours	 is	 smooth,	 rounded,	 nearly	 polished.	 Rusting
perfectionist.



Ykka’s	gaze	follows	that	self-conscious	touch	of	yours;	she	winces.	“Huh.
Yeah,	 I	 guess	you	would	be.”	Her	 jaw	 tenses.	 “Seems	 like	you	 can	 sess	 all
right,	though.”



“Yes.	I	can	help	keep	watch.	I	just	shouldn’t…	do	anything.”



Ykka	shakes	her	head	but	says,	“Fine.	You’ll	take	last	watch	of	the	night,
then.”



It’s	 the	 least	 desirable	 watch	 –	 when	 it’s	 coldest,	 now	 that	 the	 night
temperatures	have	started	to	dip	below	freezing.	Most	people	would	rather	be
asleep	in	warm	bedrolls.	It’s	also	the	most	dangerous	time	of	the	watch,	when
any	attackers	with	sense	will	hit	a	 large	group	like	this	 in	hopes	of	catching
defenders	sleepy	and	sluggish.	You	can’t	decide	whether	this	is	a	sign	of	trust,
or	a	punishment.	Experimentally,	you	say,	“Can	I	have	a	weapon,	at	 least?”
You	haven’t	carried	anything	since	a	few	months	after	you	left	Tirimo,	when
you	traded	away	your	knife	for	dried	rose	hips	to	stave	off	scurvy.



“No.”



For	 rust’s	 sake.	You	 start	 to	 fold	 your	 arms,	 remember	 you	 can’t	when
your	 empty	 sleeve	 twitches,	 and	 grimace	 instead.	 (Ykka	 and	 Esni	 grimace,
too.)	 “What	 am	 I	 supposed	 to	 do,	 then,	 yell	 really	 loud?	Are	 you	 seriously
going	to	put	the	comm	at	risk	because	of	your	grudge	against	me?”



Ykka	rolls	her	eyes.	“For	rust’s	sake.”	It’s	so	much	an	echo	of	your	own
thought	that	you	frown.	“Unbelievable.	You	think	I’m	pissed	about	the	geode,
don’t	you?”



You	can’t	help	looking	at	Esni.	She	stares	at	Ykka	as	if	to	say,	What,	you
aren’t?	It’s	eloquent	enough	for	both	of	you.



Ykka	glares,	then	scrubs	at	her	face	and	lets	out	a	mortal	sigh.	“Esni,	go…
shit,	go	do	something	Strongbackish.	Essie	–	here.	Come	here.	Rusting	walk
with	 me.”	 She	 beckons	 sharply,	 in	 frustration.	 You’re	 too	 confused	 to	 be
offended;	she	turns	to	go	and	you	follow.	Esni	shrugs	and	walks	away.



The	 two	 of	 you	move	 through	 the	 camp	 in	 silence	 for	 a	 few	moments.
Everyone	seems	keenly	aware	of	the	danger	that	the	stone	forest	presents,	so
this	 has	 become	 one	 of	 the	 busier	 rest	 stops	 you’ve	 seen.	 Some	 of	 the
Strongbacks	are	transferring	items	between	the	wagons	so	as	to	put	essentials
onto	those	with	sturdier	wheels,	which	will	be	less	heavily	loaded.	Easier	to
grab	and	run	under	pressure.	The	Hunters	are	whittling	sharpened	poles	from
some	 of	 the	 dead	 saplings	 and	 branches	 near	 the	 camp.	 These	 will	 be
positioned	around	the	perimeter	when	the	comm	finally	sets	up	camp,	so	as	to
funnel	attackers	into	kill	zones.	The	rest	of	the	Strongbacks	are	catching	naps
while	 they	can,	knowing	they’ll	either	be	patrolling	or	made	 to	sleep	on	 the
outer	 edges	 of	 camp	when	 night	 falls.	Use	 strong	 backs	 to	 guard	 them	all,
says	 stonelore.	 Strongbacks	who	 don’t	 like	 being	 human	 shields	 can	 either
find	a	way	to	distinguish	themselves	and	join	another	caste,	or	go	join	another
comm.



Your	 nose	 wrinkles	 as	 you	 pass	 the	 hastily	 dug	 roadside	 ditch	 that	 is
currently	 occupied	 by	 six	 or	 seven	 people,	 with	 a	 few	 of	 the	 younger
Resistants	standing	around	to	do	the	unhappy	duty	of	shoveling	dirt	over	the
results.	Unusually,	there’s	a	brief	line	of	people	waiting	for	their	turn	to	squat.
Not	 surprising	 that	 so	many	 people	 need	 to	 evacuate	 their	 bowels	 at	 once;
here	in	the	looming	shadow	of	the	stone	forest,	everyone’s	on	edge.	Nobody
wants	to	get	caught	with	their	pants	down	after	dark.



You’re	thinking	you	might	need	to	take	a	turn	in	the	ditch	yourself	when
Ykka	 surprises	 you	 out	 of	 this	 scintillating	 rumination.	 “So	 do	 you	 like	 us
yet?”



“What?”



She	gestures	over	the	camp.	The	people	of	the	comm.	“You’ve	been	with
Castrima	for	the	better	part	of	a	year	now.	Got	any	friends?”



You,	you	think,	before	you	can	stop	yourself.	“No,”	you	say.



She	eyes	you	for	a	moment,	and	guiltily	you	wonder	if	she	was	expecting
you	 to	name	her.	Then	she	sighs.	“Started	rolling	Lerna	yet?	No	accounting
for	taste,	I	guess,	but	the	Breeders	say	the	signs	are	all	there.	Me,	when	I	want
a	man,	 I	 pick	one	who	doesn’t	 talk	 so	much.	Women	 are	 a	 surer	 bet.	They
know	not	to	ruin	the	mood.”	She	starts	to	stretch,	grimacing	as	she	works	out
a	 kink	 in	 her	 back.	 You	 use	 the	 time	 to	 get	 control	 of	 the	 horrified
embarrassment	 on	 your	 face.	 The	 rusting	 Breeders	 obviously	 aren’t	 busy
enough.



“No,”	you	say.



“Not	yet?”



You	sigh.	“Not…	yet.”



“The	rust	are	you	waiting	for?	The	road’s	not	getting	any	safer.”



You	glare	at	her.	“I	thought	you	didn’t	care?”



“I	don’t.	But	giving	you	shit	about	it	is	helping	me	make	a	point.”	Ykka’s
leading	you	toward	the	wagons,	or	so	you	think	at	first.	Then	you	move	past
the	wagons,	and	stiffen	in	surprise.



Here,	seated	and	eating,	are	 the	seven	Rennanese	prisoners.	Even	sitting
they’re	 different	 from	 the	 people	 of	Castrima	 –	 all	 of	 the	Rennanese	 being
pure	Sanzed	or	close	enough	not	to	matter,	bigger	than	average	even	for	that
race,	 with	 fully	 grown	 ashblow	 manes	 or	 shorn-sided	 braids	 or	 short
bottlebrushes	 to	 heighten	 the	 effect.	Their	 prangers	 have	been	put	 aside	 for
the	moment	–	though	the	chains	linking	each	prisoner	to	their	set	are	still	in
place	–	and	there	are	a	few	Strongbacks	standing	guard	nearby.



You’re	surprised	that	they’re	eating,	since	you	haven’t	made	full	camp	for
the	night	yet.	The	Strongbacks	on	guard	are	eating,	too,	but	that	only	makes
sense;	 they’ve	got	a	 long	night	ahead	of	 them.	The	Rennies	 look	up	as	you
and	 Ykka	 approach,	 and	 that	 makes	 you	 stop	 in	 your	 tracks,	 because	 you
recognize	 one	 of	 the	 prisoners.	 Danel,	 the	 general	 of	 the	 Rennanis	 army.
She’s	 healthy	 and	whole,	 apart	 from	 red	marks	 around	 her	 neck	 and	wrists
from	the	pranger.	The	last	time	you	saw	her	up	close,	she	was	summoning	a
shirtless	Guardian	to	kill	you.



She	 recognizes	 you,	 too,	 and	 her	 mouth	 flattens	 into	 a	 resigned,	 ironic
line.	Then,	very	deliberately,	she	nods	to	you	before	turning	back	to	her	bowl.



Ykka	hunkers	down	to	a	crouch	beside	Danel,	to	your	surprise.	“So,	how’s
the	food?”



Danel	shrugs,	still	eating.	“Better	than	starving.”



“It’s	good,”	says	another	prisoner,	across	the	ring.	He	shrugs	when	one	of
the	others	glares	at	him.	“Well,	it	is.”



“They	 just	want	us	 to	be	 able	 to	haul	 their	wagons,”	 says	 the	man	who
glared.



“Yeah,”	Ykka	interrupts.	“That’s	precisely	right.	Strongbacks	in	Castrima
get	a	comm	share	and	a	bed,	when	we	have	one	to	give,	in	exchange	for	their
contribution.	What’d	you	get	from	Rennanis?”



“Some	rusting	pride,	maybe,”	says	the	glarer,	glaring	harder.



“Shut	up,	Phauld,”	says	Danel.



“These	mongrels	think	they	—”



Danel	sets	her	bowl	of	food	down.	The	glarer	 immediately	shuts	up	and
tenses,	his	eyes	going	a	little	wide.	After	a	moment,	Danel	picks	up	her	bowl
and	resumes	eating.	Her	expression	hasn’t	changed	the	whole	time.	You	find
yourself	suspecting	that	she’s	raised	children.



Ykka,	elbow	propped	on	one	knee,	rests	her	chin	on	her	fist	and	watches
Phauld	 for	 a	moment.	To	Danel,	 she	 says,	 “So	what	do	you	want	me	 to	do
about	that	one?”



Phauld	immediately	frowns.	“What?”



Danel	 shrugs.	 Her	 bowl’s	 empty	 now,	 but	 she	 runs	 a	 finger	 around	 its
curve	to	sweep	up	the	last	sauce.	“Not	for	me	to	say	anymore.”



“Doesn’t	 seem	very	 bright.”	Ykka	 purses	 her	 lips,	 considering	 the	man.
“Not	bad-looking,	but	harder	to	breed	for	brains	than	looks.”



Danel	says	nothing	for	a	moment,	while	Phauld	 looks	from	her	 to	Ykka
and	back	in	growing	incredulity.	Then,	with	a	heavy	sigh,	Danel	looks	up	at
Phauld,	too.	“What	do	you	want	me	to	say?	I’m	not	his	commander	anymore.
Never	wanted	to	be	in	the	first	place;	I	got	drafted.	Now	I	don’t	rusting	care.”



“I	can’t	believe	you,”	Phauld	says.	His	voice	is	too	loud,	rising	in	panic.
“I	fought	for	you.”



“And	 lost.”	Danel	shakes	her	head.	“Now	it’s	about	surviving,	adapting.
Forget	all	that	crap	you	heard	back	in	Rennanis	about	Sanzeds	and	mongrels;
that	 was	 just	 propaganda	 to	 unite	 the	 comm.	 Things	 are	 different	 now.
‘Necessity	is	the	only	law.’”



“Don’t	you	rusting	quote	stonelore	at	me!”



“She’s	quoting	stonelore	because	you	don’t	get	it,”	snaps	the	other	man	–
the	one	who	liked	the	food.	“They’re	feeding	us.	They’re	letting	us	be	useful.
It’s	 a	 test,	 you	 stupid	 shit.	 To	 see	 if	 we’re	 willing	 to	 earn	 a	 place	 in	 this
comm!”



“This	comm?”	Phauld	gestures	around	at	 the	camp.	His	laugh	echoes	off
the	rock	faces.	People	 look	around,	 trying	 to	figure	out	 if	 the	yelling	means
there’s	some	kind	of	problem.	“Do	you	hear	yourself?	These	people	haven’t
got	 a	 chance.	 They	 should	 be	 finding	 somewhere	 to	 bunker	 down,	 maybe
rebuild	one	of	the	comms	we	razed	along	the	way.	Instead	—”



Ykka	moves	with	a	casualness	that	doesn’t	deceive	you.	Everyone	could
see	 this	 coming,	 including	 Phauld,	 but	 he’s	 too	 stubborn	 to	 acknowledge
reality.	 She	 stands	 up	 and	 unnecessarily	 brushes	 ash	 off	 her	 shoulders	 and
steps	across	the	circle	and	then	puts	a	hand	on	the	crown	of	Phauld’s	head.	He
tries	to	twitch	back,	swatting	at	her.	“Don’t	rusting	touch	—”



But	then	he	stops.	His	eyes	glaze	over.	Ykka’s	done	that	thing	to	him	–	the
thing	 she	 did	 to	 Cutter	 back	 in	 Castrima-under	when	 people	were	working
themselves	into	an	orogene-lynching	mob.	Because	you	knew	it	was	coming
this	time,	you’re	able	to	get	a	better	handle	on	how	she	does	the	strange	pulse.
It’s	definitely	magic,	some	kind	of	manipulation	of	the	thin,	silvery	filaments
that	 dance	 and	 flicker	 between	 the	 motes	 of	 a	 person’s	 substance.	 Ykka’s
pulse	cuts	through	the	knot	of	threads	at	the	base	of	Phauld’s	brain,	just	above
the	 sessapinae.	 Everything’s	 still	 intact	 physically,	 but	 magically	 it’s	 as	 if
she’s	chopped	his	head	off.



He	sags	backward,	and	Ykka	steps	aside	to	let	him	flop	bonelessly	to	the
ground.



One	 of	 the	 other	 Rennanis	 women	 gasps	 and	 scoots	 back,	 her	 chains
jangling.	 The	 guards	 glance	 at	 each	 other,	 uncomfortably,	 but	 they’re	 not
surprised;	 word	 of	 what	 Ykka	 did	 to	 Cutter	 spread	 through	 the	 comm
afterward.	A	Rennanese	man	who	hasn’t	spoken	before	utters	a	swift	oath	in
one	of	the	Coaster	creole	languages;	it’s	not	Eturpic	so	you	don’t	understand
it,	but	his	fear	is	clear	enough.	Danel	only	sighs.



Ykka	 sighs,	 too,	 looking	 at	 the	 dead	 man.	 Then	 she	 eyes	 Danel.	 “I’m
sorry.”



Danel	smiles	thinly.	“We	tried.	And	you	said	it	yourself:	He	wasn’t	very
bright.”



Ykka	 nods.	 For	 some	 reason	 she	 glances	 up	 at	 you	 for	 a	moment.	You
have	 no	 idea	 what	 lesson	 you’re	 supposed	 to	 take	 from	 this.	 “Unlock	 the
manacles,”	she	says.	You’re	confused	for	an	instant	before	you	realize	it’s	an
order	for	the	guards.	One	of	them	moves	over	to	speak	to	the	other,	and	they
start	sorting	through	a	ring	of	keys.	Then	Ykka	looks	disgusted	with	herself	as
she	says	heavily,	“Who’s	on	quartermaster	duty	today?	Memsid?	Tell	him	and
some	of	the	other	Resistants	to	come	handle	this.”	She	jerks	her	head	toward
Phauld.



Everyone	 goes	 still.	 No	 one	 protests,	 though.	 The	 Hunters	 have	 been
finding	more	 game	 and	 forage,	 but	Castrima	 has	 a	 lot	 of	 people	who	 need
more	 protein	 than	 they’ve	 been	 getting,	 and	 the	 desert	 is	 coming.	 It	 was
always	going	to	come	to	this.



After	 a	 moment	 of	 silence,	 though,	 you	 step	 over	 to	 Ykka.	 “You	 sure
about	this?”	you	ask	softly.	One	of	the	guards	comes	over	to	unlock	Danel’s
ankle	 chains.	 Danel,	 who	 tried	 to	 kill	 every	 living	 member	 of	 Castrima.
Danel,	who	tried	to	kill	you.



“Why	wouldn’t	 I	 be?”	Ykka	 shrugs.	 Her	 voice	 is	 loud	 enough	 that	 the
prisoners	 can	 hear	 her.	 “We’ve	 been	 short	 on	 Strongbacks	 since	 Rennanis
attacked.	Now	we’ve	got	six	replacements.”



“Replacements	 who’ll	 stab	 us	 –	 or	 maybe	 just	 you	 –	 in	 the	 back	 first
chance!”



“If	 I	don’t	see	 them	coming	and	kill	 them	first,	yeah.	But	 that	would	be
pretty	stupid	of	them,	and	I	killed	the	stupidest	one	for	a	reason.”	You	get	the
sense	 that	Ykka’s	not	 trying	 to	scare	 the	Rennanis	people.	She’s	 just	stating
facts.	“See,	this	is	what	I	keep	trying	to	tell	you,	Essie:	The	world	isn’t	friends
and	enemies.	It’s	people	who	might	help	you,	and	people	who’ll	get	in	your
way.	Kill	this	lot	and	what	do	you	get?”



“Safety.”	



“Lots	 of	 ways	 to	 be	 safe.	 Yeah,	 there’s	 now	 a	 bigger	 chance	 I’ll	 get
shanked	in	the	night.	More	safety	for	the	comm,	though.	And	the	stronger	the
comm	is,	 the	better	 the	chance	we’ll	all	get	 to	Rennanis	alive.”	She	shrugs,
then	glances	around	at	the	stone	forest.	“Whoever	built	this	is	one	of	us,	with
real	skill.	We’re	going	to	need	that.”



“What,	 now	 you	 want	 to	 adopt…”	 You	 shake	 your	 head,	 incredulous.
“Violent	bandit	ferals?”



But	then	you	stop.	Because	once	upon	a	time,	you	loved	a	violent	pirate
feral.



Ykka	 watches	 while	 you	 remember	 Innon	 and	mourn	 him	 anew.	 Then,
with	remarkable	gentleness,	she	says,	“I	play	a	longer	game	than	just	making
it	to	the	next	day,	Essie.	Maybe	you	ought	to	try	it	for	a	change.”



You	 look	 away,	 feeling	oddly	defensive.	The	 luxury	of	 thinking	beyond
the	next	day	 isn’t	something	you’ve	ever	had	much	of	a	chance	 to	 try.	“I’m
not	a	headwoman.	I’m	just	a	rogga.”



Ykka	 tilts	 her	 head	 in	 ironic	 acknowledgment.	You	don’t	 use	 that	word
nearly	as	often	as	she	does.	When	she	says	it,	it’s	pride.	When	you	use	it,	it’s
assault.



“Well,	I’m	both,”	Ykka	says.	“A	headwoman,	and	a	rogga.	I	choose	to	be
both,	and	more.”	She	steps	past	you,	and	throws	her	next	words	at	you	over
her	 shoulder,	 as	 if	 they’re	 meaningless.	 “You	 didn’t	 think	 about	 any	 of	 us
while	you	were	using	those	obelisks,	did	you?	You	thought	about	destroying
your	 enemies.	 You	 thought	 about	 surviving	 –	 but	 you	 couldn’t	 get	 beyond
that.	That’s	why	I’ve	been	so	pissed	at	you,	Essie.	Months	in	my	comm,	and
still	all	you	are	is	‘just	a	rogga.’”



She	walks	 off	 then,	 yelling	 to	 everyone	 in	 earshot	 that	 the	 rest	 break	 is
over.	 You	 watch	 until	 she	 vanishes	 amid	 the	 stretching,	 grumbling	 crowd,
then	you	glance	over	at	Danel,	who’s	 since	 stood	up	and	 is	 rubbing	 the	 red
mark	on	one	of	her	wrists.	There’s	a	carefully	neutral	 look	on	 the	woman’s
face	as	she	watches	you.



“She	dies,	you	die,”	you	say.	 If	Ykka	won’t	 look	after	herself,	you’ll	do
what	you	can	for	her.



Danel	 lets	out	a	brief,	 amused	breath.	“That’s	 true	whether	you	 threaten
me	or	not.	Not	like	anybody	else	here	would	give	me	a	chance.”	She	throws
you	a	skeptical	look,	all	her	Sanzed	pride	completely	intact	despite	the	change
in	circumstances.	“You	really	aren’t	very	good	at	this,	are	you?”



Earthfires	 and	 rustbuckets.	 You	 walk	 away,	 because	 if	 Ykka	 already
thinks	less	of	you	for	destroying	all	threats,	she’s	really	not	going	to	like	it	if
you	start	killing	people	who	annoy	you,	for	sheer	pique.

***
2562:	Niner	shake	in	Western	Coastals,	epicenter	somewhere	in	Baga
Quartent.	Lorist	accounts	from	the	time	note	that	the	shake	“turned	the
ground	to	liquid.”	(Poetic?)	One	fishing	village	survived	intact.	From
a	villager’s	written	account:	“Bastard	roggye	killed	lah	shake	then	we
killed	hym.”	Report	filed	at	the	Fulcrum	(shared	with	permission)	by
Imperial	Orogene	who	later	visited	the	area	notes	also	that	an
underwater	oil	reservoir	off	the	coast	could	have	been	breached	by	the
shake,	but	the	unregistered	rogga	in	the	village	prevented	this.	Would
have	poisoned	water	and	beaches	for	miles	down	the	coast.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



4
Nassun,	wandering	in	the	wilderness

Schaffa	is	kind	enough	to	guide	the	other	eight	children	of	Found	Moon	out
of	Jekity	along	with	Nassun	and	himself.	He	tells	the	headwoman	that	they’re
all	 going	 on	 a	 training	 trip	 some	 miles	 away	 so	 that	 the	 comm	 won’t	 be
disturbed	by	additional	seismics.	Since	Nassun	has	just	returned	the	sapphire
to	 the	sky	–	 loudly,	 thanks	 to	 the	 thunderclap	of	displaced	air;	dramatically,
because	suddenly	there	it	was	overhead,	huge	and	deep	blue	and	too	close	–
the	 headwoman	 just	 about	 falls	 over	 herself	 to	 provide	 the	 children	 with
runny-sacks	 containing	 travel	 food	 and	 supplies	 so	 they	 can	 hurry	 on	 their
way.	 These	 aren’t	 the	 kinds	 of	 top-notch	 supplies	 one	 needs	 for	 a	 long
journey.	No	compasses,	only	moderately	good	boots,	the	kinds	of	rations	that
won’t	 last	 more	 than	 a	 couple	 of	 weeks	 before	 going	 bad.	 Still,	 it’s	 much
better	than	leaving	empty-handed.



None	 of	 the	 people	 of	 the	 comm	 know	 that	Umber	 and	Nida	 are	 dead.
Schaffa	 carried	 their	 bodies	 into	 the	Guardians’	 dorm	 and	 laid	 them	out	 on
their	 respective	 beds,	 arranged	 in	 dignified	 poses.	 This	 worked	 better	 for
Nida,	 who	 looked	 more	 or	 less	 intact	 but	 for	 the	 nape	 of	 her	 neck,	 than
Umber,	whose	head	was	a	ruin.	Schaffa	then	threw	dirt	over	the	bloodstains.
Jekity	will	 figure	 it	out	eventually,	but	by	 that	 time,	Found	Moon’s	children
will	be	out	of	reach,	if	not	safe.



Jija,	Schaffa	left	piled	where	Nassun	felled	him.	The	corpse	is	nothing	but
a	pile	of	pretty	rocks,	really,	until	one	looks	closely	at	some	of	the	pieces.



The	children	are	subdued	as	they	leave	the	comm	that	has	sheltered	them,
in	some	cases	for	years.	They	leave	via	the	rogga	steps,	as	they	have	come	to
be	 informally	 (and	 rudely)	 called	 –	 the	 series	 of	 basalt	 columns	 on	 the
comm’s	 north	 side	 that	 only	 orogenes	 can	 traverse.	 Wudeh’s	 orogeny	 is
steadier	 than	Nassun	has	ever	sessed	it	when	he	takes	them	down	to	ground
level	by	pushing	one	of	 the	pieces	of	 columnar	basalt	back	 into	 the	ancient
volcano.	Still,	 she	can	see	 the	 look	of	despair	on	his	 face,	and	 it	makes	her
ache	inside.



They	walk	westward	as	a	group,	but	before	 they’ve	gone	a	mile,	one	or
two	of	 the	children	are	quietly	weeping.	Nassun,	whose	eyes	have	remained
dry	even	through	stray	thoughts	like	I	killed	my	father	and	Daddy,	I	miss	you,
grieves	with	them.	It’s	cruel	that	they	must	suffer	this,	being	ashed	out	during
a	Season,	because	of	what	she	has	done.	(Because	of	what	Jija	tried	to	do,	she
tries	to	tell	herself,	but	she	does	not	believe	this.)	Yet	it	would	be	crueler	still
to	leave	them	in	Jekity,	where	the	commfolk	will	eventually	realize	what	has
happened	and	turn	on	the	children.



Oegin	and	Ynegen,	the	twins,	are	the	only	ones	who	look	at	Nassun	with
anything	resembling	understanding.	They	were	the	first	to	come	outside	after
Nassun	 snatched	 the	 sapphire	 out	 of	 the	 sky.	While	 the	 others	 mostly	 saw
Schaffa	fight	Umber,	and	Steel	kill	Nida,	those	two	saw	what	Jija	tried	to	do
to	Nassun.	They	understand	that	Nassun	fought	back	as	anyone	would	have.
Everyone,	though,	remembers	that	she	killed	Eitz.	Some	have	since	forgiven
her	for	that,	as	Schaffa	predicted	–	especially	shy,	scarred	Peek,	who	privately
spoke	to	Nassun	of	what	she	did	to	the	grandmother	who	stabbed	her	in	the
face	so	long	ago.	Orogene	children	learn	early	what	it	means	to	regret.



That	doesn’t	mean	 they	don’t	 still	 fear	Nassun,	 though,	and	 fear	 lends	a
clarity	that	cuts	right	through	childish	rationalizations.	They	are	not	killers	at
heart,	after	all…	and	Nassun	is.



(She	does	not	want	to	be,	any	more	than	you	do.)



Now	the	group	stands	at	a	 literal	crossroads,	where	a	 local	 trail	 running
northeast	to	southeast	meets	the	more	westerly	Jekity-Tevamis	Imperial	Road.
Schaffa	 says	 the	 Imperial	Road	will	 eventually	 lead	 to	a	highroad,	which	 is
something	 Nassun	 has	 heard	 of	 but	 never	 seen	 in	 all	 her	 travels.	 The
crossroads,	 however,	 is	 the	 place	 where	 Schaffa	 has	 chosen	 to	 inform	 the
other	children	that	they	can	follow	him	no	longer.



Shirk	is	the	only	one	who	protests	this.	“We	won’t	eat	much,”	she	says	to
Schaffa,	a	little	desperately.	“You…	you	don’t	have	to	feed	us.	You	could	just
let	us	follow	you.	We’ll	find	our	own	food.	I	know	how!”



“Nassun	 and	 I	 will	 likely	 be	 pursued,”	 Schaffa	 says.	 His	 voice	 is
unfailingly	gentle.	Nassun	knows	that	this	delivery	actually	makes	the	words
worse;	his	gentleness	makes	it	easy	to	see	that	Schaffa	truly	cares.	Farewells
are	easier	when	they	are	cruel.	“We	will	also	be	making	a	long	journey	that’s
very	dangerous.	You’re	safer	on	your	own.”



“Safer	 commless,”	 Wudeh	 says,	 and	 laughs.	 It’s	 the	 most	 bitter	 sound
Nassun	has	ever	heard	him	utter.



Shirk	has	started	to	cry.	The	tears	leave	streaks	of	startling	cleanliness	in
the	ash	that’s	beginning	to	gray	her	face.	“I	don’t	understand.	You	took	care
of	us.	You	like	us,	Schaffa,	more	than	even	Nida	and	Umber	did!	Why	would
you…	if	you	were	just	going	to	–	to…”



“Stop	 it,”	 says	 Lashar.	 She’s	 gotten	 taller	 in	 the	 past	 year,	 like	 a	 good
well-bred	Sanzed	girl.	While	most	 of	her	my-grandfather-was-an-Equatorial
arrogance	has	faded	with	time,	she	still	defaults	to	hauteur	when	she’s	upset
about	something.	She’s	folded	her	arms	and	is	looking	away	from	the	trail,	off
at	 a	 group	 of	 bare	 foothills	 in	 the	 near	 distance.	 “Have	 some	 rusting	 pride.
We’ve	been	ashed,	but	we’re	still	alive	and	that’s	what	matters.	We	can	take
shelter	in	those	hills	for	the	night.”



Shirk	 glares	 at	 her.	 “There	 isn’t	 any	 shelter!	 We’re	 going	 to	 starve	 to
death,	or	—”



“We	won’t.”	Deshati,	who’s	been	looking	at	 the	ground	while	she	scuffs
the	still-thin	ash	with	one	foot,	looks	up	suddenly.	She’s	watching	Schaffa	as
she	 speaks	 to	 Shirk	 and	 the	 others.	 “There	 are	 places	we	 can	 live.	We	 just
have	to	get	them	to	open	the	gates.”



There’s	a	tight,	determined	look	on	her	face.	Schaffa	turns	a	sharp	gaze	on
Deshati,	and	to	her	credit,	she	does	not	flinch.	“You	mean	to	force	your	way
in?”	he	asks	her.



“That’s	what	you	want	us	to	do,	isn’t	it?	You	wouldn’t	be	sending	us	away
if	 you	weren’t	 okay	with	 us…	doing	what	we	 have	 to.”	 She	 tries	 to	 shrug.
She’s	too	tense	for	such	a	casual	gesture;	it	makes	her	look	briefly	twitchy,	as
if	with	a	palsy.	“We	wouldn’t	still	be	alive	if	you	weren’t	okay	with	that.”



Nassun	looks	at	the	ground.	It’s	her	fault	that	the	other	children’s	choices
have	been	whittled	down	 to	 this.	There	was	beauty	 in	Found	Moon;	among
her	fellow	children,	Nassun	has	known	the	delight	of	reveling	in	what	she	is
and	what	 she	can	do,	 among	people	who	understand	and	 share	 that	delight.
Now	something	once	wholesome	and	good	is	dead.



You’ll	 kill	 everything	 you	 love,	 eventually,	 Steel	 has	 told	 her.	 She	 hates
that	he	is	right.



Schaffa	 regards	 the	 children	 for	 a	 long,	 thoughtful	moment.	His	 fingers
twitch,	perhaps	remembering	another	life	and	another	self	who	could	not	have
endured	 the	 idea	of	unleashing	eight	young	Misalems	upon	 the	world.	That
version	of	Schaffa,	however,	is	dead.	The	twitch	is	only	reflexive.



“Yes,”	he	says.	“That	is	what	I	want	you	to	do,	if	you	need	to	hear	it	said
aloud.	You	 have	 a	 better	 chance	 in	 a	 large,	 thriving	 comm	 than	 you	 do	 on
your	 own.	 So	 allow	me	 to	 make	 a	 suggestion.”	 Schaffa	 steps	 forward	 and
crouches	 to	 look	 Deshati	 in	 the	 eye,	 reaching	 out	 also	 to	 grip	 Shirk’s	 thin
shoulder.	He	says	to	all	of	them,	with	that	same	gentle	intensity	that	he	used
before,	 “Kill	 only	 one,	 initially.	 Pick	 someone	who	 tries	 to	 harm	you	–	 but
only	one,	even	if	more	than	one	tries.	Disable	the	others,	but	take	your	time
killing	 that	 one	 person.	 Make	 it	 painful.	 Make	 sure	 your	 target	 screams.
That’s	important.	If	the	first	one	that	you	kill	remains	silent…	kill	another.”



They	stare	back	at	him.	Even	Lashar	seems	nonplussed.	Nassun,	however,
has	seen	Schaffa	kill.	He	has	given	up	some	of	who	he	was,	but	what	remains
is	still	an	artist	of	terror.	If	he	has	seen	fit	 to	share	the	secrets	of	his	artistry
with	them,	they’re	lucky.	She	hopes	they	appreciate	it.



He	goes	on.	“When	the	killing	is	done,	make	it	clear	to	those	present	that
you	acted	only	in	self-defense.	Then	offer	to	work	in	the	dead	person’s	place,
or	to	protect	the	rest	from	danger	–	but	they’ll	recognize	the	ultimatum.	They
must	accept	you	into	the	comm.”	He	pauses,	then	fixes	his	icewhite	gaze	on
Deshati.	“If	they	refuse,	what	do	you	do?”



She	swallows.	“K-kill	them	all.”



He	smiles	again,	for	the	first	time	since	leaving	Jekity,	and	cups	the	back
of	her	head	in	fond	approval.



Shirk	 gasps	 a	 little,	 shocked	 out	 of	 tears.	Oegin	 and	Ynegen	 hold	 each
other,	 their	 expressions	 empty	 of	 anything	 but	 despair.	 Lashar’s	 jaw	 has
tightened,	 her	 nostrils	 flaring.	 She	means	 to	 take	 Schaffa’s	 words	 to	 heart.
Deshati	does,	too,	Nassun	can	tell…	but	it	will	kill	something	in	Deshati	to	do
so.



Schaffa	knows	this.	When	he	stands	to	kiss	Deshati’s	forehead,	there	is	so
much	 sorrow	 in	 the	 gesture	 that	 Nassun	 aches	 afresh.	 “‘All	 things	 change
during	a	Season,’”	he	says.	“Live.	I	want	you	to	live.”



A	tear	spills	from	one	of	Deshati’s	eyes	before	she	can	blink	it	away.	She
swallows	audibly.	But	then	she	nods	and	steps	away	from	him,	and	backs	up
to	 stand	 with	 the	 others.	 There’s	 a	 gulf	 between	 them	 now:	 Schaffa	 and
Nassun	 on	 one	 side,	 Found	Moon’s	 children	 on	 the	 other.	 The	 ways	 have
parted.	 Schaffa	 does	 not	 show	 discomfort	 with	 this.	 He	 should;	 Nassun
notices	that	the	silver	is	alive	and	throbbing	within	him,	protesting	his	choice
to	allow	these	children	to	go	free.	He	does	not	show	the	pain,	though.	When
he’s	doing	what	he	feels	is	right,	pain	only	strengthens	him.



He	stands.	“And	should	the	Season	ever	show	real	signs	of	abating…	flee.
Scatter	 and	blend	 in	 elsewhere	as	best	you	can.	The	Guardians	aren’t	dead,
little	 ones.	 They	will	 return.	And	 once	word	 spreads	 of	what	 you’ve	 done,
they’ll	come	for	you.”



The	regular	Guardians,	Nassun	knows	he	means	–	the	“uncontaminated”
ones,	like	he	used	to	be.	Those	Guardians	have	been	missing	since	the	start	of
the	 Season,	 or	 at	 least	Nassun	 hasn’t	 heard	 of	 any	 joining	 comms	or	 being
seen	 on	 the	 road.	 Return	 suggests	 they’ve	 all	 gone	 somewhere	 specific.
Where?	Somewhere	that	Schaffa	and	the	other	contaminated	ones	did	not	or
could	not	go.



But	what	matters	is	that	this	Guardian,	however	contaminated,	is	helping
them.	Nassun	feels	a	sudden	surge	of	irrational	hope.	Surely	Schaffa’s	advice
will	 keep	 them	 safe,	 somehow.	 So	 she	 swallows	 and	 adds,	 “All	 of	 you	 are
really	good	at	orogeny.	Maybe	the	comm	you	pick…	maybe	they’ll…”



She	trails	off,	unsure	of	what	she	wants	to	say.	Maybe	they’ll	like	you,	 is
what	she’s	thinking,	but	that	just	seems	foolish.	Or	maybe	you	can	be	useful,
but	 that’s	 not	 how	 it	 used	 to	work.	 Comms	 used	 to	 hire	 Fulcrum	 orogenes
only	for	brief	periods,	or	so	Schaffa	has	told	her,	to	do	needed	work	and	then
leave.	 Even	 comms	 near	 hot	 spots	 and	 fault	 lines	 hadn’t	 wanted	 orogenes
around	permanently,	no	matter	how	much	they’d	needed	them.



Before	 Nassun	 can	 think	 of	 a	 way	 to	 grope	 out	 the	 words,	 however,
Wudeh	glares	at	her.	“Shut	up.”



Nassun	blinks.	“What?”



Peek	hisses	at	Wudeh,	trying	to	shush	him,	but	he	ignores	her.	“Shut	up.	I
rusting	hate	you.	Nida	used	to	sing	to	me.”	Then,	without	warning,	he	bursts
into	 sobs.	 Peek	 looks	 confused,	 but	 some	 of	 the	 others	 surround	 him,
murmuring	and	patting	comfort	into	him.



Lashar	watches	this,	then	throws	a	last	reproachful	look	at	Nassun	before
saying,	 to	Schaffa,	“We’ll	be	on	our	way,	 then.	Thank	you,	Guardian,	 for…
for	what	it’s	worth.”



She	 turns	 and	 begins	 herding	 them	 away.	 Deshati	 walks	 with	 her	 head
down,	 not	 looking	back.	Ynegen	 lingers	 for	 a	moment	 between	 the	 groups,
then	glances	at	Nassun	and	whispers,	“Sorry.”	Then	she,	too,	leaves,	hurrying
to	catch	up	with	the	others.



As	soon	as	 the	children	are	completely	out	of	sight,	Schaffa	puts	a	hand
on	Nassun’s	shoulder	to	steer	her	away,	westward	along	the	Imperial	Road.



After	several	miles	of	silence,	she	says,	“Do	you	still	think	it	would	have
been	better	to	kill	them?”



“Yes.”	He	glances	at	her.	“And	you	know	that	as	well	as	I	do.”



Nassun	 sets	 her	 jaw.	 “I	 know.”	 All	 the	 more	 reason	 to	 stop	 this.	 Stop
everything.



“You	have	a	destination	in	mind,”	Schaffa	says.	It’s	not	a	question.



“Yes.	I…	Schaffa,	I	have	to	go	to	the	other	side	of	the	world.”	This	feels
rather	like	saying	I	need	to	go	to	a	star,	but	since	that’s	not	too	far	off	from
what	she	actually	needs	to	do,	she	decides	not	to	feel	self-conscious	about	this
smaller	absurdity.



To	 her	 surprise,	 however,	 he	 tilts	 his	 head	 instead	 of	 laughing.	 “To
Corepoint?”



“What?”



“A	city	on	the	other	side	of	the	world.	There?”



She	swallows,	bites	her	lip.	“I	don’t	know.	I	just	know	that	what	I	need	is
—”	She	doesn’t	have	the	words	for	it,	and	instead	makes	a	pantomime	with
her	cupped	hands	and	waggling	fingers,	sending	imaginary	wavelets	to	clash
and	 mesh	 with	 each	 other.	 “The	 obelisks…	 pull	 on	 that	 place.	 It’s	 what
they’re	made	to	do.	If	I	go	there,	I	think	I	might	be	able	to,	uh,	pull	back?	I
can’t	 do	 it	 anywhere	 else,	 because…”	 She	 can’t	 explain	 it.	 Lines	 of	 force,
lines	 of	 sight,	 mathematical	 configurations;	 all	 of	 the	 knowledge	 that	 she
needs	is	in	her	mind,	but	cannot	be	reproduced	by	her	tongue.	Some	of	this	is
a	gift	from	the	sapphire,	and	some	is	application	of	theories	her	mother	taught
her,	 and	 some	 is	 simply	 from	 tying	 theory	 to	observation	 and	wrapping	 the
whole	thing	in	instinct.	“I	don’t	know	which	city	over	there	is	the	right	one.	If
I	get	closer,	and	travel	around	a	little,	maybe	I	can	—”



“Corepoint	is	the	only	thing	on	that	side	of	the	world,	little	one.”



“It’s…	what?”



Schaffa	 stops	 abruptly,	 tugging	 off	 his	 pack.	 Nassun	 does	 the	 same,
reading	 this	 as	 a	 signal	 that	 it’s	 time	 for	 a	 rest	 stop.	 They’re	 just	 on	 the
leeward	 side	of	a	hill,	which	 is	 really	 just	 a	 spar	of	old	 lava	 from	 the	great
volcano	that	lies	beneath	Jekity.	There	are	natural	terraces	all	around	this	area,
weathered	out	of	the	obsidian	by	wind	and	rain,	though	the	rock	a	few	inches
down	is	 too	hard	for	farming	or	even	much	in	 the	way	of	forestation.	Some
determined,	 shallow-rooted	 trees	wave	 over	 the	 empty,	 ash-frosted	 terraces,
but	most	are	now	being	killed	by	the	ashfall.	Nassun	and	Schaffa	will	be	able
to	see	potential	threats	coming	from	a	good	ways	off.



While	 Nassun	 pulls	 out	 some	 food	 they	 can	 share,	 Schaffa	 draws
something	in	a	nearby	patch	of	windblown	ash	with	his	finger.	Nassun	cranes
her	neck	to	see	that	he’s	made	two	circles	on	the	ground.	In	one,	he	sketches	a
rough	 outline	 of	 the	 Stillness	 that	 is	 familiar	 to	 Nassun	 from	 geography
lessons	back	in	creche	–	except	this	time,	he	draws	the	Stillness	in	two	pieces,
with	a	line	of	separation	near	the	equator.	The	Rifting,	yes,	which	has	become
a	boundary	more	impassable	than	even	thousands	of	miles	of	ocean.



The	 other	 circle,	 however,	 which	 Nassun	 now	 understands	 to	 be	 a
representation	of	the	world,	he	leaves	blank	save	for	a	single	spot	just	above
the	equator	and	slightly	to	the	east	of	the	circle’s	middle	longitude.	He	doesn’t
sketch	an	island	or	continent	to	put	it	on.	Just	that	lone	dot.



“Once,	 there	were	more	cities	on	 the	empty	 face	of	 the	world,”	Schaffa
explains.	 “A	 few	 civilizations	 have	 built	 upon	 or	 under	 the	 sea,	 over	 the
millennia.	None	of	those	lasted	long,	though.	All	that	remains	is	Corepoint.”



It	is	literally	a	world	away.	“How	could	we	get	there?”



“If	—”	He	pauses.	Nassun’s	belly	clenches	when	the	blurry	look	crosses
his	face.	This	time	he	winces	and	shuts	his	eyes,	too,	as	if	even	the	attempt	to
access	his	old	self	has	added	to	his	pain.



“You	don’t	remember?”



He	sighs.	“I	remember	that	I	used	to.”



Nassun	 realizes	 she	 should	 have	 expected	 this.	 She	 bites	 her	 lip.	 “Steel
might	know.”



There	is	a	slight	flex	of	muscle	along	Schaffa’s	jaw,	quick	and	there	and
then	gone.	“Indeed	he	might.”



Steel,	who	vanished	while	Schaffa	was	putting	away	the	other	Guardians’
bodies,	might	also	be	listening	from	within	the	stone	somewhere	nearby.	Does
it	 mean	 something	 that	 he	 hasn’t	 popped	 up	 to	 tell	 them	 what	 to	 do	 yet?
Maybe	they	don’t	need	him.	“And	what	about	the	Antarctic	Fulcrum?	Don’t
they	have	 records	and	 things?”	She	 remembers	seeing	 the	Fulcrum’s	 library
before	 she	 and	 Schaffa	 and	Umber	 sat	 down	with	 its	 leaders,	 had	 a	 cup	 of
safe,	then	killed	them	all.	The	library	was	a	strange	high	room	filled	floor	to
ceiling	 with	 shelves	 of	 books.	 Nassun	 likes	 books	 –	 her	 mother	 used	 to
splurge	and	buy	one	every	few	months,	and	sometimes	Nassun	got	the	hand-
me-downs	if	Jija	deemed	them	appropriate	for	children	–	and	she	remembers
boggling	in	awe,	for	she’d	never	seen	so	many	books	in	her	life.	Surely	some
of	those	contained	information	about…	very	old	cities	no	one	has	ever	heard
of,	that	only	Guardians	know	how	to	get	to.	Um.	Hmm.



“Unlikely,”	Schaffa	says,	confirming	Nassun’s	misgivings.	“And	by	now,
that	Fulcrum	has	probably	been	annexed	by	another	comm,	or	perhaps	even
taken	over	by	commless	rabble.	Its	fields	were	full	of	edible	crops,	after	all,
and	its	houses	were	livable.	Returning	there	would	be	a	mistake.”



Nassun	 bites	 her	 lower	 lip.	 “Maybe…	 a	 boat?”	 She	 doesn’t	 know
anything	about	boats.



“No,	little	one.	A	boat	won’t	do	for	such	a	long	journey.”



He	 pauses	 significantly,	 and	with	 this	 as	warning	Nassun	 tries	 to	 brace
herself.	 Here	 is	 where	 he	 will	 abandon	 her,	 she	 feels	 painfully,	 fearfully
certain.	Here	is	where	he	will	want	to	know	what	she’s	up	to	–	and	then	want
no	part	of	it.	Why	would	he?	Even	she	knows	that	what	she	wants	is	a	terrible
thing.



“I	 take	 it,	 then,”	Schaffa	 says,	 “that	 you	mean	 to	 assume	 control	 of	 the
Obelisk	Gate.”



Nassun	 gasps.	 Schaffa	 knows	 what	 the	 Obelisk	 Gate	 is?	When	 Nassun
herself	only	 learned	 the	 term	that	morning	from	Steel?	But	 then,	 the	 lore	of
the	world,	 all	 its	 strange	mechanisms	and	workings	and	aeons	of	 secrets,	 is
mostly	still	intact	within	Schaffa.	It’s	only	things	connected	to	his	old	self	that
are	permanently	lost…	which	means	that	the	route	to	Corepoint	is	something
that	Old	 Schaffa	 needed	 to	 know,	 particularly.	What	 does	 that	mean?	 “Uh,
yes.	That’s	why	I	want	to	go	to	Corepoint.”



His	mouth	quirks	at	her	surprise.	“Finding	an	orogene	who	could	activate
the	Gate	was	our	original	purpose,	Nassun,	in	creating	Found	Moon.”



“What?	Why?”



Schaffa	glances	up	at	the	sky.	The	sun’s	beginning	to	set.	They	could	get
maybe	another	hour	of	walking	 in	before	 it	gets	 too	dark	 to	continue.	What
he’s	looking	at	is	 the	sapphire,	 though,	which	hasn’t	noticeably	moved	from
its	 position	 over	 Jekity.	 Rubbing	 absently	 at	 the	 back	 of	 his	 head,	 Schaffa
gazes	 at	 its	 faint	 outline	 through	 the	 thickening	 clouds	 and	 nods,	 as	 if	 to
himself.



“I	and	Nida	and	Umber,”	he	says.	“Perhaps	ten	years	ago,	we	were	all…
instructed…	to	travel	southward,	and	to	find	one	another.	We	were	bidden	to
seek	and	train	any	orogenes	who	had	the	potential	to	connect	to	obelisks.	This
is	not	a	thing	Guardians	normally	do,	understand,	because	there	can	be	only
one	reason	to	encourage	an	orogene	along	the	obelisk	path.	But	it’s	what	the
Earth	 wanted.	 Why,	 I	 don’t	 know.	 During	 that	 time,	 I	 was…	 less
questioning.”	 His	 mouth	 curves	 in	 a	 brief,	 rueful	 smile.	 “Now	 I	 have
guesses.”



Nassun	frowns.	“What	guesses?”



“That	the	Earth	has	its	own	plans	for	human	—”



Abruptly	 Schaffa	 tenses	 all	 over,	 and	 he	 sways	 in	 his	 crouch.	 Quickly
Nassun	grabs	him	so	he	won’t	fall	over,	and	reflexively	he	puts	an	arm	around
her	shoulders.	The	arm	is	very	tight,	but	she	does	not	protest.	That	he	needs
the	 comfort	 of	 her	 presence	 is	 obvious.	 That	 the	 Earth	 is	 angrier	 than	 ever
with	him,	perhaps	because	he’s	giving	away	its	secrets,	 is	as	palpable	as	the
raw,	flensing	pulse	of	the	silver	along	every	nerve	and	between	every	cell	of
his	body.



“Don’t	talk,”	Nassun	says,	her	throat	tight.	“Don’t	say	anything	else.	If	it’s
going	to	hurt	you	like	this	—”



“It	 does	 not	 rule	me.”	 Schaffa	 has	 to	 say	 this	 in	 quick	 blurts,	 between
pants.	“It	did	not	take	the	core	of	me.	I	may	have…	nnh…	put	myself	into	its
kennel,	but	it	cannot	leash	me.”



“I	 know.”	 Nassun	 bites	 her	 lip.	 He’s	 leaning	 on	 her	 heavily,	 and	 that’s
made	her	knee,	where	it	braces	against	the	ground,	ache	something	awful.	She
doesn’t	care,	though.	“But	you	don’t	have	to	say	everything	now.	I’m	figuring
it	out	on	my	own.”



She	 has	 all	 the	 clues,	 she	 thinks.	Nida	 once	 said,	 of	Nassun’s	 ability	 to
connect	to	obelisks,	This	is	a	thing	that	we	culled	for	in	the	Fulcrum.	Nassun
hadn’t	understood	at	the	time,	but	after	perceiving	something	of	the	Obelisk
Gate’s	immensity,	now	she	can	guess	why	Father	Earth	wants	her	dead	if	she
is	no	longer	under	Schaffa’s	–	and	through	him,	the	Earth’s	–	control.



Nassun	 chews	 her	 lip.	Will	 Schaffa	 understand?	 She	 isn’t	 sure	 she	 can
take	it	if	he	decides	to	leave	–	or	worse,	if	he	turns	on	her.	So	she	takes	a	deep
breath.	“Steel	says	the	Moon	is	coming	back.”



For	an	instant	there	is	silence	from	Schaffa’s	direction.	It	has	the	weight	of
surprise.	“The	Moon.”



“It’s	 real,”	 she	 blurts.	 She	 has	 no	 idea	 if	 this	 is	 true,	 though,	 does	 she?
There’s	 only	 Steel’s	 word	 to	 go	 on.	 She’s	 not	 even	 sure	 what	 a	 moon	 is,
beyond	 being	 Father	 Earth’s	 long-lost	 child,	 like	 the	 tales	 say.	 And	 yet
somehow	 she	 knows	 that	 this	much	 of	what	 Steel	 says	 is	 true.	 She	 doesn’t
quite	sess	it,	and	there	are	no	telltale	threads	of	silver	forming	in	the	sky,	but
she	 believes	 it	 the	way	 she	 believes	 that	 there	 is	 another	 side	 of	 the	world
even	though	she’s	never	seen	it,	and	the	way	she	knows	how	mountains	form,
and	the	way	she’s	certain	Father	Earth	is	real	and	alive	and	an	enemy.	Some
truths	are	simply	too	great	to	deny.



To	her	 surprise,	 however,	Schaffa	 says,	 “Oh,	 I	 know	 the	Moon	 is	 real.”
Perhaps	his	pain	has	faded	somewhat;	now	his	expression	has	hardened	as	he
gazes	at	the	hazy,	intermittent	disc	of	the	sun	where	it’s	managed	to	not	quite
pierce	the	clouds	near	the	horizon.	“That,	I	remember.”



“You	–	really?	Then	you	believe	Steel?”



“I	 believe	you,	 little	 one,	 because	 orogenes	 know	 the	 pull	 of	 the	Moon
when	it	draws	near.	Awareness	of	it	is	as	natural	to	you	as	sessing	shakes.	But
also,	 I	 have	 seen	 it.”	 Then	 his	 gaze	 narrows	 sharply	 to	 focus	 on	 Nassun.
“Why,	then,	did	the	stone	eater	tell	you	about	the	Moon?”



Nassun	takes	a	deep	breath	and	lets	out	a	heavy	sigh.



“I	really	just	wanted	to	live	somewhere	nice,”	she	says.	“Live	somewhere
with…	with	you.	 I	wouldn’t	have	minded	working	and	doing	 things	 to	be	a
good	comm	member.	 I	 could	have	been	a	 lorist,	maybe.”	She	 feels	her	 jaw
tighten.	“But	I	can’t	do	that,	not	anywhere.	Not	without	having	to	hide	what	I
am.	I	like	orogeny,	Schaffa,	when	I	don’t	have	to	hide	it.	I	don’t	think	having
it,	being	a	–	a	r-rogga	—”	She	has	to	stop,	and	blush,	and	shake	off	the	urge	to
feel	ashamed	for	saying	such	a	bad	word,	but	the	bad	word	is	the	right	word
for	now.	“I	don’t	think	being	one	makes	me	bad	or	strange	or	evil	—”



She	cuts	herself	off	again,	yanks	her	thoughts	out	of	that	track,	because	it
leads	right	back	to	But	you	have	done	such	evil	things.



Unconsciously,	 Nassun	 bares	 her	 teeth	 and	 clenches	 her	 fists.	 “It	 isn’t
right,	Schaffa.	It	isn’t	right	that	people	want	me	to	be	bad	or	strange	or	evil,
that	they	make	me	be	bad…”	She	shakes	her	head,	fumbling	for	words.	“I	just
want	to	be	ordinary!	But	I’m	not	and	–	and	everybody,	a	lot	of	people,	all	hate
me	 because	 I’m	 not	 ordinary.	You’re	 the	 only	 person	who	 doesn’t	 hate	me
for…	for	being	what	I	am.	And	that’s	not	right.”



“No,	 it	 isn’t.”	Schaffa	 shifts	 to	 sit	back	against	his	pack,	 looking	weary.
“But	you	speak	as	though	it’s	an	easy	thing	to	ask	people	to	overcome	their
fears,	little	one.”



And	he	does	not	say	it,	but	suddenly	Nassun	thinks:	Jija	couldn’t.



Nassun’s	gorge	rises	suddenly,	sharply	enough	that	she	must	clap	a	fist	to
her	mouth	 for	 a	moment	 and	 think	 hard	 of	 ash	 and	 how	 cold	 her	 ears	 are.
There’s	nothing	 in	her	 stomach	except	 the	handful	of	dates	 she	 just	ate,	but
the	feeling	is	awful	anyway.



Schaffa,	 uncharacteristically,	 does	 not	 move	 to	 comfort	 her.	 He	 only
watches	her,	expression	weary	but	otherwise	unreadable.



“I	know	they	can’t	do	it.”	Yes.	Speaking	helps.	Her	stomach	doesn’t	settle,
but	she	no	longer	feels	on	the	brink	of	dry	heaves.	“I	know	they	–	the	stills	–
won’t	ever	stop	being	afraid.	If	my	father	couldn’t	—”	Queasiness.	She	jerks
her	 thoughts	 away	 from	 the	 end	of	 that	 sentence.	 “They’ll	 just	go	on	being
scared	forever,	and	we’ll	just	go	on	living	like	this	forever,	and	it	isn’t	right.
There	should	be	a	–	a	fix.	It	isn’t	right	that	there’s	no	end	to	it.”



“But	do	you	mean	to	impose	a	fix,	little	one?”	Schaffa	asks.	It’s	soft.	He’s
guessed	already,	 she	 realizes.	He	knows	her	 so	much	better	 than	she	knows
herself,	and	she	loves	him	for	it.	“Or	an	end?”



She	gets	to	her	feet	and	starts	pacing,	tight	little	circles	between	his	pack
and	hers.	 It	 helps	 the	nausea	 and	 the	 jittery,	 rising	 tension	beneath	her	 skin
that	she	cannot	name.	“I	don’t	know	how	to	fix	it.”



But	that	is	not	the	whole	truth,	and	Schaffa	scents	lies	the	way	predators
scent	blood.	His	eyes	narrow.	“If	you	did	know	how,	would	you	fix	it?”



And	 then,	 in	 a	 sudden	 blaze	 of	memory	 that	 Nassun	 has	 not	 permitted
herself	to	see	or	consider	for	more	than	a	year,	she	remembers	her	last	day	in
Tirimo.



Coming	 home.	 Seeing	 her	 father	 standing	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 den
breathing	hard.	Wondering	what	was	wrong	with	him.	Wondering	why	he	did
not	quite	look	like	her	father,	in	that	moment	–	his	eyes	too	wide,	his	mouth
too	 loose,	 his	 shoulders	 hunched	 in	 a	 way	 that	 seemed	 painful.	 And	 then
Nassun	remembers	looking	down.



Looking	 down	 and	 staring	 and	 staring	 and	 thinking	What	 is	 that?	 and
staring	 and	 thinking	 Is	 it	 a	 ball?	 like	 the	 ones	 that	 the	 kids	 at	 creche	 kick
around	 during	 lunchtime,	 except	 those	 balls	 are	 made	 of	 leather	 while	 the
thing	at	her	 father’s	 feet	 is	 a	different	 shade	of	brown,	brown	with	purplish
mottling	all	over	its	surface,	lumpy	and	leathery	and	half-deflated	but	No,	it’s
not	a	ball,	wait	is	that	an	eye?	Maybe	but	it’s	so	swollen	shut	that	it	looks	like
a	 big	 fat	 coffee	 bean.	Not	 a	 ball	 at	 all	 because	 it’s	 wearing	 her	 brother’s
clothes	 including	 the	 pants	Nassun	put	 on	 him	 that	morning	while	 Jija	was
busy	trying	to	get	their	lunch	satchels	together	for	creche.	Uche	didn’t	want	to
wear	those	pants	because	he	was	still	a	baby	and	liked	to	be	silly	so	Nassun
had	done	the	butt	dance	for	him	and	he’d	laughed	so	hard,	so	hard!	His	laugh
was	her	favorite	thing	ever,	and	when	the	butt	dance	was	over	he’d	let	her	put
his	 pants	 on	 as	 a	 thank-you,	which	means	 the	unrecognizable	deflated	ball-
thing	on	the	floor	is	Uche	that	is	Uche	he	is	Uche	—



“No,”	Nassun	breathes.	“I	wouldn’t	fix	it.	Not	even	if	I	knew	how.”



She	has	stopped	pacing.	She	has	one	arm	wrapped	around	her	middle.	The
other	hand	is	a	fist,	crammed	against	her	mouth.	She	spits	out	words	around	it
now,	she	chokes	on	 them	as	 they	gush	up	her	 throat,	 she	clutches	her	belly,
which	is	full	of	such	terrible	things	that	she	must	let	them	out	somehow	or	be
torn	apart	from	within.	These	things	have	distorted	her	voice,	made	it	a	shaky
growl	that	randomly	spikes	into	a	higher	pitch	and	a	louder	volume,	because
it’s	 everything	 she	 can	 do	 not	 to	 just	 start	 screaming.	 “I	 wouldn’t	 fix	 it,
Schaffa,	I	wouldn’t,	I’m	sorry,	I	don’t	want	to	fix	it	I	want	to	kill	everybody
that	hates	me	—”



Her	middle	is	so	heavy	that	she	can’t	stand.	Nassun	drops	into	a	crouch,
then	 to	 her	 knees.	 She	wants	 to	 vomit	 but	 instead	 she	 spits	words	 onto	 the
ground	between	her	splayed	hands.	“G-g-gone!	I	want	it	all	GONE,	Schaffa!	I
want	it	to	BURN,	I	want	it	burned	up	and	dead	and	gone,	gone,	NOTHING	l-
l-left,	 no	 more	 hate	 and	 no	 more	 killing	 just	 nothing,	 r-rusting	 nothing,
nothing	FOREVER	—”



Schaffa’s	hands,	hard	and	strong,	pull	her	up.	She	flails	against	him,	tries
to	hit	him.	It	isn’t	malice	or	fear.	She	never	wants	to	hurt	him.	She	just	has	to
let	some	of	what’s	in	her	out	somehow,	or	she	will	go	mad.	For	the	first	time
she	understands	her	 father,	 as	 she	 screams	and	kicks	 and	punches	and	bites
and	yanks	at	her	clothes	and	her	hair	and	 tries	 to	 slam	her	 forehead	against
his.	Quickly,	Schaffa	 turns	her	about	and	wraps	one	of	his	big	arms	around
her,	pinning	her	arms	to	her	sides	so	that	she	cannot	hurt	him	or	herself	in	the
transport	of	her	rage.



This	is	what	Jija	felt,	observes	a	distant,	detached,	floating-obelisk	part	of
herself.	This	is	what	came	up	inside	him	when	he	realized	Mama	lied,	and	I
lied,	and	Uche	lied.	This	is	what	made	him	push	me	off	the	wagon.	This	is	why
he	came	up	to	Found	Moon	this	morning	with	a	glassknife	in	his	hand.



This.	This	 is	 the	Jija	 in	her,	making	her	 thrash	and	shout	and	weep.	She
feels	closer	than	ever	to	her	father	in	this	moment	of	utter	broken	rage.



Schaffa	holds	her	until	she	is	exhausted.	Finally	she	slumps,	shaking	and
panting	and	moaning	a	little,	her	face	all	over	tears	and	snot.



When	 it’s	 clear	 that	Nassun	will	 not	 lash	out	 again,	Schaffa	 shifts	 to	 sit
down	cross-legged,	pulling	Nassun	into	his	lap.	She	curls	against	him	the	way
another	 child	 curled	 against	 him	 once,	 many	 years	 before	 and	many	miles
away,	when	he	told	her	to	pass	a	test	for	him	so	that	she	could	live.	Nassun’s
test	has	already	been	met,	though;	even	the	old	Schaffa	would	agree	with	that
assessment.	In	all	her	rage,	Nassun’s	orogeny	did	not	twitch	once,	and	she	did
not	reach	for	the	silver	at	all.



“Shhh,”	Schaffa	soothes.	He’s	been	doing	this	all	 the	while,	 though	now
he	 rubs	her	back	and	 thumbs	away	her	occasional	 tears.	 “Shhh.	Poor	 thing.
How	unfair	 of	me.	When	only	 this	morning	—”	He	 sighs.	 “Shhh,	my	 little
one.	Just	rest.”



Nassun	is	wrung	out	and	empty	of	everything	but	the	grief	and	fury	that
run	 in	 her	 like	 fast	 lahars,	 grinding	 everything	 else	 away	 in	 a	 churning	 hot
slurry.	Grief	and	fury	and	one	last	precious,	whole	feeling.



“You’re	 the	 only	 one	 I	 love,	 Schaffa.”	 Her	 voice	 is	 raw	 and	 weary.
“You’re	the	only	reason	I	w-wouldn’t.	But…	but	I…”



He	kisses	her	forehead.	“Make	the	end	you	need,	my	Nassun.”



“I	don’t	want.”	She	has	to	swallow.	“I	want	you	to	–	to	be	alive!”



He	 laughs	 softly.	 “Still	 a	 child,	 despite	 all	 you’ve	 been	 through.”	 This
stings,	but	his	meaning	 is	clear.	She	cannot	have	both	Schaffa	alive	and	 the
world’s	hatred	dead.	She	must	choose	one	ending	or	the	other.



But	then,	firmly,	Schaffa	says	again:	“Make	the	end	you	need.”



Nassun	pulls	back	so	she	can	look	at	him.	He’s	smiling	again,	clear-eyed.
“What?”



He	squeezes	her,	very	gently.	“You’re	my	redemption,	Nassun.	You	are	all
the	children	 I	 should	have	 loved	and	protected,	even	from	myself.	And	 if	 it
will	 bring	 you	 peace…”	 He	 kisses	 her	 forehead.	 “Then	 I	 shall	 be	 your
Guardian	till	the	world	burns,	my	little	one.”



It	 is	 a	 benediction,	 and	 a	 balm.	 The	 nausea	 finally	 releases	 its	 hold	 on
Nassun.	In	Schaffa’s	arms,	safe	and	accepted,	she	sleeps	at	last,	amid	dreams
of	a	world	glowing	and	molten	and	in	its	own	way,	at	peace.

***
“Steel,”	she	calls,	the	next	morning.



Steel	blurs	into	presence	before	them,	standing	in	the	middle	of	the	road
with	his	arms	folded	and	an	expression	of	faint	amusement	on	his	face.



“The	 nearest	 way	 to	 Corepoint	 is	 not	 far,	 relatively	 speaking,”	 he	 says
when	 she	 has	 asked	 him	 for	 the	 knowledge	 that	 Schaffa	 lacks.	 “A	month’s
travel	or	so.	Of	course…”	He	lets	this	trail	off,	conspicuously.	He	has	offered
to	 take	Nassun	and	Schaffa	 to	 the	other	 side	of	 the	world	himself,	which	 is
apparently	a	thing	that	stone	eaters	can	do.	It	would	save	them	a	great	deal	of
hardship	and	danger,	but	they	would	have	to	entrust	themselves	to	Steel’s	care
as	he	transports	them	in	the	strange,	terrifying	manner	of	his	kind,	through	the
earth.



“No,	 thank	 you,”	 Nassun	 says	 again.	 She	 doesn’t	 ask	 Schaffa	 for	 his
opinion	on	this,	though	he	leans	against	a	boulder	nearby.	She	doesn’t	need	to
ask	 him.	 That	 Steel’s	 interest	 is	 wholly	 in	 Nassun	 is	 obvious.	 It	 would	 be
nothing	to	him	to	simply	forget	to	bring	Schaffa	–	or	lose	him	along	the	way
to	Corepoint.	“But	could	you	tell	us	about	this	place	we	have	to	go?	Schaffa
doesn’t	remember.”



Steel’s	 gray	 gaze	 shifts	 to	 Schaffa.	 Schaffa	 smiles	 back,	 deceptively
serene.	 Even	 the	 silver	 inside	 him	 goes	 still,	 just	 for	 this	 moment.	 Maybe
Father	Earth	doesn’t	like	Steel,	either.



“It’s	called	a	station,”	Steel	explains,	after	a	moment.	“It’s	old.	You	would
call	 it	a	deadciv	ruin,	although	this	one	 is	still	 intact,	nestled	within	another
set	 of	 ruins	 that	 aren’t.	A	 long	 time	ago,	 people	used	 stations,	 or	 rather	 the
vehicles	kept	within	 them,	 to	 travel	 long	distances	 far	more	efficiently	 than
walking.	 These	 days,	 however,	 only	 we	 stone	 eaters	 and	 the	 Guardians
remember	 that	 the	stations	exist.”	His	smile,	which	hasn’t	changed	since	he
appeared,	is	still	and	wry.	It	seems	meant	for	Schaffa	somehow.



“We	all	pay	a	price	for	power,”	Schaffa	says.	His	voice	is	cool	and	smooth
in	that	way	he	gets	when	he’s	thinking	about	doing	bad	things.



“Yes.”	Steel	pauses	for	just	a	beat	too	long.	“A	price	must	be	paid	to	use
this	method	of	transportation,	as	well.”



“We	 don’t	 have	 any	 money	 or	 anything	 good	 to	 barter,”	 Nassun	 says,
troubled.



“Fortunately,	 there	 are	 other	 ways	 to	 pay.”	 Steel	 abruptly	 stands	 at	 a
different	angle,	his	face	tilted	upward.	Nassun	follows	this,	turning,	and	sees
–	 oh.	 The	 sapphire,	 which	 has	 gotten	 a	 little	 closer	 overnight.	 Now	 it’s
halfway	between	them	and	Jekity.



“The	 station,”	 Steel	 continues,	 “is	 from	 a	 time	 before	 the	 Seasons.	 The
time	 when	 the	 obelisks	 were	 built.	 All	 the	 lingering	 artifacts	 of	 that
civilization	recognize	the	same	power	source.”



“You	mean…”	Nassun	inhales.	“The	silver.”



“Is	that	what	you	call	it?	How	poetic.”



Nassun	shrugs	uncomfortably.	“I	don’t	know	what	else	to	call	it.”



“Oh,	 how	 the	 world	 has	 changed.”	 Nassun	 frowns,	 but	 Steel	 does	 not
explain	 this	 cryptic	 statement.	 “Stay	 on	 this	 road	 until	 you	 reach	 the	 Old
Man’s	Pucker.	Do	you	know	where	that	is?”



Nassun	remembers	seeing	it	on	maps	of	the	Antarctics	a	lifetime	ago,	and
giggling	 at	 the	 name.	She	 glances	 at	 Schaffa,	who	nods	 and	 says,	 “We	 can
find	it.”



“Then	 I’ll	 meet	 you	 there.	 The	 ruin	 is	 at	 the	 exact	 center	 of	 the	 grass
forest,	within	the	inner	ring.	Enter	the	Pucker	just	after	dawn.	Don’t	dawdle
reaching	the	center;	you	won’t	want	to	still	be	in	the	forest	after	dusk.”	Then
Steel	pauses,	 shifting	 into	a	new	position	–	one	 that	 is	distinctly	 thoughtful.
His	face	is	turned	off	to	the	side,	fingers	touching	his	chin.	“I	thought	it	would
be	your	mother.”



Schaffa	goes	still.	Nassun	is	surprised	by	the	flash	of	heat,	then	cold,	that
moves	 through	her.	Slowly,	while	sifting	 through	 this	 strange	complexity	of
emotion,	she	says,	“What	do	you	mean?”



“I	expected	her	 to	be	 the	one	 to	do	 this,	 is	all.”	Steel	doesn’t	 shrug,	but
something	 in	 his	 voice	 suggests	 nonchalance.	 “I	 threatened	 her	 comm.	Her
friends,	the	people	she	cares	about	now.	I	thought	they	would	turn	on	her,	and
then	this	choice	would	seem	more	palatable	to	her.”



The	people	she	cares	about	now.	“She’s	not	in	Tirimo	anymore?”



“No.	She	has	joined	another	comm.”



“And	they…	didn’t	turn	on	her?”



“No.	Surprisingly.”	Steel’s	eyes	slide	over	to	meet	Nassun’s.	“She	knows
where	you	are	now.	The	Gate	 told	her.	But	 she	 isn’t	coming,	or	at	 least	not
yet.	She	wants	to	see	her	friends	safely	settled	first.”



Nassun	sets	her	 jaw.	“I’m	not	 in	Jekity	anymore,	anyway.	And	soon	she
won’t	have	the	Gate,	either,	so	she	won’t	be	able	to	find	me	again.”



Steel	 turns	fully	 to	face	her,	 this	movement	 too	slow	and	human-smooth
to	be	human,	 though	his	astonishment	 seems	genuine.	She	hates	 it	when	he
moves	slowly.	It	makes	her	get	goose	bumps.



“Nothing	lasts	forever,	indeed,”	he	says.



“What’s	that	mean?”



“Only	 that	 I’ve	 underestimated	 you,	 little	 Nassun.”	 Nassun	 instantly
dislikes	this	term	of	address.	He	shifts	again	to	the	thoughtful	pose,	fast	this
time,	to	her	relief.	“I	think	I’d	better	not	do	so	again.”



With	 that,	 he	vanishes.	Nassun	 frowns	at	Schaffa,	who	 shakes	his	head.
They	shoulder	their	packs	and	head	west.

2400:	Eastern	Equatorials	(check	if	node	network	was	thin	in	this	area,
because…),	unknown	comm.	Old	local	song	about	a	nurse	who
stopped	a	sudden	eruption	and	pyroclastic	flow	by	turning	it	to	ice.
One	of	her	patients	threw	himself	in	front	of	a	crossbow	bolt	to	protect
her	from	the	mob.	Mob	let	her	go;	she	vanished.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



Syl	Anagist:	Four
	

All	 energy	 is	 the	 same,	 through	 its	 different	 states	 and	 names.	 Movement
creates	 heat	 which	 is	 also	 light	 that	 waves	 like	 sound	 which	 tightens	 or
loosens	the	atomic	bonds	of	crystal	as	they	hum	with	strong	and	weak	forces.
In	mirroring	resonance	with	all	of	 this	 is	magic,	 the	radiant	emission	of	 life
and	death.



This	 is	 our	 role:	 To	 weave	 together	 those	 disparate	 energies.	 To
manipulate	and	mitigate	and,	through	the	prism	of	our	awareness,	produce	a
singular	force	that	cannot	be	denied.	To	make	of	cacophony,	symphony.	The
great	machine	called	the	Plutonic	Engine	is	the	instrument.	We	are	its	tuners.



And	 this	 is	 the	 goal:	 Geoarcanity.	 Geoarcanity	 seeks	 to	 establish	 an
energetic	 cycle	 of	 infinite	 efficiency.	 If	 we	 are	 successful,	 the	 world	 will
never	know	want	or	strife	again…	or	so	we	are	told.	The	conductors	explain
little	beyond	what	we	must	know	to	fulfill	our	roles.	It	is	enough	to	know	that
we	–	small,	unimportant	we	–	will	help	to	set	humanity	on	a	new	path	toward
an	unimaginably	bright	future.	We	may	be	tools,	but	we	are	fine	ones,	put	to	a
magnificent	purpose.	It	is	easy	to	find	pride	in	that.



We	 are	 attuned	 enough	 to	 each	 other	 that	 the	 loss	 of	 Tetlewha	 causes
trouble	 for	 a	 time.	 When	 we	 join	 to	 form	 our	 initializing	 network,	 it’s
imbalanced.	 Tetlewha	 was	 our	 countertenor,	 the	 half	 wavelengths	 of	 the
spectrum;	without	him	I	am	closest,	but	my	natural	resonance	is	a	little	high.
The	 resulting	network	 is	weaker	 than	 it	 should	be.	Our	 feeder	 threads	keep
trying	to	reach	for	Tetlewha’s	empty	middle	range.



Gaewha	 is	 able	 to	 compensate	 for	 the	 loss,	 finally.	 She	 reaches	 deeper,
resonates	 more	 powerfully,	 and	 this	 plugs	 the	 gap.	We	must	 spend	 several
days	 reforging	 all	 the	 network’s	 connections	 to	 create	 new	 harmony,	 but	 it
isn’t	difficult	 to	do	this,	 just	 time-consuming.	This	 isn’t	 the	first	 time	we’ve
had	to	do	it.



Kelenli	 joins	 us	 in	 the	 network	 only	 occasionally.	 This	 is	 frustrating,
because	her	voice	–	deep	and	powerful	and	foot-tingling	in	its	sharpness	–	is
perfect.	Better	than	Tetlewha’s,	wider	ranging	than	all	of	us	together.	But	we
are	 told	 by	 the	 conductors	 not	 to	 get	 used	 to	 her.	 “She’ll	 serve	 during	 the
actual	start-up	of	the	Engine,”	one	of	them	says	when	I	ask,	“but	only	if	she
can’t	manage	to	teach	you	how	to	do	what	she	does.	Conductor	Gallat	wants
her	on	standby	only,	come	Launch	Day.”



This	seems	sensible,	on	the	surface.



When	Kelenli	is	part	of	us,	she	takes	point.	This	is	simply	natural,	because
her	presence	is	so	much	greater	than	ours.	Why?	Something	in	the	way	she	is
made?	Something	else.	There	is	a…	held	note.	A	perpetual	hollow	burn	at	the
midpoint	of	her	balanced	lines,	at	their	fulcrum,	which	none	of	us	understand.
A	 similar	 burn	 rests	 in	 each	 of	 us,	 but	 ours	 is	 faint	 and	 intermittent,
occasionally	 flaring	 only	 to	 quickly	 fade	 back	 to	 quiescence.	 Hers	 blazes
steadily,	its	fuel	apparently	limitless.



Whatever	 this	 held-note	 burn	 is,	 the	 conductors	 have	 discovered,	 it
meshes	 beautifully	 with	 the	 devouring	 chaos	 of	 the	 onyx.	 The	 onyx	 is	 the
control	 cabochon	 of	 the	 whole	 Plutonic	 Engine,	 and	 while	 there	 are	 other
ways	 to	 start	 up	 the	 Engine	 –	 cruder	 ways,	 workarounds	 involving
subnetworks	or	the	moonstone	–	on	Launch	Day	we	will	absolutely	need	the
onyx’s	precision	and	control.	Without	it,	our	chances	of	successfully	initiating
Geoarcanity	diminish	greatly…	but	none	of	us,	thus	far,	has	had	the	strength
to	hold	the	onyx	for	more	than	a	few	minutes.	We	observe	in	awe,	however,
as	 Kelenli	 rides	 it	 for	 a	 solid	 hour,	 then	 actually	 seems	 unfazed	 when	 she
disengages	 from	 it.	 When	 we	 engage	 the	 onyx,	 it	 punishes	 us,	 stripping
everything	we	can	spare	and	leaving	us	in	a	shutdown	sleep	for	hours	or	days
–	but	not	her.	Its	threads	caress	rather	than	rip	at	her.	The	onyx	likes	her.	This
explanation	is	irrational,	but	it	occurs	to	all	of	us,	so	that’s	how	we	begin	to
think	of	it.	Now	she	must	teach	us	to	be	more	likable	to	the	onyx,	in	her	stead.



When	we	are	done	rebalancing	and	they	let	us	up	from	the	wire	chairs	that
maintain	our	bodies	while	our	minds	are	engaged,	and	we	stagger	and	must
lean	on	the	conductors	to	make	it	back	to	our	individual	quarters…	when	all
of	 this	 is	done,	 she	 comes	 to	visit	 us.	 Individually,	 so	 the	 conductors	won’t
suspect	anything.	In	face-to-face	meetings,	speaking	audible	nonsense	–	and
meanwhile,	earthspeaking	sense	to	all	of	us	at	once.



She	 feels	 sharper	 than	 the	 rest	 of	 us,	 she	 explains,	 because	 she	 is	more
experienced.	 Because	 she’s	 lived	 outside	 of	 the	 complex	 of	 buildings	 that
surround	 the	 local	 fragment,	 and	 which	 has	 comprised	 the	 entirety	 of	 our
world	 since	we	were	 decanted.	 She	 has	 visited	more	 nodes	 of	 Syl	Anagist
than	just	the	one	we	live	in;	she	has	seen	and	touched	more	of	the	fragments
than	 just	 our	 local	 amethyst.	 She	 has	 even	 been	 to	 Zero	 Site,	 where	 the
moonstone	rests.	We	are	in	awe	of	this.



“I	have	context,”	she	says	to	us	–	to	me,	rather.	She’s	sitting	on	my	couch.
I	 am	 sprawled	 facedown	 on	 the	 window	 seat,	 face	 turned	 away	 from	 her.
“When	you	do,	too,	you’ll	be	just	as	sharp.”



(It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 pidgin	 between	 us,	 using	 the	 earth	 to	 add	 meaning	 to
audible	 words.	 Her	 words	 are	 simply,	 “I’m	 older,”	 while	 a	 whitter	 of
subsidence	 adds	 the	 nuancing	 deformation	 of	 time.	 She	 is	 metamorphic,
having	transformed	to	bear	unbearable	pressure.	To	make	this	telling	simpler,
I	will	translate	it	all	as	words,	except	where	I	cannot.)



“It	would	be	good	if	we	were	as	sharp	as	you	now,”	I	reply	wearily.	I	am
not	whining.	Rebalancing	days	are	always	hard.	“Give	us	 this	context,	 then,
so	the	onyx	will	listen	and	my	head	can	stop	hurting.”



Kelenli	 sighs.	 “There’s	 nothing	 within	 these	 walls	 on	 which	 you	 can
sharpen	yourself.”	(Crumble	of	resentment,	ground	up	and	quickly	scattered.
They	have	kept	you	so	safe	and	sheltered.)	 “But	 I	 think	 there’s	a	way	 I	 can
help	you	and	the	others	do	that,	if	I	can	get	you	out	of	this	place.”



“Help	me…	sharpen	myself?”



(She	soothes	me	with	a	polishing	stroke.	It	is	not	a	kindness	that	you	are
kept	so	dull.)	“You	need	to	understand	more	about	yourself.	What	you	are.”



I	don’t	understand	why	she	thinks	I	don’t	understand.	“I’m	a	tool.”



She	says:	“If	you’re	a	tool,	shouldn’t	you	be	honed	as	fine	as	possible?”



Her	voice	is	serene.	And	yet	a	pent,	angry	jitter	of	the	entire	ambient	–	air
molecules	 shivering,	 strata	 beneath	 us	 compressing,	 a	 dissonant	 grinding
whine	at	 the	 limit	of	our	ability	 to	 sess	–	 tells	me	 that	Kelenli	hates	what	 I
have	 just	said.	 I	 turn	my	head	 to	her	and	find	myself	 fascinated	by	 the	way
this	dichotomy	 fails	 to	 show	 in	her	 face.	 It’s	 another	way	 she’s	 like	us.	We
have	 long	 since	 learned	 not	 to	 show	 pain	 or	 fear	 or	 sorrow	 in	 any	 space
aboveground	or	below	the	sky.	The	conductors	tell	us	we	are	built	to	be	like
statues	 –	 cold,	 immovable,	 silent.	 We	 aren’t	 certain	 why	 they	 believe	 we
actually	are	this	way;	after	all,	we	are	as	warm	to	the	touch	as	they.	We	feel
emotion,	as	 they	seem	to,	although	we	do	seem	less	inclined	to	display	it	 in
face	 or	 body	 language.	 Perhaps	 this	 is	 because	 we	 have	 earthtalk?	 (Which
they	don’t	seem	to	notice.	This	is	good.	In	the	earth,	we	may	be	ourselves.)	It
has	 never	 been	 clear	 to	 us	 whether	 we	 were	 built	 wrong,	 or	 whether	 their
understanding	of	us	is	wrong.	Or	whether	either	matters.



Kelenli	is	outwardly	calm	while	she	burns	inside.	I	watch	her	for	so	long
that	abruptly	she	comes	back	to	herself	and	catches	me.	She	smiles.	“I	think
you	like	me.”



I	consider	 the	possible	 implications	of	 this.	“Not	 that	way,”	I	say,	out	of
habit.	 I	 have	 had	 to	 explain	 this	 to	 junior	 conductors	 or	 other	 staff	 on
occasion.	 We	 are	 made	 like	 statues	 in	 this	 way	 as	 well	 –	 a	 design
implementation	 that	 worked	 in	 this	 case,	 leaving	 us	 capable	 of	 rutting	 but
disinterested	 in	 the	 attempt,	 and	 infertile	 should	 we	 bother.	 Is	 Kelenli	 the
same?	No,	the	conductors	said	she	was	made	different	in	only	one	way.	She
has	our	powerful,	complex,	flexible	sessapinae,	which	no	other	people	in	the
world	possess.	Otherwise	she’s	like	them.



“How	fortunate	that	I	wasn’t	talking	about	sex.”	There’s	a	drawling	hum
of	amusement	from	her;	it	both	bothers	and	pleases	me.	I	don’t	know	why.



Oblivious	to	my	sudden	confusion,	Kelenli	gets	to	her	feet.	“I’ll	be	back,”
she	says,	and	leaves.



She	doesn’t	 return	 for	 several	 days.	 She	 remains	 a	 detached	part	 of	 our
last	 network,	 though,	 so	 she	 is	 present	 for	 our	 wakings,	 our	 meals,	 our
defecations,	our	 inchoate	dreams	when	we	sleep,	our	pride	 in	ourselves	and
each	 other.	 It	 doesn’t	 feel	 like	 watching	 when	 she	 does	 it,	 even	 if	 she	 is
watching.	I	cannot	speak	for	the	others,	but	I	like	having	her	around.



Not	all	of	 the	others	do	 like	Kelenli.	Gaewha	 in	particular	 is	belligerent
about	it,	and	she	sends	this	through	our	private	discussion.	“She	appears	just
as	we	 lose	Tetlewha?	 Just	 as	 the	 project	 concludes?	We’ve	worked	 hard	 to
become	what	we	are.	Will	they	praise	her	for	our	work,	when	it’s	done?”



“She’s	only	a	standby,”	I	say,	trying	to	be	the	voice	of	reason.	“And	what
she	wants	is	what	we	want.	We	need	to	cooperate.”



“So	she	says.”	That	 is	Remwha,	who	considers	himself	smarter	 than	 the
rest	of	us.	(We’re	all	made	to	be	equally	intelligent.	Remwha	is	just	an	ass.)
“The	 conductors	 kept	 her	 away	 until	 now	 for	 a	 reason.	 She	 may	 be	 a
troublemaker.”



That	is	foolish,	I	believe,	though	I	don’t	let	myself	say	it	even	in	earthtalk.
We	 are	 part	 of	 the	 great	 machine.	 Anything	 that	 improves	 the	 machine’s
function	matters;	anything	unrelated	to	this	purpose	does	not.	If	Kelenli	were
a	troublemaker,	Gallat	would	have	sent	her	to	the	briar	patch	with	Tetlewha.
This	 is	 a	 thing	 we	 all	 understand.	 Gaewha	 and	 Remwha	 are	 just	 being
difficult.



“If	she	is	some	sort	of	troublemaker,	that	will	show	itself	with	time,”	I	say
firmly.	That	does	not	end,	but	at	least	postpones,	the	argument.



Kelenli	returns	the	next	day.	The	conductors	bring	us	together	to	explain.
“Kelenli	has	asked	to	take	you	on	a	tuning	mission,”	says	the	man	who	comes
to	deliver	the	briefing.	He’s	much	taller	than	us,	taller	even	than	Kelenli,	and
slender.	He	likes	to	dress	in	perfectly	matched	colors	and	ornate	buttons.	His
hair	is	long	and	black;	his	skin	is	white,	though	not	so	much	as	ours.	His	eyes
are	like	ours,	however	–	white	within	white.	White	as	ice.	We’ve	never	seen
another	one	of	them	with	eyes	like	ours.	He	is	Conductor	Gallat,	head	of	the
project.	I	think	of	Gallat	as	a	plutonic	fragment	–	a	clear	one,	diamond-white.
He	is	precisely	angled	and	cleanly	faceted	and	beautiful	in	a	unique	way,	and
he	 is	 also	 implacably	 deadly	 if	 not	 handled	 with	 precision.	 We	 don’t	 let
ourselves	think	about	the	fact	that	he’s	the	one	who	killed	Tetlewha.



(He	 isn’t	who	you	 think	he	 is.	 I	want	Gallat	 to	 look	 like	him	 the	way	 I
want	you	to	look	like	her.	This	is	the	hazard	of	a	flawed	memory.)



“A	 tuning…	 mission,”	 Gaewha	 says	 slowly,	 to	 show	 that	 she	 doesn’t
understand.



Kelenli	opens	her	mouth	to	speak	and	then	stops,	turning	to	Gallat.	Gallat
smiles	 genially	 at	 this.	 “Kelenli’s	 performance	 is	what	we	were	 hoping	 for
with	 all	 of	 you,	 and	 yet	 you’ve	 consistently	 underperformed,”	 he	 says.	We
tense,	uncomfortable,	hyperconscious	of	criticism,	 though	he	merely	shrugs.
“I’ve	consulted	with	the	chief	biomagestre,	and	she’s	insistent	that	there’s	no
significant	difference	in	your	relative	abilities.	You	have	the	same	capability
that	she	has,	but	you	don’t	demonstrate	the	same	skill.	There	are	any	number
of	alterations	we	could	make	to	try	to	resolve	the	discrepancy,	fine-tuning	so
to	speak,	but	that’s	a	risk	we’d	rather	not	take	so	close	to	launch.”



We	reverberate	 in	one	accord	 for	a	moment,	all	of	us	very	glad	 for	 this.
“She	said	that	she	was	here	to	teach	us	context,”	I	venture,	very	carefully.



Gallat	 nods	 to	 me.	 “She	 believes	 the	 solution	 is	 outside	 experience.
Increased	 exposure	 to	 stimuli,	 challenging	 your	 problem-solving	 cognition,
things	 like	 that.	 It’s	 a	 suggestion	 that	 has	 merit	 and	 the	 benefit	 of	 being
minimally	invasive	–	but	for	the	sake	of	the	project,	we	can’t	send	you	all	out
at	 once.	 What	 if	 something	 happened?	 Instead	 we	 will	 split	 you	 into	 two
groups.	Since	there’s	only	one	of	Kelenli,	that	means	half	of	you	will	go	with
her	now,	and	half	in	a	week.”



Outside.	We’re	going	outside.	 I’m	desperate	 to	be	 in	 the	 first	group,	but
we	know	better	 than	to	show	desire	before	the	conductors.	Tools	should	not
want	to	escape	their	box	so	obviously.



I	say,	instead,	“We’ve	been	more	than	sufficiently	attuned	to	one	another
without	this	proposed	mission.”	My	voice	is	flat.	A	statue’s.	“The	simulations
show	that	we	are	reliably	capable	of	controlling	the	Engine,	as	expected.”



“And	 we	might	 as	 well	 do	 six	 groups	 as	 two,”	 adds	 Remwha.	 By	 this
asinine	 suggestion	 do	 I	 know	 his	 eagerness.	 “Will	 each	 group	 not	 have
different	 experiences?	 As	 I	 understand	 the…	 outside…	 there’s	 no	 way	 to
control	 for	 consistency	 of	 exposure.	 If	 we	 must	 take	 time	 away	 from	 our
preparations	for	this,	surely	it	should	be	done	in	a	way	that	minimizes	risk?”



“I	 think	 six	wouldn’t	 be	 cost-effective	 or	 efficient,”	Kelenli	 says,	while
silently	signaling	approval	and	amusement	for	our	playacting.	She	glances	at
Gallat	and	shrugs,	not	bothering	to	pretend	that	she	is	emotionless;	she	simply
seems	bored.	“We	might	as	well	do	one	group	as	two	or	six.	We	can	plan	the
route,	 position	 extra	 guards	 along	 the	 way,	 involve	 the	 nodal	 police	 for
surveillance	 and	 support.	 Honestly,	 repeated	 trips	 would	 just	 increase	 the
chance	 that	 disaffected	 citizens	 might	 anticipate	 the	 route	 and	 plan…
unpleasantness.”



We	 are	 all	 intrigued	 by	 the	 possibility	 of	 unpleasantness.	Kelenli	 quells
our	excited	tremors.



Conductor	 Gallat	 winces	 as	 she	 does	 this;	 that	 one	 struck	 home.	 “The
potential	for	significant	gains	are	why	you	will	go,”	Conductor	Gallat	says	to
us.	He’s	still	smiling,	but	there’s	an	edge	to	it	now.	Was	the	word	will	ever	so
slightly	emphasized?	So	minute,	the	perturbations	of	audible	speech.	What	I
take	from	this	 is	 that	not	only	will	he	let	us	go,	but	he	has	also	changed	his
mind	about	sending	us	in	multiple	groups.	Some	of	this	is	because	Kelenli’s
suggestion	was	the	most	sensible,	but	the	rest	is	because	he’s	irritated	with	us
for	our	apparent	reluctance.



Ah,	Remwha	wields	his	annoying	nature	 like	a	diamond	chisel	as	usual.
Excellent	work,	I	pulse.	He	returns	me	a	polite	thank-you	waveform.



We	 are	 to	 leave	 that	 very	 day.	 Clothing	 suitable	 for	 travel	 outdoors	 is
brought	 to	my	quarters	by	 junior	conductors.	 I	pull	on	 the	 thicker	cloth	and
shoes	carefully,	fascinated	by	the	different	textures,	and	then	sit	quietly	while
the	junior	conductor	plaits	my	hair	into	a	single	white	braid.	“Is	this	necessary
for	 outside?”	 I	 ask.	 I’m	 genuinely	 curious,	 since	 the	 conductors	wear	 their
hair	in	many	styles.	Some	of	them	I	can’t	emulate,	because	my	hair	is	poufy
and	coarse	and	will	not	hold	a	curl	or	bear	straightening.	Only	we	have	hair
like	this.	Theirs	comes	in	many	textures.



“It	might	help,”	says	the	junior.	“You	lot	are	going	to	stand	out	no	matter
what,	but	the	more	normal	we	can	make	you	seem,	the	better.”



“People	will	 know	we’re	 part	 of	 the	Engine,”	 I	 say,	 straightening	 just	 a
little	in	pride.



His	 fingers	 slow	 for	 a	 moment.	 I	 don’t	 think	 he	 notices.	 “That’s	 not
exactly…	They’re	more	 likely	 to	 think	you’re	 something	else.	Don’t	worry,
though;	we’ll	 send	guards	along	 to	make	sure	 there’s	no	 trouble.	They’ll	be
unobtrusive,	but	there.	Kelenli	insists	that	you	can’t	be	made	to	feel	sheltered,
even	if	you	are.”



“They’re	 more	 likely	 to	 think	 we’re	 something	 else,”	 I	 repeat	 slowly,
thoughtfully.



His	 fingers	 twitch,	 pulling	 a	 few	 strands	 harder	 than	 necessary.	 I	 don’t
wince	or	pull	away.	They’re	more	comfortable	thinking	of	us	as	statues,	and
statues	aren’t	supposed	to	feel	pain.	“Well,	 it’s	a	distant	possibility,	but	 they
have	 to	 know	 you	 aren’t	 –	 I	 mean,	 it’s…”	He	 sighs.	 “Oh,	 Evil	 Death.	 It’s
complicated.	Don’t	worry	about	it.”



Conductors	say	this	when	they’ve	made	a	mistake.	I	don’t	ping	the	others
with	it	right	away,	because	we	minimize	communication	outside	of	sanctioned
meetings.	People	who	are	not	tuners	can	perceive	magic	only	in	rudimentary
ways;	 they	use	machines	and	 instruments	 to	do	what	 is	natural	 for	us.	Still,
they’re	always	monitoring	us	 in	some	measure,	so	we	cannot	allow	them	to
learn	 the	extent	 to	which	we	speak	 to	each	other,	and	hear	 them,	when	they
think	we	cannot.



Soon	 I’m	 ready.	 After	 conferring	 with	 other	 conductors	 over	 the	 vine,
mine	decides	to	brush	my	face	with	paint	and	powder.	It’s	supposed	to	make
me	look	like	them.	It	actually	makes	me	like	someone	whose	white	skin	has
been	painted	brown.	I	must	look	skeptical	when	he	shows	me	the	mirror;	my
conductor	sighs	and	complains	that	he’s	not	an	artist.



Then	 he	 brings	 me	 to	 a	 place	 that	 I’ve	 seen	 only	 a	 few	 times	 before,
within	the	building	that	houses	me:	the	downstairs	foyer.	Here	the	walls	aren’t
white;	 the	 natural	 green	 and	 brown	 of	 self-repairing	 cellulose	 has	 been
allowed	 to	 flourish	 unbleached.	 Someone	 has	 seeded	 the	 space	with	 vining
strawberries	that	are	half	in	white	flower,	half	in	ripening	red	fruit;	it’s	quite
lovely.	The	six	of	us	stand	near	the	floor	pool	waiting	for	Kelenli,	trying	not
to	notice	the	other	personnel	of	the	building	coming	and	going	and	staring	at
us:	six	smaller-than-average,	stocky	people	with	puffy	white	hair	and	painted
faces,	our	lips	arranged	in	defensively	pleasant	smiles.	If	there	are	guards,	we
do	not	know	how	to	tell	them	from	the	gawkers.



When	 Kelenli	 comes	 toward	 us,	 though,	 I	 finally	 notice	 guards.	 Hers
move	with	 her,	 not	 bothering	 to	 be	 unobtrusive	 –	 a	 tall	 brown	woman	 and
man	who	might	have	been	siblings.	I	realize	I	have	seen	them	before,	trailing
her	on	other	occasions	that	she’s	come	to	visit.	They	hang	back	as	she	reaches
us.



“Good,	you’re	ready,”	she	says.	Then	she	grimaces,	reaching	out	to	touch
Dushwha’s	 cheek.	 Her	 thumb	 comes	 away	 dusted	 with	 face	 powder.
“Really?”



Dushwha	looks	away,	uncomfortable.	They	have	never	liked	being	pushed
into	any	emulation	of	our	creators	–	not	in	clothing,	not	in	gender,	definitely
not	 in	 this.	 “It’s	 meant	 to	 help,”	 they	 mutter	 unhappily,	 perhaps	 trying	 to
convince	themselves.



“It	 makes	 you	 more	 conspicuous.	 And	 they’ll	 know	 what	 you	 are,
anyway.”	She	 turns	and	 looks	at	one	of	her	guards,	 the	woman.	“I’m	taking
them	to	clean	this	dreck	off.	Want	to	help?”	The	woman	just	 looks	at	her	in
silence.	Kelenli	laughs	to	herself.	It	sounds	genuinely	mirth	filled.



She	herds	us	into	a	personal-needs	alcove.	The	guards	station	themselves
outside	 while	 she	 splashes	 water	 on	 our	 faces	 from	 the	 clean	 side	 of	 the
latrine	 pool,	 and	 scrubs	 the	 paint	 away	with	 an	 absorbent	 cloth.	 She	 hums
while	 she	does	 it.	Does	 that	mean	 she’s	happy?	When	 she	 takes	my	arm	 to
wipe	 the	 gunk	 off	 my	 face,	 I	 search	 hers	 to	 try	 to	 understand.	 Her	 gaze
sharpens	when	she	notices.



“You’re	a	thinker,”	she	says.	I’m	not	sure	what	that’s	supposed	to	mean.



“We	all	are,”	I	say.	I	allow	a	brief	rumble	of	nuance.	We	have	to	be.



“Exactly.	You	 think	more	 than	you	have	 to.”	Apparently	 a	bit	 of	 brown
near	my	hairline	 is	 especially	 stubborn.	She	wipes	 it	off,	grimaces,	wipes	 it
again,	sighs,	rinses	the	cloth	and	wipes	at	it	again.



I	continue	searching	her	face.	“Why	do	you	laugh	at	their	fear?”



It’s	a	stupid	question.	Should’ve	asked	it	through	the	earth,	not	out	loud.
She	 stops	wiping	my	 face.	 Remwha	 glances	 at	me	 in	 bland	 reproach,	 then
goes	to	the	entrance	of	the	alcove.	I	hear	him	asking	the	guard	there	to	please
ask	 a	 conductor	 whether	 we	 are	 in	 danger	 of	 sun	 damage	 without	 the
protection	 of	 the	 paint.	 The	 guard	 laughs	 and	 calls	 over	 her	 companion	 to
relay	 this	 question,	 as	 if	 it’s	 ridiculous.	 During	 the	 moment	 of	 distraction
purchased	for	us	by	this	exchange,	Kelenli	then	resumes	scrubbing	me.



“Why	not	laugh	at	it?”	she	says.



“They	 would	 like	 you	 better	 if	 you	 didn’t	 laugh.”	 I	 signal	 nuance:
alignment,	harmonic	enmeshment,	compliance,	conciliation,	mitigation.	If	she
wants	to	be	liked.



“Maybe	 I	don’t	want	 to	be	 liked.”	She	shrugs,	 turning	 to	 rinse	 the	cloth
again.



“You	could	be.	You’re	like	them.”



“Not	enough.”



“More	than	me.”	This	is	obvious.	She	is	their	kind	of	beautiful,	their	kind
of	normal.	“If	you	tried	—”



She	laughs	at	me,	too.	It	isn’t	cruel,	I	know	instinctively.	It’s	pitying.	But
underneath	the	laugh,	her	presence	is	suddenly	as	still	and	pent	as	pressurized
stone	in	the	instant	before	it	becomes	something	else.	Anger	again.	Not	at	me,
but	triggered	by	my	words	nevertheless.	I	always	seem	to	make	her	angry.



They’re	 afraid	 because	 we	 exist,	 she	 says.	 There’s	 nothing	 we	 did	 to
provoke	 their	 fear,	other	 than	exist.	There’s	nothing	we	can	do	 to	earn	 their
approval,	except	stop	existing	–	so	we	can	either	die	like	they	want,	or	laugh
at	their	cowardice	and	go	on	with	our	lives.



I	 think	at	 first	 that	 I	don’t	understand	everything	she	 just	 told	me.	But	 I
do,	don’t	 I?	There	were	 sixteen	of	us	once;	now	we	are	but	 six.	The	others
questioned	 and	were	 decommissioned	 for	 it.	 Obeyed	without	 question,	 and
were	 decommissioned	 for	 it.	 Bargained.	 Gave	 up.	 Helped.	 Despaired.	 We
have	 tried	 everything,	done	all	 they	asked	and	more,	 and	yet	now	 there	 are
only	six	of	us	left.



That	 means	 we’re	 better	 than	 the	 others	 were,	 I	 tell	 myself,	 scowling.
Smarter,	 more	 adaptable,	 more	 skilled.	 This	 matters,	 does	 it	 not?	 We	 are
components	of	the	great	machine,	the	pinnacle	of	Sylanagistine	biomagestry.
If	some	of	us	had	to	be	removed	from	the	machine	because	of	flaws	—



Tetlewha	was	not	flawed,	Remwha	snaps	like	a	slipstrike	fault.



I	 blink	 and	 glance	 at	 him.	 He’s	 back	 in	 the	 alcove,	 waiting	 over	 near
Bimniwha	and	Salewha;	 they’ve	all	used	 the	 fountain	 to	 strip	off	 their	own
paint	 while	 Kelenli	 worked	 on	me	 and	 Gaewha	 and	 Dushwha.	 The	 guards
Remwha	distracted	are	just	outside,	still	chuckling	to	themselves	over	what	he
said	to	them.	He’s	glaring	at	me.	When	I	frown,	he	repeats:	Tetlewha	was	not
flawed.



I	 set	 my	 jaw.	 If	 Tetlewha	 was	 not	 flawed,	 then	 that	 means	 he	 was
decommissioned	for	no	reason	at	all.



Yes.	Remwha,	who	rarely	looks	pleased	on	a	good	day,	has	now	curled	his
lip	 in	 disgust.	 At	 me.	 I’m	 so	 shocked	 by	 this	 that	 I	 forget	 to	 pretend
indifference.	That	 is	 precisely	 her	 point.	 It	 doesn’t	matter	what	we	 do.	 The
problem	is	them.



It	doesn’t	matter	what	we	do.	The	problem	is	them.



When	I	am	clean,	Kelenli	cups	my	face	in	her	hands.	“Do	you	know	the
word	‘legacy’?”



I’ve	heard	 it	 and	guessed	 its	meaning	 from	context.	 It’s	 difficult	 to	 pull
my	 thoughts	 back	 on	 track	 after	 Remwha’s	 angry	 rejoinder.	He	 and	 I	 have
never	 much	 liked	 one	 another,	 but…	 I	 shake	 my	 head	 and	 focus	 on	 what
Kelenli	has	asked	me.	“A	legacy	is	something	obsolete,	but	which	you	cannot
get	rid	of	entirely.	Something	no	longer	wanted,	but	still	needed.”



She	 grimace-smiles,	 first	 at	 me	 and	 then	 at	 Remwha.	 She’s	 heard
everything	he	said	to	me.	“That	will	do.	Remember	that	word	today.”



Then	she	gets	to	her	feet.	The	three	of	us	stare	at	her.	She’s	not	only	taller
and	browner,	but	she	moves	more,	breathes	more.	Is	more.	We	worship	what
she	is.	We	fear	what	she	will	make	of	us.



“Come,”	she	says,	and	we	follow	her	out	into	the	world.
***

2613:	A	massive	underwater	volcano	erupted	in	the	Tasr	Straits
between	the	Antarctic	Polar	Waste	and	the	Stillness.	Selis	Leader
Zenas,	previously	unknown	to	be	an	orogene,	apparently	quelled	the
volcano,	although	she	was	unable	to	escape	the	tsunami	that	it	caused.
Skies	in	the	Antarctics	darkened	for	five	months,	but	cleared	just
before	a	Season	could	be	officially	declared.	In	the	immediate
aftermath	of	the	tsunami,	Selis	Leader’s	husband	–	the	comm	head	at
the	time	of	the	eruption,	deposed	by	emergency	election	–	attempted
to	defend	their	one-year-old	child	from	a	mob	of	survivors	and	was
killed.	Cause	disputed:	Some	witnesses	say	the	mob	stoned	him,
others	say	the	former	comm	head	was	strangled	by	a	Guardian.
Guardian	took	the	orphaned	infant	to	Warrant.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



5
you	are	remembered

The	attack	comes,	like	clockwork,	near	dawn.



Everyone’s	 ready	 for	 it.	 The	 camp	 is	 about	 a	 third	 of	 the	way	 into	 the
stone	forest,	which	is	as	far	as	Castrima	was	able	to	get	before	full	darkness
made	 further	 progress	 treacherous.	 The	 group	 should	 be	 able	 to	 get	 all	 the
way	through	the	forest	before	sunset	the	next	day	–	assuming	everyone	lives
through	the	night.



Restlessly	you	prowl	the	camp,	and	you	are	not	the	only	one	to	do	so.	The
Hunters	 are	 supposed	 to	 all	 be	 sleeping,	 since	 during	 the	 day	 they	 act	 as
scouts	as	well	as	ranging	afield	to	forage	and	catch	game.	You	see	quite	a	few
of	 them	awake,	 too.	The	Strongbacks	 are	 supposed	 to	 be	 sleeping	 in	 shifts,
but	 all	 of	 them	 are	 up,	 as	 are	 a	 good	 number	 of	 the	 other	 castes.	You	 spot
Hjarka	 sitting	 atop	 a	 pile	 of	 baggage,	 her	 head	 down	 and	 eyes	 shut,	 but
otherwise	 her	 legs	 are	 braced	 for	 a	 quick	 lunge	 and	 there’s	 a	 glassknife	 in
each	hand.	Her	fingers	haven’t	loosened	with	sleep.



It’s	a	stupid	 time	to	attack,	given	all	 this,	but	 there	 isn’t	a	better	one,	so
apparently	your	assailants	decide	 to	work	with	what	 they’ve	got.	You’re	 the
first	 to	 sess	 it,	 and	 you’re	 pivoting	 on	 the	 ball	 of	 one	 foot	 and	 shouting	 a
warning	even	as	you	narrow	your	perception	and	drop	into	that	space	of	mind
from	which	 you	 can	 command	 volcanoes.	A	 fulcrum,	 deep	 and	 strong,	 has
been	rooted	in	the	earth	nearby.	You	follow	it	to	the	midpoint	of	its	potential
torus,	 the	 center	 of	 the	 circle,	 like	 a	 hawk	 sighting	 prey.	 Right	 side	 of	 the
road.	Twenty	feet	into	the	stone	forest,	out	of	line	of	sight	amid	the	wends	and
drooping	greenery.	“Ykka!”



She	appears	at	once	from	wherever	she	was	sitting	amid	the	tents.	“Yeah,
felt	it.”



“Not	 active	 yet.”	By	 this	 you	mean	 that	 the	 torus	 hasn’t	 begun	 to	 draw
heat	 or	movement	 from	 the	 ambient.	But	 that	 fulcrum	 is	 deep	 as	 a	 taproot.
There’s	not	much	seismic	potential	gathered	in	this	region	–	and	indeed,	much
of	the	pressure	on	the	lower-level	strata	has	been	absorbed	by	the	creation	of
the	stone	forest.	Still,	 there’s	always	heat	if	you	go	deep	enough,	and	this	is
deep.	Solid.	Fulcrum-precise.



“We	don’t	have	to	fight,”	Ykka	yells,	suddenly,	into	the	forest.	You	start,
though	you	shouldn’t.	You’re	shocked	that	she	was	serious,	though	you	really
should	know	better	 by	now.	She	 stalks	 forward,	 body	 taut,	 knees	 bent	 as	 if
she’s	about	to	sprint	into	the	forest,	hands	held	out	before	her	and	fingertips
wiggling.



It’s	easier	now	to	reach	for	magic,	though	you	still	focus	on	the	stump	of
your	own	arm	to	begin,	out	of	habit.	It	will	never	feel	natural	for	you	to	use
this	instead	of	orogeny,	but	at	least	your	perception	shifts	quickly.	Ykka’s	way
ahead	of	you.	Wavelets	and	arcs	of	silver	dance	along	the	ground	around	her,
mostly	in	front	of	her,	spreading	and	flickering	as	she	draws	them	up	from	the
ground	and	makes	them	hers.	What	little	vegetation	you	can	sess	in	the	stone
forest	 makes	 it	 easier;	 the	 seedling	 vines	 and	 light-starved	mosses	 act	 like
wires,	 channeling	and	aligning	 the	 silver	 into	patterns	 that	make	 sense.	Are
predictable.	Are	 searching…	ah.	You	 tense	 in	 the	 same	moment	 that	Ykka
does.	Yes.	There.



Above	that	deep-rooted	fulcrum,	at	 the	center	of	a	 torus	 that	has	not	yet
begun	 to	 spin,	 crouches	 a	 body	 etched	 out	 in	 silver.	 For	 the	 first	 time,	 in
comparison,	 you	 notice	 that	 an	 orogene’s	 silver	 is	 both	 brighter	 and	 less
complex	than	that	of	the	plants	and	insects	around	it.	The	same…	er,	amount,
if	that	word	applies,	if	not	capacity	or	potential	or	aliveness,	but	not	the	same
design.	This	orogene’s	 silver	 is	 concentrated	 into	 a	 relative	 few	bright	 lines
that	 all	 align	 in	 similar	 directions.	 They	 don’t	 flicker,	 and	 neither	 does	 his
torus.	He	–	you	guess	that,	but	it	feels	right	–	is	listening.



Ykka,	another	outline	of	precise,	concentrated	silver,	nods	in	satisfaction.
She	 climbs	 up	 on	 top	 of	 some	 of	 the	wagon	 cargo	 so	 her	 voice	will	 carry
better.



“I’m	Ykka	Rogga	Castrima,”	she	calls.	You	guess	that	she	points	at	you.
“She’s	a	rogga,	too.	So’s	he.”	Temell.	“So	are	those	kids	over	there.	We	don’t
kill	roggas	here.”	She	pauses.	“You	hungry?	We’ve	got	a	little	to	spare.	You
don’t	need	to	try	to	take	it.”



That	fulcrum	doesn’t	budge.



Something	else	does,	though	–	from	the	other	side	of	the	stone	forest,	as
thin,	attenuated	agglomerations	of	silver	suddenly	blur	into	chaotic	movement
and	 come	 charging	 toward	 you.	 Other	 raiders;	 Evil	 Earth,	 you	 were	 all	 so
focused	on	 the	 rogga	 that	 you	didn’t	 even	notice	 the	ones	behind	you.	You
hear	 them	now,	 though,	 voices	 rising,	 cursing,	 feet	 pounding	 on	 ashy	 sand.
The	Strongbacks	near	the	barrier	of	stakes	on	that	side	cry	warning.	“They’re
attacking,”	you	call.



“No	shit,”	Ykka	snaps,	drawing	a	glassknife.



You	retreat	to	within	the	tent	circle,	acutely	aware	of	your	vulnerability	in
a	way	 that’s	 strange	and	deeply	unpleasant.	 It’s	worse	because	you	can	still
sess,	and	because	your	instincts	prompt	you	to	respond	when	you	see	where
you	could	help.	A	cluster	of	attackers	comes	at	a	part	of	the	perimeter	that’s
light	on	stakes	and	defenders,	and	you	open	your	eyes	so	you	can	actually	see
them	 trying	 to	 fight	 their	way	 in.	They’re	 typical	commless	 raiders	–	 filthy,
emaciated,	dressed	 in	 an	 ash-faded	combination	of	 rags	 and	newer,	 pilfered
clothing.	You	could	 take	out	all	 six	 in	half	a	breath,	with	a	 single	precision
torus.



But	you	can	also	feel	how…	what?	How	aligned	you	are.	Ykka’s	silver	is
concentrated	 like	 that	 of	 the	 other	 roggas	 you’ve	 observed,	 but	 hers	 is	 still
layered,	 jagged,	 a	 little	 jittery.	 It	 flows	 every-which-way	within	 her	 as	 she
jumps	down	from	the	cargo	wagon	and	shouts	 for	people	 to	help	 the	sparse
Strongbacks	near	that	cluster	of	raiders,	running	to	help	herself.	Your	magic
flows	with	smooth	clarity,	every	line	matching	perfectly	in	direction	and	flow
to	every	other	line.	You	don’t	know	how	to	change	it	back	to	the	way	it	was,
if	that’s	even	possible.	And	you	know	instinctively	that	using	the	silver	when
you’re	like	this	will	pack	every	particle	of	your	body	together	as	neatly	as	a
mason	lays	a	wall	of	bricks.	You’ll	be	stone	the	same	way.



So	 you	 fight	 your	 instincts	 and	 hide,	 much	 as	 that	 rankles.	 There	 are
others	here,	crouching	amid	 the	central	circle	of	 tents	–	 the	comm’s	smaller
children,	 its	 bare	 handful	 of	 elders,	 one	 woman	 so	 pregnant	 that	 she	 can’t
move	with	any	real	flexibility	even	though	she’s	got	a	loaded	crossbow	in	her
hands,	 two	 knife-wielding	 Breeders	 who’ve	 obviously	 been	 charged	 with
defending	her	and	the	children.



When	you	poke	your	head	up	to	observe	the	fighting,	you	catch	a	glimpse
of	something	stunning.	Danel,	having	appropriated	one	of	the	spear-whittled
sticks	 that	 form	 the	 fence,	 is	 using	 it	 to	 carve	 a	 bloody	 swath	 through	 the
raiders.	She’s	phenomenal,	spinning	and	stabbing	and	blocking	and	stabbing
again,	 twirling	 the	 stick	 in	 between	 attacks	 as	 if	 she’s	 fought	 commless	 a
million	 times.	 That’s	 not	 just	 being	 an	 experienced	 Strongback;	 that’s
something	 else.	 She’s	 just	 too	 good.	 But	 it	 follows,	 doesn’t	 it?	 Not	 like
Rennanis	made	her	the	general	of	their	army	for	her	charm.



It	 isn’t	much	 of	 a	 fight	 in	 the	 end.	 Twenty	 or	 thirty	 scrawny	 commless
against	 trained,	 fed,	 prepared	 comm	members?	This	 is	why	 comms	 survive
Seasons,	and	why	long-term	commlessness	is	a	death	sentence.	This	lot	was
probably	desperate;	 there	can’t	have	been	much	traffic	along	the	road	in	 the
past	few	months.	What	were	they	thinking?



Their	orogene,	you	realize.	That’s	who	they	expected	to	win	this	fight	for
them.	But	he’s	still	not	moving,	orogenically	or	physically.



You	get	up,	walking	past	the	lingering	knots	of	fighting.	Self-consciously
adjusting	 your	 mask,	 you	 step	 off	 the	 road	 and	 slip	 through	 the	 perimeter
stakes,	moving	 into	 the	deeper	darkness	of	 the	 stone	 forest.	The	 firelight	of
the	camp	leaves	you	night-blind,	so	you	stop	a	moment	to	allow	your	eyes	to
adjust.	 No	 telling	 what	 kinds	 of	 traps	 the	 commless	 have	 left	 here;	 you
shouldn’t	 be	 doing	 this	 alone.	 Again	 you’re	 surprised,	 though,	 because
between	one	blink	and	the	next,	you	suddenly	begin	to	see	in	silver.	Insects,
leaf	litter,	a	spiderweb,	even	the	rocks	–	all	of	it	now	flickers	in	wild,	veined
patterns,	 their	 cells	 and	 particulates	 etched	 out	 by	 the	 lattice	 that	 connects
them.



And	people.	You	 stop	 as	 you	make	 them	out,	well	 camouflaged	 against
the	silver	bloom	of	 the	 forest.	The	 rogga	 is	 still	where	he’s	been,	a	brighter
etching	 against	 more	 delicate	 lines.	 But	 there	 are	 also	 two	 small	 shapes
crouched	 in	 a	 cavelet,	 about	 twenty	 feet	 further	 into	 the	 forest.	 Two	 other
bodies,	somehow	high	overhead	atop	the	jagged,	curving	rocks	of	the	forest.
Lookouts,	maybe?	None	of	them	move	much.	Can’t	tell	if	they’ve	seen	you,
or	 if	 they’re	 watching	 the	 battle	 somehow.	 You’re	 frozen,	 startled	 by	 this
sudden	 shift	 in	 your	 perception.	 Is	 this	 some	 by-product	 of	 learning	 to	 see
silver	 in	yourself	 and	 the	obelisks?	Maybe	once	you	can	do	 that,	you	see	 it
everywhere.	Or	maybe	you’re	hallucinating	all	of	 it	now,	 like	an	afterimage
against	your	eyelids.	After	 all,	Alabaster	never	mentioned	being	able	 to	 see
like	this	–	but	then,	when	did	Alabaster	ever	try	to	be	a	good	teacher?



You	grope	 forward	 for	a	bit,	hand	out	 in	 front	of	you	 in	case	 it	 is	 some
kind	of	illusion,	but	if	so,	it’s	at	least	an	accurate	one.	While	it’s	strange	to	put
your	foot	down	on	a	lattice	of	silver,	after	a	while	you	get	used	to	it.



The	orogene’s	distinctive	lattice	and	that	still-held	torus	aren’t	far,	but	he’s
somewhere	higher	up	than	the	ground.	Maybe	ten	feet	above	where	you	stand.
This	 is	 explained	 somewhat	 when	 the	 ground	 abruptly	 slopes	 upward	 and
your	hand	touches	stone.	Your	regular	vision	has	adapted	enough	that	you	can
see	there’s	a	pillar	here,	crooked	and	probably	climbable,	at	least	by	someone
who’s	got	more	than	one	arm.	So	you	stop	at	the	foot	of	it	and	say,	“Hey.”



No	response.	You	become	aware	of	breathing:	quick,	shallow,	pent.	Like
someone	who’s	trying	not	to	be	heard	breathing.



“Hey.”	Squinting	in	the	dark,	you	finally	make	out	some	kind	of	structure
of	stacked	branches	and	old	boards	and	debris.	A	blind,	maybe.	From	up	there
in	the	blind,	it	must	be	possible	to	see	the	road.	Sight	doesn’t	matter	for	the
average	orogene;	 untrained	ones	 can’t	 direct	 their	 power	 at	 all.	A	Fulcrum-
trained	orogene,	though,	needs	line	of	sight	to	be	able	to	distinguish	between
freezing	useful	supplies,	or	just	freezing	the	people	defending	same.



Something	 shifts	 in	 the	 blind	 above	 you.	Has	 there	 been	 a	 catch	 in	 the
breathing?	You	try	to	think	of	something	to	say,	but	all	that’s	in	your	head	is	a
question:	 What’s	 a	 Fulcrum-trained	 orogene	 doing	 among	 the	 commless?
Must	have	been	out	on	an	assignment	when	the	Rifting	occurred.	Without	a
Guardian	–	or	he’d	be	dead	–	so	that	means	he’s	fifth	ring	or	higher,	or	maybe
a	 three-	 or	 four-ringer	who’s	 lost	 their	 higher-ranked	 partner.	 You	 envision
yourself,	if	you’d	been	on	the	road	to	Allia	when	the	Rifting	struck.	Knowing
your	Guardian	might	come	for	you,	but	gambling	that	he	might	instead	write
you	 off	 for	 dead…	no.	 That	 ends	 the	 imagining	 right	 there.	 Schaffa	would
have	come	for	you.	Schaffa	did	come	for	you.



But	that	was	between	Seasons.	Guardians	supposedly	do	not	join	comms
when	Seasons	come,	which	means	they	die	–	and,	in	fact,	the	only	Guardian
you’ve	seen	since	the	Rifting	was	that	one	with	Danel	and	the	Rennanis	army.
She	died	 in	 the	boilbug	storm	that	you	invoked,	and	you’re	glad	of	 it,	since
she	was	 one	 of	 the	 bare-skin	 killers	 and	 there’s	more	 than	 the	 usual	wrong
with	that	kind.	Either	way,	here’s	another	ex-blackjacket	out	here	alone,	and
maybe	 afraid,	 and	maybe	 hair-triggered	 to	 kill.	 You	 know	what	 that’s	 like,
don’t	 you?	But	 this	 one	 hasn’t	 attacked	yet.	You	have	 to	 find	 some	way	 to
make	a	connection.



“I	 remember,”	you	say.	 It’s	 soft,	a	murmur.	Like	you	don’t	want	 to	hear
even	yourself.	 “I	 remember	 the	crucibles.	The	 instructors,	killing	us	 to	 save
us.	Did	they	m-make	you	have	children,	too?”	Corundum.	Your	thoughts	jerk
away	 from	memories.	 “Did	 they	–	 shit.”	The	hand	 that	Schaffa	once	broke,
your	 right	hand,	 is	 somewhere	 in	whatever	passes	 for	Hoa’s	belly.	You	 still
feel	it,	though.	Phantom	ache	across	phantom	bones.	“I	know	they	broke	you.
Your	hand.	All	of	us.	They	broke	us	so	they	could	—”



You	hear,	very	clearly,	a	soft,	horrified	inhalation	from	within	the	blind.



The	 torus	 whips	 into	 a	 blurring,	 blistering	 spin,	 and	 explodes	 outward.
You’re	 so	 close	 that	 it	 almost	 catches	 you.	That	 gasp	was	 enough	warning,
though,	and	so	you’ve	braced	yourself	orogenically,	even	if	you	couldn’t	do
so	 physically.	 Physically	 you	 flinch	 and	 it’s	 too	much	 for	 your	 precarious,
one-armed	balance.	You	fall	backward,	landing	hard	on	your	ass	–	but	you’ve
been	drilled	since	childhood	in	how	to	retain	control	on	one	level	even	as	you
lose	it	in	another,	so	in	the	same	instant	you	flex	your	sessapinae	and	simply
slap	his	fulcrum	out	of	the	earth,	inverting	it.	You’re	much	stronger;	it’s	easy.
You	react	magically,	 too,	grabbing	 those	whipping	 tendrils	of	 silver	 that	 the
torus	has	stirred	–	and	belatedly	you	realize	orogeny	affects	magic,	but	 isn’t
magic	 itself,	 in	 fact	 the	magic	 flinches	 away	 from	 it;	 that’s	 why	 you	 can’t
work	high-level	orogeny	without	negatively	impacting	your	ability	to	deploy
magic,	how	nice	to	finally	understand!	Regardless,	you	tamp	the	wild	threads
of	magic	back	down,	and	quell	everything	at	once,	so	that	nothing	worse	than
a	rime	of	frost	dusts	your	body.	It’s	cold,	but	only	on	your	skin.	You’ll	live.



Then	you	 let	go	–	 and	all	 the	orogeny	and	magic	 snaps	 away	 from	you
like	 stretched	 rubber.	 Everything	 in	 you	 seems	 to	 twang	 in	 response,	 in
resonance,	and	–	oh	–	oh	no	–	you	feel	the	amplitude	of	the	resonance	rise	as
your	cells	begin	to	align…	and	compress	into	stone.



You	can’t	stop	it.	You	can,	however,	direct	it.	In	the	instant	that	you	have,
you	 decide	 which	 body	 part	 you	 can	 afford	 to	 lose.	 Hair!	 No,	 too	 many
strands,	 too	much	of	 it	distant	 from	 the	 live	 follicles;	you	can	do	 it	but	 it’ll
take	too	long	and	half	your	scalp	will	be	stone	by	the	time	you’re	done.	Toes?
You	need	to	be	able	to	walk.	Fingers?	You’ve	only	got	one	hand,	need	to	keep
it	intact	as	long	as	you	can.



Breasts.	Well,	you’re	not	planning	on	having	more	children	anyway.



It’s	enough	 to	channel	 the	 resonance,	 the	stoning,	 into	 just	one.	Have	 to
take	it	through	the	glands	under	the	armpit,	but	you	manage	to	keep	it	above
the	muscle	layer;	that	might	keep	the	damage	from	impairing	your	movement
and	breathing.	You	pick	the	left	breast,	to	offset	your	missing	right	arm.	The
right	breast	is	the	one	you	always	liked	better,	anyway.	Prettier.	And	then	you
lie	 there	when	 it’s	done,	 still	 alive,	 hyperaware	of	 the	 extra	weight	on	your
chest,	too	shocked	to	mourn.	Yet.



Then	you’re	pushing	yourself	up,	awkwardly,	grimacing,	as	the	person	in
the	 blind	 utters	 a	 nervous	 little	 chuckle	 and	 says,	 “Oh,	 rust.	 Oh,	 Earth.
Damaya?	It	really	is	you.	Sorry	about	the	torus,	I	was	just	–	You	don’t	know
what	it’s	been	like.	I	can’t	believe	it.	Do	you	know	what	they	did	to	Crack?”



Arkete,	says	your	memory.	“Maxixe,”	says	your	mouth.



It’s	Maxixe.
***

Maxixe	is	half	the	man	he	used	to	be.	Physically,	anyway.



He’s	got	no	legs	below	the	thighs.	One	eye,	or	rather	only	one	that	works.
The	left	one	is	clouded	with	damage,	and	it	doesn’t	track	quite	with	the	other.
The	 left	 side	of	his	head	–	he’s	got	almost	nothing	 left	of	 that	 lovely	blond
ashblow	 that	 you	 remember,	 just	 a	 knife-hacked	 bottlebrush	 –	 is	 a	mess	 of
pinkish	 scars,	 amid	which	 you	 think	 the	 ear	 is	 healed	 shut.	 The	 scars	 have
seamed	his	forehead	and	cheek,	and	pull	his	mouth	a	little	out	of	true	on	that
side.



Yet	he	wriggles	 down	 from	 the	blind	nimbly,	walking	on	his	 hands	 and
lifting	his	 torso	and	 stumpy	 legs	with	 sheer	muscle	 as	he	does	 so.	He’s	 too
good	at	getting	around	without	legs;	must	have	been	doing	it	for	a	while	now.
He	makes	it	over	to	you	before	you’re	able	to	climb	to	your	feet.	“It	really	is
you.	 I	 thought,	 I	 heard	 you	 were	 only	 fourth	 ring,	 did	 you	 really	 punch
through	my	torus?	I’m	a	sixer.	Six!	But	that’s	how	I	knew,	see,	you	still	sess
the	same,	still	quiet	on	the	outside	and	rusting	furious	on	the	inside,	it	really	is
you.”



The	other	commless	are	starting	to	creep	down	from	their	spires	and	such.
You	 tense	as	 they	appear	–	scarecrow	figures,	 thin	and	ragged	and	stinking,
watching	 you	 from	 stolen	 or	 homemade	 goggles	 and	 above	 wraparound
masks	 that	 obviously	 used	 to	 be	 somebody’s	 clothes.	 They	 do	 not	 attack,
however.	They	gather	and	watch	you	with	Maxixe.



You	stare	as	he	circles	you,	levering	himself	along	rapidly.	He’s	wearing
commless	 rags,	 long-sleeved	 and	 layered,	 but	 you	 can	 see	 how	 big	 his
shoulder	 and	 arm	 muscles	 are	 under	 the	 tattered	 cloth.	 The	 rest	 of	 him	 is
scrawny.	The	 gauntness	 of	 his	 face	 is	 painful	 to	 see,	 but	 it’s	 clear	what	 his
body	has	prioritized	during	the	long	hungry	months.



“Arkete,”	 you	 say,	 because	 you	 remember	 that	 he	 always	 preferred	 the
name	he	was	born	with.



He	stops	circling	and	peers	at	you	for	a	moment,	head	tilted.	Maybe	this
helps	him	see	better	with	one	functioning	eye.	The	look	on	his	face	tells	you
off,	though.	He’s	not	Arkete,	any	more	than	you	are	Damaya.	Too	much	has
changed.	Maxixe	it	is,	then.



“You	remembered,”	he	says,	though.	In	that	moment	of	stillness,	this	eye
in	his	previous	storm	of	words,	you	glimpse	the	thoughtful,	charming	boy	you
remember.	Even	though	the	coincidence	of	this	is	almost	too	much	to	digest.
The	 only	 thing	 stranger	 would	 be	 running	 into…	 the	 brother	 you	 actually
forgot	 you	 had,	 until	 just	 now.	 What	 was	 his	 name?	 Earthfires,	 you’ve
forgotten	that,	too.	But	you	probably	wouldn’t	recognize	him,	if	you	saw	him.
The	grits	of	the	Fulcrum	were	your	siblings,	in	pain	if	not	in	blood.



You	shake	your	head	to	focus,	and	nod.	You’re	on	your	feet	now,	dusting
leaf	litter	and	ash	off	your	butt,	though	awkwardly	around	the	pulling	weight
on	 your	 chest.	 “I’m	 surprised	 I	 remembered,	 too.	 You	must	 have	made	 an
impression.”



He	 smiles.	 It’s	 lopsided.	Only	 half	 his	 face	works	 the	way	 it	 should.	 “I
forgot.	Tried	hard	to,	anyway.”



You	 set	 your	 jaw,	 steeling	 yourself.	 “I’m	 –	 sorry.”	 It’s	 pointless.	 He
probably	doesn’t	even	remember	what	you’re	sorry	about.



He	shrugs.	“Doesn’t	matter.”



“It	does.”



“No.”	He	 looks	away	for	a	moment.	“I	should	have	 talked	 to	you,	after.
Shouldn’t	have	hated	you	the	way	I	did.	Shouldn’t	have	let	her,	them,	change
me.	But	I	did,	and	now…	none	of	that	matters.”



You	know	exactly	which	“her”	he’s	referring	to.	After	that	whole	incident
with	 Crack,	 bullying	 that	 exposed	 a	 whole	 network	 of	 grits	 just	 trying	 to
survive	 and	 a	 larger	 network	 of	 adults	 exploiting	 their	 desperation…	 You
remember.	Maxixe,	returning	to	the	grit	barracks	one	day	with	both	his	hands
broken.



“Better	than	what	they	did	to	Crack,”	you	murmur,	before	it	occurs	to	you
not	to	say	this.



Yet	he	nods,	unsurprised.	“Went	to	a	node	station	once.	It	wasn’t	her.	Rust
knows	what	 I	 was	 thinking…	But	 I	 wanted	 to	 search	 them	 all.	 Before	 the
Season.”	 He	 utters	 a	 ragged,	 bitter	 chuckle.	 “I	 didn’t	 even	 like	 her.	 Just
needed	to	know.”



You	shake	your	head.	Not	that	you	don’t	understand	the	impulse;	you’d	be
lying	if	you	said	you	hadn’t	thought	it,	too,	in	the	years	since	you	learned	the
truth.	Go	 to	 all	 the	 stations.	 Figure	 out	 some	way	 to	 restore	 their	 damaged
sessapinae	and	set	them	free.	Or	kill	them	as	a	kindness;	ah,	you’d	have	been
such	a	good	 instructor,	 if	 the	Fulcrum	had	ever	given	you	a	 chance.	But	of
course	you	did	nothing.	And	of	course	Maxixe	didn’t	do	anything	to	save	the
node	maintainers,	either.	Only	Alabaster	ever	managed	that.



You	take	a	deep	breath.	“I’m	with	them,”	you	say,	jerking	your	head	back
toward	the	road.	“You	heard	what	the	headwoman	said.	Orogenes	welcome.”



He	sways	a	little,	there	on	his	stumps	and	arms.	It’s	hard	to	see	his	face	in
the	dark.	“I	can	sess	her.	She’s	the	headwoman?”



“Yeah.	And	everyone	in	the	comm	knows	it.	They’re	–	This	comm	is	—”
And	you	take	a	deep	breath.	“We.	Are	a	comm	that’s	trying	to	do	something
different.	Orogenes	and	stills.	Not	killing	each	other.”



He	 laughs,	which	 sets	 off	 a	 few	moments	 of	 coughing.	 The	 other	 stick
figures	 chuckle,	 too,	 but	 it’s	 Maxixe’s	 cough	 that	 worries	 you.	 It’s	 dry,
hacking,	pebbly;	not	a	good	sound.	He’s	been	breathing	too	much	ash	without
a	 mask.	 It’s	 loud,	 too.	 If	 the	 Hunters	 aren’t	 nearby,	 watching	 and	 perhaps
ready	to	shoot	him	and	his	people,	you’ll	eat	your	runny-sack.



At	the	end	of	the	coughing	fit,	he	tilts	his	head	up	at	you	again,	with	an
amused	look	in	his	eye.	“I’m	doing	the	same	thing,”	he	drawls.	With	his	chin,
he	points	 toward	his	 gathered	people.	 “These	 rusters	 stick	with	me	because
I’m	not	 going	 to	 eat	 them.	They	don’t	 fuck	with	me	because	 I’ll	 kill	 them.
There:	peaceful	coexistence.”



You	look	around	at	them	and	frown.	Hard	to	see	their	expressions.	“They
didn’t	attack	my	people,	though.”	Or	they’d	be	dead.



“Nah.	 That	 was	 Olemshyn.”	 Maxixe	 shrugs;	 it	 makes	 his	 whole	 body
move.	 “Half-Sanzed	 bastard.	 Got	 kicked	 out	 of	 two	 comms	 for	 ‘anger
management	 issues,’	 he	 said.	He	would’ve	 gotten	 us	 all	 killed	 raiding,	 so	 I
told	anybody	who	wanted	to	live	and	could	stand	me	to	come	follow	me,	and
we	did	our	own	thing.	This	side	of	the	forest	is	ours,	that	side	was	theirs.”



Two	commless	tribes,	not	one.	Maxixe’s	hardly	qualifies,	 though;	only	a
handful	of	people	besides	himself?	But	he	 said	 it:	Those	who	could	 endure
living	with	 a	 rogga	went	with	 him.	 That	 just	 didn’t	 turn	 out	 to	 be	 a	 lot	 of
people.



Maxixe	turns	and	climbs	halfway	up	to	the	blind	again,	so	that	he	can	sit
down	and	also	be	on	an	eye	level	with	you.	He	lets	out	another	rattly	cough
from	the	effort	of	doing	this.	“I	figure	he	was	expecting	me	to	hit	you	lot,”	he
continues,	once	the	cough	subsides.	“That’s	how	we	usually	do	it:	I	ice	’em,
his	 group	 grabs	 what	 it	 can	 before	 I	 and	 mine	 can	 show	 up,	 we	 both	 get
enough	 to	 go	 on	 a	 little	 longer.	 But	 I	 was	 all	 fucked	 up	 from	 what	 your
headwoman	 said.”	He	 looks	 away,	 shaking	 his	 head.	 “Olemshyn	 should’ve
broken	off	once	he	saw	I	wasn’t	going	to	ice	you,	but,	well.	I	did	say	he	was
gonna	get	them	killed.”



“Yeah.”



“Good	riddance.	What	happened	to	your	arm?”	He’s	looking	at	you	now.
He	can’t	see	your	left	breast,	even	though	you’re	slouching	a	little	to	the	left.
It	hurts,	weighing	on	your	flesh.



You	counter,	“What	happened	to	your	legs?”



He	smiles,	lopsidedly,	and	doesn’t	answer.	Neither	do	you.



“So,	not	killing	each	other.”	Maxixe	shakes	his	head.	“And	that’s	actually
working	out?”



“So	far.	We’re	trying,	anyway.”



“Won’t	work.”	Maxixe	shifts	again	and	darts	another	 look	at	you.	“How
much	did	it	cost	you,	to	join	them?”



You	don’t	say	nothing,	because	that’s	not	what	he’s	asking,	anyway.	You
can	see	the	bargain	he’s	made	for	survival	here:	his	skills	in	exchange	for	the
raiders’	limited	food	and	dubious	shelter.	This	stone	forest,	this	death	trap,	is
his	doing.	How	many	people	did	he	kill	for	his	raiders?



How	many	have	you	killed,	for	Castrima?



Not	the	same.



How	many	people	were	in	Rennanis’s	army?	How	many	of	them	did	you
sentence	 to	 be	 steam-cooked	 alive	 by	 insects?	 How	many	 ash-mounds	 dot
Castrima-over	now,	each	with	a	hand	or	booted	foot	poking	out?



Not	the	rusting	same.	That	was	them	or	you.



Just	like	Maxixe,	trying	to	survive.	Him	or	them.



You	 set	 your	 jaw	 to	 silence	 this	 internal	 argument.	 There	 isn’t	 time	 for
this.



“We	 can’t	 —”	 you	 attempt,	 then	 shift.	 “There	 are	 other	 ways	 besides
killing.	Other…	We	 don’t	 just	 have	 to	 be…	 this.”	Ykka’s	words,	 awkward
and	 oily	 with	 hypocrisy	 from	 your	 mouth.	 And	 are	 those	 words	 even	 true
anymore?	 Castrima	 no	 longer	 has	 the	 geode	 to	 force	 cooperation	 between
orogene	and	still.	Maybe	it’ll	all	fall	apart	tomorrow.



Maybe.	But	until	then,	you	force	yourself	to	finish.	“We	don’t	have	to	be
what	they	made	us,	Maxixe.”



He	shakes	his	head,	 staring	at	 the	 leaf	 litter.	 “You	 remember	 that	name,
too.”



You	lick	your	lips.	“Yeah.	I’m	Essun.”



He	 frowns	a	 little	 at	 this,	perhaps	because	 it	 isn’t	 a	 stone-themed	name.
That’s	why	 you	 picked	 it.	 He	 doesn’t	 question	 it,	 though.	At	 last	 he	 sighs.
“Rusting	 look	 at	me,	 Essun.	Listen	 to	 the	 rocks	 in	my	 chest.	 Even	 if	 your
headwoman	will	 take	half	 a	 rogga,	 I’m	not	going	 to	 last	much	 longer.	Also
—”	Because	he’s	sitting,	he	can	use	his	hands;	he	gestures	around	at	the	other
scarecrow	figures.



“No	comm	will	let	us	in,”	says	one	of	the	smaller	figures.	You	think	that’s
a	woman’s	voice,	but	it’s	so	hoarse	and	weary	you	can’t	tell.	“Don’t	even	play
that	game.”



You	shift,	uncomfortable.	The	woman	is	right;	Ykka	might	be	willing	to
take	in	a	commless	rogga,	but	not	the	rest.	Then	again,	you	can	never	figure
out	quite	what	Ykka	will	do.	“I	can	ask.”



Chuckles	all	around,	jaded	and	thin	and	tired.	A	few	more	rattly	coughs	in
addition	 to	Maxixe’s.	These	 people	 are	 starved	 nearly	 to	 death,	 and	 half	 of
them	are	sick.	This	is	pointless.	Still.	To	Maxixe,	you	say,	“If	you	don’t	come
with	us,	you’ll	die	here.”



“Olemshyn’s	people	had	most	of	 the	 supplies.	We’ll	 go	 take	 ’em.”	That
sentence	ends	on	a	pause:	the	opening	bid	in	a	bargain.	“And	it’s	all	of	us,	or
none	of	us.”



“Up	 to	 the	 headwoman,”	 you	 say,	 refusing	 to	 commit.	 But	 you	 know
haggling	 when	 you	 hear	 it.	 His	 Fulcrum-trained	 orogeny	 in	 exchange	 for
comm	membership	for	him	and	his	handful,	with	 the	deal	sweetened	by	 the
raiders’	supplies.	And	he’s	fully	prepared	to	walk	away	if	Ykka	can’t	meet	his
opening	price.	It	bothers	you.	“I’ll	also	put	in	a	good	word	for	your	character,
or	at	least	your	character	thirty	years	ago.”



He	smiles	a	little.	Hard	not	to	see	that	smile	as	patronizing.	Look	at	you,
trying	to	make	this	something	more	than	it	is.	You’re	probably	projecting.	“I
also	 know	 a	 little	 about	 the	 area.	 Might	 be	 useful,	 since	 you’re	 obviously
going	somewhere.”	He	jerks	his	chin	toward	firelight	reflecting	off	the	crags
closer	to	the	road.	“You	are	going	somewhere?”



“Rennanis.”



“Assholes.”



Which	means	the	Rennanis	army	must	have	come	through	the	area	on	its
way	south.	You	let	yourself	smile.	“Dead	assholes.”



“Huh.”	He	squints	his	good	eye.	“They’ve	been	smashing	comms	all	over
the	area.	That’s	why	we’ve	had	 such	a	hard	 time;	no	 trade	caravans	 to	 raid
once	the	Rennies	were	done.	I	did	sess	something	weird	in	the	direction	they
went,	though.”



He	 falls	 silent,	 watching	 you,	 because	 of	 course	 he	 knows.	 Any	 rogga
with	 rings	 should	 have	 sessed	 the	 activity	 of	 the	 Obelisk	 Gate	 when	 you
ended	the	Rennanis-Castrima	war	so	decisively.	They	might	not	have	known
what	 they	 were	 sessing,	 and	 unless	 they	 knew	 magic,	 they	 wouldn’t	 have
perceived	the	totality	of	it	even	if	they’d	known,	but	they	would	have	at	least
picked	up	the	backwash.



“That…	was	me,”	you	say.	It’s	surprisingly	hard	to	admit.



“Rusting	Earth,	Da	–	Essun.	How?”



You	take	a	deep	breath.	Extend	a	hand	to	him.	So	much	of	your	past	keeps
coming	 back	 to	 haunt	 you.	 You	 can	 never	 forget	 where	 you	 came	 from,
because	it	won’t	rusting	let	you.	But	maybe	Ykka’s	got	the	right	of	it.	You	can
reject	 these	dregs	of	your	old	 self	 and	pretend	 that	nothing	and	no	one	else
matters…	or	 you	 can	 embrace	 them.	Reclaim	 them	 for	what	 they’re	worth,
and	grow	stronger	as	a	whole.



“Let’s	go	talk	to	Ykka,”	you	say.	“If	she	adopts	you	–	and	your	people,	I
know	 –	 I’ll	 tell	 you	 everything.”	 And	 if	 he’s	 not	 careful,	 you’ll	 end	 up
teaching	him	how	to	do	it,	too.	He’s	a	six-ringer,	after	all.	If	you	fail,	someone
else	will	have	to	take	up	the	mantle.



To	your	surprise,	he	regards	your	hand	with	something	akin	to	wariness.
“Not	sure	I	want	to	know	everything.”



It	makes	you	smile.	“You	really	don’t.”



He	 smiles	 lopsidedly.	 “You	 don’t	 want	 to	 know	 everything	 that’s
happened	to	me,	either.”



You	incline	your	head.	“Deal,	then.	Only	the	good	parts.”



He	grins.	One	of	 his	 teeth	 is	missing.	 “That’s	 too	 short	 to	 even	make	 a
good	pop	lorist	tale.	Nobody	would	buy	a	story	like	that.”



But.	Then	he	shifts	his	weight	and	lifts	his	right	hand.	The	skin	is	thick	as
horn,	beyond	callused,	and	filthy.	You	wipe	your	hand	on	your	pants	without
thinking,	after.	His	people	chuckle	at	this.



Then	you	lead	him	back	toward	Castrima,	into	the	light.
***

2470:	Antarctics.	Massive	sinkhole	began	to	open	beneath	city	of
Bendine	(comm	died	shortly	after).	Karst	soils,	not	seismic,	but	the
sinking	of	the	city	generated	waves	that	Antarctic	Fulcrum	orogenes
detected.	From	the	Fulcrum,	somehow	shifted	whole	city	to	more
stable	position,	saving	most	of	population.	Fulcrum	records	note	that
doing	this	killed	three	senior	orogenes.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



6
Nassun	makes	her	fate

The	monthlong	journey	to	Steel’s	deadciv	ruin	is	uneventful	by	the	standards
of	mid-Season	 travel.	Nassun	 and	Schaffa	 have	 or	 forage	 sufficient	 food	 to
sustain	 themselves,	 though	 both	 of	 them	 begin	 to	 lose	 weight.	 Nassun’s
shoulder	heals	without	trouble,	though	she	is	feverish	and	weak	for	a	couple
of	days	at	one	point,	and	on	those	days	Schaffa	calls	a	halt	for	rest	sooner	than
she	 thinks	he	normally	would	have.	On	 the	 third	day	 the	 fever	 is	 gone,	 the
wound	is	beginning	to	scab,	and	they	resume.



They	encounter	almost	no	one	else	on	the	road,	though	that	is	unsurprising
a	 year	 and	 a	 half	 into	 the	 Season.	Anyone	 still	 commless	 at	 this	 point	 has
joined	a	 raider	band,	 and	 there	won’t	 be	many	of	 those	 left	 –	 just	 the	most
vicious,	 or	 the	 ones	 with	 some	 kind	 of	 edge	 beyond	 savagery	 and
cannibalism.	Most	 of	 those	will	 have	 gone	 north,	 into	 the	 Somidlats	where
there	are	more	comms	to	prey	upon.	Not	even	raiders	like	the	Antarctics.



In	many	ways	the	near-solitude	suits	Nassun	fine.	No	other	Guardians	to
tiptoe	 around.	No	commfolk	whose	 irrational	 fears	must	 always	be	planned
for.	Not	even	other	orogene	children;	Nassun	misses	the	others,	misses	 their
chatter	and	 the	comradeship	 that	 she	enjoyed	with	 them	for	 so	brief	a	 time,
but	at	the	end	of	the	day,	she	resented	how	much	time	and	attention	Schaffa
had	 to	 give	 them.	She’s	 old	 enough	 to	 know	 that	 it’s	 childish	 for	 her	 to	 be
jealous	of	such	a	thing.	(Her	parents	doted	on	Uche,	too,	but	it	is	horrifyingly
obvious	now	that	getting	more	attention	isn’t	necessarily	favoritism.)	Doesn’t
mean	she	isn’t	glad,	and	greedy,	for	the	chance	to	have	Schaffa	all	to	herself.



Their	time	together	is	companionable,	and	largely	silent,	by	day.	At	night
they	sleep,	curled	together	against	the	deepening	cold,	secure	because	Nassun
has	 reliably	 demonstrated	 that	 the	 slightest	 shift	 in	 the	 ambient,	 or	 footstep
upon	the	nearby	ground,	is	enough	to	wake	her.	Sometimes	Schaffa	does	not
sleep;	he	tries,	but	instead	lies	shuddering	minutely,	catching	his	breath	now
and	again	with	half-suppressed	muscle	 twitches,	 trying	not	 to	disturb	her	 in
his	 quiet	 agonies.	When	 he	 does	 sleep,	 it	 is	 fitful	 and	 shallow.	 Sometimes
Nassun	does	not	sleep,	either,	aching	in	silent	sympathy.



So	she	resolves	to	do	something	about	it.	It’s	the	thing	she	learned	to	do
back	in	Found	Moon,	though	to	a	lesser	degree:	She	sometimes	lets	the	little
corestone	in	his	sessapinae	have	some	of	her	silver.	She	doesn’t	know	why	it
works,	but	she	recalls	seeing	the	Guardians	in	Found	Moon	all	taking	bits	of
silver	from	their	charges	and	exhaling	afterward,	as	 if	 it	eased	something	 in
them	to	give	the	corestone	someone	else	to	chew	on.



Schaffa,	however,	has	not	 taken	silver	from	her	or	anyone	else	since	the
day	she	offered	all	of	hers	to	him	–	the	day	she	realized	the	true	nature	of	the
metal	shard	in	his	brain.	She	thinks	maybe	she	understands	why	he	stopped.
Something	 changed	 between	 them	 that	 day,	 and	 he	 can	 no	 longer	 bring
himself	 to	 feed	 on	 her	 like	 some	 sort	 of	 parasite.	 But	 that	 is	 why	 Nassun
sneaks	him	magic	now.	Because	something	changed	between	them,	and	he’s
not	a	parasite	if	she	needs	him,	too,	and	if	she	gives	what	he	will	not	take.



(One	day	soon,	she	will	learn	the	word	symbiosis	and	nod,	pleased	to	have
a	name	for	it	at	last.	But	long	before	that,	she	will	have	already	decided	that
family	will	do.)



When	 Nassun	 gives	 Schaffa	 her	 silver,	 though	 he	 is	 asleep,	 his	 body
swallows	it	so	quickly	that	she	must	snatch	her	hand	away	to	avoid	losing	too
much.	She	can	spare	only	dribbles.	Any	more	and	she	will	be	 the	one	 tired
and	unable	to	travel	the	next	day.	Even	that	tiny	amount	is	enough	to	let	him
sleep,	however	–	and	as	the	days	pass,	Nassun	finds	herself	gradually	making
more	 silver,	 somehow.	 It’s	 a	 welcome	 change;	 now	 she	 can	 ease	 his	 pain
better	 without	 wearying	 herself.	 Every	 time	 she	 sees	 Schaffa	 settle	 into	 a
deep,	peaceful	 sleep,	 she	 feels	proud	and	good,	even	 though	she	knows	she
isn’t.	Doesn’t	matter.	She	is	determined	to	be	a	better	daughter	to	Schaffa	than
she	was	to	Jija.	Everything	will	be	better,	until	the	end.



Schaffa	 sometimes	 tells	 stories	 in	 the	 evenings,	 while	 dinner	 cooks.	 In
them,	the	Yumenes	of	the	past	is	a	place	both	wondrous	and	strange,	as	alien
as	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 sea.	 (It	 is	 always	 the	 Yumenes	 of	 the	 past.	 Recent
Yumenes	 is	 lost	 to	him,	 along	with	his	memories	of	 the	Schaffa	he	used	 to
be.)	Even	the	idea	of	Yumenes	is	hard	for	Nassun	to	comprehend:	millions	of
people,	none	of	them	farmers	or	miners	or	anything	that	fits	within	the	range
of	her	experience,	many	of	them	obsessed	with	strange	fads	and	politics	and
alignments	far	more	complex	than	those	of	caste	or	race.	Leaders,	but	also	the
elite	Yumenescene	Leadership	 families.	Strongbacks	of	 the	union	 and	 those
without,	varying	by	their	connections	and	financial	security.	Innovators	from
generations-old	 families	 who	 competed	 to	 be	 sent	 off	 to	 the	 Seventh
University,	and	Innovators	who	merely	built	and	repaired	 trinkets	out	of	 the
city’s	shantytowns.	It	is	strange	to	realize	that	much	of	Yumenes’s	strangeness
was	simply	because	it	lasted	so	long.	It	had	old	families.	Books	in	its	libraries
that	 were	 older	 than	 Tirimo.	 Organizations	 that	 remembered,	 and	 avenged,
slights	from	three	or	four	Seasons	back.



Schaffa	 also	 tells	 her	 about	 the	 Fulcrum,	 although	 not	 much.	 There	 is
another	 memory	 hole	 here,	 deep	 and	 fathomless	 as	 an	 obelisk	 –	 though
Nassun	finds	herself	unable	 to	resist	probing	its	edges.	It	 is	a	space	that	her
mother	once	inhabited,	after	all,	and	in	spite	of	everything,	this	fascinates	her.
Schaffa	remembers	Essun	poorly,	however,	even	when	Nassun	works	up	the
courage	to	ask	direct	questions	about	 the	matter.	He	tries	 to	answer	Nassun,
but	his	speech	 is	halting	when	he	does,	and	 the	 look	 that	crosses	his	 face	 is
pained,	 troubled,	 paler	 than	 usual.	 She	 therefore	 forces	 herself	 to	 ask	 these
questions	slowly,	hours	or	days	apart,	to	give	him	time	to	recover	in	between.
What	she	learns	is	little	more	than	she	has	already	guessed	about	her	mother
and	the	Fulcrum	and	life	before	the	Season.	It	helps	to	hear	it,	nevertheless.



The	miles	pass	like	this,	in	memory	and	edged-around	pain.



Conditions	 in	 the	 Antarctics	 grow	 worse	 by	 the	 day.	 The	 ashfall	 is	 no
longer	intermittent,	and	the	landscape	has	begun	to	turn	into	a	still	life	of	hills
and	ridges	and	dying	plants	chiseled	in	gray-white.	Nassun	starts	to	miss	the
sight	 of	 the	 sun.	 One	 night	 they	 hear	 the	 squeals	 of	 what	 must	 be	 a	 large
kirkhusa	romp	out	hunting,	 though	fortunately	the	sound	is	distant.	One	day
they	 pass	 a	 pond	whose	 surface	 is	mirror-gray	 from	 floating	 ash;	 the	water
underneath	is	disturbingly	still,	given	that	the	pond	is	fed	by	a	rapid	stream.
Although	their	canteens	are	low,	Nassun	looks	at	Schaffa,	and	Schaffa	nods	in
silent,	wary	agreement.	There’s	nothing	overtly	wrong,	but…	well.	Surviving
a	Season	is	as	much	a	matter	of	having	the	right	instincts	as	having	the	right
tools.	They	avoid	the	still	water,	and	live.



On	 the	 evening	 of	 the	 twenty-ninth	 day,	 they	 reach	 a	 place	 where	 the
Imperial	Road	abruptly	plateaus	and	veers	southward.	Nassun	sesses	that	the
road	 edges	 along	 something	 that	 feels	 a	 bit	 like	 a	 crater	 rim.	 They	 have
crested	 the	 ridge	 that	 surrounds	 this	 circular,	 unusually	 flat	 region,	 and	 the
road	follows	the	ridge	in	an	arc	around	the	zone	of	old	damage,	resuming	its
westward	 track	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 In	 the	 middle,	 though,	 Nassun	 at	 last
beholds	a	wonder.



The	Old	Man’s	Pucker	is	a	sommian	–	a	caldera	inside	a	caldera.	This	one
is	unusual	in	being	so	perfectly	formed;	from	what	Nassun	has	read,	usually
the	 outer,	 older	 caldera	 is	 badly	 damaged	 by	 the	 eruption	 that	 creates	 the
inner,	 newer	 caldera.	 In	 this	 case	 the	 outer	 one	 is	 an	 intact,	 nearly	 perfect
circle,	 though	heavily	eroded	by	time	and	forested	over;	Nassun	can’t	really
see	it	under	the	greenery,	though	she	can	sess	it	clearly.	The	inner	caldera	is	a
little	more	oblong,	and	it	gleams	so	brightly	from	a	distance	that	Nassun	can
guess	what	happened	without	even	sessing	it.	The	eruption	must	have	been	so
hot,	at	least	at	one	point,	that	the	whole	geological	formation	nearly	destroyed
itself.	What	 remains	 has	 gone	 to	 glass,	 naturally	 tempered	 enough	 that	 not
even	centuries	of	weathering	has	damaged	it	much.	The	volcano	that	created
this	sommian	is	extinct	now,	its	ancient	magma	chamber	long	since	emptied,
not	 even	 a	 whiff	 of	 leftover	 heat	 lingering.	 Once	 upon	 a	 time,	 though,	 the
Pucker	 was	 the	 site	 of	 a	 truly	 awesome	 –	 and	 horrific	 –	 puncturing	 of	 the
world’s	crust.



As	Steel	instructed,	they	camp	for	the	night	a	mile	or	two	back	from	the
Pucker.	 In	 the	 small	 hours	 before	 dawn,	 Nassun	 wakes,	 hearing	 a	 distant
screech,	 but	 Schaffa	 soothes	 her.	 “I’ve	 heard	 that	 now	 and	 again,”	 he	 says
softly,	 over	 the	 crackling	 of	 the	 fire.	 He	 insisted	 on	 a	 watch	 this	 time,	 so
Nassun	took	the	earlier	shift.	“Something	in	the	Pucker	forest.	It	doesn’t	seem
to	be	coming	this	way.”



She	believes	him.	But	neither	of	them	sleeps	well	that	night.



In	the	morning,	they	rise	before	dawn	and	start	up	the	road.	In	the	early-
morning	light,	Nassun	stares	at	the	deceptively	still	double	crater	before	them.
Up	close,	it’s	easier	to	see	that	there	are	breaks	in	the	inner	caldera’s	walls	at
regular	intervals;	someone	meant	for	people	to	be	able	to	get	inside.	The	outer
caldera’s	 floor	 is	completely	overgrown,	however,	yellow-green	and	waving
with	a	forest	of	treelike	grass	that	has	apparently	choked	out	every	other	form
of	vegetation	in	the	area.	There’s	no	sess	of	even	game	trails	across	it.



The	real	surprise,	though,	is	underneath	the	Pucker.



“Steel’s	deadciv	ruin,”	she	says.	“It’s	underground.”



Schaffa	glances	at	her	in	surprise,	but	he	does	not	protest.	“In	the	magma
chamber?”



“Maybe?”	Nassun	can’t	believe	 it,	either,	at	 first,	but	 the	silver	does	not
lie.	She	notices	something	else	strange	as	she	expands	her	sesunal	awareness
of	the	area.	The	silver	mirrors	the	perturbations	of	topography	and	the	forest
here	 –	 the	 same	 way	 it	 does	 everywhere.	 Yet	 the	 silver	 here	 is	 brighter,
somehow,	and	it	seems	to	flow	more	readily	from	plant	to	plant	and	rock	to
rock.	These	blend	to	become	larger,	dazzling	flows	that	all	run	together	like
streams,	until	 the	 ruin	 sits	within	a	pool	of	glimmering,	 churning	 light.	She
can’t	 make	 out	 details,	 there’s	 so	 much	 of	 it	 –	 just	 empty	 space,	 and	 an
impression	of	buildings.	 It’s	huge,	 this	 ruin.	A	city,	 like	no	city	Nassun	has
ever	sessed.



But	she	has	sessed	this	torrential	churn	of	silver	before.	She	cannot	help
turning	to	glance	back	toward	the	sapphire	that	 is	faintly	visible	some	miles
off.	They’ve	outpaced	it,	but	it’s	still	following.



“Yes,”	Schaffa	says.	He’s	been	watching	her,	and	missing	nothing	as	she
makes	the	connections.	“I	don’t	remember	this	city,	but	I	know	of	others	like
it.	The	obelisks	were	made	in	such	places.”



She	shakes	her	head,	trying	to	fathom	it	all.	“What	happened	to	this	city?
There	must	have	been	a	lot	of	people	here	once.”



“The	Shattering.”



She	 inhales.	 She’s	 heard	 of	 it,	 of	 course,	 and	 believed	 in	 it	 the	 way
children	believe	most	stories.	She	remembers	seeing	an	artist’s	line	rendering
of	the	event	in	one	of	her	creche	books:	lightning	and	rocks	falling	from	the
sky,	fire	erupting	from	the	ground,	tiny	human	figures	running	and	doomed.
“So	that’s	what	it	was	like?	A	big	volcano?”



“The	 Shattering	was	 like	 this	here.”	 Schaffa	 gazes	 out	 over	 the	waving
forest.	 “Elsewhere,	 it	was	 different.	The	Shattering	was	 a	 hundred	 different
Seasons,	Nassun,	 all	 over	 the	world,	 all	 striking	 at	 once.	 It	 is	 a	marvel	 that
anything	of	humanity	survived.”



The	 way	 he’s	 talking…	 It	 seems	 impossible,	 but	 Nassun	 bites	 her	 lip.
“Were	you…	do	you	remember	it?”



He	glances	 at	Nassun,	 surprised,	 and	 then	 smiles	 in	 a	way	 that	 is	 equal
parts	weary	and	wry.	“I	don’t.	 I	 think…	I	suspect	 that	 I	was	born	sometime
after,	though	I	have	no	proof	of	that.	Even	if	I	could	remember	the	Shattering,
though,	I	feel	fairly	certain	that	I	wouldn’t	want	to.”	He	sighs,	then	shakes	his
head.	 “The	 sun	 is	 up.	 Let’s	 face	 the	 future,	 at	 least,	 and	 leave	 the	 past	 to
itself.”	Nassun	nods,	and	they	step	off	the	trail	into	the	trees.



The	 trees	 are	 strange	 things,	with	 long,	 thin	 leaves	 like	 elongated	 grass
blades,	 and	narrow,	 flexible	 trunks	 that	grow	no	more	 than	a	 couple	of	 feet
apart.	In	some	places	Schaffa	has	to	stop	and	push	apart	two	or	three	trees	so
that	they	can	wriggle	through.	This	makes	for	hard	going,	though,	and	before
long	Nassun	 is	out	of	breath.	She	 stops,	dripping	 sweat,	but	Schaffa	pushes
on.	“Schaffa,”	she	says,	about	to	ask	for	a	break.



“No,”	 he	 says,	 pushing	 over	 another	 tree	 with	 a	 grunt.	 “Remember	 the
stone	 eater’s	warning,	 little	 one.	We	must	 reach	 the	 center	 of	 this	 forest	 by
dusk.	It’s	now	clear	we	will	need	every	moment	of	that	time.”



He’s	right.	Nassun	swallows,	starts	taking	deeper	breaths	so	she	can	work
better,	and	then	resumes	pushing	through	the	forest	with	him.



She	 develops	 a	 rhythm,	 working	 with	 him.	 She’s	 good	 at	 finding	 the
quickest	 paths	 that	 don’t	 require	 pushing	 through,	 and	 when	 she	 does,	 he
follows	her.	When	these	paths	end,	however,	he	shoves	and	kicks	and	breaks
trees	until	the	way	is	clear,	while	she	follows.	She	can	catch	her	breath	during
these	brief	lulls,	but	it’s	never	quite	enough.	A	stitch	develops	in	her	side.	She
starts	having	trouble	seeing	because	the	tree	leaves	keep	pulling	some	of	her
hair	 loose	 from	 its	 twin	 buns,	 and	 sweat	 has	 made	 the	 curls	 lengthen	 and
dangle	 into	her	eyes.	She	wants	desperately	 to	 rest	 for	an	hour	or	so.	Drink
some	water.	Eat	something.	The	clouds	overhead	get	grayer	as	the	hours	pass,
however,	and	it	becomes	increasingly	hard	to	tell	how	much	daylight	is	left.



“I	can,”	Nassun	tries	at	one	point,	while	trying	to	think	of	how	she	can	use
orogeny,	or	the	silver,	or	something,	to	clear	the	way.



“No,”	 Schaffa	 says,	 somehow	 intuiting	what	 she	would	 have	 said.	He’s
produced	 a	 black	 glass	 poniard	 from	 somewhere.	 It’s	 not	 a	 useful	 knife	 for
this	 situation,	although	somehow	he	has	made	 it	 so	by	 stabbing	each	of	 the
grass-tree	 trunks	 before	 kicking	 them	 down.	 That	 helps	 them	 break	 more
easily.	 “Freezing	 these	 plants	 would	 only	 make	 them	 more	 difficult	 to	 get
through,	and	a	shake	could	cause	the	magma	chamber	below	us	to	collapse.”



“The	s-silver,	then	—”



“No.”	He	 stops	 for	 only	 a	moment	 and	 turns	 to	 fix	 a	 hard	 gaze	 on	 her.
He’s	not	breathing	harder,	she	notes	with	great	chagrin,	although	a	faint	sheen
of	sweat	does	glisten	on	his	 forehead.	His	 iron	shard	punishes	him,	but	still
grudgingly	 grants	 him	 greater	 strength.	 “Other	 Guardians	 may	 be	 near,
Nassun.	It’s	unlikely	at	this	point,	but	still	a	possibility.”



All	Nassun	can	do	is	grope	for	another	question,	because	this	momentary
pause	is	giving	her	time	to	catch	her	breath.	“Other	Guardians?”	Ah,	but	then
he	has	said	that	they	all	go	somewhere	during	a	Season,	and	that	this	station
that	 Steel	 told	 them	 about	 is	 the	 means	 by	 which	 they	 do	 it.	 “Do	 you
remember	something?”



“Nothing	more,	sadly.”	He	smiles	a	little,	knowingly,	as	if	he	can	tell	what
she’s	doing.	“Only	that	this	is	how	we	get	there.”



“Get	where?”



His	smile	fades,	expression	settling	into	that	familiar,	disturbing	blankness
for	the	briefest	of	instants.	“Warrant.”



She	remembers,	belatedly,	that	his	full	name	is	Schaffa	Guardian	Warrant.
It	 has	 never	 occurred	 to	 her	 to	wonder	where	 the	 comm	of	Warrant	 is.	But
what	 does	 it	 mean	 that	 the	 way	 to	Warrant	 is	 through	 a	 buried	 dead	 city?
“Wh-why	—”



He	shakes	his	head	then,	expression	hardening.	“Stop	stalling.	In	this	low
light,	not	every	nocturnal	hunter	will	wait	for	night.”	He	glances	up	at	the	sky
with	a	look	that	is	only	mildly	annoyed,	as	if	it	does	not	threaten	their	lives.



It’s	pointless	 to	complain	 that	 she	 is	 ready	 to	drop.	 It’s	 a	Season.	 If	 she
drops,	she	dies.	So	she	forces	herself	through	the	gap	he	has	broken,	and	starts
questing	again	for	the	best	route.



In	 the	 end	 they	 make	 it,	 which	 is	 good	 because	 otherwise	 this	 would
become	 the	 rather	 straightforward	 tale	of	you	 learning	 that	your	daughter	 is
dead,	and	letting	the	world	wither	in	your	grief.



It	isn’t	even	a	near	thing.	Abruptly	the	last	patch	of	thick	grass-trees	thins
out,	revealing	a	smooth-cut	pass	through	the	inner	caldera	ring.	The	walls	of
the	pass	loom	high	overhead,	though	they	did	not	look	so	tall	from	far	away,
and	the	pass	itself	is	wide	enough	for	two	horse-drawn	carriages	to	travel	side
by	 side	 without	 crowding.	 The	 walls	 of	 these	 passages	 are	 covered	 in
tenacious	 mosses	 and	 some	 sort	 of	 woody	 vine,	 the	 latter	 of	 which	 is
fortunately	 dead	 because	 otherwise	 it	 might	 entangle	 them	 and	 slow	 their
progress	more.	Instead	they	hurry	forward,	cracking	the	dead	branches	aside,
and	 then	abruptly	Nassun	and	Schaffa	 stumble	out	of	 the	pass	onto	 a	wide,
round	slab	of	perfectly	white	material	that	is	neither	metal	nor	stone.	Nassun’s
seen	 something	 like	 it	 before,	near	other	deadciv	 ruins;	 sometimes	 the	 stuff
glows	faintly	at	night.	This	particular	slab	fills	the	entirety	of	the	space	within
the	inner	caldera.



Steel	 has	 told	 them	 that	 the	 deadciv	 ruin	 is	 here,	 at	 the	 center	 –	 but	 all
Nassun	 sees	 ahead	 of	 them	 is	 a	 dainty,	 rising	 curl	 of	 metal,	 seemingly	 set
directly	into	the	white	material.	She	tenses,	as	wary	of	something	new	as	any
Seasoned	survivor.	Schaffa,	however,	walks	over	to	it	without	hesitation.	He
stops	beside	it,	and	for	an	instant	there	is	an	odd	expression	on	his	face	that
Nassun	suspects	is	caused	by	the	momentary	conflict	between	what	his	body
has	done	out	of	habit	and	what	his	mind	cannot	remember	–	but	then	he	puts	a
hand	on	the	curlicue	at	the	tip	of	the	metal.



Flat	 shapes	and	 lines	of	 light	suddenly	appear	out	of	nothingness	on	 the
stone	 around	him.	Nassun	gasps,	 but	 they	do	nothing	other	 than	march	 and
ignite	others	in	turn,	spreading	and	glowing	until	a	roughly	rectangular	shape
has	 been	 etched	 out	 on	 the	 stone	 at	 Schaffa’s	 feet.	 There	 is	 a	 faint,	 barely
audible	hum	that	makes	Nassun	twitch	and	look	around	wildly,	but	a	moment
later	the	white	material	in	front	of	Schaffa	vanishes.	It	doesn’t	slide	aside,	or
open	like	a	door;	it’s	just	gone.	But	it	is	a	doorway,	Nassun	abruptly	realizes.
“And	here	we	are,”	Schaffa	murmurs.	He	sounds	a	little	surprised	himself.



Beyond	 this	 doorway	 is	 a	 tunnel	 that	 curves	 gradually	 down	 into	 the
ground	and	out	of	sight.	Narrow	rectangular	panels	of	light	edge	the	steps	on
either	side,	illuminating	the	way.	The	curling	bit	of	metal	is	a	railing,	she	sees
now,	 her	 perception	 reorienting	 as	 she	 moves	 to	 stand	 beside	 Schaffa.
Something	to	hold	on	to,	as	one	walks	down	into	the	depths.



In	a	distant	part	of	the	grass	forest	that	they	just	traversed,	there	is	a	high-
pitched	grating	noise	that	Nassun	immediately	identifies	as	animal.	Chitinous,
maybe.	A	closer,	louder	version	of	the	screeches	they	heard	the	night	before.
Nassun	flinches	and	looks	at	Schaffa.



“Some	sort	of	grasshopper,	I	believe,”	he	says.	His	jaw	is	tight	as	he	gazes
back	at	 the	pass	 they	 just	 traversed,	 though	nothing	moves	 there	–	yet.	 “Or
cicadas,	perhaps.	Inside	now.	I’ve	seen	something	like	this	mechanism	before;
it	should	close	after	we	pass	through.”



He	gestures	for	her	to	go	first	so	that	he	can	guard	the	rear.	Nassun	takes	a
deep	breath	and	reminds	herself	that	this	is	what	is	necessary	to	make	a	world
that	will	hurt	no	one	else.	Then	she	trots	down	the	stairs.



The	light	panels	ignite	five	or	six	steps	ahead	as	she	progresses,	and	fade
three	steps	behind.	Once	 they’re	a	 few	feet	down,	 just	as	Schaffa	predicted,
the	 white	 material	 that	 covered	 the	 stairwell	 reappears,	 cutting	 off	 further
screeches	from	the	forest.



Then	there	is	nothing	but	the	light,	and	the	stairs,	and	the	long-forgotten
city	somewhere	below.

***
2699:	Two	Fulcrum	blackjackets	summoned	to	Deejna	comm	(Uher
Quartent,	Western	Coastals,	near	Kiash	Traps)	when	Mount	Imher
showed	eruption	signs.	Blackjackets	informed	comm	officials	that
eruption	was	imminent,	and	that	it	would	likely	touch	off	the	whole
Kiash	cluster,	including	Madness	(local	name	for	the	supervolcano
that	triggered	the	Madness	Season;	Imher	sits	on	the	same	hot	spot).
Upon	determining	that	Imher	was	beyond	their	ability	to	quell,	the
blackjackets	–	one	three-ringer,	the	other	supposedly	seven	although
did	not	wear	rings	for	some	reason	–	made	the	attempt	anyway,	due	to
insufficient	time	to	send	for	higher-ringed	Imperial	Orogenes.	They
successfully	stilled	the	eruption	long	enough	for	a	nine-ring	senior
Imperial	Orogene	to	arrive	and	push	it	back	into	dormancy.	(Three-
ringer	and	seven-ringer	found	holding	hands,	charred,	frozen.)

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



Syl	Anagist:	Three
	

Fascinating.	 All	 of	 this	 grows	 easier	 to	 remember	 with	 the	 telling…	 or
perhaps	I	am	still	human,	after	all.

***
At	first	our	field	excursion	is	simply	the	act	of	walking	through	the	city.	We
have	spent	the	brief	years	since	our	initial	decanting	immersed	in	sesuna,	the
sense	of	energy	in	all	 its	forms.	A	walk	outside	forces	us	to	pay	attention	to
our	other,	 lesser	 senses,	 and	 this	 is	 initially	overwhelming.	We	 flinch	at	 the
springiness	 of	 pressed-fiber	 sidewalks	 under	 our	 shoes,	 so	 unlike	 the	 hard
lacquerwood	of	our	quarters.	We	sneeze	trying	to	breathe	air	thick	with	smells
of	 bruised	 vegetation	 and	 chemical	 by-product	 and	 thousands	 of	 exhaled
breaths.	Their	first	sneeze	frightens	Dushwha	into	tears.	We	clap	hands	over
our	ears	to	try,	and	fail,	to	screen	out	many	voices	talking	and	walls	groaning
and	leaves	rustling	and	machinery	whining	in	the	distance.	Bimniwha	tries	to
yell	 over	 it	 all,	 and	 Kelenli	 must	 stop	 and	 soothe	 her	 before	 she	 will	 try
speaking	 normally	 again.	 I	 duck	 and	 yelp	 in	 fear	 of	 the	 birds	 that	 sit	 in	 a
nearby	bush,	and	I	am	the	calmest	of	us.



What	settles	us,	at	last,	is	finally	having	the	chance	to	gaze	upon	the	full
beauty	 of	 the	 amethyst	 plutonic	 fragment.	 It	 is	 an	 awesome	 thing,	 pulsing
with	the	slow	flux	of	magic	as	it	towers	over	the	city-node’s	heart.	Every	node
of	Syl	Anagist	has	adapted	in	unique	ways	to	suit	its	local	climate.	We	have
heard	of	nodes	in	the	desert	where	buildings	are	grown	from	hardened	giant
succulents;	nodes	on	 the	ocean	built	by	coral	organisms	engineered	 to	grow
and	die	on	command.	(Life	is	sacred	in	Syl	Anagist,	but	sometimes	death	is
necessary.)	Our	node	–	 the	node	of	 the	amethyst	–	was	once	an	old-growth
forest,	so	I	cannot	help	thinking	that	something	of	ancient	trees’	majesty	is	in
the	 great	 crystal.	 Surely	 this	 makes	 it	 more	 stately	 and	 strong	 than	 other
fragments	of	the	machine!	This	feeling	is	completely	irrational,	but	I	look	at
my	 fellow	 tuners’	 faces	 as	we	gaze	 at	 the	 amethyst	 fragment,	 and	 I	 see	 the
same	love	there.



(We	 have	 been	 told	 stories	 of	 how	 the	 world	 was	 different,	 long	 ago.
Once,	cities	were	not	 just	dead	 themselves,	stone	and	metal	 jungles	 that	did
not	grow	or	change,	but	they	were	actually	deadly,	poisoning	soil	and	making
water	undrinkable	and	even	changing	the	weather	by	their	very	existence.	Syl
Anagist	is	better,	but	we	feel	nothing	when	we	think	of	the	city-node	itself.	It
is	nothing	to	us	–	buildings	full	of	people	we	cannot	truly	understand,	going
about	business	 that	 should	matter	but	does	not.	The	 fragments,	 though?	We
hear	 their	voices.	We	sing	their	magic	song.	The	amethyst	 is	part	of	us,	and
we	it.)



“I’m	going	to	show	you	three	things	during	this	trip,”	Kelenli	says,	once
we’ve	gazed	at	the	amethyst	enough	to	calm	down.	“These	things	have	been
vetted	by	the	conductors,	if	that	matters	to	you.”	She	makes	a	show	of	eying
Remwha	as	 she	 says	 this,	 since	he	was	 the	one	who	made	 the	biggest	 stink
about	having	to	go	on	this	trip.	Remwha	affects	a	bored	sigh.	They	are	both
excellent	actors,	before	our	watching	guards.



Then	Kelenli	leads	us	forward	again.	It’s	such	a	contrast,	her	behavior	and
ours.	 She	 walks	 easily	 with	 head	 high,	 ignoring	 everything	 that	 isn’t
important,	radiating	confidence	and	calm.	Behind	her,	we	start-and-stop-and-
scurry,	all	timid	clumsiness,	distracted	by	everything.	People	stare,	but	I	don’t
think	it’s	actually	our	whiteness	that	they	find	so	strange.	I	think	we	just	look
like	fools.



I	have	always	been	proud,	and	their	amusement	stings,	so	I	straighten	and
try	 to	 walk	 as	 Kelenli	 does,	 even	 though	 this	means	 ignoring	many	 of	 the
wonders	 and	 potential	 threats	 around	me.	Gaewha	 notices,	 too,	 and	 tries	 to
emulate	 both	 of	 us.	 Remwha	 sees	 what	 we	 are	 doing	 and	 looks	 annoyed,
sending	 a	 little	 ripple	 through	 the	 ambient:	We	 will	 never	 be	 anything	 but
strange	to	them.



I	answer	in	an	angry	basso	push-wave	throb.	This	is	not	about	them.



He	sighs	but	begins	emulating	me,	too.	The	others	follow	suit.



We	have	traveled	to	the	southernmost	quartent	of	the	city-node,	where	the
air	 is	 redolent	 with	 faint	 sulfur	 smells.	 Kelenli	 explains	 that	 the	 smell	 is
because	 of	 the	 waste	 reclamation	 plants,	 which	 grow	 thicker	 here	 where
sewers	bring	the	city’s	gray	water	near	the	surface.	The	plants	make	the	water
clean	again	and	spread	thick,	healthy	foliage	over	the	streets	to	cool	them,	as
they	were	designed	to	do	–	but	not	even	the	best	genegineers	can	stop	plants
that	live	on	waste	from	smelling	a	bit	like	what	they	eat.



“Do	 you	 mean	 to	 show	 us	 the	 waste	 infrastructure?”	 Remwha	 asks
Kelenli.	“I	feel	more	contextual	already.”



Kelenli	snorts.	“Not	exactly.”



She	turns	a	corner,	and	then	there	is	a	dead	building	before	us.	We	all	stop
and	stare.	Ivy	wends	up	this	building’s	walls,	which	are	made	of	some	sort	of
red	clay	pressed	into	bricks,	and	around	some	of	its	pillars,	which	are	marble.
Aside	from	the	ivy,	though,	nothing	of	the	building	is	alive.	It’s	squat	and	low
and	 shaped	 like	 a	 rectangular	 box.	 We	 can	 sess	 no	 hydrostatic	 pressure
supporting	its	walls;	it	must	use	force	and	chemical	fastenings	to	stay	upright.
The	windows	are	just	glass	and	metal,	and	I	can	see	no	nematocysts	growing
over	 their	 surfaces.	How	 do	 they	 keep	 safe	 anything	 inside?	The	 doors	 are
dead	 wood,	 polished	 dark	 red-brown	 and	 carved	 with	 ivy	 motifs;	 pretty,
surprisingly.	 The	 steps	 are	 a	 dull	 tawny-white	 sand	 suspension.	 (Centuries
before,	people	called	this	concrete.)	The	whole	thing	is	stunningly	obsolete	–
yet	intact,	and	functional,	and	thus	fascinating	for	its	uniqueness.



“It’s	so…	symmetrical,”	says	Bimniwha,	curling	her	lip	a	little.



“Yes,”	says	Kelenli.	She’s	stopped	before	this	building	to	let	us	take	it	in.
“Once,	though,	people	thought	this	sort	of	thing	was	beautiful.	Let’s	go.”	She
starts	forward.



Remwha	stares	after	her.	“What,	inside?	Is	that	thing	structurally	sound?”



“Yes.	And	yes,	we’re	going	inside.”	Kelenli	pauses	and	looks	back	at	him,
perhaps	surprised	to	realize	that	at	least	some	of	his	reticence	wasn’t	an	act.
Through	the	ambient,	I	feel	her	touch	him,	reassure	him.	Remwha	is	more	of
an	ass	when	he	is	afraid	or	angry,	so	her	comfort	helps;	the	spiky	jitter	of	his
nerves	begins	to	ease.	She	still	has	to	play	the	game,	however,	for	our	many
observers.	“Though	I	suppose	you	could	stay	outside,	if	you	wanted.”



She	glances	at	her	two	guards,	the	brown	man	and	woman	who	stay	near
her.	 They	 have	 not	 kept	 back	 from	 our	 group,	 unlike	 the	 other	 guards	 of
whom	we	catch	glimpses	now	and	again,	skirting	our	periphery.



Woman	Guard	scowls	back	at	her.	“You	know	better.”



“It	was	a	thought.”	Kelenli	shrugs	then,	and	gestures	with	her	head	toward
the	building,	speaking	to	Remwha	now.	“Sounds	like	you	don’t	actually	have
a	choice.	But	I	promise	you,	the	building	won’t	collapse	on	your	head.”



We	 move	 to	 follow.	 Remwha	 walks	 a	 little	 slower,	 but	 eventually	 he
comes	along,	too.



A	holo-sign	writes	itself	in	the	air	before	us	as	we	cross	the	threshold.	We
have	not	been	taught	 to	read,	and	the	letters	of	 this	sign	look	strange	in	any
case,	 but	 then	 a	 booming	 voice	 sounds	 over	 the	 building’s	 audio	 system:
“Welcome	to	the	story	of	enervation!”	I	have	no	idea	what	this	means.	Inside,
the	building	smells…	wrong.	Dry	and	dusty,	the	air	stale	as	if	there’s	nothing
taking	in	its	carbon	dioxide.	There	are	other	people	here,	we	see,	gathered	in
the	 building’s	 big	 open	 foyer	 or	making	 their	way	 up	 its	 symmetrical	 twin
curving	 stairs,	 peering	 in	 fascination	 at	 the	 panels	 of	 carved	 wooden
decoration	 which	 line	 each	 stair.	 They	 don’t	 look	 at	 us,	 distracted	 by	 the
greater	strangeness	of	our	environs.



But	then,	Remwha	says,	“What	is	that?”



His	 unease,	 prickling	 along	 our	 network,	makes	 us	 all	 look	 at	 him.	He
stands	frowning,	tilting	his	head	from	one	side	to	the	other.



“What	is	—”	I	start	to	ask,	but	then	I	hear?	sess?	it	too.



“I’ll	show	you,”	says	Kelenli.



She	leads	us	deeper	into	the	boxy	building.	We	walk	past	display	crystals,
each	 holding	 preserved	 within	 itself	 a	 piece	 of	 incomprehensible	 –	 but
obviously	old	–	equipment.	I	make	out	a	book,	a	coil	of	wire,	and	a	bust	of	a
person’s	head.	Placards	near	each	 item	explain	 its	 importance,	 I	 think,	but	 I
cannot	fathom	any	explanation	sufficient	to	make	sense	of	it	all.



Then	Kelenli	leads	us	onto	a	wide	balcony	with	an	old-fashioned	ornate-
wood	 railing.	 (This	 is	 especially	 horrifying.	We	 are	 to	 rely	 on	 a	 rail	 made
from	a	dead	 tree,	unconnected	 to	 the	city	alarm	grid	or	anything,	 for	safety.
Why	not	just	grow	a	vine	that	would	catch	us	if	we	fell?	Ancient	times	were
horrible.)	And	 there	we	 stand	 above	 a	 huge	 open	 chamber,	 gazing	 down	 at
something	that	belongs	in	this	dead	place	as	much	as	we	do.	Which	is	to	say,
not	at	all.



My	first	 thought	 is	 that	 it	 is	 another	plutonic	engine	–	a	whole	one,	not
just	 a	 fragment	 of	 a	 larger	 piece.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 the	 tall,	 imposing	 central
crystal;	 there	 is	 the	 socket	 from	which	 it	grows.	This	 engine	has	even	been
activated;	much	of	its	structure	hovers,	humming	just	a	little,	a	few	feet	above
the	floor.	But	this	is	 the	only	part	of	the	engine	that	makes	sense	to	me.	All
around	the	central	crystal	float	longer,	inward-curving	structures;	the	whole	of
the	design	 is	somehow	floral,	a	stylized	chrysanthemum.	The	central	crystal
glows	a	pale	gold,	and	the	supporting	crystals	fade	from	green	bases	to	white
at	the	tips.	Lovely,	if	altogether	strange.



Yet	when	I	look	at	this	engine	with	more	than	my	eyes,	and	touch	it	with
nerves	attuned	to	the	perturbations	of	the	earth,	I	gasp.	Evil	Death,	the	lattice
of	 magics	 created	 by	 the	 structure	 is	 magnificent!	 Dozens	 of	 silvery,
threadlike	lines	supporting	one	another;	energies	across	spectra	and	forms	all
interlinked	 and	 state-changing	 in	 what	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 chaotic,	 yet	 utterly
controlled,	order.	The	central	crystal	flickers	now	and	again,	phasing	through
potentialities	 as	 I	watch.	And	 it’s	 so	 small!	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 an	 engine	 so
well	constructed.	Not	even	the	Plutonic	Engine	is	this	powerful	or	precise,	for
its	size.	 If	 it	had	been	built	as	efficiently	as	 this	 tiny	engine,	 the	conductors
would	never	have	needed	to	create	us.



And	yet	this	structure	makes	no	sense.	There	isn’t	enough	magic	being	fed
into	the	mini-engine	to	produce	all	the	energy	I	detect	here.	And	I	shake	my
head,	 but	 now	 I	 can	 hear	 what	 Remwha	 heard:	 a	 soft,	 insistent	 ringing.
Multiple	tones,	blending	and	haunting	and	making	the	little	hairs	on	the	back
of	my	neck	rise…	I	look	at	Remwha,	who	nods,	his	expression	tight.



This	engine’s	magics	have	no	purpose	 that	 I	 can	 see,	other	 than	 to	 look
and	 sound	 and	 be	 beautiful.	 And	 somehow	 –	 I	 shiver,	 understanding
instinctively	but	 resisting	because	 this	 contradicts	 everything	 I	have	 learned
from	 the	 laws	 of	 both	 physics	 and	 arcanity	 –	 somehow	 this	 structure	 is
generating	more	energy	than	it	consumes.



I	 frown	 at	 Kelenli,	 who’s	 watching	 me.	 “This	 should	 not	 exist,”	 I	 say.
Words	 only.	 I	 don’t	 know	 how	 else	 to	 articulate	 what	 I’m	 feeling.	 Shock.
Disbelief?	Fear,	for	some	reason.	The	Plutonic	Engine	is	 the	most	advanced
creation	of	geomagestry	ever	built.	That	is	what	the	conductors	have	told	us,
over	and	over	again	for	all	the	years	since	we	were	decanted…	and	yet.	This
tiny,	 bizarre	 engine,	 sitting	 half-forgotten	 in	 a	 dusty	 museum,	 is	 more
advanced.	And	it	seems	to	have	been	built	for	no	purpose	other	than	beauty.



Why	does	this	realization	frighten	me?



“But	 it	 does	 exist,”	 Kelenli	 says.	 She	 leans	 back	 against	 the	 railing,
looking	 lazily	 amused	 –	 but	 through	 the	 soft	 shimmering	 harmony	 of	 the
structure	on	display,	I	sess	her	ping	on	the	ambient.



Think,	she	says	without	words.	She	watches	me	in	particular.	Her	thinker.



I	 glance	 around	 at	 the	 others.	 As	 I	 do,	 I	 notice	Kelenli’s	 guards	 again.
They’ve	taken	up	positions	on	either	end	of	the	balcony,	so	that	they	can	see
the	 corridor	 we	 came	 down	 as	 well	 as	 the	 display	 room.	 They	 both	 look
bored.	Kelenli	 brought	 us	 here.	Got	 the	 conductors	 to	 agree	 to	 bringing	 us
here.	Means	for	us	to	see	something	in	this	ancient	engine	that	her	guards	do
not.	What?



I	step	forward,	putting	my	hands	on	the	dead	railing,	and	peer	intently	at
the	thing	as	if	that	will	help.	What	to	conclude?	It	has	the	same	fundamental
structure	 as	 other	 plutonic	 engines.	 Only	 its	 purpose	 is	 different	 –	 no,	 no.
That’s	 too	 simple	 an	 assessment.	 What’s	 different	 here	 is…	 philosophical.
Attitudinal.	The	Plutonic	Engine	is	a	tool.	This	thing?	Is…	art.



And	then	I	understand.	No	one	of	Syl	Anagist	built	this.



I	 look	 at	 Kelenli.	 I	 must	 use	 words,	 but	 the	 conductors	 who	 hear	 the
guards’	report	should	not	be	able	to	guess	anything	from	it.	“Who?”



She	 smiles,	 and	 my	 whole	 body	 tingles	 all	 over	 with	 the	 rush	 of
something	I	cannot	name.	I	am	her	thinker,	and	she	is	pleased	with	me,	and	I
have	never	been	happier.



“You,”	she	replies,	to	my	utter	confusion.	Then	she	pushes	away	from	the
railing.	“I	have	much	more	to	show	you.	Come.”

***
All	things	change	during	a	Season.

—	Tablet	One,	“On	Survival,”	verse	two



7
you’re	planning	ahead

Ykka	 is	 more	 inclined	 to	 adopt	 Maxixe	 and	 his	 people	 than	 you	 were
expecting.	She’s	not	happy	that	Maxixe	has	an	advanced	case	of	ash	lung	–	as
Lerna	 confirms	 after	 they’ve	 all	 had	 sponge	 baths	 and	 he’s	 given	 them	 a
preliminary	examination.	Nor	does	she	like	that	four	of	his	people	have	other
serious	medical	issues,	ranging	from	fistulas	to	the	complete	lack	of	teeth,	or
that	Lerna	says	 they’re	all	going	 to	be	 touch	and	go	on	surviving	refeeding.
But,	 as	 she	 informs	 those	 of	 you	 on	 her	 impromptu	 council,	 loudly	 so	 that
anyone	listening	will	hear,	she	can	put	up	with	a	lot	from	people	who	bring	in
extra	 supplies,	 knowledge	 of	 the	 area,	 and	 precision	 orogeny	 that	 can	 help
safeguard	 the	 group	 against	 attack.	And,	 she	 adds,	Maxixe	 doesn’t	 have	 to
live	forever.	Long	enough	to	help	the	comm	will	be	enough	for	her.



She	 doesn’t	 add,	 Not	 like	 Alabaster,	 which	 is	 kind	 –	 or	 at	 least
conspicuously	not-cruel	–	of	her.	 It’s	 surprising	 that	 she	 respects	your	grief,
and	maybe	it’s	also	a	sign	that	she	is	beginning	to	forgive	you.	It’ll	be	good	to
have	a	friend	again.	Friends.	Again.



That’s	 not	 enough,	 of	 course.	 Nassun	 is	 alive	 and	 you’ve	more	 or	 less
recovered	from	your	post-Gate	coma,	so	now	it	becomes	a	struggle,	daily,	to
remember	 why	 you’re	 staying	 with	 Castrima.	 It	 helps,	 sometimes,	 to	 go
through	 the	 reasons	 for	 staying.	For	Nassun’s	 future,	 that’s	one,	 so	 that	you
can	have	somewhere	to	shelter	her	once	you’ve	found	her	again.	Because	you
can’t	do	it	alone	is	the	second	reason	–	and	you	can’t	rightly	let	Tonkee	come
with	 you	 anymore,	 however	 willing	 she	 might	 be.	 Not	 with	 your	 orogeny
compromised;	the	long	journey	back	south	would	be	a	death	sentence	for	both
of	you.	Hoa	isn’t	going	to	be	able	to	help	you	get	dressed,	or	cook	food,	or	do
any	of	 the	other	 things	one	needs	 two	good	hands	for.	And	Reason	Number
Three,	the	most	important	of	the	set:	You	don’t	know	where	to	go	anymore.
Hoa	has	confirmed	that	Nassun	is	on	the	move,	and	has	been	traveling	away
from	 the	site	of	 the	sapphire	since	you	opened	 the	Obelisk	Gate.	 It	was	 too
late	to	find	her	before	you	ever	woke	up.



But	there	is	hope.	In	the	small	hours	of	one	morning	after	Hoa	has	taken
the	stone	burden	of	your	left	breast	from	you,	he	says	quietly,	“I	think	I	know
where	she’s	going.	 If	 I’m	right,	 she’ll	 stop	soon.”	He	sounds	uncertain.	No,
not	uncertain.	Troubled.



You	sit	on	a	rocky	outcrop	some	ways	from	the	encampment,	recovering
from	the…	excision.	It	wasn’t	as	uncomfortable	as	you	thought	it	would	be.
You	pulled	off	your	clothing	layers	to	bare	the	stoned	breast.	He	put	a	hand	on
it	and	it	came	away	from	your	body,	cleanly,	into	his	palm.	You	asked	why	he
didn’t	 do	 that	 for	 your	 arm	 and	 he	 said,	 “I	 do	what’s	most	 comfortable	 for
you.”	 Then	 he	 lifted	 your	 breast	 to	 his	 lips	 and	 you	 decided	 to	 become
fascinated	 by	 the	 flat,	 slightly	 roughened	 cautery	 of	 stone	 over	 the	 space
where	your	breast	was.	It	aches	a	little,	but	you’re	not	sure	whether	this	is	the
pain	of	amputation	or	something	more	existential.



(Three	bites,	it	takes	him,	to	eat	the	breast	that	Nassun	liked	best.	You’re
perversely	proud	to	feed	someone	else	with	it.)



As	 you	 awkwardly	 pull	 undershirts	 and	 shirts	 back	 on	 with	 one	 arm	 –
stuffing	one	side	of	your	bra	with	the	lightest	undershirt	so	it	won’t	slip	off	–
you	probe	after	that	hint	of	unease	that	you	heard	in	Hoa’s	voice	earlier.	“You
know	something.”



Hoa	doesn’t	answer	at	first.	You	think	you’re	going	to	have	to	remind	him
that	 this	 is	 a	 partnership,	 that	 you’re	 committed	 to	 catching	 the	Moon	 and
ending	this	endless	Season,	that	you	care	about	him	but	he	can’t	keep	hiding
things	from	you	like	this	–	and	then	he	finally	says,	“I	believe	Nassun	seeks	to
open	the	Obelisk	Gate	herself.”



Your	reaction	is	visceral	and	immediate.	Pure	fear.	It	probably	isn’t	what
you	 should	 feel.	 Logic	 would	 dictate	 disbelief	 that	 a	 ten-year-old	 girl	 can
manage	 a	 feat	 that	 you	barely	 accomplished.	But	 somehow,	maybe	because
you	remember	 the	 feel	of	your	 little	girl	 thrumming	with	angry	blue	power,
and	you	knew	in	that	instant	that	she	understood	the	obelisks	better	than	you
ever	will,	you	have	no	trouble	believing	Hoa’s	core	premise	–	that	your	little
girl	is	bigger	than	you	thought.



“It	will	kill	her,”	you	blurt.



“Very	likely,	yes.”



Oh,	Earth.	“But	you	can	track	her	again?	You	lost	her	after	Castrima.”



“Yes,	now	that	she	is	attuned	to	an	obelisk.”



Again,	 though,	 that	 odd	 hesitation	 is	 in	 his	 voice.	Why?	Why	would	 it
bother	 him	 that	 –	 Oh.	 Oh,	 rusty	 burning	 Earth.	 Your	 voice	 shakes	 as	 you
understand.	“Which	means	that	any	stone	eater	can	‘perceive’	her	now.	Is	that
what	you’re	saying?”	Castrima	all	over	again.	Ruby	Hair	and	Butter	Marble
and	Ugly	Dress,	may	you	never	 see	 those	 parasites	 again.	Fortunately,	Hoa
killed	most	of	them.	“Your	kind	get	interested	in	us	then,	right?	When	we	start
using	obelisks,	or	when	we’re	close	to	being	able	to.”



“Yes.”	Inflectionless,	that	one	soft	word,	but	you	know	him	by	now.



“Earthfires.	One	of	you	is	after	her.”



You	didn’t	think	stone	eaters	were	capable	of	sighing,	but	sure	enough	the
sound	emerges	from	Hoa’s	chest.	“The	one	you	call	Gray	Man.”



Cold	runs	through	you.	But	yes.	You’d	guessed	already,	really.	There	have
been,	what,	three	orogenes	in	the	world	lately	who	mastered	connecting	to	the
obelisks?	 Alabaster	 and	 you	 and	 now	Nassun.	 Uche,	 maybe,	 briefly	 –	 and
maybe	there	was	even	a	stone	eater	lurking	about	Tirimo	back	then.	Rusting
bastard	must	 be	 terribly	 disappointed	 that	Uche	 died	 by	 filicide	 rather	 than
stoning.



Your	 jaw	tightens	as	your	mouth	 tastes	of	bile.	“He’s	manipulating	her.”
To	activate	the	Gate	and	transform	herself	into	stone,	so	that	she	can	be	eaten.
“That’s	what	he	tried	to	do	at	Castrima,	force	Alabaster,	or	me,	or	–	rust	it,	or
Ykka,	any	of	us,	to	try	to	do	something	beyond	our	ability	so	we	might	turn
ourselves	into	—”	You	put	a	hand	on	the	stone	marker	of	your	breast.



“There	 have	 always	 been	 those	 who	 use	 despair	 and	 desperation	 as
weapons.”	This	is	delivered	softly,	as	if	in	shame.



Suddenly	you’re	furious	with	yourself,	and	your	impotence.	Knowing	that
you’re	the	real	target	of	your	own	anger	doesn’t	stop	you	from	taking	it	out	on
him.	“Seems	to	me	all	of	you	do	that!”



Hoa	has	 positioned	 himself	 to	 gaze	 out	 at	 the	 dull	 red	 horizon,	 a	 statue
paying	homage	to	nostalgia	in	pensive	shadowed	lines.	He	does	not	turn,	but
you	hear	hurt	in	his	voice.	“I	haven’t	lied	to	you.”



“No,	you’ve	just	withheld	the	truth	so	much	it’s	the	same	fucking	thing!”
You	rub	your	eyes.	Had	to	take	the	goggles	off	to	put	your	shirt	back	on,	and
now	 you’ve	 got	 ash	 in	 them.	 “You	 know	what,	 just	 –	 I	 don’t	want	 to	 hear
anything	else	right	now.	I	need	to	rest.”	You	get	to	your	feet.	“Take	me	back.”



His	hand	is	abruptly	extended	in	your	direction.	“One	more	thing,	Essun.”



“I	told	you	—”



“Please.	You	need	to	know	this.”	He	waits	until	you	settle	into	a	fuming
silence.	Then	he	says,	“Jija	is	dead.”



You	freeze.
***

In	 this	moment	 I	 remind	myself	of	why	I	continue	 to	 tell	 this	story	 through
your	eyes	rather	than	my	own:	because,	outwardly,	you’re	too	good	at	hiding
yourself.	 Your	 face	 has	 gone	 blank,	 your	 gaze	 hooded.	 But	 I	 know	 you.	 I
know	you.	Here	is	what’s	inside	you.

***
You	surprise	yourself	by	being	surprised.	Surprised,	that	is,	and	not	angry,	or
thwarted,	or	sad.	Just…	surprised.	But	that	is	because	your	first	thought,	after
relief	that	Nassun’s	safe	now,	is…



Isn’t	she?	



And	then	you	surprise	yourself	by	being	afraid.	You	aren’t	sure	of	what,
but	it’s	a	stark,	sour	thing	in	your	mouth.	“How?”	you	ask.



Hoa	says,	“Nassun.”



The	 fear	 increases.	 “She	 couldn’t	 have	 lost	 control	 of	 her	 orogeny,	 she
hasn’t	done	that	since	she	was	five	—”



“It	was	not	orogeny.	And	it	was	intentional.”



There,	at	last:	 the	foreshock	of	a	Rifting-level	shake,	inside	you.	It	 takes
you	a	moment	to	say	aloud,	“She	killed	him?	On	purpose?”



“Yes.”



You	fall	silent	 then,	dazed,	 troubled.	Hoa’s	hand	is	still	extended	toward
you.	An	offer	of	answers.	You	aren’t	sure	you	want	 to	know,	but…	but	you
take	 his	 hand	 anyway.	 Perhaps	 it’s	 for	 comfort.	You	 don’t	 imagine	 that	 his
hand	folds	about	your	own	and	squeezes,	just	a	little,	in	a	way	that	makes	you
feel	better.	Still	he	waits.	You’re	very,	very	glad	for	his	consideration.



“Is	he…	Where	is,”	you	begin,	when	you	feel	ready.	You’re	not	ready.	“Is
there	a	way	I	can	go	there?”



“There?”



You’re	pretty	sure	he	knows	where	you	mean.	He’s	just	making	sure	you
know	what	you’re	asking	for.



You	swallow	hard	and	try	to	reason	it	out.	“They	were	in	the	Antarctics.
Jija	didn’t	keep	her	on	the	road	forever.	She	had	somewhere	safe,	time	to	get
stronger.”	A	lot	stronger.	“I	can	hold	my	breath	underground,	 if	you…	Take
me	to	where	she	w	—”	But	no.	That’s	not	really	where	you	want	to	go.	Stop
dancing	around	it.	“Take	me	to	where	Jija	is.	To…	to	where	he	died.”



Hoa	doesn’t	move	 for	 perhaps	 half	 a	minute.	You’ve	 noticed	 this	 about
him.	 He	 takes	 varying	 amounts	 of	 time	 to	 respond	 to	 conversational	 cues.
Sometimes	 his	words	 nearly	 overlap	 yours	when	he	 replies,	 and	 sometimes
you	think	he	hasn’t	heard	you	before	he	finally	gets	around	to	replying.	You
don’t	 think	 he’s	 thinking	 during	 that	 time,	 or	 anything.	 You	 think	 it	 just
doesn’t	mean	 anything	 to	 him	 –	 one	 second	 or	 ten,	 now	 or	 later.	He	 heard
you.	He’ll	get	around	to	it	eventually.



In	token	of	which,	at	last,	he	blurs	a	bit,	 though	you	see	the	slowness	of
the	 end	 of	 the	 gesture	 as	 he	 puts	 his	 other	 hand	 over	 yours	 as	 well,
sandwiching	 you	 between	 his	 hard	 palms.	 The	 pressure	 of	 both	 hands
increases	until	the	grip	is	quite	firm.	Not	uncomfortable,	but	still.	“Close	your
eyes.”



He’s	never	suggested	this	before.	“Why?”



He	takes	you	down.	It’s	further	down	than	you’ve	ever	been	before,	and	it
isn’t	 instantaneous	 this	 time.	You	gasp	 inadvertently	–	 somehow	–	and	 thus
discover	 that	 you	don’t	 need	 to	 hold	 your	 breath	 after	 all.	As	 the	 dark	 gets
darker,	 it	brightens	with	flashes	of	red,	and	then	for	 just	a	moment	you	blur
through	molten	 reds	 and	 oranges	 and	 catch	 the	most	 fleeting	 glimpse	 of	 a
wavering	open	 space	where	 something	 in	 the	distance	 is	bursting	apart	 in	 a
shower	of	 semiliquid	glowing	 chunks	–	 and	 then	 there	 is	 black	 around	you
again,	and	then	you	stand	on	open	ground	beneath	a	thinly	clouded	sky.



“That’s	why,”	Hoa	says.



“Rusty	 flaking	 fuck!”	 You	 try	 to	 yank	 your	 hand	 free	 and	 fail.	 “Shit,
Hoa!”



Hoa’s	hands	stop	pressing	so	hard	on	yours,	so	that	you	can	slip	free.	You
stagger	 a	 few	 feet	 away	 and	 then	 clap	 hands	 over	 yourself,	 checking	 for
injury.	You’re	fine	–	not	burned	to	death,	not	crushed	by	the	pressure	as	you
should	have	been,	not	suffocated,	not	even	shaken	up.	Much.



You	 straighten	 and	 rub	 your	 face.	 “Okay.	 I’m	 really	 going	 to	 have	 to
remember	that	stone	eaters	don’t	say	anything	without	reason.	Never	wanted
to	actually	see	the	Fire-Under-Earth.”



But	 you’re	 here	 now,	 standing	 atop	 a	 hill	 that	 is	 itself	 on	 some	 kind	 of
plateau.	The	 sky	 is	 your	place-marker.	 It’s	 later	 in	 the	morning	here	 than	 it
was	 where	 you	 were	 –	 a	 little	 after	 dawn,	 instead	 of	 predawn.	 The	 sun	 is
actually	visible,	 though	thin	through	the	scrim	of	ash	clouds	overhead.	(You
surprise	yourself	by	feeling	an	ache	of	longing	at	the	sight.)	But	the	fact	that
you	can	see	it	means	that	you’re	much	farther	from	the	Rifting	than	you	were
a	few	moments	ago.	You	glance	to	the	west,	and	the	faint	shimmer	of	a	dark
blue	obelisk	in	the	distance	confirms	your	guess.	This	is	where,	a	month	or	so
ago	when	you	opened	the	Obelisk	Gate,	you	felt	Nassun.



(That	 way.	 She’s	 gone	 that	 way.	 But	 that	 way	 lies	 thousands	 of	 square
miles	of	the	Stillness.)



You	 turn	 to	 find	 that	 you’re	 standing	 amid	 a	 small	 cluster	 of	 wooden
buildings	positioned	at	the	top	of	the	hill,	including	one	storeshack	on	stilts,	a
few	lean-tos,	and	what	look	like	dormitories	or	classroom	buildings.	All	of	it
is	 surrounded,	however,	by	a	neat,	precisely	 level	 fence	of	columnar	basalt.
That	 an	 orogene	 has	made	 this,	 harnessing	 the	 slow	 explosion	 of	 the	 great
volcano	beneath	your	feet,	is	as	plain	to	you	as	the	sun	in	the	sky.	But	equally
obvious	is	the	fact	that	the	compound	is	empty.	There’s	no	one	in	sight,	and
the	 reverberations	 of	 footprints	 on	 the	 ground	 are	 farther	 away,	 beyond	 the
fence.



Curious,	you	walk	to	a	break	in	the	basalt	fence,	where	a	pathway	that	is
half	 dirt	 and	 half	 cobbles	wends	 down.	At	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 hill	 is	 a	 village,
occupying	the	rest	of	the	plateau.	The	village	could	be	any	comm	anywhere.
You	make	out	houses	in	varying	shapes,	most	with	still-growing	housegreens,
several	 standing	 storecaches,	what	 looks	 like	 a	 bathhouse,	 a	 kiln	 shed.	The
people	moving	among	the	buildings	don’t	glance	up	to	notice	you,	and	why
would	they?	It’s	a	lovely	day,	here	where	the	sun	still	mostly	shines.	They’ve
got	 fields	 to	 tend	 and	 –	 are	 those	 little	 rowboats	 tied	 to	 one	 of	 the
watchtowers?	–	trips	to	the	nearby	sea	to	organize.	This	compound,	whatever
it	is,	is	unimportant	to	them.



You	turn	away	from	the	village,	and	that’s	when	you	spot	the	crucible.



It’s	near	 the	edge	of	 the	compound,	elevated	a	 little	above	 the	rest	of	 it,
though	visible	from	where	you	are.	When	you	climb	the	path	to	look	into	the
crucible	 bowl,	 which	 is	 marked	 out	 in	 cobbles	 and	 brick,	 it’s	 old	 habit	 to
thrust	your	senses	 into	 the	ground	to	find	the	nearest	marked	stone.	Not	far,
only	maybe	 five	or	 six	 feet	 down.	You	 search	 its	 surface	 and	 find	 the	 faint
pressure	 indentations	 of	 a	 chisel,	maybe	 a	 hammer.	 FOUR .	 It’s	 too	 easy;	 in
your	day	the	stones	were	marked	with	paint	and	numbers,	which	made	them
less	distinctive.	Still,	the	stone	is	small	enough	that,	yes,	anyone	below	a	four-
ringer	would	have	trouble	finding	and	identifying	it.	They’ve	got	 the	details
of	the	training	wrong,	but	the	basics	are	spot-on.



“This	can’t	be	the	Antarctic	Fulcrum,”	you	say,	crouching	to	finger	one	of
the	 stones	 of	 the	 ring.	 Just	 pebbles	 instead	 of	 the	 beautiful	 tile	mosaic	 you
remember,	but	again,	they’ve	got	the	idea.



Hoa’s	 still	 standing	 where	 you	 emerged	 from	 the	 ground,	 hands	 still
positioned	 to	 press	 down	 on	 yours,	 perhaps	 for	 the	 return	 trip.	 He	 doesn’t
answer,	but	then	you’re	mostly	talking	to	yourself.



“I	 always	 heard	 that	 Antarctic	 was	 small,”	 you	 continue,	 “but	 this	 is
nothing.	This	 is	a	camp.”	There’s	no	Ring	Garden.	No	Main	building.	Also,
you’ve	heard	that	the	Arctic	and	Antarctic	Fulcrums	were	lovely,	despite	their
size	and	remote	location.	That	makes	sense;	the	Fulcrum’s	beauty	was	all	that
official,	state-sanctioned	orogene-kind	ever	had	to	show	for	itself.	This	sorry
collection	of	shacks	doesn’t	 fit	 the	 ideology.	Also	–	“It’s	on	a	volcano.	And
too	close	to	those	stills	down	the	hill.”	That	village	isn’t	Yumenes,	surrounded
on	 all	 sides	by	node	maintainers	 and	with	 the	 added	protection	of	 the	most
powerful	 senior	 orogenes.	 One	 overwrought	 grit’s	 tantrum	 could	 turn	 this
whole	region	into	a	crater.



“It	 isn’t	 the	Antarctic	Fulcrum,”	Hoa	says.	His	voice	 is	usually	soft,	but
he’s	turned	away	now,	and	that	makes	him	softer.	“That’s	farther	to	the	west,
and	it	has	been	purged.	No	orogenes	live	there	anymore.”



Of	course	 it’s	been	purged.	You	set	your	 jaw	against	 sorrow.	“So	 this	 is
somebody’s	 idea	 of	 homage.	 A	 survivor?”	 Inadvertently	 you	 find	 another
marker	underground	–	a	small	round	pebble,	maybe	fifty	feet	down.	NINE 	 is
written	on	it,	in	ink.	You	have	no	trouble	reading	it.	Shaking	your	head,	you
rise	and	turn	to	explore	the	compound	further.



Then	 you	 stop,	 tensing,	 as	 a	 man	 limps	 out	 of	 one	 of	 the	 dormitory-
looking	buildings.	He	stops,	too,	staring	at	you	in	surprise.	“Who	the	rust	are
you?”	he	asks,	in	a	noticeable	Antarctic	drawl.



Your	awareness	plummets	into	the	earth	–	and	then	you	wrench	it	back	up.
Stupid,	because	remember?	Orogeny	will	kill	you?	Also,	 the	man	isn’t	even
armed.	He’s	 fairly	 young,	 probably	 only	 in	 his	 twenties	 despite	 an	 already-
receding	 hairline.	 The	 limp	 is	 an	 easy	 thing,	 and	 one	 of	 his	 shoes	 is	 built
higher	than	the	other	–	ah.	The	village	handyman,	probably,	come	to	do	some
basic	caretaking	on	buildings	that	might	again	be	needed	someday.



“Uh,	 hi,”	 you	 stammer.	 Then	 you	 fall	 silent,	 not	 sure	what	 to	 say	 from
there.



“Hi.”	The	man	sees	Hoa	and	flinches,	then	stares	with	the	open	shock	of
someone	who’s	 only	 heard	 of	 stone	 eaters	 in	 lorist	 tales,	 and	maybe	 didn’t
quite	believe	them.	Only	belatedly	does	he	seem	to	remember	you,	frowning	a
little	 at	 the	 ash	 on	 your	 hair	 and	 clothing,	 but	 it’s	 clear	 you’re	 not	 as
impressive	a	sight.	“Tell	me	that’s	a	statue,”	he	says	to	you.	Then	he	laughs	a
little,	 nervously.	 “Except	 it	 wasn’t	 here	 when	 I	 came	 up	 the	 hill.	 Uh,	 hi,	 I
guess?”



Hoa	 doesn’t	 bother	 replying,	 though	 you	 see	 his	 eyes	 have	 shifted	 to
watch	the	man	instead	of	you.	You	steel	yourself	and	step	forward.	“Sorry	to
alarm	you,”	you	say.	“You	from	this	comm?”



The	man	finally	focuses	on	you.	“Uh,	yeah.	And	you’re	not.”	Instead	of
showing	unease,	however,	he	blinks.	“You	another	Guardian?”



Your	skin	prickles	all	over.	For	an	instant	you	want	to	shout	no,	and	then
sense	reasserts	itself.	You	smile.	They	always	smile.	“Another?”



The	young	man’s	looking	you	up	and	down	now,	maybe	suspicious.	You
don’t	 care,	 as	 long	 as	 he	 answers	 your	 questions	 and	 doesn’t	 attack	 you.
“Yeah,”	 he	 says,	 after	 a	 moment.	 “We	 found	 the	 two	 dead	 ones	 after	 the
children	left	on	that	 training	trip.”	His	lip	curls,	 just	a	 little.	You’re	not	sure
whether	he	doesn’t	believe	the	children	have	gone	off	training,	whether	he’s
really	upset	 about	 “the	 two	dead	ones,”	or	whether	 that’s	 just	 the	usual	 lip-
curl	 that	 people	wear	when	 they	 talk	 about	 roggas,	 since	 it’s	 obvious	 that’s
what	the	children	in	question	must	be.	If	Guardians	were	here.	“Headwoman
did	say	there	might	be	other	Guardians	along	someday.	The	three	we	had	all
popped	up	out	of	nowhere,	after	all,	at	different	times	down	the	years.	You’re
just	a	late	one,	I	guess.”



“Ah.”	 It	 is	 surprisingly	 easy	 to	 pretend	 to	 be	 a	 Guardian.	 Just	 keep
smiling,	 and	 never	 offer	 information.	 “And	 when	 did	 the	 others	 leave	 on
their…	training	trip?”



“About	 a	 month	 ago.”	 The	 young	 man	 shifts,	 getting	 comfortable,	 and
turns	 to	 gaze	 after	 the	 sapphire	 obelisk	 in	 the	 distance.	 “Schaffa	 said	 they
were	going	far	enough	away	that	we	wouldn’t	feel	any	aftershakes	of	what	the
kids	did.	Guess	that’s	pretty	far.”



Schaffa.	 The	 smile	 freezes	 on	 your	 face.	 You	 can’t	 help	 hissing	 it.
“Schaffa.”



The	 young	 man	 frowns	 at	 you.	 Definitely	 suspicious	 now.	 “Yeah.
Schaffa.”



It	can’t	be.	He’s	dead.	“Tall,	black	hair,	icewhite	eyes,	strange	accent?”



The	young	man	relaxes	somewhat.	“Oh.	You	know	him,	then?”



“Yes,	 very	well.”	 So	 easy	 to	 smile.	Harder	 to	wrestle	 down	 the	 urge	 to
scream,	to	grab	Hoa,	to	demand	that	he	plunge	you	both	into	the	earth	now,
now,	now,	so	you	can	go	and	rescue	your	daughter.	Hardest	of	all	not	to	fall	to
the	ground	and	curl	into	a	ball,	trying	to	clench	the	hand	you	no	longer	have
but	 that	hurts;	 Evil	 Earth,	 it	 aches	 like	 it’s	 broken	 all	 over	 again,	 phantom
pain	so	real	your	eyes	prickle	with	pain	tears.



Imperial	Orogenes	do	not	lose	control.	You	haven’t	been	a	blackjacket	for
going	 on	 twenty	 years,	 and	 you	 lose	 control	 all	 the	 rusting	 time	 –	 but
nevertheless	the	old	discipline	helps	you	pull	yourself	together.	Nassun,	your
baby,	is	in	the	hands	of	a	monster.	You	need	to	understand	how	this	happened.



“Very	 well,”	 you	 repeat.	 No	 one	 will	 think	 repetition	 strange,	 from	 a
Guardian.	“Can	you	 tell	me	about	one	of	his	charges?	Midlatter	girl,	brown
and	willowy,	curly	hair,	gray	eyes	—”



“Nassun,	 right.	 Jija’s	girl.”	The	young	man	 relaxes	 completely	now,	not
noticing	that	you’ve	tensed	that	much	more.	“Evil	Earth,	I	hope	Schaffa	kills
her	while	they’re	on	that	trip.”



The	 threat	 is	 not	 to	 you,	 but	 your	 awareness	 dips	 again	 anyway,	 before
you	drag	 it	back.	Ykka’s	 right:	You	 really	do	need	 to	 stop	defaulting	 to	kill
everything.	At	least	your	smile	hasn’t	faltered.	“Oh?”



“Yeah.	I	think	she’s	the	one	who	did	it…	Rust,	could’ve	been	any	of	’em,
though.	That	girl’s	 just	 the	one	who	gave	me	the	shivers	 the	most.”	His	jaw
tightens	as	he	finally	notices	the	sharp	edges	of	your	smile.	But	that,	too,	isn’t
something	that	anyone	familiar	with	Guardians	would	question.	He	just	looks
away.



“‘Did	it’?”	you	ask.



“Oh.	Guess	you	wouldn’t	know.	Come	on,	I’ll	show	you.”



He	turns	and	limps	toward	the	northern	end	of	the	compound.	You	follow,
after	a	moment’s	exchanged	glance	with	Hoa.	There’s	another	slight	rise	here,
culminating	in	a	flat	area	that’s	clearly	been	used	before	for	stargazing	or	just
staring	 at	 the	 horizon;	 you	 can	 see	 much	 of	 the	 surrounding	 countryside,
which	still	shows	shocking	amounts	of	green	beneath	a	relatively	recent	and
still-thin	layer	of	whitening	ash.



But	here,	though,	is	something	strange:	a	pile	of	rubble.	You	think	at	first
it’s	a	glass	recycling	pile;	Jija	used	to	keep	one	of	those	near	the	house	back
in	Tirimo,	and	neighbors	would	dump	their	broken	glasses	and	such	there	for
him	to	use	in	glassknife	hilts.	Some	of	this	looks	like	higher-quality	stuff	than
just	 glass;	 maybe	 someone’s	 tossed	 in	 some	 unworked	 semiprecious	 stone.
All	jumbled	colors,	tan	and	gray	and	a	bit	of	blue,	but	rather	a	lot	of	red.	But
there’s	a	pattern	to	it,	something	that	makes	you	pause	and	tilt	your	head	and
try	to	take	in	the	whole	of	what	you’re	seeing.	When	you	do,	you	notice	that
the	 colors	 and	 arrangement	of	 stones	 at	 the	nearer	 edge	of	 the	pile	 vaguely
resemble	a	mosaic.	Boots,	if	someone	had	sculpted	boots	out	of	pebbles	and
then	knocked	 them	over.	Then	 those	would	be	pants,	except	 there’s	 the	off-
white	of	bone	among	them	and	—



No.



Fire.	Under.	Earth.



No.	Your	Nassun	didn’t	do	this,	she	couldn’t	have,	she	—



She	did.



The	young	man	sighs,	 reading	your	 face.	You’ve	 forgotten	 to	 smile,	but
even	a	Guardian	would	be	sobered	by	this.	“Took	us	a	while	to	realize	what
we	were	seeing,	too,”	he	says.	“Maybe	this	is	something	you	understand.”	He
glances	at	you	hopefully.



You	just	shake	your	head,	and	the	man	sighs.



“Well.	 It	was	 just	 before	 they	 all	 left.	One	morning	we	 hear	 something
like	thunder.	Go	outside	and	the	obelisk	–	big	blue	one	that	had	been	lurking
around	for	a	few	weeks,	you	know	how	they	are	–	is	gone.	Then	later	that	day
there’s	the	same	loud	ch-kow	—”	He	claps	his	hands	as	he	imitates	the	sound.
You	manage	not	to	jump.	“And	it’s	back.	And	then	Schaffa	suddenly	tells	the
headwoman	 he’s	 got	 to	 take	 the	 kids	 away.	No	 explanation	 for	 the	 obelisk
stuff.	 No	 mention	 that	 Nida	 and	 Umber	 –	 those	 are	 the	 other	 two,	 the
Guardians	who	used	to	run	this	place	with	Schaffa	–	are	dead.	Umber’s	head
is	 staved	 in.	 Nid…”	 He	 shakes	 his	 head.	 The	 look	 on	 his	 face	 is	 pure
revulsion.	“The	back	of	her	head	is…	But	Schaffa	doesn’t	say	anything.	Just
takes	the	kids	away.	Lot	of	us	are	starting	to	hope	he	never	brings	them	back.”



Schaffa.	 That’s	 the	 part	 you	 should	 focus	 on.	 That’s	 what	 matters,	 not
what	was	but	what	 is…	but	you	can’t	 take	your	eyes	off	 Jija.	Burning	rust,
Jija.	Jija.

***
I	wish	I	were	still	flesh,	for	you.	I	wish	that	I	were	still	a	tuner,	so	that	I	could
speak	 to	 you	 through	 temperatures	 and	 pressures	 and	 reverberations	 of	 the
earth.	Words	 are	 too	much,	 too	 indelicate,	 for	 this	 conversation.	 You	 were
fond	of	Jija,	after	all,	to	the	degree	that	your	secrets	allowed.	You	thought	he
loved	you	–	and	he	did,	to	the	degree	that	your	secrets	allowed.	It’s	just	that
love	and	hate	aren’t	mutually	exclusive,	as	I	first	learned	so	very	long	ago.



I’m	sorry.
***

You	make	yourself	say,	“Schaffa	won’t	be	coming	back.”	Because	you	need
to	 find	 him	 and	 kill	 him	 –	 but	 even	 through	 your	 fear	 and	 horror,	 reason
asserts	 itself.	This	 strange	 imitation	Fulcrum,	which	 is	not	 the	 true	Fulcrum
that	 he	 should	 have	 brought	 Nassun	 to.	 These	 children,	 gathered	 and	 not
slaughtered.	Nassun,	openly	controlling	an	obelisk	well	enough	to	do	 this…
and	yet	Schaffa	has	not	killed	her.	Something’s	going	on	here	that	you’re	not
getting.



“Tell	me	more	about	this	man,”	you	say,	lifting	your	chin	toward	the	pile
of	jumbled	jewels.	Your	ex-husband.



The	young	man	shrugs	in	an	audible	stirring	of	cloth.	“Oh,	right,	uh.	So,
his	name	was	Jija	Resistant	Jekity.”	Because	the	young	man	is	sighing	down
at	the	pile	of	rubble,	you	don’t	think	he	sees	you	twitch	at	the	wrongness	of
the	comm	name.	“New	to	the	comm,	a	knapper.	We	got	too	many	men,	but	we
needed	 a	 knapper	 bad,	 so	when	 he	 turned	 up,	we	 basically	would’ve	 taken
him	in	as	 long	as	he	wasn’t	old	or	sick	or	obviously	 crazy.	You	know?”	He
shrugs.	 “The	girl	 seemed	 all	 right	when	 they	 first	 got	 here.	Wouldn’t	 know
her	for	one	of	them,	she	was	so	proper	and	polite.	Somebody	raised	her	right.”
You	 smile	 again.	 Perfect	 tight-jawed	Guardian	 smile.	 “We	 only	 knew	what
she	was	because	Jija	had	come	here,	see.	Heard	the	rumors	about	how	roggas
could	become…	un-roggas,	 I	 guess.	We	get	 a	 lot	 of	 visitors	who	 ask	 about
that.”



You	frown	and	nearly	look	away	from	Jija.	Un-roggas?



“Not	that	it	ever	happened.”	The	young	man	sighs	and	adjusts	his	cane	for
comfort.	“And	not	that	we’d	have	taken	in	a	kid	who	used	to	be	one	of	them,
right?	What	 if	 that	kid	grew	up	and	had	kids	who	were	wrong,	 too?	Got	 to
breed	the	taint	out	somehow.	Anyway,	the	girl	minded	her	father	well	enough
until	 a	 few	weeks	 ago.	Neighbors	 said	 they	 heard	 him	 shouting	 at	 her	 one
night,	 and	 then	 she	 moved	 up	 here	 to	 the	 compound	 with	 the	 others.	 You
could	see	how	the	change	sort	of…	untied	Jija.	He	started	talking	to	himself
about	 how	 she	 wasn’t	 his	 daughter	 anymore.	 Cursing	 out	 loud,	 now	 and
again.	Hitting	things	–	walls	and	such	–	when	he	thought	you	weren’t	looking.



“And	the	girl,	she	pulled	away.	Can’t	say	I	blame	her;	everybody	was	on
eggshells	around	him	for	 that	while.	Always	 the	quiet	ones,	 right?	So	I	saw
her	hanging	around	Schaffa	more.	Like	a	duckling,	always	right	 there	 in	his
shadow.	Whenever	he’d	hold	still,	she’d	take	his	hand.	And	he	—”	The	young
man	 eyes	 you	warily.	 “Don’t	 usually	 see	 you	 lot	 being	 affectionate.	But	 he
seemed	 to	 think	 the	world	of	her.	 I	hear	he	nearly	killed	Jija	when	 the	man
came	at	her,	actually.”



The	hand	that	you	don’t	have	twinges	again,	but	 it	 is	more	tentative	this
time	and	not	 the	 throb	of	before.	Because…	he	wouldn’t	have	had	 to	break
Nassun’s	hand,	would	he?	No,	no,	no.	You	did	that	to	her	yourself.	And	Uche
was	 another	 broken	 hand,	 inflicted	 by	 Jija.	 Schaffa	protected	 her	 from	 Jija.
Schaffa	was	affectionate	with	her,	as	you	struggled	to	be.	And	now	everything
inside	you	shudders	at	the	thought	that	follows,	and	it	takes	the	willpower	that
has	destroyed	cities	to	keep	this	shudder	internal,	but…



But…



How	 much	 more	 welcome	 would	 a	 Guardian’s	 conditional,	 predictable
love	have	been	to	Nassun,	after	her	parents’	unconditional	love	had	betrayed
her	again	and	again?



You	close	your	eyes	for	a	moment,	because	you	don’t	think	Guardians	cry.



With	an	effort,	you	say,	“What	is	this	place?”



He	looks	at	you	in	surprise,	then	glances	at	Hoa,	a	ways	behind	you.	“This
is	 the	 comm	 of	 Jekity,	 Guardian.	 Though	 Schaffa	 and	 the	 others	 —”	 He
gestures	 around	 you,	 at	 the	 compound.	 “They	 called	 this	 part	 of	 the	 comm
‘Found	Moon.’”



Of	course	they	did.	And	of	course	Schaffa	already	knew	the	secrets	of	the
world	that	you’ve	paid	in	flesh	and	blood	to	learn.



In	your	silence,	the	young	man	regards	you	thoughtfully.	“I	can	introduce
you	to	the	headwoman.	I	know	she’ll	be	glad	to	have	Guardians	around	again.
Good	help	against	raiders.”



You’re	 looking	 at	 Jija	 again.	 You	 see	 one	 piece	 of	 jewel	 in	 the	 perfect
likeness	of	a	pinky	finger.	You	know	that	pinky	finger.	You	kissed	that	pinky
finger	—



It’s	too	much,	you	can’t	do	this,	you’ve	got	to	get	a	grip,	get	out	of	here
before	you	break	down	any	further.	“I	–	I	n-need	—”	Deep	breath	for	calm.	“I
need	 some	 time	 to	 consider	 the	 situation.	 Would	 you	 go	 and	 let	 your
headwoman	know	I’ll	come	pay	my	respects	shortly?”



The	young	man	side-gazes	you	for	a	moment,	but	you	know	now	that	it’s
not	a	bad	thing	if	you	seem	a	little	off.	He’s	used	to	Guardian-style	offness.
Perhaps	because	of	this,	he	nods	and	shuffles	back	awkwardly.	“Can	I	ask	you
a	question?”



No.	“Yes?”



He	 bites	 his	 lip.	 “What’s	 going	 on?	 It	 feels	 like…	 Nothing	 that’s
happening	is	normal	lately.	I	mean,	 it’s	a	Season,	but	even	that	feels	wrong.
Guardians	not	 taking	 roggas	 to	 the	Fulcrum.	Roggas	doing	 things	nobody’s
ever	heard	of	them	doing.”	He	chin-points	toward	the	pile	of	Jija.	“Whatever
the	 rust	went	 on	 up	 north.	Even	 those	 things	 in	 the	 sky,	 the	 obelisks…	 It’s
all…	People	are	 talking.	Saying	maybe	 the	world’s	not	going	 to	go	back	 to
normal.	Ever.”



You’re	staring	at	Jija,	but	you’re	thinking	of	Alabaster.	Don’t	know	why.



“One	 person’s	 normal	 is	 another	 person’s	 Shattering.”	 Your	 face	 aches
from	smiling.	There	is	an	art	to	smiling	in	a	way	that	others	will	believe,	and
you’re	 terrible	 at	 it.	 “Would’ve	been	nice	 if	we	could’ve	all	had	normal,	of
course,	but	not	enough	people	wanted	to	share.	So	now	we	all	burn.”



He	stares	at	you	for	a	long,	vaguely	horrified	moment.	Then	he	mumbles
something	and	finally	goes	away,	skirting	wide	around	Hoa.	Good	riddance.



You	crouch	beside	Jija.	He	is	beautiful	like	this,	all	jewels	and	colors.	He
is	 monstrous	 like	 this.	 Beneath	 the	 colors	 you	 perceive	 the	 crazed	 every-
which-wayness	of	 the	magic	 threads	 in	him.	 It’s	wholly	different	 from	what
happened	 to	 your	 arm	 and	 your	 breast.	 He	 has	 been	 smashed	 apart	 and
rearranged	at	random,	on	an	infinitesimal	level.



“What	have	I	done?”	you	ask.	“What	have	I	made	her?”



Hoa’s	toes	have	appeared	in	your	peripheral	vision.	“Strong,”	he	suggests.



You	shake	your	head.	Nassun	was	that	on	her	own.



“Alive.”	



You	 close	 your	 eyes	 again.	 It’s	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 should	 matter,	 that
you’ve	brought	three	babies	into	the	world	and	this	one,	this	precious	last	one,
is	still	breathing.	And	yet.



I	made	her	me.	Earth	eat	us	both,	I	made	her	into	me.



And	maybe	 that’s	why	Nassun	 is	 still	 alive.	But	 it’s	 also,	you	 realize	as
you	 stare	 at	what	 she’s	 done	 to	 Jija,	 and	 as	 you	 realize	 you	 can’t	 even	 get
revenge	on	him	for	Uche	because	your	daughter	has	done	that	for	you…	why
you	are	terrified	of	her.



And	there	it	is	–	the	thing	you	haven’t	faced	in	all	this	time,	the	kirkhusa
with	ash	and	blood	on	its	muzzle.	Jija	owed	you	a	debt	of	pain	for	your	son,
but	you	owe	Nassun,	in	turn.	You	didn’t	save	her	from	Jija.	You	haven’t	been
there	when	she’s	needed	you,	here	at	 the	 literal	end	of	 the	world.	How	dare
you	presume	to	protect	her?	Gray	Man	and	Schaffa;	she	has	found	her	own,
better,	protectors.	She	has	found	the	strength	to	protect	herself.



You	are	so	very	proud	of	her.	And	you	don’t	dare	go	anywhere	near	her,
ever	again.



Hoa’s	heavy,	hard	hand	presses	down	on	your	good	shoulder.	“It	isn’t	wise
for	us	to	stay	here.”



You	shake	your	head.	Let	the	people	of	this	comm	come.	Let	them	realize
you	 aren’t	 a	 Guardian.	 Let	 one	 of	 them	 finally	 notice	 how	 alike	 you	 and
Nassun	look.	Let	them	bring	their	crossbows	and	slingshots	and	—



Hoa’s	hand	curves	to	grip	your	shoulder,	vise-tight.	You	know	it’s	coming
and	 still	 you	 don’t	 bother	 to	 brace	 yourself	 as	 he	 drags	 you	 into	 the	 earth,
back	 north.	 You	 keep	 your	 eyes	 open	 on	 purpose	 this	 time,	 and	 the	 sight
doesn’t	 bother	 you.	 The	 fires	 within	 the	 earth	 are	 nothing	 to	 what	 you’re
feeling	right	now,	failed	mother	that	you	are.



The	 two	 of	 you	 emerge	 from	 the	 ground	 in	 a	 quiet	 part	 of	 the
encampment,	though	it’s	near	a	small	stand	of	trees	that	a	lot	of	people,	by	the
stink,	 have	 apparently	 been	 using	 for	 a	 pisser.	When	Hoa	 lets	 you	 go,	 you
start	 to	walk	 away	 and	 then	 stop	 again.	Your	 thoughts	 have	 gone	 blank.	 “I
don’t	know	what	to	do.”



Silence	from	Hoa.	Stone	eaters	don’t	bother	with	unnecessary	movement
or	words,	and	Hoa	has	already	made	his	intentions	clear.	You	imagine	Nassun
talking	with	Gray	Man,	and	you	laugh	softly,	because	he	seems	more	animate
and	talkative	than	most	of	his	kind.	Good.	He’s	a	good	stone	eater,	for	her.



“I	don’t	know	where	to	go,”	you	say.	You’ve	been	sleeping	in	Lerna’s	tent
lately,	but	that	isn’t	what	you	mean.	Inside	you,	there’s	a	clump	of	emptiness.
A	raw	hole.	“I	don’t	have	anything	left	now.”



Hoa	says,	“You	have	comm	and	kin.	You’ll	have	a	home,	once	you	reach
Rennanis.	You	have	your	life.”



Do	you	really	have	these	things?	The	dead	have	no	wishes,	says	stonelore.
You	think	of	Tirimo,	where	you	didn’t	want	to	wait	for	death	to	come	for	you,
and	so	you	killed	the	comm.	Death	is	always	with	you.	Death	is	you.



Hoa	says	to	your	slumped	back,	“I	can’t	die.”



You	frown,	jarred	out	of	melancholy	by	this	apparent	non	sequitur.	Then
you	understand:	He’s	 saying	you	won’t	 ever	 lose	him.	He	will	 not	 crumble
away	like	Alabaster.	You	can’t	ever	be	surprised	by	the	pain	of	Hoa’s	loss	the
way	you	were	with	Corundum	or	 Innon	 or	Alabaster	 or	Uche,	 or	 now	 Jija.
You	can’t	hurt	Hoa	in	any	way	that	matters.



“It’s	safe	to	love	you,”	you	murmur,	in	startled	realization.



“Yes.”



Surprisingly,	this	eases	the	knot	of	silence	in	your	chest.	Not	much,	but…
but	it	helps.



“How	do	you	do	it?”	you	ask.	It’s	hard	to	imagine.	Not	being	able	to	die
even	when	you	want	to,	even	as	everything	you	know	and	care	about	falters
and	fails.	Having	to	go	on,	no	matter	what.	No	matter	how	tired	you	are.



“Move	forward,”	Hoa	says.



“What?”



“Move.	Forward.”	



And	then	he	is	gone,	into	the	earth.	Nearby,	somewhere,	if	you	need	him.
Right	now,	though,	he’s	right:	you	don’t.



Can’t	think.	You’re	thirsty,	and	hungry	and	tired	besides.	It	stinks	in	this
part	of	camp.	The	stump	of	your	arm	hurts.	Your	heart	hurts	more.



You	take	a	step,	though,	toward	the	camp.	And	then	another.	And	another.



Forward.
***

2490:	Antarctics	near	eastern	coast;	unnamed	farming	comm	twenty
miles	from	Jekity	City.	Initially	unknown	event	caused	everyone	in	the
comm	to	turn	to	glass.	(??	Is	this	right?	Glass,	not	ice?	Find	tertiary
sources.)	Later,	headman’s	second	husband	found	alive	in	Jekity	City;
discovered	to	be	rogga.	Under	intensive	questioning	by	comm	militia,
he	admitted	to	somehow	doing	the	deed.	Claimed	that	it	was	the	only
way	to	stop	the	Jekity	volcano	from	erupting,	though	no	eruption	signs
were	observed.	Reports	indicate	the	man’s	hands	were	also	stone.
Questioning	interrupted	by	a	stone	eater,	who	killed	seventeen	militia
members	and	took	rogga	into	earth;	both	vanished.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



8
Nassun	underground

The	white	stair	winds	downward	for	quite	some	while.	The	tunnel	walls	are
close	and	claustrophobic,	but	 the	air	 somehow	 isn’t	 stale.	 Just	being	 free	of
the	ashfall	is	novelty	enough,	but	Nassun	notices	that	there’s	not	much	dust,
either.	That’s	weird,	isn’t	it?	All	of	this	is	weird.



“Why	isn’t	there	dust?”	Nassun	asks	as	they	walk.	She	speaks	in	hushed
tones	at	first,	but	gradually	she	relaxes	–	a	little.	It’s	still	a	deadciv	ruin,	after
all,	and	she’s	heard	 lots	of	 lorist	 tales	about	how	dangerous	such	places	can
be.	 “Why	 do	 the	 lights	 still	work?	That	 door	we	 came	 through	 back	 there,
why	did	it	still	work?”



“I	haven’t	a	clue,	little	one.”	Schaffa	now	precedes	her	down	the	steps,	on
the	 theory	 that	anything	dangerous	should	encounter	him	first.	Nassun	can’t
see	his	face,	and	must	gauge	his	mood	by	his	broad	shoulders.	(It	bothers	her
that	she	does	this,	watching	him	constantly	for	shifts	of	mood	or	warnings	of
tension.	It	is	another	thing	she	learned	from	Jija.	She	cannot	seem	to	shed	it
with	 Schaffa,	 or	 anyone	 else.)	 He’s	 tired,	 she	 can	 see,	 but	 otherwise	 well.
Satisfied,	perhaps,	that	they	have	made	it	here.	Wary,	of	what	they	might	find
–	but	that	makes	two	of	them.	“With	deadciv	ruins,	sometimes	the	answer	is
simply	‘because.’”



“Do	you…	remember	anything,	Schaffa?”



A	 shrug,	 not	 as	 nonchalant	 as	 it	 should	 be.	 “Some.	 Flashes.	 The	 why,
rather	than	the	what.”



“Then,	why?	Why	do	Guardians	come	here,	during	a	Season?	Why	don’t
they	just	stay	wherever	they	are,	and	help	the	comms	they	join	the	way	you
helped	Jekity?”



The	stairs	are	ever	so	slightly	too	wide	for	Nassun’s	stride,	even	when	she
keeps	to	the	more	narrow	inner	bend.	Periodically	she	has	to	stop	and	put	both
feet	on	one	step	in	order	to	rest,	then	trot	to	catch	up.	He	is	drumbeat-steady,
proceeding	without	her	–	but	abruptly,	 just	as	she	asks	 these	questions,	 they
reach	a	landing	within	the	stairwell.	To	Nassun’s	great	relief,	Schaffa	stops	at
last,	 signaling	 that	 they	can	sit	down	and	rest.	She’s	still	 soaked	with	sweat
from	the	frantic	scrabble	through	the	grass	forest,	though	it	has	begun	to	dry
now	 that	 she’s	moving	 slower.	The	 first	 drink	 of	water	 from	her	 canteen	 is
sweet,	 and	 the	 floor	 feels	 comfortingly	 cool,	 though	 hard.	 She’s	 abruptly
sleepy.	 Well,	 it	 is	 night	 outside,	 up	 on	 the	 surface	 where	 grasshoppers	 or
cicadas	now	cavort.



Schaffa	 rummages	 in	 his	 pack	 and	 hands	 her	 a	 slab	 of	 dried	meat.	 She
sighs	 and	 begins	 the	 laborious	 process	 of	 gnawing	 on	 it.	 He	 smiles	 at	 her
grumpiness,	and	perhaps	to	soothe	her,	he	finally	answers	her	question.



“We	leave	during	Seasons	because	we	have	nothing	 to	offer	 to	a	comm,
little	one.	I	cannot	have	children,	for	one	thing,	which	makes	me	a	less	than
ideal	 community	 adoptee.	 However	 much	 I	 might	 contribute	 toward	 the
survival	of	any	comm,	its	investment	in	me	will	return	only	short-term	gains.”
He	 shrugs.	 “And	 without	 orogenes	 to	 tend,	 over	 time,	 we	 Guardians
become…	difficult	to	live	with.”



Because	the	things	in	their	heads	make	them	want	magic	all	the	time,	she
realizes.	 And	 although	 orogenes	 make	 enough	 of	 the	 silver	 to	 spare,	 stills
don’t.	What	happens	when	a	Guardian	takes	silver	from	a	still?	Maybe	that’s
why	Guardians	leave	–	so	no	one	will	find	out.



“How	do	you	know	you	can’t	have	children?”	she	presses.	This	is	maybe
too	personal	a	question,	but	he	has	never	minded	her	asking	those.	“Did	you
ever	try?”



He’s	 taking	 a	 drink	 from	 his	 canteen.	 When	 he	 lowers	 it,	 he	 looks
bemused.	“It	would	be	clearer	to	say	that	I	should	not,”	he	says.	“Guardians
carry	the	trait	of	orogeny.”



“Oh.”	Schaffa’s	mother	or	 father	must	have	been	an	orogene!	Or	maybe
his	grandparents?	Anyway,	the	orogeny	didn’t	come	out	in	him	the	way	it	has
in	Nassun.	His	mother	–	she	decides	arbitrarily	that	it	was	his	mother,	for	no
particular	reason	–	never	needed	to	train	him,	or	teach	him	to	lie,	or	break	his
hand.	“Lucky,”	she	murmurs.



He’s	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 raising	 the	 canteen	 again	 when	 he	 pauses.
Something	 flows	 over	 his	 face.	 She’s	 learned	 to	 read	 this	 look	 of	 his	 in
particular,	despite	the	fact	that	it’s	such	a	rare	one.	Sometimes	he’s	forgotten
things	he	wishes	he	could	remember,	but	right	now,	he	is	remembering	what
he	wishes	he	could	forget.



“Not	so	lucky.”	He	touches	the	nape	of	his	neck.	The	bright,	nerve-etched
network	 of	 searing	 light	within	 him	 is	 still	 active	 –	 hurting	 him,	 driving	 at
him,	trying	to	break	him.	At	the	center	of	that	web	is	the	shard	of	corestone
that	someone	put	into	him.	For	the	first	time,	Nassun	wonders	how	it	was	put
into	 him.	 She	 thinks	 about	 the	 long,	 ugly	 scar	 down	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck,
which	she	thinks	he	keeps	his	hair	long	to	cover.	She	shivers	a	little	with	the
implications	of	that	scar.



“I	 don’t	—”	Nassun	 tries	 to	 drag	 her	 thoughts	 away	 from	 the	 image	 of
Schaffa	 screaming	while	 someone	cuts	 him.	 “I	 don’t	 understand	Guardians.
The	 other	 kind	 of	 Guardian,	 I	 mean.	 I	 don’t…	 They’re	 awful.”	 And	 she
cannot	even	begin	to	imagine	Schaffa	being	like	them.



He	 doesn’t	 reply	 for	 a	 while,	 as	 they	 chew	 through	 their	 meal.	 Then,
softly,	he	 says,	 “The	details	 are	 lost	 to	me,	 and	 the	names,	 and	most	of	 the
faces.	But	the	feelings	remain,	Nassun.	I	remember	that	I	loved	the	orogenes
to	whom	I	was	Guardian	–	or	at	least,	I	believed	that	I	loved	them.	I	wanted
them	to	be	safe,	even	if	that	meant	inflicting	small	cruelties	to	hold	the	greater
at	bay.	Anything,	I	felt,	was	better	than	genocide.”



Nassun	frowns.	“What’s	genocide?”



He	smiles	again,	but	it	is	sad.	“If	every	orogene	is	hunted	down	and	slain,
and	if	the	neck	of	every	orogene	infant	born	thereafter	is	wrung,	and	if	every
one	like	me	who	carries	the	trait	is	killed	or	effectively	sterilized,	and	if	even
the	 notion	 that	 orogenes	 are	 human	 is	 denied…	 that	 would	 be	 genocide.
Killing	a	people,	down	to	the	very	idea	of	them	as	a	people.”



“Oh.”	Nassun	feels	queasy	again,	inexplicably.	“But	that’s…”



Schaffa	 inclines	his	head,	acknowledging	her	unspoken	But	 that’s	what’s
been	 happening.	 “This	 is	 the	 task	 of	 the	 Guardians,	 little	 one.	We	 prevent
orogeny	from	disappearing	–	because	in	truth,	the	people	of	the	world	would
not	 survive	 without	 it.	 Orogenes	 are	 essential.	 And	 yet	 because	 you	 are
essential,	you	cannot	be	permitted	to	have	a	choice	in	the	matter.	You	must	be
tools	 –	 and	 tools	 cannot	 be	 people.	 Guardians	 keep	 the	 tool…	 and	 to	 the
degree	possible,	while	still	retaining	the	tool’s	usefulness,	kill	the	person.”



Nassun	stares	back	at	him,	understanding	shifting	within	her	like	an	out-
of-nowhere	 niner.	 It	 is	 the	 way	 of	 the	 world,	 but	 it	 isn’t.	 The	 things	 that
happen	to	orogenes	don’t	just	happen.	They’ve	been	made	to	happen,	by	the
Guardians,	after	years	and	years	of	work	on	their	part.	Maybe	they	whispered
ideas	 into	 the	 ears	 of	 every	 warlord	 or	 Leader,	 in	 the	 time	 before	 Sanze.
Maybe	they	were	even	there	during	the	Shattering	–	inserting	themselves	into
ragged,	 frightened	 pockets	 of	 survivors	 to	 tell	 them	who	 to	 blame	 for	 their
misery,	and	how	to	find	them,	and	what	to	do	with	the	culprits	found.



Everybody	 thinks	 orogenes	 are	 so	 scary	 and	 powerful,	 and	 they	 are.
Nassun	is	pretty	sure	she	could	wipe	out	the	Antarctics	if	she	really	wanted,
though	 she	 would	 probably	 need	 the	 sapphire	 to	 do	 it	 without	 dying.	 But
despite	all	her	power,	she’s	still	just	a	little	girl.	She	has	to	eat	and	sleep	like
every	other	little	girl,	among	people	if	she	hopes	to	keep	eating	and	sleeping.
People	need	other	people	to	live.	And	if	she	has	to	fight	to	live,	against	every
person	in	every	comm?	Against	every	song	and	every	story	and	history	and
the	Guardians	and	the	militia	and	Imperial	law	and	stonelore	itself?	Against	a
father	who	could	not	reconcile	daughter	with	rogga?	Against	her	own	despair
when	she	contemplates	the	gargantuan	task	of	simply	trying	to	be	happy?



What	 can	 orogeny	 do	 against	 something	 like	 that?	 Keep	 her	 breathing,
maybe.	 But	 breathing	 doesn’t	 always	 mean	 living,	 and	 maybe…	 maybe
genocide	doesn’t	always	leave	bodies.



And	now	she	is	more	certain	than	ever	that	Steel	was	right.



She	looks	up	at	Schaffa.	“Till	 the	world	burns.”	It’s	what	he	said	 to	her,
when	she	told	him	what	she	meant	to	do	with	the	Obelisk	Gate.



Schaffa	 blinks,	 then	 smiles	 the	 tender,	 awful	 smile	 of	 a	 man	 who	 has
always	known	that	love	and	cruelty	are	two	faces	of	the	same	coin.	He	pulls
her	close	and	kisses	her	forehead,	and	she	hugs	him	tight,	so	very	glad	to	have
one	parent,	at	last,	who	loves	her	as	he	should.



“Till	 the	 world	 burns,	 little	 one,”	 he	 murmurs	 against	 her	 hair.	 “Of
course.”

***
In	the	morning,	they	resume	walking	down	the	winding	stair.



The	first	sign	of	change	is	the	appearance	of	another	railing	on	the	other
side	 of	 the	 stairwell.	 The	 railing	 itself	 is	 made	 of	 strange	 stuff,	 bright
gleaming	metal	not	marred	at	all	by	verdigris	or	tarnish.	Now,	though,	there
are	 twin	railings,	and	 the	stairwell	widens	enough	 that	 two	people	can	walk
abreast.	Then	the	winding	stairwell	begins	to	unwind	–	still	descending	at	the
same	 angle,	 but	 less	 and	 less	 curved,	 until	 finally	 it	 extends	 straight	 ahead,
into	darkness.



After	an	hour	or	so	of	walking,	the	tunnel	suddenly	opens	out,	walls	and
roof	vanishing.	Now	 they	descend	along	a	 trail	of	 lighted,	 linked	 stairs	 that
are	completely	unsupported,	 somehow,	 in	open	air.	The	stairs	 should	not	be
possible,	held	up	as	they	are	by	nothing	but	the	railing	and,	apparently,	each
other	 –	 but	 there	 is	 no	 judder	 or	 creak	 as	Nassun	 and	 Schaffa	walk	 down.
Whatever	 the	 stuff	 that	 comprises	 the	 steps	 is,	 it’s	 much	 stronger	 than
ordinary	stone.



And	now	they’re	descending	into	a	massive	cavern.	It’s	impossible	to	see
how	 large	 it	 is	 in	 the	 darkness,	 although	 shafts	 of	 illumination	 slant	 down
from	 occasional	 circles	 of	 cool	 white	 light	 that	 dot	 the	 cavern’s	 ceiling	 at
irregular	 intervals.	 The	 light	 illuminates…	 nothing.	 The	 cavern’s	 floor	 is	 a
vast	expanse	of	empty	space	filled	with	 irregular,	 lumpen	piles	of	sand.	But
now	 that	 they	 are	within	what	Nassun	 once	 thought	was	 an	 empty	magma
chamber,	 she	 can	 sess	 things	more	 clearly,	 and	 all	 at	 once	 she	 realizes	 just
how	wrong	she	was.



“This	 isn’t	 a	 magma	 chamber,”	 she	 tells	 Schaffa	 in	 an	 awed	 tone.	 “It
wasn’t	a	cavern	at	all	when	this	city	was	built.”



“What?”



She	 shakes	 her	 head.	 “It	 wasn’t	 enclosed.	 It	 must	 have	 been…	 I	 don’t
know?	Whatever’s	left	when	a	volcano	blows	up	completely.”



“A	crater?”



She	 nods	 quickly,	 excited	 with	 the	 realization.	 “It	 was	 open	 to	 the	 sky
then.	People	built	the	city	in	the	crater.	But	then	there	was	another	eruption,
right	 in	the	middle	of	 the	city.”	She	points	ahead	of	 them,	into	the	dark;	 the
stairwell	is	going	right	toward	what	she	sesses	is	the	epicenter	of	this	ancient
destruction.



But	that	can’t	be	right.	Another	eruption,	depending	on	the	type	of	 lava,
should	 simply	 have	 destroyed	 the	 city	 and	 filled	 the	 old	 crater.	 Instead,
somehow,	all	the	lava	went	up	and	over	the	city,	spreading	out	like	a	canopy
and	solidifying	over	it	to	form	this	cavern.	Leaving	the	city	within	the	crater
more	or	less	intact.



“Impossible,”	 Schaffa	 says,	 frowning.	 “Not	 even	 the	most	 viscous	 lava
would	behave	that	way.	But…”	His	expression	clouds.	Again	he	is	trying	to
sift	through	memories	truncated	and	trimmed,	or	perhaps	simply	dimmed	by
age.	On	impulse	Nassun	grabs	his	hand,	to	encourage	him.	He	glances	at	her,
smiles	absently,	and	 resumes	 frowning.	“But	 I	 think…	an	orogene	could	do
such	a	thing.	It	would	take	one	of	rare	power,	however,	and	probably	the	aid
of	an	obelisk.	A	ten-ringer.	At	least.”



Nassun	frowns	in	confusion	at	this.	The	gist	of	what	he’s	said	fits,	though:
Someone	did	 this.	Nassun	 looks	up	at	 the	ceiling	of	 the	cavern	and	 realizes
belatedly	that	what	she	thought	were	odd	stalactites	are	actually	–	she	gasps	–
the	leftover	impressions	of	buildings	that	are	no	longer	there!	Yes,	there	is	a
narrowing	 point	 that	 must	 have	 been	 a	 spire;	 here	 a	 curving	 arch;	 there	 a
geometric	strangeness	of	spokes	and	curves	that	looks	oddly	organic,	like	the
under-ribs	 of	 a	mushroom	 cap.	 But	while	 these	 imprints	 fossil	 all	 over	 the
ceiling	of	the	cavern,	the	solidified	lava	itself	stops	a	few	hundred	feet	above
the	 ground.	 Belatedly,	 Nassun	 realizes	 that	 the	 “tunnel”	 from	 which	 they
emerged	 is	 also	 the	 remains	 of	 a	 building.	 Looking	 back,	 she	 sees	 that	 the
outside	 of	 the	 tunnel	 looks	 like	 one	 of	 the	 cuttlebones	 that	 her	 father	 once
used	for	 fine	knapping	work	–	more	solid,	and	made	from	the	same	strange
white	material	as	the	slab	up	on	the	surface.	That	must	have	been	the	top	of
the	building.	But	a	few	feet	below	where	the	canopy	ends,	the	building	does,
too,	 to	 be	 replaced	 by	 this	 strange	 white	 stair.	 That	 must	 have	 been	 done
sometime	after	the	disaster	–	but	how?	And	by	whom?	And	why?



Trying	to	understand	what	she’s	seeing,	Nassun	looks	more	closely	at	the
cavern’s	floor.	The	sand	is	mostly	pale,	though	there	are	mottling	patches	of
darker	gray	and	brown	laced	throughout.	In	a	few	places,	 twisted	lengths	of
metal	 or	 immense	 broken	 fragments	 of	 something	 larger	 –	 other	 buildings,
maybe	–	poke	through	the	sand	like	bones	from	a	half-unearthed	grave.



But	this	is	wrong,	too,	Nassun	realizes.	There	isn’t	enough	material	here
to	be	the	remnants	of	a	city.	She	hasn’t	seen	many	deadciv	ruins,	or	cities	for
that	matter,	but	she’s	read	about	them	and	heard	stories.	She’s	pretty	sure	that
cities	are	supposed	to	be	full	of	stone	buildings	and	wooden	storecaches	and
maybe	 metal	 gates	 and	 cobbled	 streets.	 This	 city	 is	 nothing,	 relatively
speaking.	Just	metal	and	sand.



Nassun	puts	down	her	hands,	which	 she’s	 raised	without	 thinking	while
her	fleshless	senses	flicker	and	search.	Inadvertently	she	glances	down,	which
makes	the	distance	between	the	stair	she	stands	on	and	that	sandy	cavern	floor
yawn	and	seem	 to	 stretch.	This	makes	her	 step	back	closer	 to	Schaffa,	who
puts	a	reassuring	hand	on	her	shoulder.



“This	 city,”	 Schaffa	 says.	 She	 glances	 at	 him	 in	 surprise;	 he	 looks
thoughtful.	“There	is	a	word	in	my	mind,	but	I	don’t	know	what	it	is.	A	name?
Something	 that	 holds	 meaning	 in	 another	 language?”	 He	 shakes	 his	 head.
“But	 if	 this	 is	 the	city	 I	 think	 it	 is,	 I	have	heard	 tales	of	 its	grandeur.	Once,
they	say,	this	city	held	billions	of	people.”



That	seems	impossible.	“In	one	city?	How	big	was	Yumenes?”



“A	 few	 million.”	 He	 smiles	 at	 her	 openmouthed	 gape,	 then	 sobers
somewhat.	“And	now	there	can’t	be	many	more	people	than	that,	altogether,
across	 the	whole	of	 the	Stillness.	When	we	 lost	 the	Equatorials,	we	 lost	 the
bulk	of	humanity.	Still.	Once,	the	world	was	even	bigger.”



It	 can’t	 be.	 The	 volcanic	 crater	 is	 only	 so	 vast.	 And	 yet…	 Delicately,
Nassun	 sesses	 below	 the	 sand	 and	 debris,	 searching	 for	 evidence	 of	 the
impossible.	 The	 sand	 is	 much	 deeper	 than	 she	 thought.	 Far	 beneath	 its
surface,	 though,	 she	 finds	 pressed	 pathways	 in	 long,	 straight	 lines.	 Roads?
Foundations,	too,	though	they	are	in	oblong	and	round	and	other	odd	shapes:
hourglass	loops	and	fat	S-curves	and	bowl-shaped	dips.	Not	a	single	square.
She	puzzles	over	the	odd	composition	of	these	foundations,	and	then	abruptly
realizes	 that	 it	 all	 has	 the	 sess	 of	 something	mineralized,	 alkaline.	 Oh,	 it’s
petrifying!	Which	means	that	originally	–	Nassun	gasps.



“It’s	 wood,”	 she	 blurts	 aloud.	 A	 building	 foundation	 of	 wood?	 No,	 it’s
something	like	wood,	but	also	a	bit	like	the	polymer	stuff	that	her	father	used
to	make,	and	a	little	like	the	strange	not-stone	of	the	stair	they’re	standing	on.
All	 the	 roads	 she	 can	 sess	 are	 something	 similar.	 “Dust.	 Everything	 down
there,	Schaffa.	 It’s	not	sand,	 it’s	dust!	 It’s	plants,	 lots	of	 them,	dead	so	 long
ago	that	it’s	all	just	dried	up	and	crumbled	away.	And…”	Her	gaze	is	drawn
back	 up	 to	 the	 lava	 canopy	 overheard.	 What	 must	 it	 have	 been	 like?	 The
whole	 cavern	 lit	 up	 in	 red.	The	 air	 too	 hot	 to	 breathe.	The	 buildings	 lasted
longer,	long	enough	for	the	lava	to	start	to	cool	around	them,	but	every	person
in	 this	 city	 would	 have	 roasted	 within	 the	 first	 few	 hours	 of	 being	 buried
under	a	bubble	of	fire.



That’s	what’s	 in	 the	 sand,	 too,	 then:	 countless	 people,	 cooked	 into	 char
and	crumbled	away.



“Intriguing,”	 Schaffa	 says.	 He	 leans	 on	 the	 railing,	 heedless	 of	 the
distance	 to	 the	 ground	 as	 he	 gazes	 out	 over	 the	 cavern.	 Nassun’s	 belly
clenches	in	fear	for	him.	“A	city	built	of	plants.”	Then	his	gaze	sharpens.	“But
nothing’s	growing	here	now.”



Yes.	 That’s	 the	 other	 thing	 Nassun	 has	 noticed.	 She’s	 traveled	 enough
now,	and	seen	enough	other	caves	to	know	that	this	place	should	be	teeming
with	 life,	 like	 lichens	 and	 bats	 and	 blind	 white	 insects.	 She	 shunts	 her
perception	 into	 the	 realm	 of	 the	 silver,	 searching	 for	 the	 delicate	 lines	 that
should	be	everywhere	amid	 so	much	 living	detritus.	She	 finds	 them,	 lots	of
them,	 but…	 Something	 is	 strange.	 The	 lines	 flow	 together	 and	 focus,	 tiny
threads	becoming	 thicker	channels	–	much	 like	 the	way	magic	 flows	within
an	orogene.	She’s	never	seen	this	happen	in	plants	or	animals	or	soil	before.
These	 more	 concentrated	 flows	 come	 together	 and	 continue	 forward	 –	 the
direction	 in	 which	 the	 stairway	 is	 going.	 She	 follows	 them	 well	 past	 the
stairway	 she	can	 see,	 thickening,	brightening…	and	 then	 somewhere	ahead,
they	abruptly	stop.



“Something	 bad	 is	 here,”	Nassun	 says,	 her	 skin	 prickling.	Abruptly	 she
stops	sessing.	She	does	not	want	to	sess	what’s	ahead,	for	some	reason.



“Nassun?”



“Something	is	eating	this	place.”	She	blurts	the	words,	then	wonders	why
she’s	said	them.	But	now	that	she’s	said	it,	she	feels	like	it	was	the	right	thing
to	say.	“That’s	why	nothing	grows.	Something	is	 taking	all	 the	magic	away.
Without	that,	everything’s	dead.”



Schaffa	regards	her	for	a	long	moment.	One	of	his	hands,	Nassun	sees,	is
on	 the	 hilt	 of	 his	 black	 glass	 poniard,	where	 it’s	 strapped	 against	 his	 thigh.
She	wants	 to	 laugh	 at	 this.	What’s	 ahead	 isn’t	 something	 he	 can	 stab.	 She
doesn’t	laugh	because	it’s	cruel,	and	because	she’s	suddenly	so	scared	that	if
she	starts	laughing,	she	might	not	stop.



“We	don’t	have	 to	go	forward,”	Schaffa	suggests.	 It	 is	gentle,	and	badly
needed	 reassurance	 that	he	will	not	 lose	 respect	 for	her	 if	 she	abandons	her
mission	out	of	fear.



It	 bothers	Nassun,	 though.	She	has	her	pride.	 “N-no.	Let’s	keep	going.”
She	swallows	hard.	“Please.”



“Very	well,	then.”



They	proceed.	Someone	or	something	has	dug	a	channel	through	the	dust,
beneath	 and	 around	 the	 impossible	 stair.	As	 they	 continue	 to	 descend,	 they
pass	 mountains	 of	 the	 stuff.	 Presently,	 though,	 Nassun	 sees	 another	 tunnel
looming	ahead.	This	one	is	set	against	the	floor	of	the	cavern	–	at	last	–	and
its	 mouth	 is	 immense.	 Concentric	 arches,	 each	 carved	 from	 marble	 in
different	 shades,	 loom	 high	 overhead	 as	 the	 stairway	 finally	 reaches	 the
ground	 and	 flattens	 into	 the	 surrounding	 stones.	The	 tunnel	 narrows	 further
in;	there’s	only	darkness	beyond.	The	floor	of	the	entryway	is	something	that
looks	like	lacquer,	tiled	in	gradient	shades	of	blue	and	black	and	dark	red.	It	is
rich	and	lovely	color,	a	relief	to	the	eyes	after	so	much	white	and	gray,	and	yet
it,	too,	is	impossibly	strange.	Somehow,	none	of	the	city’s	dust	has	blown	or
subsided	into	this	entryway.



Dozens	of	people	could	pass	through	that	archway.	Hundreds	in	a	minute.
Now,	 however,	 only	 one	 stands	 here,	watching	 them	 from	 under	 a	 band	 of
rose	marble	that	contrasts	sharply	against	his	paler,	colorless	lines.	Steel.



He	doesn’t	move	as	Nassun	walks	over	to	him.	(Schaffa	comes	over,	too,
but	he	is	slower,	tense.)	Steel’s	gray	gaze	is	fixed	on	an	object	beside	him	that
is	 not	 familiar	 to	 Nassun	 but	 which	 would	 be	 to	 her	 mother:	 a	 hexagonal
plinth	 rising	 from	 the	 floor,	 like	 a	 smoky	quartz	 crystal	 shaft	 that	 has	 been
sheared	off	 halfway.	 Its	 topmost	 surface	 is	 at	 a	 slight	 angle.	Steel’s	 hand	 is
held	toward	it	in	a	gesture	of	presentation.	For	you.



So	Nassun	focuses	on	the	plinth.	She	reaches	toward	it	and	jerks	back	as
something	 lights	 up	 around	 its	 rim	before	 her	 fingers	 can	 touch	 the	 slanted
surface.	Bright	 red	marks	 float	 in	 the	air	above	 the	crystal,	etching	symbols
into	 empty	 space.	She	 cannot	 fathom	 their	meaning,	 but	 the	 color	 unnerves
her.	She	looks	up	at	Steel,	who	has	not	moved	and	looks	as	if	he’s	been	in	the
same	position	since	this	place	was	built.	“What	does	it	say?”



“That	 the	 transport	 vehicle	 I	 told	you	 about	 is	 currently	 nonfunctional,”
says	the	voice	from	within	Steel’s	chest.	“You’ll	need	to	power	and	reboot	the
system	before	we	can	use	this	station.”



“‘R-re…	boot?’”	She	 tries	 to	 figure	out	what	putting	on	boots	has	 to	do
with	ancient	ruins,	then	decides	to	run	with	the	part	she	understands.	“How	do
I	give	it	power?”



Abruptly,	 Steel	 is	 in	 a	 different	 position,	 facing	 the	 archway	 that	 leads
deeper	into	the	station.	“Go	inside	and	provide	power	at	the	root.	I’ll	stay	here
and	key	in	the	start-up	sequence	once	there’s	enough	power.”



“What?	I	don’t	—”



His	gray-on-gray	eyes	shift	over	to	her.	“You’ll	see	what	to	do	inside.”



Nassun	chews	on	 the	 inside	of	her	 cheek,	 looking	 into	 the	archway.	 It’s
really	dark	in	there.



Schaffa’s	hand	touches	her	shoulder.	“I’ll	go	with	you,	of	course.”



Of	 course.	 Nassun	 swallows	 and	 nods,	 grateful.	 Then	 she	 and	 Schaffa
walk	into	the	dark.



It	doesn’t	stay	dark	for	long.	Like	on	the	white	stair,	small	panels	of	light
begin	glowing	along	 the	sides	of	 the	 tunnel	as	 they	progress.	The	 lights	are
dim,	 and	 yellowy	 in	 a	 way	 that	 suggests	 age,	 weathering,	 or…	 well,	 or
weariness.	That’s	the	word	that	pops	into	Nassun’s	head	for	some	reason.	The
light	is	enough	to	glimmer	off	the	edges	of	the	tiles	beneath	their	feet.	There
are	doors	and	alcoves	along	the	tunnel	walls,	and	at	one	point	Nassun	spots	a
strange	contraption	jutting	out	about	ten	feet	up.	It	looks	like…	a	wagon	bed?
Without	wheels	or	 a	yoke,	 and	as	 if	 that	wagon	bed	was	made	of	 the	 same
smooth	material	as	the	stair,	and	as	if	that	wagon	bed	ran	along	some	kind	of
track	 set	 into	 the	wall.	 It	 seems	obviously	made	 to	 transport	people;	maybe
it’s	how	people	who	couldn’t	or	wouldn’t	walk	got	around?	Now	it	is	still	and
dark,	locked	to	the	wall	forever	where	its	last	driver	left	it.



They	notice	the	peculiar	bluish	light	illuminating	the	tunnel	up	ahead,	but
that	 still	 isn’t	 adequate	warning	 enough	 to	 prepare	 them	 for	when	 the	 path
suddenly	 curves	 left,	 and	 they	 find	 themselves	 in	 a	 new	cavern.	This	much
smaller	 cavern	 isn’t	 full	 of	 dust,	 or	 at	 least	 not	 much	 of	 it.	 What	 it	 does
contain,	instead,	is	a	titanic	column	of	solid	blue-black	volcanic	glass.



The	 column	 is	 huge,	 and	 irregular,	 and	 impossible.	 Nassun	 just	 stares,
openmouthed,	 at	 this	 thing	 that	 fills	 nearly	 the	 whole	 cavern,	 ground	 to
ceiling	and	beyond.	That	 it	 is	 the	 solidified,	 rapidly	cooled	product	of	what
must	 have	 been	 a	 titanic	 explosion	 is	 immediately	 obvious.	 That	 it	 is
somehow	 the	 source	 of	 the	 lava	 canopy	 which	 flowed	 into	 the	 adjoining
cavern	is	equally	indisputable.



“I	see,”	Schaffa	says.	Even	he	sounds	overwhelmed,	his	voice	softened	by
awe.	“Look.”	He	points	down.	This	is	what	finally	provides	Nassun	the	focal
point	 to	 establish	 perspective,	 and	 size,	 and	 distance.	 The	 thing	 is	 huge,
because	 now	 she	 can	 see	 tiers	 that	 descend	 toward	 its	 base,	 ringing	 it	 in
concentric	octagons.	Three	of	them.	On	the	outermost	tier	are	buildings,	she
thinks.	 They’re	 badly	 damaged,	 half	 fallen	 in,	 just	 shells,	 but	 she	 sesses	 at
once	why	they	still	exist	where	the	ones	in	the	cavern	beyond	have	crumbled.
The	heat	 that	must	have	 filled	 this	 cavern	has	metamorphized	 something	 in
the	 buildings’	 construction,	 hardening	 and	 preserving	 them.	 Some	 sort	 of
concussion	has	done	damage,	too:	All	the	buildings	are	torn	open	on	the	same
side,	facing	the	great	glass	column.	Looking	from	what	she	guesses	is	a	three-
story	building	to	the	glass	column,	she	guesstimates	that	the	column	is	not	as
far	away	as	it	looks;	it’s	just	much	bigger	than	she	initially	guessed.	The	size
of…	oh.



“An	 obelisk,”	 she	 whispers.	 And	 then	 she	 can	 sess	 and	 guess	 what
happened,	as	clearly	as	if	she	were	there.



Long	 ago,	 an	 obelisk	 sat	 here,	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 this	 cavern,	 one	 of	 its
points	jammed	into	the	ground	like	some	kind	of	bizarre	plant.	At	some	point,
the	obelisk	 lifted	free	of	 the	pit,	 to	float	and	shimmer	 like	 its	 fellows	above
the	 strange	 immensity	 of	 the	 city	 –	 and	 then	 something	 went	 very,	 very
wrong.	The	obelisk…	fell.	Where	it	struck	the	earth,	Nassun	imagines	she	can
hear	 the	 echo	 of	 the	 concussion;	 it	 did	 not	merely	 fall,	 it	drove	 its	way	 in,
punching	through	and	churning	down	and	down	and	down,	powered	by	all	the
force	 of	 concentrated	 silver	 within	 its	 core.	 Nassun	 can’t	 track	 its	 path	 for
more	than	a	mile	or	so	down,	but	there’s	no	reason	to	think	it	didn’t	just	keep
going.	To	where,	she	cannot	guess.



And	in	 its	wake,	channeled	straight	up	from	the	most	molten	part	of	 the
earth,	came	a	literal	fountain	of	earthfire	to	bury	this	city.



There’s	still	nothing	around	that	looks	like	a	way	to	supply	power	to	the
station.	 Nassun	 notices,	 though,	 that	 the	 cavern’s	 illumination	 comes	 from
enormous	pylons	of	blue	light	near	the	base	of	the	glass	column.	These	make
up	 the	 lower-	 and	 innermost	 tier	 of	 the	 chamber.	Something	 is	making	 that
light.



Schaffa,	too,	has	come	to	the	same	conclusion.	“The	tunnel	ends	here,”	he
says,	 gesturing	 toward	 the	 blue	 pylons	 and	 the	 column’s	 base.	 “There’s
nowhere	else	to	go	but	to	the	foot	of	this	monstrosity.	But	are	you	certain	you
want	to	follow	in	the	footsteps	of	whoever	did	this?”



Nassun	bites	her	bottom	lip.	She	does	not.	Here	is	the	wrongness	that	she
sessed	 from	 the	 stair,	 though	 she	 cannot	 tell	 its	 source	 yet.	 Still…	 “Steel
wants	me	to	see	whatever	is	down	there.”



“Are	you	certain	you	want	to	do	what	he	wishes,	Nassun?”



She	isn’t.	Steel	cannot	be	trusted.	But	she’s	already	committed	herself	to
the	path	of	destroying	the	world;	whatever	Steel	wants	cannot	be	worse	than
this.	So	when	Nassun	nods,	Schaffa	simply	inclines	his	head	in	acquiescence,
and	 offers	 her	 his	 hand	 so	 that	 they	 can	walk	 down	 the	 road	 to	 the	 pylons
together.



Walking	past	the	tiers	feels	like	moving	through	a	graveyard,	and	Nassun
feels	compelled	to	a	respectful	silence	for	that	reason.	Between	the	buildings,
she	can	make	out	carbonized	walkways,	melted-glass	troughs	that	must	have
once	 held	 plants,	 strange	 posts	 and	 structures	whose	 purpose	 she	 isn’t	 sure
she’d	be	able	to	fathom	even	if	they	weren’t	half-melted.	She	decides	that	this
post	 is	 for	 tying	 horses,	 and	 that	 frame	 is	where	 the	 tanners	 racked	 drying
hides.	 Remapping	 the	 familiar	 onto	 the	 strange	 doesn’t	 work	 very	 well,	 of
course,	because	nothing	about	this	city	is	normal.	If	the	people	who	lived	here
rode	mounts,	they	were	not	horses.	If	they	made	pottery	or	tools,	those	were
not	shaped	from	clay	or	obsidian,	and	the	crafters	who	made	such	things	were
not	merely	knappers.	These	are	people	who	built,	and	then	lost	control	of,	an
obelisk.	There	is	no	telling	what	wonders	and	horrors	filled	their	streets.



In	 her	 anxiety,	 Nassun	 reaches	 up	 to	 touch	 the	 sapphire,	mostly	 just	 to
reassure	herself	that	she	can	do	so	through	tons	of	cooled	lava	and	petrifying
decayed	 city.	 It	 is	 as	 easy	 to	 connect	 to	 here	 as	 it	was	up	 there,	which	 is	 a
relief.	 It	 tugs	 at	 her	 gently	 –	 or	 as	 gently	 as	 any	 obelisk	 does	 –	 and	 for	 a
moment	 she	 lets	herself	 be	drawn	 into	 its	 flowing,	watery	 light.	 It	 does	not
frighten	her	to	be	so	drawn	in;	 to	the	degree	that	one	can	trust	an	inanimate
object,	Nassun	 trusts	 the	 sapphire	obelisk.	 It	 is	 the	 thing	 that	 told	her	about
Corepoint,	after	all,	and	now	she	senses	another	message	 in	 the	shimmering
interstices	of	its	tight-packed	lines	—



“Up	ahead,”	she	blurts,	startling	herself.



Schaffa	stops	and	looks	at	her.	“What?”



Nassun	has	to	shake	her	head,	drawing	her	mind	back	into	itself	and	out	of
all	 that	blue.	“The…	the	place	 to	put	 in	power.	 Is	up	ahead,	 like	Steel	 said.
Past	the	track.”



“Track?”	Schaffa	 turns,	 gazing	 down	 the	 sloping	walkway.	Up	 ahead	 is
the	second	tier	–	a	smooth,	featureless	plane	of	more	of	that	not-stone	white
stuff.	The	 people	who	 built	 the	 obelisks	 seem	 to	 have	 used	 that	 stuff	 in	 all
their	oldest	and	most	enduring	ruins.



“The	 sapphire…	knows	 this	 place,”	 she	 tries	 to	 explain.	 It’s	 a	 fumbling
sort	of	explanation,	as	hard	as	trying	to	describe	orogeny	to	a	still.	“Not	this
place	specifically,	but	somewhere	 like	 it…”	She	reaches	for	 it	again,	asking
for	more	 without	 words,	 and	 is	 nearly	 overwhelmed	with	 a	 blue	 flicker	 of
images,	sensations,	beliefs.	Her	perspective	changes.	She	stands	at	the	center
of	 three	 tiers,	 no	 longer	 in	 a	 cavern	but	 facing	a	blue	horizon	across	which
pleasant	 clouds	 churn	 and	 race	 and	vanish	 and	 are	 reborn.	The	 tiers	 around
her	teem	with	activity	–	though	it	all	blurs	together,	and	what	she	can	discern
of	 the	few	instants	of	stillness	makes	no	sense.	Strange	vehicles	 like	 the	car
she	 saw	 in	 the	 tunnel	 run	 along	 the	 sides	 of	 buildings,	 following	 tracks	 of
differently	colored	light.	The	buildings	are	covered	in	green,	vines	and	grassy
rooftops	and	flowers	curling	over	lintels	and	walls.	People,	hundreds	of	them,
go	in	and	out	of	these,	and	walk	up	and	down	the	paths	in	unbroken	blurs	of
motion.	She	cannot	see	their	faces,	but	she	catches	glimpses	of	black	hair	like
Schaffa’s,	 earrings	 of	 artfully	 curled	 vine	 motifs,	 a	 dress	 swirling	 about
ankles,	fingers	flicking	while	adorned	with	sheaths	of	colored	lacquer.



And	 everywhere,	 everywhere,	 is	 the	 silver	 that	 lies	 beneath	 heat	 and
motion,	the	stuff	of	the	obelisks.	It	spiders	and	flows,	converging	not	just	into
trickles	but	rivers,	and	when	she	looks	down	she	sees	that	she	stands	in	a	pool
of	liquid	silver,	soaking	in	through	her	feet	—



Nassun	staggers	a	 little	as	she	comes	back	 this	 time,	and	Schaffa’s	hand
lands	firmly	on	her	shoulder	to	steady	her.	“Nassun.”



“I’m	 all	 right,”	 she	 says.	 She	 isn’t	 sure	 of	 that,	 but	 she	 says	 it	 anyway
because	 she	doesn’t	want	him	 to	worry.	And	because	 it	 is	easier	 to	 say	 this
than	I	think	I	was	an	obelisk	for	a	minute.



Schaffa	moves	 around	 to	 crouch	 in	 front	 of	 her,	 gripping	her	 shoulders.
The	 concern	 in	 his	 expression	 almost,	 almost,	 eclipses	 the	weary	 lines,	 the
hint	of	distraction,	and	the	other	signs	of	struggle	that	are	building	beneath	the
surface	of	him.	His	pain	is	worse,	here	underground.	He	hasn’t	said	that	it	is,
and	Nassun	doesn’t	know	why	it’s	getting	worse,	but	she	can	tell.



But.	 “Don’t	 trust	 the	 obelisks,	 little	 one,”	 he	 says.	 This	 does	 not	 seem
nearly	 as	 strange	 or	wrong	 a	 thing	 for	 him	 to	 say	 as	 it	 should.	On	 impulse
Nassun	hugs	Schaffa;	he	holds	her	tight,	rubbing	comfort	into	her	back.	“We
allowed	 a	 few	 to	 progress,”	 he	 murmurs	 in	 her	 ear.	 Nassun	 blinks,
remembering	 poor,	 mad,	 murderous	 Nida,	 who	 said	 the	 same	 thing	 once.
“Back	 in	 the	Fulcrum.	 I	was	 permitted	 to	 remember	 that	much	because	 it’s
important.	 The	 few	 who	 reached	 ninth-	 or	 tenth-ring	 status…	 they	 were
always	able	to	sense	the	obelisks,	and	the	obelisks	could	sense	them	in	turn.
They	would	 have	 drawn	 you	 to	 them	 one	way	 or	 another.	 They’re	missing
something,	 incomplete	 somehow,	 and	 that’s	 what	 they	 need	 an	 orogene	 to
provide.



“But	 the	obelisks	killed	 them,	my	Nassun.”	He	presses	his	 face	 into	her
hair.	 She’s	 filthy	 and	 hasn’t	 truly	 washed	 since	 Jekity,	 but	 his	 words	 strip
away	such	mundane	thoughts.	“The	obelisks…	I	remember.	They	will	change
you,	remake	you,	if	they	can.	That’s	what	that	rusting	stone	eater	wants.”



His	arms	tighten	for	an	instant,	with	a	hint	of	his	old	strength,	and	it	is	the
most	 beautiful	 feeling	 in	 the	world.	She	knows	 in	 this	moment	 that	 he	will
never	 falter,	 never	 not	 be	 there	 when	 she	 needs	 him,	 never	 devolve	 into	 a
mere	fallible	human	being.	And	she	loves	him	more	than	life	for	his	strength.



“Yes,	Schaffa,”	she	promises.	“I’ll	be	careful.	I	won’t	let	them	win.”



Him,	she	thinks,	and	she	knows	he	thinks	it	too.	She	won’t	let	Steel	win.
At	least	not	without	getting	what	she	wants	first.



So	 they	 are	 resolved.	 When	 Nassun	 pulls	 back,	 Schaffa	 nods	 before
getting	to	his	feet.	They	go	forward	again.



The	 innermost	 tier	 sits	 in	 the	 glass	 column’s	 blue,	 gloomy	 shadow.	The
pylons	 are	 bigger	 than	 they	 looked	 from	 afar	 –	 perhaps	 twice	 as	 tall	 as
Schaffa,	 three	or	 four	 times	as	wide,	and	humming	 faintly	now	 that	Nassun
and	Schaffa	are	close	enough	to	hear.	They’re	arranged	in	a	ring	around	what
must	have	once	been	the	resting	place	of	an	obelisk,	like	a	buffer	protecting
the	outer	two	tiers.	Like	a	fence,	separating	the	bustling	life	of	the	city	from…
this.



This:	At	first	Nassun	thinks	 it	 is	a	 thicket	of	 thorns.	The	 thornvines	curl
and	tangle	along	the	ground	and	up	the	inner	surface	of	the	pylons,	filling	all
the	available	space	between	them	and	the	glass	column	itself.	Then	she	sees
that	they	aren’t	thornvines:	no	leaves.	No	thorns.	Just	these	curling,	gnarling,
ropelike	twists	of	something	that	looks	woody	but	smells	a	little	like	fungus.



“How	odd,”	Schaffa	says.	“Something	alive	at	last?”



“M-maybe	they	aren’t	alive?”	They	do	 look	dead,	 though	they	stand	out
by	 being	 still	 recognizably	 plants	 and	 not	 crumbled	 bits	 of	 decay	 on	 the
ground.	Nassun	does	not	like	it	here,	amid	these	ugly	vines	and	in	the	shadow
of	 the	 glass	 column.	 Is	 that	what	 the	 pylons	 are	 for,	 to	 cut	 off	 sight	 of	 the
vines’	 grotesquerie	 from	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 city?	 “And	 maybe	 they	 grew	 here
after…	the	rest.”



Then	she	blinks,	noticing	something	new	about	 the	vine	nearest	her.	 It’s
different	 from	 the	others	 around	 it.	Those	are	obviously	dead,	withered	and
blackened	 and	 broken	 off	 in	 places.	 This	 one,	 however,	 looks	 as	 though	 it
might	be	alive.	It	is	ropy	and	knotted	in	places,	with	a	wood-like	surface	that
looks	old	and	 rough,	but	whole.	Debris	 litters	 the	 floor	beneath	 it	–	grayish
lumps	 and	 dust,	 scraps	 of	 dry-rotted	 cloth,	 and	 even	 a	moldering	 length	 of
frayed	rope.



There	is	a	thing	Nassun	has	resisted	doing	since	entering	the	cavern	of	the
glass	column;	some	things	she	doesn’t	quite	want	to	know.	Now,	however,	she
closes	her	eyes	and	reaches	inside	the	vine	with	her	sense	of	the	silver.



At	first	 it’s	hard.	The	cells	of	the	thing	–	because	it	 is	alive,	more	like	a
fungus	 than	 a	 plant,	 but	 there	 is	 also	 something	 artificial	 and	 mechanical
about	the	way	it	has	been	made	to	function	–	press	together	so	tightly	that	she
doesn’t	expect	 to	see	any	silver	between	them.	More	dense	 than	 the	stuff	 in
people’s	 bodies.	 The	 arrangement	 of	 its	 substance	 is	 almost	 crystalline,	 in
fact,	cells	 lined	up	 in	neat	 little	matrices,	which	she’s	never	seen	 in	a	 living
thing	before.



And	 now	 that	 Nassun	 has	 seen	 down	 into	 the	 interstices	 of	 the	 vine’s
substance,	she	can	see	that	it	doesn’t	have	any	silver	in	it.	What	it	has	instead
are…	She	isn’t	sure	how	to	describe	it.	Negative	spaces?	Where	silver	should
be,	 but	 isn’t.	 Spaces	 that	 can	 be	 filled	 with	 silver.	 And	 as	 she	 gingerly
explores	 them,	 fascinated,	 she	 begins	 to	 notice	 the	 way	 they	 pull	 at	 her
perception,	more	and	more,	until	–	with	a	gasp,	Nassun	jerks	her	perception
free.



You’ll	see	what	to	do,	Steel	has	said.	It	should	be	obvious.



Schaffa,	who	has	crouched	to	peer	at	the	bit	of	rope,	pauses	and	glances	at
her,	frowning.	“What	is	it?”



She	stares	back	at	him,	but	she	doesn’t	have	the	words	to	say	what	needs
to	be	done.	The	words	do	not	exist.	She	knows,	however,	what	she	needs	to
do.	Nassun	takes	a	step	closer	to	the	living	vine.



“Nassun,”	Schaffa	says,	his	voice	tight	and	warning	with	sudden	alarm.



“I	 have	 to,	 Schaffa,”	 she	 says.	 She’s	 already	 lifting	 her	 hands.	 This	 is
where	all	the	silver	of	the	outer	cavern	has	been	going,	she	realizes	now;	these
vines	have	been	eating	it	up.	Why?	She	knows	why,	in	the	deepest	and	most
ancient	design	of	her	flesh.	“I	have	to,	um,	power	the	system.”



Then,	before	Schaffa	can	stop	her,	Nassun	wraps	both	hands	around	 the
vine.



It	 does	 not	 hurt.	 That’s	 the	 trap	 of	 it.	 The	 sensation	 that	 spreads
throughout	her	body	 is	pleasant,	 in	 fact.	Relaxing.	 If	she	could	not	perceive
the	silver,	or	the	way	the	vine	instantly	starts	dragging	every	bit	of	silver	out
of	the	spaces	between	her	cells,	she	would	think	it	was	doing	something	good
for	her.	As	it	is,	it	will	kill	her	in	moments.



She	has	access	 to	more	silver	 than	just	her	own,	 though.	Lazily,	 through
the	 languor,	 Nassun	 reaches	 for	 the	 sapphire	 –	 and	 the	 sapphire	 responds
instantly,	easily.



Amplifiers,	 Alabaster	 called	 them,	 long	 before	 Nassun	 was	 ever	 born.
Batteries	 is	 how	 you	 think	 of	 them,	 and	 how	 you	 once	 explained	 them	 to
Ykka.



What	Nassun	understands	the	obelisks	to	be	is	simply	engines.	She’s	seen
engines	at	work	–	the	simple	pump-and-turbine	things	that	regulated	geo	and
hydro	 back	 in	 Tirimo,	 and	 occasionally	 more	 complex	 things	 like	 grain
elevators.	What	she	understands	about	engines	would	fill	less	than	a	thimble,
but	this	much	is	clear	even	to	a	ten-year-old:	To	work,	engines	need	fuel.



So	she	 flows	with	 the	blue,	and	 the	sapphire’s	power	 flows	 through	her.
The	vine	in	her	hands	seems	to	gasp	at	the	sudden	influx,	though	this	is	just
her	imagination,	she’s	sure.	Then	it	hums	in	her	hands,	and	she	sees	how	the
empty,	 yawning	 spaces	 of	 its	matrices	 fill	 and	 flow	with	 glimmering	 silver
light,	and	something	immediately	shunts	that	light	away	to	somewhere	else	—



A	loud	clack	echoes	through	the	cavern.	This	is	followed	by	other,	fainter
clacks,	 ramping	 up	 to	 a	 rhythm,	 and	 then	 a	 rising,	 low	 hum.	 The	 cavern
brightens	suddenly	as	the	blue	pylons	turn	white	and	blaze	brighter,	as	do	the
tired	 yellow	 lights	 that	 they	 followed	 down	 the	 mosaic	 tunnel.	 Nassun
flinches	even	 in	 the	depths	of	 the	sapphire,	and	 in	half	a	breath	Schaffa	has
grabbed	her	away	from	the	vine.	His	hands	shake	as	he	holds	her	close,	but	he
doesn’t	 say	anything,	his	 relief	palpable	as	he	 lets	Nassun	 flop	against	him.
She’s	suddenly	so	drained	that	only	his	grip	holds	her	up.



And	in	the	meantime,	something	is	coming	along	the	track.



It	is	a	ghostly	thing,	iridescent	beetle	green,	graceful	and	sleek	and	nearly
silent	as	 it	emerges	from	somewhere	behind	the	glass	column.	Nothing	of	 it
makes	 sense	 to	 Nassun’s	 eyes.	 The	 bulk	 of	 it	 is	 roughly	 teardrop-shaped,
though	its	narrower,	pointy	end	is	asymmetrical,	the	tip	curving	high	off	the
ground	in	a	way	that	makes	her	 think	of	a	crow’s	beak.	It’s	huge,	easily	the
size	of	a	house,	and	yet	 it	 floats	a	 few	 inches	above	 the	 track,	unsupported.
The	substance	of	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	guess,	 though	 it	 seems	 to	have…	skin?
Yes;	up	close,	Nassun	can	see	that	the	surface	of	the	thing	has	the	same	finely
wrinkled	texture	as	thick,	well-worked	leather.	Here	and	there	on	that	skin	she
glimpses	odd,	 irregular	 lumps,	 each	perhaps	 the	 size	of	 a	 fist;	 they	 seem	 to
have	no	visible	purpose.



It	blurs	and	flickers,	though,	the	thing.	From	solidity	to	translucence	and
back,	just	like	an	obelisk.



“Very	good,”	says	Steel,	who	is	suddenly	in	front	of	them	and	to	one	side
of	the	thing.



Nassun	is	too	drained	to	flinch,	though	she’s	recovering.	Schaffa’s	hands
tighten	on	her	shoulders	in	reflex,	then	relax.	Steel	ignores	them	both.	One	of
the	 stone	 eater’s	 hands	 is	 upraised	 toward	 the	 strange	 floating	 thing,	 like	 a
proud	 artist	 displaying	 his	 latest	 creation.	 He	 says,	 “You	 gave	 the	 system
rather	 more	 power	 than	 absolutely	 necessary.	 The	 overflow	 has	 gone	 into
lighting,	 as	 you	 can	 see,	 and	other	 systems	 such	 as	 environmental	 controls.
Pointless,	 but	 I	 suppose	 it	 does	 no	 harm.	 They’ll	 run	 down	 again	 in	 a	 few
months,	without	any	source	to	provide	additional	power.”



Schaffa’s	voice	is	very	soft	and	cold.	“This	could	have	killed	her.”



Steel	 is	 still	 smiling.	Nassun	finally	begins	 to	suspect	 that	 this	 is	Steel’s
attempt	 to	mock	 a	Guardian’s	 frequent	 smiles.	 “Yes,	 if	 she	 hadn’t	 used	 the
obelisk.”	 There	 is	 nothing	 of	 apology	 in	 his	 tone.	 “Death	 is	 what	 usually
happens	when	someone	charges	the	system.	Orogenes	capable	of	channeling
magic	can	survive	it,	however	–	as	can	Guardians,	who	usually	can	draw	upon
an	outside	source.”



Magic?	Nassun	thinks	in	fleeting	confusion.



But	Schaffa	stiffens.	Nassun	is	confused	by	his	fury	at	first,	and	then	she
realizes:	Ordinary	Guardians,	the	uncontaminated	kind,	draw	silver	from	the
earth	and	put	it	into	the	vines.	Guardians	like	Umber	and	Nida	can	probably
do	the	same,	though	they	would	try	only	if	it	served	Father	Earth’s	interests.
But	 Schaffa,	 despite	 his	 corestone,	 cannot	 rely	 on	 the	 Earth’s	 silver,	 and
cannot	draw	more	of	 it	 at	will.	 If	Nassun	was	 in	danger	 from	 the	vine,	 that
was	because	of	Schaffa’s	inadequacy.



Or	 so	 Steel	means	 to	 suggest.	 Nassun	 stares	 at	 him	 incredulously,	 then
turns	 back	 to	 Schaffa.	 She’s	 getting	 some	 of	 her	 strength	 back	 already.	 “I
knew	I	could	do	it,”	she	says.	Schaffa	is	still	glaring	at	Steel.	Nassun	balls	up
her	fists	in	his	shirt	and	tugs	to	make	him	look	at	her.	He	blinks	and	does	so,
in	surprise.	“I	knew!	And	I	wouldn’t	have	let	you	do	the	vines,	Schaffa.	It’s
because	of	me	that	—”



She	falters	then,	her	throat	closing	with	impending	tears.	Some	of	this	is
just	nerves	and	exhaustion.	Much	of	it,	 though,	is	the	sense	of	guilt	 that	has
been	 lurking	 and	 growing	 within	 her	 for	 months,	 only	 now	 spilling	 out
because	 she’s	 too	 tired	 to	 keep	 it	 in.	 It’s	 her	 fault	 that	 Schaffa	 has	 lost
everything:	Found	Moon,	the	children	he	cared	for,	the	companionship	of	his
fellow	 Guardians,	 the	 reliable	 power	 that	 should	 have	 come	 from	 his
corestone,	even	peaceful	sleep	at	night.	She’s	why	he’s	down	here	in	the	dust
of	a	dead	city,	and	why	they’re	about	to	entrust	themselves	to	machinery	older
than	Sanze	and	maybe	the	whole	Stillness,	to	go	to	an	impossible	place	and	do
an	impossible	thing.



Schaffa	 sees	 all	 this	 instantly,	 with	 the	 skill	 of	 a	 longtime	 caretaker	 of
children.	The	frown	clears	from	his	face,	and	he	shakes	his	head	and	crouches
to	face	her.	“No,”	he	says.	“Nothing	is	your	fault,	my	Nassun.	No	matter	what
it	has	cost	me,	and	no	matter	what	it	may	cost	yet,	always	remember	that	I	–
that	I	—”



His	 expression	 falters.	 For	 a	 fleeting	 instant,	 that	 horrible,	 blurry
confusion	 is	 there,	 threatening	 to	wipe	away	even	 this	moment	 in	which	he
means	to	declare	his	strength	to	her.	Nassun	catches	her	breath	and	focuses	on
him	in	the	silver	and	bares	her	teeth	as	she	sees	that	 the	corestone	in	him	is
alive	again,	working	viciously	along	his	nerves	and	spidering	over	his	brain,
even	now	trying	to	force	him	to	heel.



No,	she	thinks	in	a	sudden	fury.	She	grips	his	shoulders	and	shakes	him.	It
takes	her	whole	body	to	do	this	because	he’s	such	a	big	man,	but	it	makes	him
blink	and	focus	through	the	blur.	“You’re	Schaffa,”	she	says.	“You	are!	And…
and	you	chose.”	Because	that’s	important.	That’s	the	thing	the	world	doesn’t
want	people	like	them	to	do.	“You’re	not	my	Guardian	anymore,	you’re	—”
She	dares	 to	say	 it	aloud	at	 last.	“You’re	my	new	father.	Okay?	And	 th-that
means	we’re	family,	and…	and	we	have	to	work	together.	That’s	what	family
does,	right?	You	let	me	protect	you	sometimes.”



Schaffa	stares	at	her,	then	he	sighs	and	leans	forward	to	kiss	her	forehead.
He	 stays	 there	 after	 the	 kiss,	 nose	 pressed	 into	 her	 hair;	 Nassun	 makes	 a
mighty	 effort	 and	 does	 not	 burst	 into	 tears.	 When	 he	 speaks	 at	 last,	 the
horrible	blurriness	has	faded,	as	have	even	some	of	the	pain-lines	around	his
eyes.	“Very	well,	Nassun.	Sometimes,	you	may	protect	me.”



That	settled,	she	sniffs,	wipes	her	nose	on	a	sleeve,	and	then	turns	to	face
Steel.	He	hasn’t	changed	position,	so	she	pulls	away	from	Schaffa	and	goes
over	to	him,	stopping	right	in	front	of	him.	His	eyes	shift	to	follow	her,	lazily
slow.	“Don’t	do	that	again.”



She	half	expects	him	to	say,	in	his	too-knowing	voice,	Do	what?	 Instead
he	says,	“It’s	a	mistake	to	bring	him	with	us.”



Cold	washes	through	Nassun,	followed	by	hot.	Is	it	a	threat,	or	a	warning?
She	doesn’t	like	it,	either	way.	Her	jaw	feels	so	tight	that	she	almost	bites	her
tongue	trying	to	speak.	“I	don’t	care.”



Silence	 in	 reply.	 Is	 this	 capitulation?	 Agreement?	 Refusal	 to	 argue?
Nassun	doesn’t	know.	She	wants	 to	yell	 at	him:	Say	you	won’t	hurt	Schaffa
again!	Even	though	it	feels	wrong	to	yell	at	any	adult.	Yet	she	has	also	spent
the	past	year	and	a	half	 learning	 that	adults	are	people,	and	sometimes	 they
are	wrong,	and	sometimes	somebody	should	yell	at	them.



But	 Nassun	 is	 tired,	 so	 instead	 she	 retreats	 to	 Schaffa,	 taking	 his	 hand
tightly	and	glaring	back	at	Steel,	daring	him	to	say	anything	else.	He	doesn’t,
though.	Good.



The	 huge	 green	 thing	 sort	 of	 ripples	 then,	 and	 they	 all	 turn	 to	 face	 it.
Something	is	–	Nassun	shudders,	both	revolted	and	fascinated.	Something	is
growing	 from	the	weird	nodules	all	over	 the	 thing’s	surface.	Each	 is	several
feet	long,	narrow,	featherlike,	attenuating	near	the	tips.	In	a	moment	there	are
dozens	of	them,	curling	and	waving	gently	in	an	unfelt	breeze.	Cilia,	Nassun
thinks	suddenly,	remembering	a	picture	in	an	old	biomestry	creche	book.	Of
course.	Why	wouldn’t	 people	who	made	 buildings	 out	 of	 plants	 also	make
carriages	that	look	like	germs?



Some	of	 the	feathers	are	flickering	faster	 than	others,	clustering	together
for	a	moment	at	a	point	along	the	thing’s	side.	Then	the	feathers	all	peel	back,
flattening	against	 the	mother-of-pearl	 surface,	 to	 reveal	a	soft	 rectangle	of	a
door.	 Beyond,	 Nassun	 can	 see	 gentle	 light	 and	 surprisingly	 comfortable-
looking	chairs,	in	rows.	They	will	ride	in	style	to	the	other	side	of	the	world.



Nassun	looks	up	at	Schaffa.	He	nods	back	at	her	with	jaw	tight.	She	does
not	look	at	Steel,	who	hasn’t	moved	and	makes	no	attempt	to	join	them.



Then	 they	 climb	 aboard,	 and	 the	 feathers	 weave	 the	 door	 shut	 behind
them.	 As	 they	 sit	 down,	 the	 great	 vehicle	 utters	 a	 low,	 resonant	 tone,	 and
begins	to	move.

***
Wealth	has	no	value	when	the	ash	falls.

—	Tablet	Three,	“Structures,”	verse	ten



Syl	Anagist:	Two
	

It’s	a	magnificent	house,	compact	but	elegantly	designed	and	full	of	beautiful
furnishings.	 We	 stare	 at	 its	 arches	 and	 bookcases	 and	 wooden	 bannisters.
There	are	only	a	few	plants	growing	from	the	cellulose	walls,	so	the	air	is	dry
and	a	little	stale.	It	feels	like	the	museum.	We	cluster	together	in	the	big	room
at	the	front	of	the	house,	afraid	to	move,	afraid	to	touch	anything.



“Do	you	live	here?”	one	of	the	others	asks	Kelenli.



“Occasionally,”	 she	 says.	 Her	 face	 is	 expressionless,	 but	 there	 is
something	in	her	voice	that	troubles	me.	“Follow	me.”



She	leads	us	through	the	house.	A	den	of	stunning	comfort:	every	surface
soft	and	sittable,	even	the	floor.	What	strikes	me	is	that	nothing	is	white.	The
walls	are	green	and	in	some	places	painted	a	deep,	rich	burgundy.	In	the	next
room,	 the	 beds	 are	 covered	 in	 blue	 and	 gold	 fabric	 in	 contrasting	 textures.
Nothing	is	hard	and	nothing	is	bare	and	I	have	never	thought	before	that	the
chamber	I	live	in	is	a	prison	cell,	but	now	for	the	first	time,	I	do.



I	have	thought	many	new	things	this	day,	especially	during	our	journey	to
this	house.	We	walked	the	whole	way,	our	feet	aching	with	the	unaccustomed
use,	and	the	whole	way,	people	stared.	Some	whispered.	One	reached	out	to
stroke	my	hair	 in	passing,	 then	giggled	when	 I	belatedly	 twitched	away.	At
one	point	a	man	 followed	us.	He	was	older,	with	short	gray	hair	almost	 the
same	texture	as	ours,	and	he	began	to	say	angry	things.	Some	of	the	words	I
did	not	know	(“Niesbred”	and	“forktongue,”	for	example).	Some	I	knew,	but
did	not	understand.	(“Mistakes”	and	“We	should	have	wiped	you	out,”	which
makes	no	sense	because	we	were	very	carefully	and	intentionally	made.)	He
accused	us	of	lying,	though	none	of	us	spoke	to	him,	and	of	only	pretending
to	 be	 gone	 (somewhere).	 He	 said	 that	 his	 parents	 and	 his	 parents’	 parents
taught	him	the	true	horror,	the	true	enemy,	monsters	like	us	were	the	enemy	of
all	good	people,	and	he	was	going	to	make	sure	we	didn’t	hurt	anyone	else.



Then	he	came	closer,	big	fists	balled	up.	As	we	stumbled	along	gawping,
so	 confused	 that	 we	 did	 not	 even	 realize	 we	 were	 in	 danger,	 some	 of	 our
unobtrusive	guards	abruptly	became	more	obtrusive	and	pulled	the	man	into	a
building	alcove,	where	they	held	him	while	he	shouted	and	struggled	to	get	at
us.	Kelenli	kept	walking	forward	the	whole	time,	her	head	high,	not	looking
at	 the	man.	We	followed,	knowing	nothing	else	 to	do,	and	after	a	while	 the
man	fell	behind	us,	his	words	lost	to	the	sounds	of	the	city.



Later,	Gaewha,	 shaking	 a	 little,	 asked	Kelenli	what	was	wrong	with	 the
angry	man.	 Kelenli	 laughed	 softly	 and	 said,	 “He’s	 Sylanagistine.”	 Gaewha
subsided	into	confusion.	We	all	sent	her	quick	pulses	of	reassurance	that	we
are	equally	mystified;	the	problem	was	not	her.



This	is	normal	life	in	Syl	Anagist,	we	understand,	as	we	walk	through	it.
Normal	people	on	the	normal	streets.	Normal	touches	that	make	us	cringe	or
stiffen	or	back	up	quickly.	Normal	houses	with	normal	 furnishings.	Normal
gazes	 that	 avert	or	 frown	or	ogle.	With	every	glimpse	of	normalcy,	 the	city
teaches	 us	 just	 how	 abnormal	we	 are.	 I	 have	 never	minded	 before	 that	 we
were	merely	constructs,	genegineered	by	master	biomagests	and	developed	in
capsids	 of	 nutrient	 slush,	 decanted	 fully	 grown	 so	 that	 we	 would	 need	 no
nurturing.	I	have	been…	proud,	until	now,	of	what	I	am.	I	have	been	content.
But	now	I	see	the	way	these	normal	people	look	at	us,	and	my	heart	aches.	I
don’t	understand	why.



Perhaps	all	the	walking	has	damaged	me.



Now	 Kelenli	 leads	 us	 through	 the	 fancy	 house.	 We	 pass	 through	 a
doorway,	however,	and	find	an	enormous	sprawling	garden	behind	the	house.
Down	 the	steps	and	around	 the	dirt	path,	 there	are	 flower	beds	everywhere,
their	 fragrance	 summoning	 us	 closer.	 These	 aren’t	 like	 the	 precisely
cultivated,	 genegineered	 flower	 beds	 of	 the	 compound,	 with	 their	 color-
coordinated	winking	flowers;	what	grows	here	 is	wild,	and	perhaps	 inferior,
their	 stems	 haphazardly	 short	 or	 long	 and	 their	 petals	 frequently	 less	 than
perfect.	 And	 yet…	 I	 like	 them.	 The	 carpet	 of	 lichens	 that	 covers	 the	 path
invites	closer	study,	so	we	confer	in	rapid	pulse-waves	as	we	crouch	and	try	to
understand	why	 it	 feels	 so	 springy	 and	 pleasant	 beneath	 our	 feet.	A	pair	 of
scissors	dangling	from	a	stake	invites	curiosity.	I	resist	the	urge	to	claim	some
of	the	pretty	purple	flowers	for	myself,	though	Gaewha	tries	the	scissors	and
then	clutches	some	flowers	in	her	hand,	tightly,	fiercely.	We	have	never	been
allowed	possessions	of	our	own.



I	watch	Kelenli	surreptitiously,	compulsively,	while	she	watches	us	play.
The	strength	of	my	interest	confuses	and	frightens	me	a	little,	though	I	seem
unable	to	resist	it.	We’ve	always	known	that	the	conductors	failed	to	make	us
emotionless,	 but	 we…	 well.	 I	 thought	 us	 above	 such	 intensity	 of	 feeling.
That’s	what	I	get	for	being	arrogant.	Now	here	we	are,	 lost	 in	sensation	and
reaction.	Gaewha	huddles	 in	a	corner	with	 the	 scissors,	 ready	 to	defend	her
flowers	to	the	death.	Dushwha	spins	in	circles,	 laughing	deliriously;	I’m	not
sure	 exactly	 at	 what.	 Bimniwha	 has	 cornered	 one	 of	 our	 guards	 and	 is
peppering	him	with	questions	about	what	we	saw	during	 the	walk	here;	 the
guard	 has	 a	 hunted	 look	 and	 seems	 to	 be	 hoping	 for	 rescue.	 Salewha	 and
Remwha	 are	 in	 an	 intense	 discussion	 as	 they	 crouch	 beside	 a	 little	 pond,
trying	 to	 figure	 out	 whether	 the	 creatures	 moving	 in	 the	 water	 are	 fish	 or
frogs.	Their	conversation	is	entirely	auditory,	no	earthtalk	at	all.



And	I,	fool	that	I	am,	watch	Kelenli.	I	want	to	understand	what	she	means
us	to	learn,	either	from	that	art-thing	at	the	museum	or	our	afternoon	garden
idyll.	Her	face	and	sessapinae	reveal	nothing,	but	that’s	all	right.	I	also	want
to	simply	look	at	her	face	and	bask	in	that	deep,	powerful	orogenic	presence
of	hers.	It’s	nonsensical.	Probably	disturbing	to	her,	though	she	ignores	me	if
so.	I	want	her	to	look	at	me.	I	want	to	speak	to	her.	I	want	to	be	her.



I	 decide	 that	what	 I’m	 feeling	 is	 love.	Even	 if	 it	 isn’t,	 the	 idea	 is	 novel
enough	to	fascinate	me,	so	I	decide	to	follow	where	its	impulses	lead.



After	 a	 time,	Kelenli	 rises	 and	walks	 away	 from	where	we	wander	 the
garden.	At	the	center	of	the	garden	is	a	small	structure,	like	a	tiny	house	but
made	of	stone	bricks	rather	 than	 the	cellulose	greenstrate	of	most	buildings.
One	determined	ivy	grows	over	its	nearer	wall.	When	she	opens	the	door	of
this	house,	I	am	the	only	one	who	notices.	By	the	time	she’s	stepped	inside,
all	the	others	have	stopped	whatever	they	were	doing	and	stood	to	watch	her,
too.	She	pauses,	amused	–	I	think	–	by	our	sudden	silence	and	anxiety.	Then
she	sighs	and	jerks	her	head	in	a	silent	Come	on.	We	scramble	to	follow.



Inside	–	we	cram	carefully	in	after	Kelenli;	it’s	a	tight	fit	–	the	little	house
has	a	wooden	floor	and	some	furnishings.	It’s	nearly	as	bare	as	our	cells	back
at	the	compound,	but	there	are	some	important	differences.	Kelenli	sits	down
on	one	of	the	chairs	and	we	realize:	This	is	hers.	Hers.	 It	 is	her…	cell?	No.
There	are	peculiarities	all	around	the	space,	things	that	offer	intriguing	hints
as	to	Kelenli’s	personality	and	past.	Books	on	a	shelf	in	the	corner	mean	that
someone	has	taught	her	to	read.	A	brush	on	the	edge	of	the	sink	suggests	that
she	does	her	own	hair,	impatiently	to	judge	by	the	amount	of	hair	caught	in	its
bristles.	Maybe	the	big	house	is	where	she	is	supposed	to	be,	and	maybe	she
actually	 sleeps	 there	 sometimes.	This	 little	garden	house,	however,	 is…	her
home.



“I	grew	up	with	Conductor	Gallat,”	Kelenli	says	softly.	(We’ve	sat	down
on	 the	 floor	 and	 chairs	 and	 bed	 around	 her,	 rapt	 for	 her	wisdom.)	 “Raised
alongside	him,	the	experiment	to	his	control	–	just	as	I’m	your	control.	He’s
ordinary,	except	for	a	drop	of	undesirable	ancestry.”



I	blink	my	icewhite	eyes,	and	think	of	Gallat’s,	and	suddenly	I	understand
many	new	things.	She	smiles	when	my	mouth	drops	open	in	an	O.	Her	smile
doesn’t	last	long,	however.



“They	–	Gallat’s	parents,	who	I	thought	were	my	parents	–	didn’t	tell	me
at	first	what	I	was.	I	went	to	school,	played	games,	did	all	the	things	a	normal
Sylanagistine	girl	does	while	growing	up.	But	they	didn’t	treat	me	the	same.
For	a	long	time	I	 thought	it	was	something	I’d	done.”	Her	gaze	drifts	away,
weighty	with	old	bitterness.	“I	wondered	why	I	was	so	horrible	that	even	my
parents	couldn’t	seem	to	love	me.”



Remwha	 crouches	 to	 rub	 a	 hand	 along	 the	wooden	 slats	 of	 the	 floor.	 I
don’t	 know	why	 he	 does	 anything.	 Salewha	 is	 still	 outside,	 since	Kelenli’s
little	house	is	too	cramped	for	her	tastes;	she	has	gone	to	stare	at	a	tiny,	fast-
moving	 bird	 that	 flits	 among	 the	 flowers.	 She	 listens	 through	 us,	 though,
through	 the	house’s	open	door.	We	all	need	 to	hear	what	Kelenli	 says,	with
voice	and	vibration	and	the	steady,	heavy	weight	of	her	gaze.



“Why	did	they	deceive	you?”	Gaewha	asks.



“The	 experiment	 was	 to	 see	 if	 I	 could	 be	 human.”	 Kelenli	 smiles	 to
herself.	 She’s	 sitting	 forward	 in	 her	 chair,	 elbows	 braced	 on	 her	 knees,
looking	at	her	hands.	“See	if,	raised	among	decent,	natural	folk,	I	might	turn
out	at	least	decent,	if	not	natural.	And	so	my	every	achievement	was	counted
a	Sylanagistine	 success,	while	my	every	 failure	or	display	of	poor	behavior
was	seen	as	proof	of	genetic	degeneracy.”



Gaewha	and	I	look	at	each	other.	“Why	would	you	be	indecent?”	she	asks,
utterly	mystified.



Kelenli	blinks	out	of	her	reverie	and	stares	at	us	for	a	moment,	and	in	that
time	we	feel	the	gulf	between	us.	She	thinks	of	herself	as	one	of	us,	which	she
is.	 She	 thinks	 of	 herself	 as	 a	 person,	 too,	 though.	 Those	 two	 concepts	 are
incompatible.



“Evil	Death,”	 she	 says	 softly,	wonderingly,	 echoing	 our	 thoughts.	 “You
really	don’t	know	anything,	do	you?”



Our	guards	have	taken	up	positions	at	the	top	of	the	steps	leading	into	the
garden,	nowhere	in	earshot.	This	space	is	as	private	as	anything	we	have	had
today.	It	is	almost	surely	bugged,	but	Kelenli	does	not	seem	to	care,	and	we
don’t,	 either.	 She	 draws	 up	 her	 feet	 and	wraps	 her	 arms	 around	 her	 knees,
curiously	vulnerable	for	someone	whose	presence	within	the	strata	is	as	deep
and	dense	as	a	mountain.	I	reach	up	to	touch	her	ankle,	greatly	daring,	and	she
blinks	and	smiles	at	me,	reaching	down	to	cover	my	fingers	with	her	hand.	I
will	not	understand	my	feelings	for	centuries	afterward.



The	 contact	 seems	 to	 strengthen	Kelenli.	Her	 smile	 fades	 and	 she	 says,
“Then	I’ll	tell	you.”



Remwha	is	still	studying	her	wooden	floor.	He	rubs	the	grain	of	it	with	his
fingers	 and	 manages	 to	 send	 along	 its	 dust	 molecules:	 Should	 you?	 I	 am
chagrined	because	it’s	something	I	should	have	considered.



She	shakes	her	head,	smiling.	No,	she	shouldn’t.



But	she	does	anyway,	through	the	earth	so	we	will	know	it’s	true.
***

Remember	what	I	have	told	you:	The	Stillness	in	these	days	is	three	lands,	not
one.	 Their	 names,	 if	 this	 matters,	 are	 Maecar,	 Kakhiarar,	 and	 Cilir.	 Syl
Anagist	started	out	as	part	of	Kakhiarar,	then	all	of	it,	then	all	of	Maecar,	too.
All	became	Syl	Anagist.



Cilir,	to	the	south,	was	once	a	small	and	nothing	land	occupied	by	many
small	and	nothing	peoples.	One	of	these	groups	was	the	Thniess.	It	was	hard
to	say	their	name	with	the	proper	pronunciation,	so	Sylanagistines	called	them
Niess.	 The	 two	 words	 did	 not	 mean	 the	 same	 thing,	 but	 the	 latter	 is	 what
caught	on.



The	Sylanagistines	took	their	land.	The	Niess	fought,	but	then	responded
like	any	living	thing	under	threat	–	with	diaspora,	sending	whatever	was	left
of	 themselves	 flying	 forth	 to	 take	 root	 and	 perhaps	 survive	where	 it	 could.
The	 descendants	 of	 these	 Niess	 became	 part	 of	 every	 land,	 every	 people,
blending	in	among	the	rest	and	adapting	to	 local	customs.	They	managed	to
keep	hold	of	who	they	were,	though,	continuing	to	speak	their	own	language
even	as	they	grew	fluent	in	other	tongues.	They	maintained	some	of	their	old
ways,	too	–	like	splitting	their	tongues	with	salt	acid,	for	reasons	known	only
to	 them.	 And	 while	 they	 lost	 much	 of	 the	 distinctive	 look	 that	 came	 of
isolation	within	their	small	land,	many	retained	enough	of	it	that	to	this	day,
icewhite	eyes	and	ashblow	hair	carry	a	certain	stigma.



Yes,	you	see	now.



But	the	thing	that	made	the	Niess	truly	different	was	their	magic.	Magic	is
everywhere	 in	 the	 world.	 Everyone	 sees	 it,	 feels	 it,	 flows	 with	 it.	 In	 Syl
Anagist,	magic	is	cultivated	in	every	flower	bed	and	tree	line	and	grapevine-
draped	wall.	Each	household	or	business	must	produce	its	share,	which	is	then
funneled	away	in	genegineered	vines	and	pumps	to	become	the	power	source
for	 a	 global	 civilization.	 It	 is	 illegal	 to	 kill	 in	 Syl	Anagist	 because	 life	 is	 a
valuable	resource.



The	Niess	did	not	believe	this.	Magic	could	not	be	owned,	they	insisted,
any	more	than	life	could	be	–	and	thus	they	wasted	both,	by	building	(among
many	other	things)	plutonic	engines	that	did	nothing.	They	were	just…	pretty.
Or	 thought-provoking,	 or	 crafted	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 crafting.	And	yet	 this
“art”	ran	more	efficiently	and	powerfully	than	anything	the	Sylanagistine	had
ever	managed.



How	did	 it	 begin?	You	must	 understand	 that	 fear	 is	 at	 the	 root	 of	 such
things.	Niespeople	looked	different,	behaved	differently,	were	different	–	but
every	group	 is	 different	 from	others.	Differences	 alone	 are	never	 enough	 to
cause	problems.	Syl	Anagist’s	assimilation	of	 the	world	had	been	over	for	a
century	before	I	was	ever	made;	all	cities	were	Syl	Anagist.	All	languages	had
become	Sylanagistine.	But	there	are	none	so	frightened,	or	so	strange	in	their
fear,	 as	 conquerors.	 They	 conjure	 phantoms	 endlessly,	 terrified	 that	 their
victims	will	someday	do	back	what	was	done	to	them	–	even	if,	in	truth,	their
victims	 couldn’t	 care	 less	 about	 such	 pettiness	 and	 have	 moved	 on.
Conquerors	live	in	dread	of	the	day	when	they	are	shown	to	be,	not	superior,
but	simply	lucky.



So	 when	 Niess	 magic	 proved	 more	 efficient	 than	 Sylanagistine,	 even
though	the	Niess	did	not	use	it	as	a	weapon…



This	 is	what	Kelenli	 told	 us.	 Perhaps	 it	 began	with	whispers	 that	white
Niess	irises	gave	them	poor	eyesight	and	perverse	inclinations,	and	that	split
Niess	 tongues	could	not	 speak	 truth.	That	 sort	of	 sneering	happens,	cultural
bullying,	 but	 things	 got	 worse.	 It	 became	 easy	 for	 scholars	 to	 build
reputations	 and	 careers	 around	 the	 notion	 that	 Niess	 sessapinae	 were
fundamentally	 different,	 somehow	 –	 more	 sensitive,	 more	 active,	 less
controlled,	 less	 civilized	 –	 and	 that	 this	 was	 the	 source	 of	 their	 magical
peculiarity.	 This	 was	 what	 made	 them	 not	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 human	 as
everyone	else.	Eventually:	not	as	human	as	everyone	else.	Finally:	not	human
at	all.



Once	the	Niess	were	gone,	of	course,	it	became	clear	that	the	fabled	Niess
sessapinae	did	not	exist.	Sylanagistine	scholars	and	biomagestres	had	plenty
of	 prisoners	 to	 study,	 but	 try	 as	 they	 might,	 no	 discernible	 variance	 from
ordinary	people	could	be	found.	This	was	intolerable;	more	than	intolerable.
After	 all,	 if	 the	Niess	were	 just	 ordinary	human	beings,	 then	on	what	 basis
had	 military	 appropriations,	 pedagogical	 reinterpretation,	 and	 entire
disciplines	of	study	been	formed?	Even	the	grand	dream	itself,	Geoarcanity,
had	grown	out	of	 the	notion	 that	Sylanagistine	magestric	 theory	–	 including
its	 scornful	 dismissal	 of	 Niess	 efficiency	 as	 a	 fluke	 of	 physiology	 –	 was
superior	and	infallible.



If	 the	 Niess	 were	 merely	 human,	 the	 world	 built	 on	 their	 inhumanity
would	fall	apart.



So…	they	made	us.



We,	 the	carefully	engineered	and	denatured	 remnants	of	 the	Niess,	have
sessapinae	far	more	complex	than	those	of	ordinary	people.	Kelenli	was	made
first,	but	she	wasn’t	different	enough.	Remember,	we	must	be	not	just	 tools,
but	 myths.	 Thus	 we	 later	 creations	 have	 been	 given	 exaggerated	 Niess
features	 –	 broad	 faces,	 small	mouths,	 skin	 nearly	 devoid	 of	 color,	 hair	 that
laughs	 at	 fine	 combs,	 and	 we’re	 all	 so	 short.	 They’ve	 stripped	 our	 limbic
systems	 of	 neurochemicals	 and	 our	 lives	 of	 experience	 and	 language	 and
knowledge.	And	only	 now,	when	we	 have	 been	made	 over	 in	 the	 image	 of
their	 own	 fear,	 are	 they	 satisfied.	 They	 tell	 themselves	 that	 in	 us,	 they’ve
captured	the	quintessence	and	power	of	who	the	Niess	really	were,	and	they
congratulate	themselves	on	having	made	their	old	enemies	useful	at	last.



But	 we	 are	 not	 the	 Niess.	 We	 aren’t	 even	 the	 glorious	 symbols	 of
intellectual	 achievement	 that	 I	 believed	 we	 were.	 Syl	 Anagist	 is	 built	 on
delusions,	and	we	are	 the	product	of	 lies.	They	have	no	idea	what	we	really
are.



It’s	up	to	us,	then,	to	determine	our	own	fate	and	future.
***

When	Kelenli’s	 lesson	 is	done,	a	 few	hours	have	passed.	We	sit	at	her	 feet,
stunned,	changed	and	changing	by	her	words.



It’s	 getting	 late.	 She	 gets	 up.	 “I’m	 going	 to	 get	 us	 some	 food	 and
blankets,”	 she	 says.	 “You’ll	 stay	here	 tonight.	We’ll	visit	 the	 third	and	 final
component	of	your	tuning	mission	tomorrow.”



We	have	never	slept	anywhere	but	our	cells.	It’s	exciting.	Gaewha	sends
little	pulses	of	delight	through	the	ambient,	while	Remwha	is	a	steady	buzz	of
pleasure.	Dushwha	and	Bimniwha	spike	now	and	again	with	anxiety;	will	we
be	all	right,	doing	this	thing	that	human	beings	have	done	throughout	history
–	 sleeping	 in	 a	 different	 place?	The	 two	 of	 them	 curl	 together	 for	 security,
though	 this	 actually	 increases	 their	 anxiety	 for	 a	 time.	 We	 are	 not	 often
allowed	to	touch.	They	stroke	one	another,	 though,	and	this	gradually	calms
them	both.



Kelenli	 is	 amused	 by	 their	 fear.	 “You’ll	 be	 all	 right,	 though	 I	 suppose
you’ll	figure	that	out	for	yourselves	in	the	morning,”	she	says.	Then	she	heads
for	 the	door	to	go.	I	am	standing	at	 the	door,	 looking	through	its	window	at
the	newly	risen	Moon.	She	touches	me	because	I’m	in	her	way.	I	don’t	move
at	once,	though.	Because	of	the	direction	that	the	window	in	my	cell	faces,	I
don’t	get	to	see	the	Moon	often.	I	want	to	savor	its	beauty	while	I	can.



“Why	have	you	brought	us	here?”	 I	ask	Kelenli,	while	still	 staring	at	 it.
“Why	tell	us	these	things?”



She	doesn’t	answer	at	once.	I	think	she’s	looking	at	the	Moon,	too.	Then
she	says,	in	a	thoughtful	reverberation	of	the	earth,	I’ve	studied	what	I	could
of	the	Niess	and	their	culture.	There	isn’t	much	left,	and	I	have	to	sift	the	truth
from	 all	 the	 lies.	 But	 there	 was	 a…	 a	 practice	 among	 them.	 A	 vocation.
People	whose	job	it	was	to	see	that	the	truth	got	told.



I	 frown	 in	 confusion.	 “So…	 what?	 You’ve	 decided	 to	 carry	 on	 the
traditions	of	a	dead	people?”	Words.	I’m	stubborn.



She	shrugs.	“Why	not?”



I	shake	my	head.	I’m	tired,	and	overwhelmed,	and	perhaps	a	little	angry.
This	day	has	upended	my	sense	of	self.	 I’ve	spent	my	whole	 life	knowing	I
was	a	tool,	yes;	not	a	person,	but	at	least	a	symbol	of	power	and	brilliance	and
pride.	Now	I	know	I’m	really	just	a	symbol	of	paranoia	and	greed	and	hate.
It’s	a	lot	to	deal	with.



“Let	the	Niess	go,”	I	snap.	“They’re	dead.	I	don’t	see	the	sense	in	trying
to	remember	them.”



I	 want	 her	 to	 get	 angry,	 but	 she	merely	 shrugs.	 “That’s	 your	 choice	 to
make	–	once	you	know	enough	to	make	an	informed	choice.”



“Maybe	I	didn’t	want	to	be	informed.”	I	lean	against	the	glass	of	the	door,
which	is	cool	and	does	not	sting	my	fingers.



“You	wanted	to	be	strong	enough	to	hold	the	onyx.”



I	blurt	a	soft	laugh,	too	tired	to	remember	I	should	pretend	to	feel	nothing.
Hopefully	 our	 observers	 won’t	 notice.	 I	 shift	 to	 earthtalk,	 and	 speak	 in	 an
acid,	 pressurized	 boil	 of	 bitterness	 and	 contempt	 and	 humiliation	 and
heartbreak.	What	does	it	matter?	is	what	it	means.	Geoarcanity	is	a	lie.



She	shakes	apart	my	self-pity	with	gentle,	 inexorable	 slipstrike	 laughter.
“Ah,	my	thinker.	I	didn’t	expect	melodrama	from	you.”



“What	is	melo	—”	I	shake	my	head	and	fall	silent,	 tired	of	not	knowing
things.	Yes,	I’m	sulking.



Kelenli	sighs	and	touches	my	shoulder.	I	flinch,	unused	to	the	warmth	of
another	person’s	hand,	but	she	keeps	it	in	place	and	this	quiets	me.



“Think,”	 she	 repeats.	 “Does	 the	 Plutonic	 Engine	 work?	 Do	 your
sessapinae?	You	aren’t	what	they	made	you	to	be;	does	that	negate	what	you
are?”



“I	–	That	question	doesn’t	make	sense.”	But	now	I’m	just	being	stubborn.
I	understand	her	point.	I’m	not	what	they	made	me;	I’m	something	different.	I
am	 powerful	 in	 ways	 they	 did	 not	 expect.	 They	made	me	 but	 they	 do	 not
control	me,	not	 fully.	This	 is	why	I	have	emotions	 though	they	 tried	 to	 take
them	away.	This	is	why	we	have	earthtalk…	and	perhaps	other	gifts	that	our
conductors	don’t	know	about.



She	 pats	my	 shoulder,	 pleased	 that	 I	 seem	 to	 be	working	 through	what
she’s	told	me.	A	spot	on	the	floor	of	her	house	calls	to	me;	I	will	sleep	so	well
tonight.	But	I	fight	my	exhaustion,	and	remain	focused	on	her,	because	I	need
her	more	than	sleep,	for	now.



“You	see	yourself	as	one	of	these…	truth-tellers?”	I	ask.



“Lorist.	The	last	Niess	lorist,	if	I	have	the	right	to	claim	such	a	thing.”	Her
smile	 abruptly	 fades,	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 I	 realize	 what	 a	 wealth	 of
weariness	and	hard	lines	and	sorrow	her	smiles	cover.	“Lorists	were	warriors,
storytellers,	 nobility.	 They	 told	 their	 truths	 in	 books	 and	 song	 and	 through
their	 art	 engines.	 I	 just…	 talk.	But	 I	 feel	 like	 I’ve	earned	 the	 right	 to	claim
some	part	of	their	mantle.”	Not	all	fighters	use	knives,	after	all.



In	 earthtalk	 there	 can	 be	 nothing	 but	 truth	 –	 and	 sometimes	more	 truth
than	 one	 wants	 to	 convey.	 I	 sense…	 something,	 in	 her	 sorrow.	 Grim
endurance.	 A	 flutter	 of	 fear	 like	 the	 lick	 of	 salt	 acid.	 Determination	 to
protect…	something.	It’s	gone,	a	fading	vibration,	before	I	can	identify	more.



She	 takes	 a	 deep	 breath	 and	 smiles	 again.	 So	 few	 of	 them	 are	 real,	 her
smiles.



“To	master	the	onyx,”	she	continues,	“you	need	to	understand	the	Niess.
What	 the	 conductors	 don’t	 realize	 is	 that	 it	 responds	 best	 to	 a	 certain
emotional	resonance.	Everything	I’m	telling	you	should	help.”



Then,	finally,	she	pushes	me	gently	aside	so	that	she	can	go.	The	question
must	be	asked	now.	“So	what	happened,”	I	say	slowly,	“to	the	Niess?”



She	 stops,	 and	 chuckles,	 and	 for	 once	 it	 is	 genuine.	 “You’ll	 find	 out
tomorrow,”	she	says.	“We’re	going	to	see	them.”



I’m	confused.	“To	their	graves?”



“Life	is	sacred	in	Syl	Anagist,”	she	says	over	her	shoulder.	She’s	passed
through	 the	 door;	 now	 she	 keeps	 going	 without	 stopping	 or	 turning	 back.
“Don’t	you	know	that?”	And	then	she	is	gone.



It	is	an	answer	that	I	feel	I	should	understand	–	but	in	my	own	way,	I	am
still	innocent.	Kelenli	is	kind.	She	lets	me	keep	that	innocence	for	the	rest	of
the	night.

***
	

To:	Alma	Innovator	Dibars
From:	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars
Alma,	the	committee	can’t	pull	my	funding.	Look,	this	is	just	the	dates
of	the	incidents	I’ve	gathered.	Just	look	at	the	last	ten!
2729
2714–2719:	Choking
2699
2613
2583
2562
2530
2501
2490
2470
2400
2322–2329:	Acid

	
Is	Seventh	even	interested	in	the	fact	that	our	popular	conception	of
the	frequency	of	Season-level	events	is	completely	wrong?	These
things	aren’t	happening	every	two	hundred	or	three	hundred	years.	It’s
more	like	every	thirty	or	forty!	If	not	for	roggas,	we’d	be	a	thousand
times	dead.	And	with	these	dates	and	the	others	I’ve	compiled,	I’m
trying	to	put	together	a	predictive	model	for	the	more	intensive
Seasons.	There’s	a	cycle	here,	a	rhythm.	Don’t	we	need	to	know	in
advance	if	the	next	Season	is	going	to	be	longer	or	worse	somehow?
How	can	we	prepare	for	the	future	if	we	won’t	acknowledge	the	past?



9
the	desert,	briefly,	and	you

Deserts	are	worse	than	most	places,	during	Seasons.	Tonkee	lets	Ykka	know
that	 water	 will	 be	 easy;	 Castrima’s	 Innovators	 have	 already	 assembled	 a
number	 of	 contraptions	 they’re	 calling	 dew-catchers.	 The	 sun	 won’t	 be	 an
issue	either,	thanks	to	the	ash	clouds	that	you	never	thought	you’d	have	cause
to	thank.	It	will	be	chilly,	in	fact,	though	less	so	by	day.	You	might	even	get	a
bit	of	snow.



No,	the	danger	of	deserts	during	a	Season	is	simply	that	nearly	all	animals
and	insects	there	hibernate,	deep	under	the	sand	where	it’s	still	warm.	There
are	 those	 who	 claim	 to	 have	 figured	 out	 a	 surefire	 method	 of	 digging	 up
sleeping	 lizards	 and	 such,	 but	 those	 are	 usually	 scams;	 the	 few	comms	 that
edge	 the	 desert	 guard	 such	 secrets	 jealously.	 The	 surface	 plants	 will	 have
already	shriveled	away	or	been	eaten	by	creatures	preparing	for	hibernation,
leaving	nothing	aboveground	but	sand	and	ash.	Stonelore’s	advice	on	entering
deserts	during	Seasons	is	simply:	don’t.	Unless	you	mean	to	starve.



The	comm	spends	 two	days	camped	at	 the	edge	of	 the	Merz,	preparing,
though	 the	 truth	 is	 –	 as	Ykka	 has	 confided	 in	 you,	while	 you	 sat	 with	 her
sharing	your	 last	mellow	–	 there’s	 really	no	amount	of	preparation	 that	will
make	 the	 journey	 any	 easier.	 People	 are	 going	 to	 die.	You	won’t	 be	 one	 of
them;	 it’s	 a	 curious	 feeling	 knowing	 that	 Hoa	 can	 whisk	 you	 away	 to
Corepoint	 if	 there’s	 any	 real	 danger.	 It’s	 cheating,	 maybe.	 Except	 it’s	 not.
Except	you’re	going	to	help	as	much	as	you	can	–	and	because	you	won’t	die,
you’re	going	to	watch	a	lot	of	other	people	suffer.	That’s	the	least	you	can	do,
now	that	you’ve	committed	to	the	cause	of	Castrima.	Bear	witness,	and	fight
like	earthfires	to	keep	death	from	claiming	more	than	its	share.



In	 the	 meantime,	 the	 folks	 on	 cookfire	 duty	 pull	 double	 shifts	 roasting
insects,	 drying	 tubers,	 baking	 the	 last	 of	 the	 grain	 stores	 into	 cakes,	 salting
meat.	After	they	were	fed	enough	to	have	some	strength,	Maxixe’s	surviving
people	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 especially	 helpful	 with	 foraging,	 since	 several	 are
locals	and	 remember	where	 there	might	be	abandoned	 farms	or	debris	 from
the	 Rifting	 shake	 that	 hasn’t	 been	 too	 picked	 over.	 Speed	 will	 be	 of	 the
essence;	 survival	 means	 winning	 the	 race	 between	 the	 Merz’s	 width	 and
Castrima’s	supplies.	Because	of	this,	Tonkee	–	who	is	increasingly	becoming
a	 spokesperson	 for	 the	 Innovators,	 much	 to	 her	 own	 disgruntlement	 –
oversees	a	quick	and	dirty	breakdown	and	rebuilding	of	the	storage	wagons	to
a	new	lighter,	more	shock-resistant	design	 that	should	pull	more	easily	over
desert	sand.	The	Resistants	and	Breeders	 redistribute	 the	remaining	supplies
to	make	sure	the	loss	of	any	one	wagon,	if	it	must	be	abandoned,	won’t	cause
some	kind	of	critical	shortage.



The	 night	 before	 the	 desert,	 you’re	 hunkered	 down	 beside	 one	 of	 the
cookfires,	 still-awkwardly	 navigating	 how	 to	 feed	 yourself	 with	 one	 arm,
when	 someone	 sits	 down	 beside	 you.	 It	 startles	 you	 a	 little,	 and	 you	 jerk
enough	to	knock	your	cornbread	off	the	plate.	The	hand	that	reaches	into	your
view	 to	 retrieve	 it	 is	 broad	 and	 bronze	 and	 nicked	with	 combat	 scars,	 and
there’s	 a	 bit	 of	 yellow	 watered	 silk	 –	 filthy	 and	 ragged	 now,	 but	 still
recognizable	as	such	–	looped	around	the	wrist.	Danel.



“Thanks,”	 you	 say,	 hoping	 she	won’t	 use	 the	 opportunity	 to	 strike	 up	 a
conversation.



“They	say	you	were	Fulcrum	once,”	she	says,	handing	the	cornbread	back
to	you.	No	such	luck,	then.



It	 really	 shouldn’t	 surprise	 you	 that	 the	 people	 of	 Castrima	 have	 been
gossiping.	 You	 decide	 not	 to	 care,	 using	 the	 cornbread	 to	 sop	 up	 another
mouthful	 of	 stew.	 It’s	 especially	 good	 today,	 thickened	with	 corn	 flour	 and
rich	with	 the	 tender,	 salty	meat	 that’s	 been	 plentiful	 since	 the	 stone	 forest.
Everybody	needs	as	much	fat	on	them	as	they	can	pack	away,	to	prepare	for
the	desert.	You	don’t	think	about	the	meat.



“I	was,”	you	say,	in	what	you	hope	sounds	like	a	tone	of	warning.



“How	many	rings?”



You	grimace	 in	distaste,	consider	 trying	 to	explain	 the	“unofficial”	 rings
that	Alabaster	gave	you,	 consider	how	 far	you’ve	come	beyond	even	 those,
consider	 being	 humble…	 and	 then	 finally	 you	 settle	 for	 accuracy.	 “Ten.”
Essun	Tenring,	the	Fulcrum	would	call	you	now,	if	the	seniors	would	bother
to	acknowledge	your	current	name,	and	if	the	Fulcrum	still	existed.	For	what
it’s	worth.



Danel	 whistles	 appreciatively.	 So	 strange	 to	 encounter	 someone	 who
knows	and	cares	about	such	things.	“They	say,”	she	continues,	“that	you	can
do	things	with	the	obelisks.	That’s	how	you	beat	us,	at	Castrima;	I	had	no	idea
you’d	 be	 able	 to	 rile	 up	 the	 bugs	 that	 way.	 Or	 trap	 so	 many	 of	 the	 stone
eaters.”



You	pretend	not	to	care	and	concentrate	on	the	cornbread.	It’s	just	a	little
sweet;	 the	 cookfire	 squad	 is	 trying	 to	 use	 up	 the	 sugar,	 to	 make	 room	 for
edibles	with	more	nutritional	value.	It’s	delicious.



“They	 say,”	 Danel	 continues,	 watching	 you	 sidelong,	 “that	 a	 ten-ring
rogga	broke	the	world,	up	in	the	Equatorials.”



Okay,	no.	“Orogene.”



“What?”



“Orogene.”	 It’s	 petty,	 maybe.	 Because	 of	 Ykka’s	 insistence	 on	 making
rogga	 a	 use-caste	 name,	 all	 the	 stills	 are	 tossing	 the	 word	 around	 like	 it
doesn’t	mean	anything.	It’s	not	petty.	It	means	something.	“Not	‘rogga.’	You
don’t	get	to	say	‘rogga.’	You	haven’t	earned	that.”



Silence	 for	 a	 few	 breaths.	 “All	 right,”	Danel	 says	 then,	with	 no	 hint	 of
either	 apology	 or	 humoring	 you.	 She	 just	 accepts	 the	 new	 rule.	 She	 also
doesn’t	insinuate	again	that	you’re	the	person	who	caused	the	Rifting.	“Point
stands,	though.	You	can	do	things	most	orogenes	can’t.	Yeah?”



“Yeah.”	You	blow	a	stray	ash	flake	off	the	baked	potato.



“They	 say,”	 Danel	 says,	 planting	 her	 hands	 on	 her	 knees	 and	 leaning
forward,	 “that	 you	 know	 how	 to	 end	 this	 Season.	 That	 you’re	 going	 to	 be
leaving	soon	to	go	somewhere	and	actually	try.	And	that	you’ll	need	people	to
go	with	you,	when	you	do.”



What.	You	frown	at	your	potato.	“Are	you	volunteering?”



“Maybe.”



You	stare	at	her.	“You	just	got	accepted	into	the	Strongbacks.”



Danel	regards	you	for	a	moment	longer,	expression	unreadably	still.	You
don’t	 realize	 she’s	 wavering,	 trying	 to	 decide	 whether	 to	 reveal	 something
about	herself	 to	you,	until	 she	 sighs	and	does	 it.	 “I’m	Lorist	 caste,	 actually.
Danel	 Lorist	 Rennanis,	 once.	 Danel	 Strongback	 Castrima’s	 never	 gonna
sound	right.”



You	must	 look	 skeptical	 as	you	 try	 to	visualize	her	with	black	 lips.	She
rolls	 her	 eyes	 and	 looks	 away.	 “Rennanis	 didn’t	 need	 lorists,	 the	 headman
said.	It	needed	soldiers.	And	everybody	knows	lorists	are	good	in	a	fight,	so
—”



“What?”



She	sighs.	“Equatorial	 lorists,	 I	mean.	Those	of	us	who	come	out	of	 the
old	 Lorist	 families	 train	 in	 hand-to-hand,	 the	 arts	 of	 war,	 and	 so	 forth.	 It
makes	 us	 more	 useful	 during	 Seasons,	 and	 in	 the	 task	 of	 defending
knowledge.”



You	had	no	idea.	But	–	“Defending	knowledge?”



A	muscle	 flexes	 in	Danel’s	 jaw.	 “Soldiers	might	 get	 a	 comm	 through	 a
Season,	but	storytellers	are	what	kept	Sanze	going	through	seven	of	them.”



“Oh.	Right.”



She	 makes	 a	 palpable	 effort	 to	 not	 shake	 her	 head	 at	 Midlatter
provincialism.	“Anyway.	Better	to	be	a	general	than	cannon	fodder,	since	that
was	 the	 only	 choice	 I	 was	 given.	 But	 I’ve	 tried	 not	 to	 forget	 who	 I	 really
am…”	Abruptly	her	expression	grows	troubled.	“You	know,	I	can’t	remember
the	 exact	 wording	 of	 Tablet	 Three	 anymore?	 Or	 the	 Tale	 of	 Emperor
Mutshatee.	Just	two	years	without	stories,	and	I’m	losing	them.	Never	thought
it	would	happen	so	fast.”



You’re	 not	 sure	what	 to	 say	 to	 that.	 She	 looks	 so	 grim	 that	 you	 almost
want	to	reassure	her.	Oh,	it’ll	be	all	right	now	that	you’re	no	longer	occupying
your	mind	with	 the	wholesale	 slaughter	of	 the	Somidlats,	 or	 something	 like
that.	You	don’t	 think	you	could	pull	 that	off	without	sounding	a	 little	snide,
though.



Danel’s	 jaw	 tightens	 in	 a	 determined	 sort	 of	 way	 anyway	 as	 she	 looks
sharply	at	you.	“I	know	when	I	see	new	stories	being	written,	though.”



“I…	I	don’t	know	anything	about	that.”



She	shrugs.	“The	hero	of	the	story	never	does.”



Hero?	You	laugh	a	little,	and	it’s	got	an	edge.	Can’t	help	thinking	of	Allia,
and	Tirimo,	 and	Meov,	 and	Rennanis,	 and	Castrima.	Heroes	 don’t	 summon
swarms	 of	 nightmare	 bugs	 to	 eat	 their	 enemies.	 Heroes	 aren’t	 monsters	 to
their	daughters.



“I	won’t	forget	what	I	am,”	Danel	continues.	She’s	braced	one	hand	on	her
knee	and	is	leaning	forward,	insistent.	Somewhere	in	the	last	few	days,	she’s
gotten	her	hands	on	a	knife,	and	used	it	to	shave	the	sides	of	her	scalp.	It	gives
her	 a	 naturally	 lean,	 hungry	 look.	 “If	 I’m	possibly	 the	 last	Equatorial	 lorist
left,	then	it’s	my	duty	to	go	with	you.	To	write	the	tale	of	what	happens	–	and
if	I	survive,	to	make	sure	the	world	hears	it.”



This	 is	 ridiculous.	You	 stare	 at	 her.	 “You	don’t	 even	know	where	we’re
going.”



“Figured	we’d	settle	the	issue	of	whether	I’m	going	first,	but	we	can	skip
to	the	details	if	you	want.”



“I	don’t	trust	you,”	you	say,	mostly	in	exasperation.



“I	 don’t	 trust	 you,	 either.	But	we	 don’t	 have	 to	 like	 each	 other	 to	work
together.”	Her	own	plate	 is	 empty;	 she	picks	 it	 up	 and	waves	 to	one	of	 the
kids	on	cleanup	duty	to	come	take	it.	“It’s	not	like	I	have	a	reason	to	kill	you,
anyway.	This	time.”



And	 it’s	worse	 that	Danel	 has	 said	 this	 –	 that	 she	 remembers	 siccing	 a
shirtless	Guardian	on	you	and	is	unapologetic	about	 it.	Yes,	 it	was	war	and,
yes,	 you	 later	 slaughtered	 her	 army,	 but…	 “People	 like	 you	 don’t	 need	 a
reason!”



“I	don’t	think	you	have	any	real	idea	who	or	what	‘people	like	me’	are.”
She’s	 not	 angry;	 her	 statement	 was	 matter-of-fact.	 “But	 if	 you	 need	 more
reasons,	 here’s	 another:	 Rennanis	 is	 shit.	 Sure,	 there’s	 food,	 water,	 and
shelter;	your	headwoman’s	 right	 to	 lead	you	 there	 if	 it’s	 true	 that	 the	city	 is
empty	 now.	 Better	 than	 commlessness,	 or	 rebuilding	 somewhere	 with	 no
storecaches.	But	shit	otherwise.	I’d	rather	stay	on	the	move.”



“Bullshit,”	you	say,	frowning.	“No	comm	is	that	bad.”



Danel	just	lets	out	a	single	bitter	snort.	It	makes	you	uneasy.



“Just	think	about	it,”	she	says	finally,	and	gets	up	to	leave.
***

“I	agree	 that	Danel	should	come	with	us,”	Lerna	says,	 later	 that	night	when
you	 tell	him	about	 the	conversation.	“She’s	a	good	fighter.	Knows	 the	road.
And	she’s	right:	she	has	no	reason	to	betray	us.”



You’re	half-asleep,	because	of	the	sex.	It’s	an	anticlimactic	thing	now	that
it’s	finally	happened.	What	you	feel	for	Lerna	will	never	be	intense,	or	guilt-
free.	You’ll	always	feel	too	old	for	him.	But,	well.	He	asked	you	to	show	him
the	 truncated	 breast	 and	 you	 did,	 thinking	 that	 would	 mark	 the	 end	 of	 his
interest	in	you.	The	sandy	patch	is	crusty	and	rough	amid	the	smoother	brown
of	 your	 torso	 –	 like	 a	 scab,	 though	 the	wrong	 color	 and	 texture.	His	 hands
were	gentle	as	he	examined	the	spot	and	pronounced	it	sound	enough	to	need
no	further	bandaging.	You	told	him	that	it	didn’t	hurt.	You	didn’t	say	that	you
were	 afraid	 you	 couldn’t	 feel	 anything	 anymore.	 That	 you	 were	 changing,
hardening	in	more	ways	than	one,	becoming	nothing	but	the	weapon	everyone
keeps	 trying	 to	make	 of	 you.	You	 didn’t	 say,	Maybe	 you’re	 better	 off	 with
unrequited	love.



But	even	though	you	didn’t	say	any	of	these	things,	after	the	examination
he	looked	at	you	and	replied,	“You’re	still	beautiful.”	You	apparently	needed
to	hear	that	a	lot	more	than	you	realized.	And	now	here	you	are.



So	you	process	his	words	slowly	because	he’s	made	you	feel	relaxed	and
boneless	 and	 human	 again,	 and	 it’s	 a	 good	 ten	 seconds	 before	 you	 blurt,
“‘Us’?”



He	just	looks	at	you.



“Shit,”	you	say,	and	drape	an	arm	over	your	eyes.



The	next	day,	Castrima	enters	the	desert.
***

There	comes	a	time	of	greater	hardship	for	you.



All	 Seasons	 are	 hardship,	Death	 is	 the	 fifth,	 and	master	 of	 all,	 but	 this
time	is	different.	This	is	personal.	This	is	a	thousand	people	trying	to	cross	a
desert	that	is	deadly	even	when	acid	rain	isn’t	sheeting	from	the	sky.	This	is	a
group	force-march	along	a	highroad	that	is	shaky	and	full	of	holes	big	enough
to	drop	a	house	through.	Highroads	are	built	to	withstand	shakes,	but	there’s	a
limit,	 and	 the	Rifting	 definitely	 surpassed	 it.	Ykka	 decided	 to	 take	 the	 risk
because	even	a	damaged	highroad	is	faster	to	travel	than	the	desert	sand,	but
this	 takes	 a	 toll.	 Every	 orogene	 in	 the	 comm	 has	 to	 stay	 on	 alert,	 because
anything	worse	than	a	microshake	while	you’re	up	here	could	spell	disaster.
One	day	Penty,	too	exhausted	to	pay	attention	to	her	own	instincts,	steps	on	a
patch	of	 cracked	 asphalt	 that’s	 completely	 unstable.	One	of	 the	 other	 rogga
kids	 snatches	 her	 away	 just	 as	 a	 big	 piece	 simply	 falls	 through	 the
substructure	of	the	road.	Others	are	less	careful,	and	less	lucky.



The	 acid	 rain	 was	 unexpected.	 Stonelore	 does	 not	 discuss	 the	 ways	 in
which	Seasons	can	impact	weather,	because	such	things	are	unpredictable	at
the	 best	 of	 times.	 What	 happens	 here	 is	 not	 entirely	 surprising,	 however.
Northward,	at	the	equator,	the	Rifting	pumps	heat	and	particulates	into	the	air.
Moisture-laden	 tropical	 winds	 coming	 off	 the	 sea	 hit	 this	 cloud-seeding,
energy-infusing	 wall,	 which	 whips	 them	 into	 storm.	 You	 remember	 being
worried	about	snow.	No.	It’s	endless,	miserable	rain.



(The	rain	is	not	so	very	acid,	as	these	things	go.	In	the	Season	of	Turning
Soil	 –	 long	 before	 Sanze,	 you	 would	 not	 know	 of	 it	 –	 there	 was	 rain	 that
stripped	 animals’	 fur	 and	 peeled	 the	 skins	 off	 oranges.	 This	 is	 nothing
compared	to	that,	and	diluted	as	it	is	by	water.	Like	vinegar.	You’ll	live.)



Ykka	 sets	 a	 brutal	 pace	while	 you’re	 on	 the	 highroad.	On	 the	 first	 day
everyone	makes	 camp	well	 after	 nightfall,	 and	Lerna	 does	 not	 come	 to	 the
tent	after	you	wearily	put	 it	up.	He’s	busy	 tending	half	a	dozen	people	who
are	going	 lame	from	slips	or	 twisted	ankles,	and	 two	elders	who	are	having
breathing	problems,	 and	 the	pregnant	woman.	The	 latter	 three	 are	doing	 all
right,	he	tells	you	when	he	finally	crawls	into	your	bedroll,	near	dawn;	Ontrag
the	potter	lives	on	spite,	and	the	pregnant	woman	has	both	her	household	and
half	the	Breeders	taking	care	of	her.	What’s	troubling	are	the	injuries.	“I	have
to	tell	Ykka,”	he	says	as	you	push	a	slab	of	rain-soaked	cachebread	and	sour
sausage	into	his	mouth,	then	cover	him	up	and	make	him	lie	still.	He	chews
and	 swallows	 almost	 without	 noticing.	 “We	 can’t	 keep	 going	 at	 this	 pace.
We’ll	start	losing	people	if	we	don’t	—”



“She	knows,”	you	tell	him.	You’ve	spoken	as	gently	as	you	can,	but	it	still
silences	him.	He	stares	until	you	lie	back	down	beside	him	–	awkwardly,	with
only	 one	 arm,	 but	 successfully.	Eventually	 exhaustion	 overwhelms	 anguish,
and	he	sleeps.



You	walk	with	Ykka	one	day.	She’s	 setting	 the	 pace	 like	 a	 good	 comm
leader	 should,	 pushing	 no	 one	 harder	 than	 herself.	At	 the	 lone	midday	 rest
stop,	she	takes	off	one	boot	and	you	see	that	her	feet	are	streaked	with	blood
from	 blisters.	 You	 look	 at	 her,	 frowning,	 and	 it’s	 eloquent	 enough	 that	 she
sighs.	“Never	got	around	to	requisitioning	better	boots,”	she	says.	“These	are
too	loose.	Always	figured	I’d	have	more	time.”



“If	your	feet	rot	off,”	you	begin,	but	she	rolls	her	eyes	and	points	toward
the	supply	pile	in	the	middle	of	the	camp.



You	 glance	 at	 it	 in	 confusion,	 start	 to	 resume	 your	 scolding,	 and	 then
pause.	Think.	Look	at	the	supply	pile	again.	If	every	wagon	carries	a	crate	of
the	salted	cachebread	and	another	of	sausage,	and	 if	 those	casks	are	pickled
vegetables,	and	those	are	the	grains	and	beans…



The	pile	is	so	small.	So	little,	for	a	thousand	people	who	have	weeks	yet
to	go	through	the	Merz.



You	 shut	 up	 about	 the	 boots.	 Though	 she	 gets	 some	 extra	 socks	 from
someone;	that	helps.



It	shocks	you	that	you’re	doing	as	well	as	you	are.	You’re	not	healthy,	not
exactly.	Your	menstrual	cycle	has	stopped,	and	 it’s	probably	not	menopause
yet.	 When	 you	 undress	 to	 basin-wash,	 which	 is	 sort	 of	 pointless	 in	 the
constant	rain	but	habit	is	habit,	you	notice	that	your	ribs	show	starkly	beneath
loose	skin.	That’s	only	partly	because	of	all	the	walking,	though;	some	of	it	is
because	you	keep	forgetting	to	eat.	You	feel	tired	at	the	end	of	the	day,	but	it’s
a	 distant,	 detached	 sort	 of	 thing.	When	you	 touch	Lerna	 –	 not	 for	 sex,	 you
don’t	have	the	energy,	but	cuddling	for	warmth	saves	calories,	and	he	needs
the	 comfort	 –	 it	 feels	 good,	 but	 in	 an	 equally	 detached	 way.	 You	 feel	 as
though	 you’re	 floating	 above	 yourself,	 watching	 him	 sigh,	 listening	 to
someone	else	yawn.	Like	it’s	happening	to	someone	else.



This	 is	what	 happened	 to	Alabaster,	 you	 remember.	A	 detachment	 from
the	flesh,	as	it	became	no	longer	flesh.	You	resolve	to	do	a	better	job	of	eating
at	every	opportunity.



Three	weeks	 into	 the	 desert,	 as	 expected,	 the	 highroad	 veers	 off	 to	 the
west.	From	there	on,	Castrima	must	descend	to	the	ground	and	contend	with
desert	terrain	up	close	and	personal.	It’s	easier,	in	some	ways,	because	at	least
the	ground	isn’t	likely	to	crumble	away	beneath	your	feet.	On	the	other	hand,
sand	is	harder	to	walk	on	than	asphalt.	Everyone	slows	down.	Maxixe	earns
his	keep	by	drawing	enough	of	the	moisture	out	of	the	topmost	layer	of	sand
and	ash	and	icing	it	a	few	inches	down,	to	firm	it	up	beneath	everyone’s	feet.
It	exhausts	him	to	do	this	on	a	constant	basis,	 though,	so	he	saves	 it	 for	 the
worst	patches.	He	tries	to	teach	Temell	how	to	do	the	same	trick,	but	Temell’s
an	ordinary	feral;	he	can’t	manage	the	necessary	precision.	(You	could	have
done	it	once.	You	don’t	let	yourself	think	about	this.)



Scouts	sent	forth	to	try	to	find	a	better	path	all	come	back	and	report	the
same	thing:	rusting	sand-ash-mud	everywhere.	There	is	no	better	path.



Three	people	got	left	behind	on	the	highroad,	unable	to	walk	any	further
because	of	sprains	or	breaks.	You	don’t	know	them.	In	theory,	they’ll	catch	up
once	they’ve	recovered,	but	you	can’t	see	how	they’ll	recover	with	no	food	or
shelter.	Here	on	the	ground	it’s	worse:	a	half-dozen	broken	ankles,	one	broken
leg,	one	wrenched	back	among	the	Strongbacks	pulling	the	wagons,	all	in	the
first	day.	After	a	while,	Lerna	stops	going	to	them	unless	they	ask	for	his	help.
Most	don’t	ask.	There’s	nothing	he	can	do,	and	everyone	knows	it.



On	a	chilly	day,	Ontrag	the	potter	just	sits	down	and	says	she	doesn’t	feel
like	 going	 any	 further.	 Ykka	 actually	 argues	 with	 her,	 which	 you	 weren’t
expecting.	Ontrag	 has	 passed	 on	 her	 skill	 of	 pottery	 to	 two	 younger	 comm
members.	 She’s	 redundant,	 long	 past	 childbearing;	 it	 should	 be	 an	 easy
headwoman’s	choice,	by	 the	 rules	of	Old	Sanze	and	 the	 tenets	of	 stonelore.
But	in	the	end,	Ontrag	herself	has	to	tell	Ykka	to	shut	up	and	walk	away.



It’s	 a	warning	 sign.	 “I	 can’t	do	 this	 anymore,”	you	hear	Ykka	 say	 later,
when	Ontrag	has	fallen	out	of	sight	behind	you.	She	plods	forward,	her	pace
steady	 and	 ground-eating	 as	 usual,	 but	 her	 head	 is	 down,	 hanks	 of	 wet
ashblow	hair	 obscuring	 her	 face.	 “I	 can’t.	 It	 isn’t	 right.	 It	 shouldn’t	 be	 like
this.	It	shouldn’t	just	be	–	there’s	more	to	being	Castrima	than	being	rusting
useful,	for	Earth’s	sake,	she	used	to	teach	me	in	creche,	she	knows	stories,	I
rusting	can’t.”



Hjarka	Leadership	Castrima,	who	was	taught	from	an	early	age	to	kill	the
few	so	 the	many	might	 live,	only	 touches	her	shoulder	and	says,	“You’ll	do
what	you	have	to	do.”



Ykka	doesn’t	 say	anything	 for	 the	next	 few	miles,	but	maybe	 that’s	 just
because	there’s	nothing	to	say.



The	vegetables	run	out	first.	Then	the	meat.	The	cachebread	Ykka	tries	to
ration	for	as	 long	as	she	can,	but	 the	plain	fact	 is	 that	people	can’t	 travel	at
this	speed	on	nothing.	She	has	to	give	everyone	at	least	a	wafer	a	day.	That’s
not	enough,	but	it’s	better	than	nothing	–	until	there	is	nothing.	And	you	keep
walking	anyway.



In	 the	 absence	of	 all	 else,	 people	 run	on	hope.	On	 the	other	 side	of	 the
desert,	 Danel	 tells	 everyone	 around	 a	 campfire	 one	 night,	 there’s	 another
Imperial	Road	you	can	pick	up.	Easy	traveling	all	the	way	to	Rennanis.	It’s	a
river	 delta	 region,	 too,	 with	 good	 soil,	 once	 the	 breadbasket	 of	 the
Equatorials.	 Lots	 of	 now-abandoned	 farms	 outside	 of	 any	 comm.	 Danel’s
army	had	good	 foraging	 there	 on	 its	way	 south.	 If	 you	 can	get	 through	 the
desert,	there	will	be	food.



If	you	can	get	through	the	desert.



You	know	the	end	to	this.	Don’t	you?	How	could	you	be	here	listening	to
this	 tale	 if	 you	 didn’t?	But	 sometimes	 it	 is	 the	how	 of	 a	 thing,	 not	 just	 the
endgame,	that	matters	most.



So	this	is	the	endgame:	Of	the	nearly	eleven	hundred	souls	who	went	into
the	desert,	a	little	over	eight	hundred	and	fifty	reach	the	Imperial	Road.



For	 a	 few	 days	 after	 that,	 the	 comm	 effectively	 dissolves.	 Desperate
people,	no	longer	willing	to	wait	for	orderly	foraging	by	the	Hunters,	stagger
off	to	dig	through	sour	soil	for	half-rotted	tubers	and	bitter	grubs	and	barely
chewable	woody	roots.	The	land	around	here	is	scraggly,	treeless,	half-desert
and	half-fertile,	long	depopulated	by	the	Rennies.	Before	she	loses	too	many
people,	Ykka	orders	camp	made	on	an	old	farm	with	several	barns	that	have
managed	to	survive	the	Season	thus	far.	The	walls,	apart	from	basic	framing,
haven’t	fared	as	well,	but	then	they	haven’t	collapsed,	either.	It’s	the	roofs	she
wanted,	since	the	rain	still	falls	here	on	the	desert’s	edge,	 though	it’s	 lighter
and	intermittent.	Nice	to	sleep	dry,	at	last.



Three	 days,	Ykka	 gives	 it.	During	 that	 time,	 people	 creep	 back	 in	 ones
and	 twos,	 some	bringing	 food	 to	 share	with	others	 too	weak	 to	 forage.	The
Hunters	who	bother	to	return	bring	fish	from	one	of	the	river	branches	that’s
relatively	nearby.	One	of	 them	finds	 the	 thing	 that	 saves	you,	 the	 thing	 that
feels	like	life	after	all	the	death	behind	you:	a	farmer’s	private	housecache	of
cornmeal,	 sealed	 in	 clay	 urns	 and	 kept	 hidden	 under	 the	 floorboards	 of	 the
ruined	house.	You	have	nothing	to	mix	it	with,	no	milk	or	eggs	or	dried	meat,
just	 the	 acid	 water,	 but	 food	 is	 that	 which	 nourishes,	 stonelore	 says.	 The
comm	feasts	on	 fried	corn	mush	 that	night.	One	urn	has	cracked	and	 teems
with	mealybugs,	but	no	one	cares.	Extra	protein.



A	lot	of	people	don’t	come	back.	It’s	a	Season.	All	things	change.



At	 the	end	of	 three	days,	Ykka	declares	 that	 anyone	 still	 in	 the	camp	 is
Castrima;	anyone	who	hasn’t	returned	is	now	ashed	out	and	commless.	Easier
than	 speculating	 on	 how	 they	 might	 have	 died,	 or	 who	 might	 have	 killed
them.	What’s	left	of	the	group	strikes	camp.	You	head	north.

***
Was	 this	 too	 fast?	Perhaps	 tragedies	should	not	be	summarized	so	bluntly.	 I
meant	 to	be	merciful,	not	 cruel.	That	you	had	 to	 live	 it	 is	 the	cruelty…	but
distance,	detachment,	heals.	Sometimes.



I	could	have	taken	you	from	the	desert.	You	did	not	have	to	suffer	as	they
did.	And	yet…	they	have	become	part	of	you,	the	people	of	this	comm.	Your
friends.	 Your	 fellows.	 You	 needed	 to	 see	 them	 through.	 Suffering	 is	 your
healing,	at	least	for	now.



Lest	you	think	me	inhuman,	a	stone,	I	did	what	I	could	to	help.	Some	of
the	beasts	that	hibernate	beneath	the	sand	of	the	desert	are	capable	of	preying
on	humans;	did	you	know	that?	A	few	woke	as	you	passed,	but	I	kept	 them
away.	One	 of	 the	wagons’	wooden	 axles	 partially	 dissolved	 in	 the	 rain	 and
began	to	sag,	though	none	of	you	noticed.	I	transmuted	the	wood	–	petrified
it,	 if	you	prefer	 to	 think	 that	way	–	 so	 that	 it	would	 last.	 I	 am	 the	one	who
moved	the	moth-eaten	rug	in	that	abandoned	farmhouse,	so	that	your	Hunter
found	the	cornmeal.	Ontrag,	who	had	not	told	Ykka	about	the	growing	pain	in
her	side	and	chest,	or	her	shortness	of	breath,	did	not	live	long	after	the	comm
left	her	behind.	I	went	back	to	her	on	the	night	that	she	died,	and	tuned	away
what	 little	 pain	 she	 felt.	 (You’ve	 heard	 the	 song.	 Antimony	 sang	 it	 for
Alabaster	once.	I’ll	sing	it	for	you,	if…)	She	was	not	alone,	at	the	end.



Does	any	of	this	comfort	you?	I	hope	so.	I’m	still	human,	I	told	you.	Your
opinion	matters	to	me.



Castrima	 survives;	 that	 is	 also	 what	 matters.	 You	 survive.	 For	 now,	 at
least.



And	 at	 last,	 some	 while	 later,	 you	 reach	 the	 southernmost	 edge	 of
Rennanis’s	territory.

***
Honor	in	safety,	survival	under	threat.	Necessity	is	the	only	law.

—	Tablet	Three,	“Structures,”	verse	four



10
Nassun,	through	the	fire

All	of	this	happens	in	the	earth.	It	is	mine	to	know,	and	to	share	with	you.	It	is
hers	to	suffer.	I’m	sorry.



Inside	 the	 pearlescent	 vehicle,	 the	 walls	 are	 inlaid	 with	 elegant	 vining
designs	 wrought	 of	 what	 looks	 like	 gold.	 Nassun	 isn’t	 sure	 if	 the	 metal	 is
purely	decorative	or	has	some	sort	of	purpose.	The	hard,	smooth	seats,	which
are	pastel	colors	and	shaped	something	like	the	shells	of	mussels	that	she	ate
sometimes	at	Found	Moon,	have	amazingly	soft	cushions.	They	are	locked	to
the	floor,	Nassun	finds,	and	yet	it	is	possible	to	turn	them	from	side	to	side	or
lean	back.	She	cannot	fathom	what	the	chairs	are	made	of.



To	her	greater	shock,	a	voice	speaks	in	the	air	a	moment	after	they	settle
in.	 The	 voice	 is	 female,	 polite,	 detached,	 and	 somehow	 reassuring.	 The
language	 is…	 incomprehensible,	 and	 not	 remotely	 familiar.	 However,	 the
pronunciation	 of	 the	 syllables	 is	 no	 different	 from	 that	 of	 Sanze-mat,	 and
something	about	the	rhythm	of	the	sentences,	their	order,	fits	the	expectations
of	Nassun’s	ear.	She	suspects	that	part	of	the	first	sentence	is	a	greeting.	She
thinks	a	word	that	keeps	being	repeated,	amid	a	passage	that	has	the	air	of	a
command,	 might	 be	 a	 softening	 word,	 like	 please.	 The	 rest,	 however,	 is
wholly	foreign.



The	 voice	 speaks	 only	 briefly,	 and	 then	 falls	 silent.	 Nassun	 glances	 at
Schaffa	and	is	surprised	to	see	him	frowning,	eyes	narrowed	in	concentration
–	 though	 some	 of	 that	 is	 also	 tension	 in	 his	 jaw,	 and	 a	 hint	 of	 extra	 pallor
around	his	lips.	The	silver	is	hurting	him	more,	and	it	must	be	bad	this	time.
Still,	 he	 looks	 up	 at	 her	 in	 something	 like	 wonder.	 “I	 remember	 this
language,”	he	says.



“Those	weird	words?	What	did	she	say?”



“That	 this…”	 He	 grimaces.	 “Thing.	 It’s	 called	 a	 vehimal.	 The
announcement	 says	 it	 will	 depart	 from	 this	 city	 and	 begin	 the	 transit	 to
Corepoint	in	two	minutes,	to	arrive	in	six	hours.	There	was	something	about
other	vehicles,	other	routes,	return	trips	to	various…	nodes?	I	don’t	remember
what	that	means.	And	she	hopes	we	will	enjoy	the	ride.”	He	smiles	thinly.



“Oh.”	Pleased,	Nassun	kicks	a	little	in	her	chair.	Six	hours	to	travel	all	the
way	 to	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 planet?	 But	 she	 shouldn’t	 be	 amazed	 by	 that,
maybe,	since	these	are	the	people	who	built	the	obelisks.



There	seems	to	be	nothing	to	do	but	get	comfortable.	Cautiously,	Nassun
unslings	 her	 runny-sack	 and	 lets	 it	 hang	 from	 the	 back	 of	 her	 chair.	 This
causes	her	to	notice	that	something	like	lichen	grows	all	over	the	floor,	though
it	cannot	be	natural	or	accidental;	the	blooms	of	it	spread	out	in	pretty,	regular
patterns.	She	stretches	down	a	foot	and	finds	that	it	is	soft,	like	carpet.



Schaffa	is	more	restless,	pacing	around	the	comfortable	confines	of	the…
vehimal…	and	touching	its	golden	veins	now	and	again.	It’s	slow,	methodical
pacing,	but	 even	 that	 is	unusual	 for	him,	 so	Nassun	 is	 restless,	 too.	 “I	have
been	here,”	he	murmurs.



“What?”	She	heard	him.	She’s	just	confused.



“In	this	vehimal.	Perhaps	in	that	very	seat.	I	have	been	here,	I	feel	it.	And
that	language	–	I	don’t	remember	ever	having	heard	it,	and	yet.”	He	bares	his
teeth	suddenly,	and	thrusts	his	fingers	into	his	hair.	“Familiarity,	but	no,	no…
context!	No	meaning!	Something	about	 this	 journey	 is	wrong.	Something	 is
wrong	and	I	don’t	remember	what.”



Schaffa	has	been	damaged	for	as	long	as	Nassun	has	known	him,	but	this
is	 the	 first	 time	he	has	seemed	 damaged	 to	her.	He’s	 speaking	 faster,	words
tumbling	 over	 one	 another.	 There	 is	 an	 oddness	 to	 the	 way	 his	 eyes	 dart
around	the	vehimal	interior	that	makes	Nassun	suspect	he’s	seeing	things	that
aren’t	there.



Trying	 to	 conceal	 her	 anxiety,	 she	 reaches	 out	 and	 pats	 the	 shell-chair
beside	her.	“These	are	soft	enough	to	sleep	in,	Schaffa.”



It’s	too	obvious	a	suggestion,	but	he	turns	to	gaze	at	her,	and	for	a	moment
the	haunted	tension	of	his	expression	softens.	“Always	so	concerned	for	me,
my	little	one.”	But	it	stops	the	restlessness	as	she’d	hoped,	and	he	comes	over
to	sit.



Just	 as	 he	 does	 –	Nassun	 starts	 –	 the	woman’s	 voice	 speaks	 again.	 It’s
asking	a	question.	Schaffa	frowns	and	then	translates,	slowly,	“She	–	I	think
this	 is	 the	 vehimal’s	 voice.	 It	 speaks	 to	 us	 now,	 specifically.	 Not	 just	 an
announcement.”



Nassun	 shifts,	 suddenly	 less	 comfortable	 inside	 the	 thing.	 “It	 talks.	 It’s
alive?”



“I’m	not	certain	the	distinction	between	living	creature	and	lifeless	object
matters	to	the	people	who	built	this	place.	Yet	—”	He	hesitates,	then	raises	his
voice	 to	 haltingly	 speak	 strange	words	 to	 the	 air.	 The	 voice	 answers	 again,
repeating	something	Nassun	heard	before.	She’s	not	sure	where	some	of	 the
words	 begin	 or	 end,	 but	 the	 syllables	 are	 the	 same.	 “It	 says	 that	 we	 are
approaching	 the…	 transition	 point.	 And	 it	 asks	 if	 we	 would	 like	 to…
experience?”	He	 shakes	 his	 head,	 irritable.	 “To	 see	 something.	 Finding	 the
words	 in	 our	 own	 tongue	 is	more	 difficult	 than	 understanding	what’s	 being
said.”



Nassun	 twitches	 with	 nerves.	 She	 draws	 her	 feet	 up	 into	 her	 chair,
irrationally	afraid	of	hurting	 the	creature-thing’s	 insides.	She	 isn’t	sure	what
she	means	to	ask.	“Will	it	hurt,	to	see?”	Hurt	the	vehimal,	she	means,	but	she
cannot	help	also	thinking,	Hurt	us.



The	 voice	 speaks	 again	 before	 Schaffa	 has	 time	 to	 translate	 Nassun’s
question.	“No,”	it	says.



Nassun	jumps	in	pure	shock,	her	orogeny	twitching	in	a	way	that	would
have	earned	her	 a	 shout	 from	Essun.	 “Did	you	 say	no?”	 she	blurts,	 looking
around	at	the	vehimal’s	walls.	Maybe	it	was	a	coincidence.



“Biomagestric	storage	surpluses	permit	—”	The	voice	slips	back	into	the
old	language,	but	Nassun	is	certain	she	did	not	 imagine	hearing	those	oddly
pronounced	words	 of	 Sanze-mat.	 “—	processing,”	 it	 concludes.	 Its	 voice	 is
soothing,	 but	 it	 seems	 to	 come	 from	 the	 very	walls,	 and	 it	 troubles	Nassun
that	she	has	nothing	to	look	at,	no	face	to	orient	on	while	she’s	listening	to	it.
How	is	it	even	speaking	with	no	mouth,	no	throat?	She	imagines	the	cilia	on
the	outside	of	the	vehicle	somehow	rubbing	together	like	insects’	legs,	and	her
skin	crawls.



It	 continues,	 “Translation	 —”	 Something.	 “—	 linguistic	 drift.”	 That
sounded	like	Sanze-mat,	but	she	doesn’t	know	what	it	means.	It	continues	for
a	few	more	words,	incomprehensible	again.



Nassun	looks	at	Schaffa,	who’s	also	frowning	in	alarm.	“How	do	I	answer
what	it	was	asking	before?”	she	whispers.	“How	do	I	tell	it	that	I	want	to	see
whatever	it’s	talking	about?”



In	answer,	 though	Nassun	had	not	meant	 to	ask	 this	question	directly	of
the	vehimal,	the	featureless	wall	in	front	of	them	suddenly	darkens	into	round
black	spots,	as	if	the	surface	has	suddenly	sprouted	ugly	mold.	These	spread
and	merge	rapidly	until	half	of	the	wall	is	nothing	but	blackness.	As	if	they’re
looking	through	a	window	into	the	bowels	of	the	city,	but	outside	the	vehimal
there’s	nothing	to	see	but	black.



Then	light	appears	on	the	bottom	edge	of	this	window	–	which	really	is	a
window,	 she	 realizes;	 the	 entire	 front	 end	 of	 the	 vehimal	 has	 somehow
become	 transparent.	The	 light,	 in	 rectangular	panels	 like	 the	ones	 that	 lined
the	 stairway	 from	 the	 surface,	 brightens	 and	 marches	 forward	 into	 the
darkness	 ahead,	 and	 by	 its	 illumination	Nassun	 is	 able	 to	 see	walls	 arching
around	them.	Another	tunnel,	this	one	only	large	enough	for	the	vehimal,	and
curving	through	dark	rocky	walls	that	are	surprisingly	rough-hewn	given	the
obelisk-builders’	penchant	 for	 seamless	 smoothness.	The	vehimal	 is	moving
steadily	along	this	tunnel,	though	not	quickly.	Propelled	by	its	cilia?	By	some
other	 means	 Nassun	 cannot	 fathom?	 She	 finds	 herself	 simultaneously
fascinated	 and	 a	 little	 bored,	 if	 that	 is	 possible.	 It	 seems	 impossible	 that
something	which	goes	so	slow	can	get	them	to	the	other	side	of	the	world	in
six	hours.	 If	all	of	 those	hours	will	be	 like	 this,	 riding	a	smooth	white	 track
through	a	rocky	black	 tunnel,	with	nothing	 to	occupy	them	except	Schaffa’s
restlessness	and	a	disembodied	voice,	it	will	feel	much	longer.



And	 then	 the	 curve	 of	 the	 tunnel	 straightens	 out,	 and	 up	 ahead	Nassun
sees	the	hole	for	the	first	time.



The	 hole	 isn’t	 large.	 There’s	 something	 about	 it	 that	 is	 immediately,
viscerally	 impressive	 nevertheless.	 It	 sits	 at	 the	 center	 of	 a	 vaulted	 cavern,
surrounded	by	more	panel	lights,	which	have	been	set	into	the	ground.	As	the
vehimal	approaches,	these	turn	from	white	to	bright	red	in	a	way	that	Nassun
decides	is	another	signal	of	warning.	Down	the	hole	is	a	yawning	blackness.
Instinctively	she	sesses,	trying	to	grasp	its	dimensions	–	but	she	cannot.	The
circumference	 of	 the	 hole,	 yes;	 it’s	 only	 about	 twenty	 feet	 across.	 Perfectly
circular.	 The	 depth,	 though…	 she	 frowns,	 uncurls	 from	 her	 chair,
concentrates.	The	sapphire	tickles	at	her	mind,	inviting	use	of	its	power,	but
she	 resists	 this;	 there	 are	 too	many	 things	 in	 this	 place	 that	 respond	 to	 the
silver,	 to	 magic,	 in	 ways	 she	 doesn’t	 understand.	 And	 anyway,	 she’s	 an
orogene.	Sessing	the	depth	of	a	hole	should	be	easy…	but	this	hole	stretches
deep,	deep,	beyond	her	range.



And	the	vehimal’s	track	runs	right	up	to	the	hole,	and	over	its	edge.



Which	 is	 as	 it	 should	be,	 should	 it	 not?	The	goal	 is	 to	 reach	Corepoint.
Still,	Nassun	 cannot	 help	 a	 surge	 of	 alarm	 that	 is	 powerful	 enough	 to	 edge
along	 panic.	 “Schaffa!”	 He	 immediately	 reaches	 for	 her	 hand.	 She	 grips	 it
tightly	with	no	 fear	 of	 hurting	him.	His	 strength,	which	has	only	 ever	 been
used	 to	 protect	 her,	 never	 in	 threat,	 is	 desperately	 needed	 reassurance	 right
now.



“I	 have	 done	 this	 before,”	 he	 says,	 but	 he	 sounds	 uncertain.	 “I	 have
survived	it.”



But	you	don’t	remember	how,	she	thinks,	feeling	a	kind	of	terror	that	she
doesn’t	know	the	word	for.



(That	word	is	premonition.)



Then	 the	edge	 is	 there,	 and	 the	vehimal	 tips	 forward.	Nassun	gasps	 and
clutches	at	 the	armrests	of	her	chair	–	but	bizarrely,	 there	 is	no	vertigo.	The
vehimal	does	not	speed	up;	 its	movement	pauses	for	a	moment,	 in	fact,	and
Nassun	catches	a	fleeting	glimpse	of	a	few	of	the	thing’s	cilia	blurring	at	the
edges	of	the	view,	as	they	somehow	adjust	the	trajectory	of	the	vehimal	from
forward	 to	 down.	 Something	 else	 has	 adjusted	 with	 this	 change,	 so	 that
Nassun	and	Schaffa	do	not	 fall	 forward	out	of	 their	seats;	Nassun	finds	 that
her	back	and	butt	are	just	as	firmly	tucked	into	the	chair	now	as	before,	even
though	this	is	impossible.



And	 meanwhile,	 a	 faint	 hum	 within	 the	 vehimal,	 which	 until	 now	 has
been	 too	 low	 to	 be	 much	 more	 than	 subliminal,	 abruptly	 begins	 to	 grow
louder.	Unseen	mechanisms	reverberate	faster	in	an	unmistakable	cycling-up
pattern.	As	the	vehimal	completes	its	tilt,	 the	view	fills	with	darkness	again,
but	this	time	Nassun	knows	it	is	the	yawning	black	of	the	pit.	There’s	nothing
ahead	anymore.	Only	down.



“Launch,”	says	the	voice	within	the	vehimal.



Nassun	gasps	 and	clutches	Schaffa’s	hand	harder	 as	 she	 is	pressed	back
into	 her	 seat	 then	 by	motion.	 It	 isn’t	 as	much	momentum	 as	 she	 should	 be
feeling,	 however,	 because	 her	 every	 sense	 tells	 her	 that	 they	 have	 just	 shot
forward	at	a	 tremendous	 rate,	going	much,	much	faster	 than	even	a	 running
horse.



Into	the	dark.



At	first	 the	darkness	is	absolute,	 though	broken	periodically	by	a	ring	of
light	that	blurs	past	as	they	hurtle	through	the	tunnel.	Their	speed	continues	to
increase;	 presently	 these	 rings	 pass	 so	 quickly	 that	 they	 are	 just	 flashes.	 It
takes	three	before	Nassun	is	able	to	discern	what	she’s	seeing	and	sessing,	and
then	 only	 once	 she	 watches	 a	 ring	 as	 they	 pass	 it:	 windows.	 There	 are
windows	 set	 into	 the	 walls	 of	 the	 tunnel,	 illuminated	 by	 the	 light.	 There’s
living	space	down	here,	at	 least	 for	 the	 first	 few	miles.	Then	 the	 rings	stop,
and	the	tunnel	is	nothing	but	dark	for	a	while.



Nassun	 sesses	 impending	 change	 an	 instant	 before	 the	 tunnel	 suddenly
brightens.	They	can	see	a	new,	ruddy	light	that	intersperses	the	rock	walls	of
the	tunnel.	Ah,	yes;	they’ve	gone	far	enough	down	that	some	of	the	rock	has
melted	 and	 glows	 bright	 red.	 This	 new	 light	 paints	 the	 vehimal’s	 interior
bloody	 and	makes	 the	 gold	 filigree	 along	 its	 walls	 seem	 to	 catch	 fire.	 The
forward	view	is	indistinct	at	first,	just	red	amid	gray	and	brown	and	black,	but
Nassun	 understands	 instinctively	 what	 she’s	 seeing.	 They	 have	 entered	 the
mantle,	and	her	fear	finally	begins	to	ebb	amid	fascination.



“The	 asthenosphere,”	 she	 murmurs.	 Schaffa	 frowns	 at	 her,	 but	 naming
what	she	sees	has	eased	her	fear.	Names	have	power.	She	bites	her	 lip,	 then
finally	 lets	go	of	Schaffa’s	hand	 to	 rise	 and	approach	 the	 forward	view.	Up
close	it’s	easier	to	tell	that	what	she’s	seeing	is	just	an	illusion	of	sorts	–	tiny
diamonds	of	color	rising	on	the	vehimal’s	inner	skin,	like	a	blush,	to	form	a
mosaic	of	moving	images.	How	does	it	work?	She	can’t	begin	to	fathom	it.



Fascinated,	 she	 reaches	 up.	 The	 vehimal’s	 inner	 skin	 gives	 off	 no	 heat,
though	she	knows	they	are	already	at	a	level	underground	where	human	flesh
should	 burn	 up	 in	 an	 instant.	When	 she	 touches	 the	 image	 on	 the	 forward
view,	it	ripples	ever	so	slightly	around	her	finger,	like	waves	in	water.	Putting
her	whole	hand	on	a	roil	of	brown-red	color,	she	cannot	help	smiling.	Just	a
few	feet	away,	on	 the	other	 side	of	 the	vehimal’s	 skin,	 is	 the	burning	earth.
She’s	touching	the	burning	earth,	thinly	removed.	She	puts	her	other	hand	up,
presses	 her	 cheek	 against	 the	 smooth	 plates.	 Here	 in	 this	 strange	 deadciv
contraption,	she	is	part	of	the	earth,	perhaps	more	so	than	any	orogene	before
her	has	ever	been.	It	is	her,	it	is	in	her,	she	is	in	it.



When	 Nassun	 glances	 back	 over	 her	 shoulder	 at	 Schaffa,	 he’s	 smiling,
despite	 the	 lines	of	pain	around	his	eyes.	 It’s	different	 from	his	usual	smile.
“What?”	she	asks.



“The	Leadership	 families	of	Yumenes	believed	 that	orogenes	once	 ruled
the	 world,”	 he	 says.	 “That	 their	 duty	 was	 to	 keep	 your	 kind	 from	 ever
regaining	that	much	power.	That	you	would	be	monstrous	rulers	of	the	world,
doing	back	 to	ordinary	 folk	what	had	been	done	 to	you,	 if	you	ever	got	 the
chance.	I	don’t	think	they	were	right	about	any	of	it	–	and	yet.”	He	gestures,
as	she	stands	there	illuminated	by	the	fire	of	the	earth.	“Look	at	you,	little	one.
If	you	are	the	monster	they	imagined	you	to	be…	you	are	also	glorious.”



Nassun	loves	him	so	much.



It’s	why	 she	 gives	 up	 the	 illusion	 of	 power	 and	 goes	 back	 to	 sit	 beside
him.	But	when	she	gets	close,	she	sees	just	how	much	strain	he’s	under.	“Your
head	hurts	a	lot.”



His	smile	fades.	“It’s	bearable.”



Troubled,	she	puts	her	hands	on	his	shoulders.	Dozens	of	nights	of	easing
his	pain	have	made	it	easy	–	but	this	time	when	she	sends	silver	into	him,	the
white-hot	 burn	 of	 lines	 between	 his	 cells	 does	 not	 fade.	 In	 fact,	 they	 blaze
brighter,	 so	 sharply	 that	 Schaffa	 tenses	 and	 pulls	 away	 from	 her,	 rising	 to
begin	pacing	again.	He	has	plastered	a	smile	on	his	face,	more	of	a	rictus	as
he	 prowls	 restlessly	 back	 and	 forth,	 but	 Nassun	 can	 tell	 that	 the	 smile-
endorphins	are	doing	nothing.



Why	 did	 the	 lines	 get	 brighter?	 Nassun	 tries	 to	 understand	 this	 by
examining	 herself.	 Nothing	 of	 her	 silver	 is	 different;	 it	 flows	 in	 its	 usual
clearly	 delineated	 lines.	 She	 turns	 her	 silver	 gaze	 on	 Schaffa	 –	 and	 then,
belatedly,	notices	something	stunning.



The	vehimal	is	made	of	silver,	and	not	just	fine	lines	of	it.	It	is	surrounded
by	 silver,	 permeated	 with	 it.	 What	 she	 perceives	 is	 a	 wave	 of	 the	 stuff,
rippling	 in	 ribbons	 around	 herself	 and	 Schaffa,	 starting	 at	 the	 nose	 of	 the
vehicle	 and	 enclosing	 them	 behind.	 This	 sheath	 of	 magic,	 she	 understands
suddenly,	 is	what’s	pushing	away	the	heat	and	pushing	back	on	the	pressure
and	tilting	the	lines	of	force	within	the	vehimal	so	that	gravity	pulls	toward	its
floor	and	not	toward	the	center	of	the	earth.	The	walls	are	only	a	framework;
something	 about	 their	 structure	 makes	 it	 easier	 for	 the	 silver	 to	 flow	 and
connect	 and	 form	 lattices.	 The	 gold	 filigree	 helps	 to	 stabilize	 the	 churn	 of
energies	at	the	front	of	the	vehicle	–	or	so	Nassun	guesses,	since	she	cannot
understand	all	the	ways	in	which	these	magic	mechanisms	work	together.	It’s
just	too	complex.	It	is	like	riding	inside	an	obelisk.	It’s	like	being	carried	by
the	wind.	She	had	no	idea	the	silver	could	be	so	amazing.



But	 there	 is	 something	 beyond	 the	 miracle	 of	 the	 vehimal’s	 walls.
Something	outside	the	vehimal.



At	 first	Nassun	 isn’t	 sure	what	 she’s	perceiving.	More	 lights?	No.	She’s
looking	at	it	all	wrong.



It’s	 the	 silver,	 same	 as	what	 flows	 between	 her	 own	 cells.	 It’s	 a	 single
thread	of	silver	–	and	yet	it	is	titanic,	curling	away	between	a	whorl	of	soft,
hot	 rock	 and	 a	 high-pressure	 bubble	 of	 searing	 water.	 A	 single	 thread	 of
silver…	and	it	is	longer	than	the	tunnel	they	have	traversed	so	far.	She	can’t
find	either	of	 its	ends.	 It’s	wider	 than	 the	vehimal’s	circumference	and	 then
some.	 Yet	 otherwise	 it’s	 just	 as	 clear	 and	 focused	 as	 any	 one	 of	 the	 lines
within	Nassun	herself.	The	same,	just…	immense.



And	 Nassun	 understands	 then,	 she	 understands,	 so	 suddenly	 and
devastatingly	 that	 her	 eyes	 snap	 open	 and	 she	 stumbles	 backward	with	 the
force	of	the	realization,	bumping	into	another	chair	and	nearly	falling	before
she	grabs	it	to	hold	herself	upright.	Schaffa	makes	a	low,	frustrated	sound	and
turns	in	an	attempt	to	respond	to	her	alarm	–	but	the	silver	within	his	body	is
so	 bright	 that	 when	 it	 flares,	 he	 doubles	 over,	 clutching	 at	 his	 head	 and
groaning.	He	is	in	too	much	pain	to	fulfill	his	duty	as	a	Guardian,	or	to	act	on
his	concern	for	her,	because	the	silver	in	his	body	has	grown	to	be	as	bright	as
that	immense	thread	out	in	the	magma.



Magic,	 Steel	 called	 the	 silver.	 The	 stuff	 underneath	 orogeny,	 which	 is
made	by	 things	 that	 live	or	once	 lived.	This	silver	deep	within	Father	Earth
wends	 between	 the	 mountainous	 fragments	 of	 his	 substance	 in	 exactly	 the
same	way	 that	 they	 twine	among	 the	cells	of	 a	 living,	breathing	 thing.	And
that	is	because	a	planet	is	a	living,	breathing	thing;	she	knows	this	now	with
the	certainty	of	instinct.	All	the	stories	about	Father	Earth	being	alive	are	real.



But	if	the	mantle	is	Father	Earth’s	body,	why	is	his	silver	getting	brighter?



No.	Oh	no.



“Schaffa,”	 Nassun	 whispers.	 He	 grunts;	 he	 has	 sagged	 to	 one	 knee,
gasping	shallowly	as	he	clutches	at	his	head.	She	wants	to	go	to	him,	comfort
him,	help	him,	but	she	stands	where	she	is,	her	breath	coming	too	fast	from
rising	 panic	 at	 what	 she	 suddenly	 knows	 is	 coming.	 She	 wants	 to	 deny	 it,
though.	 “Schaffa,	 p-please,	 that	 thing	 in	 your	 head,	 the	 piece	 of	 iron,	 you
called	 it	 a	 corestone,	 Schaffa	—”	Her	 voice	 is	 fluttery.	 She	 can’t	 catch	 her
breath.	Fear	has	nearly	closed	her	throat.	No.	No.	She	did	not	understand,	but
now	she	does	and	she	has	no	idea	how	to	stop	it.	“Schaffa,	where	does	it	come
from,	that	corestone	thing	in	your	head?”



The	vehimal’s	voice	speaks	again	with	that	greeting	language,	and	then	it
continues,	 obscene	 in	 its	 detached	 pleasantry.	 “—	 a	marvel,	 only	 available
—”	 Something.	 “—	 route.	 This	 vehimal	 —”	 Something.	 “—	 heart,
illuminated	—”	Something.	“—	for	your	pleasure.”



Schaffa	 does	 not	 reply.	But	Nassun	 can	 sess	 the	 answer	 to	 her	 question
now.	She	can	 feel	 it	as	the	paltry	thin	silver	that	runs	through	her	own	body
resonates	–	but	that	is	a	faint	resonance,	from	her	silver,	generated	by	her	own
flesh.	The	 silver	 in	Schaffa,	 in	 all	Guardians,	 is	 generated	 by	 the	 corestone
that	sits	lodged	in	their	sessapinae.	She’s	studied	this	stone	sometimes,	to	the
degree	that	she	is	able	while	Schaffa	sleeps	and	she	feeds	him	magic.	It’s	iron,
but	like	no	other	iron	she’s	ever	sessed.	Oddly	dense.	Oddly	energetic,	though
some	of	that	is	the	magic	that	it	channels	into	him	from…	somewhere.	Oddly
alive.



And	 when	 the	 whole	 right	 side	 of	 the	 vehimal	 dissolves	 to	 let	 its
passengers	glimpse	the	rarely	seen	wonder	that	is	the	world’s	unfettered	heart,
it	already	blazes	before	her:	a	silver	sun	underground,	so	bright	that	she	must
squint,	 so	 heavy	 that	 perceiving	 it	 hurts	 her	 sessapinae,	 so	 powerful	 with
magic	 that	 it	makes	 the	 lingering	 connection	of	 the	 sapphire	 feel	 tremulous
and	weak.	It	is	the	Earth’s	core,	the	source	of	the	corestones,	and	before	her	it
is	 a	world	 in	 itself,	 swallowing	 the	 viewscreen	 and	 growing	 further	 still	 as
they	hurtle	closer.



It	does	not	look	like	rock,	Nassun	thinks	faintly,	beneath	the	panic.	Maybe
that’s	just	the	waver	of	molten	metal	and	magic	all	round	the	vehimal,	but	the
immensity	before	her	seems	to	shimmer	when	she	tries	to	focus	on	it.	There’s
some	solidity	to	it;	as	they	draw	closer,	Nassun	can	detect	anomalies	dotting
the	surface	of	the	bright	sphere,	made	tiny	by	contrast	–	even	as	she	realizes
they	are	obelisks.	Several	dozen	of	them,	jammed	into	the	heart	of	the	world
like	needles	in	a	pincushion.	But	these	are	nothing.	Nothing.



And	Nassun	is	nothing.	Nothing	before	this.



It’s	a	mistake	to	bring	him,	Steel	had	said,	of	Schaffa.



Panic	snaps.	Nassun	runs	to	Schaffa	as	he	falls	to	the	floor,	thrashing.	He
does	not	scream,	though	his	mouth	is	open	and	his	icewhite	eyes	have	gone
wide	and	his	every	limb,	when	she	wrestles	him	onto	his	back,	is	muscle-stiff.
One	flailing	arm	hits	her	collarbone,	flinging	her	back,	and	there	is	a	flash	of
terrible	pain,	but	Nassun	barely	spares	a	 thought	for	 it	before	she	scrambles
back	 to	 him.	 She	 grabs	 his	 arm	with	 both	 of	 her	 own	 and	 tries	 to	 hold	 on
because	he	is	reaching	for	his	head	and	his	hands	are	forming	claws	and	his
nails	are	raking	at	his	scalp	and	face	–	“Schaffa,	no!”	she	cries.	But	he	cannot
hear	her.



And	then	the	vehimal	goes	dark	inside.



It’s	 still	 moving,	 though	 slower.	 They’ve	 actually	 passed	 into	 the
semisolid	stuff	of	the	core,	the	vehimal’s	route	skimming	its	surface	–	because
of	 course	 the	 people	 who	 built	 the	 obelisks	 would	 revel	 in	 their	 ability	 to
casually	 pierce	 the	 planet	 for	 entertainment.	 She	 can	 feel	 the	 blaze	 of	 that
silver,	 churning	 sun	 all	 around	 her.	 Behind	 her,	 however,	 the	 wall-window
goes	 suddenly	 dim.	 There’s	 something	 just	 outside	 the	 vehimal,	 pressing
against	its	sheath	of	magic.



Slowly,	with	Schaffa	writhing	in	silent	agony	in	her	lap,	Nassun	turns	to
face	the	core	of	the	Earth.



And	here,	within	the	sanctum	of	its	heart,	the	Evil	Earth	notices	her	back.



When	the	Earth	speaks,	it	does	not	do	so	in	words,	exactly.	This	is	a	thing
you	know	already,	but	that	Nassun	only	learns	in	this	moment.	She	sesses	the
meanings,	hears	the	vibrations	with	the	bones	of	her	ears,	shudders	them	out
through	her	 skin,	 feels	 them	pull	 tears	 from	her	eyes.	 It	 is	 like	drowning	 in
energy	and	 sensation	and	emotion.	 It	hurts.	Remember:	The	Earth	wants	 to
kill	her.



But	remember,	too:	Nassun	wants	it	just	as	dead.



So	it	says,	in	microshakes	that	will	eventually	stir	a	tsunami	somewhere	in
the	southern	hemisphere,	Hello,	little	enemy.



(This	 is	 an	 approximation,	 you	 realize.	 This	 is	 all	 her	 young	mind	 can
bear.)



And	as	Schaffa	chokes	and	goes	into	convulsions,	Nassun	clutches	at	his
pain-wracked	 form	and	 stares	 at	 the	wall	of	 rusty	darkness.	She	 isn’t	 afraid
anymore;	fury	has	steeled	her.	She	is	so	very	much	her	mother’s	daughter.



“You	let	him	go,”	she	snarls.	“You	let	him	go	right	now.”



The	core	of	the	world	is	metal,	molten	and	yet	crushed	into	solidity.	There
is	some	malleability	to	it.	The	surface	of	the	red	darkness	begins	to	ripple	and
change	as	Nassun	watches.	Something	appears	that	for	an	instant	she	cannot
parse.	A	pattern,	familiar.	A	face.	It	is	just	a	suggestion	of	a	person,	eyes	and	a
mouth,	shadow	of	a	nose	–	but	then	for	just	an	instant	the	eyes	are	distinct	in
shape,	 the	 lips	 lined	and	detailed,	a	mole	appearing	beneath	 the	eyes,	which
open.



No	 one	 she	 knows.	 Just	 a	 face…	where	 there	 should	 be	 none.	 And	 as
Nassun	stares	at	this,	dawning	horror	slowly	pushing	aside	her	anger,	she	sees
another	face	–	and	another,	more	of	them	appearing	all	at	once	to	fill	the	view.
Each	 is	 pushed	 aside	 as	 another	 rises	 from	 underneath.	 Dozens.	 Hundreds.
This	one	jowled	and	tired-looking,	that	one	puffy	as	if	from	crying,	that	one
openmouthed	 and	 screaming	 in	 silence,	 like	 Schaffa.	 Some	 look	 at	 her
pleadingly,	mouthing	words	 she	wouldn’t	 be	 able	 to	understand	 even	 if	 she
could	hear.



All	of	them	ripple,	though,	with	the	amusement	of	a	greater	presence.	He
is	mine.	Not	a	voice.	When	the	Earth	speaks,	it	is	not	in	words.	Nevertheless.



Nassun	presses	her	lips	together	and	reaches	into	the	silver	of	Schaffa	and
ruthlessly	cuts	as	many	of	the	tendrils	etched	into	his	body	as	she	can,	right
around	the	corestone.	It	doesn’t	work	like	 it	usually	does	when	she	uses	 the
silver	 for	 surgery.	 The	 silver	 lines	 in	 Schaffa	 reestablish	 themselves	 almost
instantly,	 and	 throb	 that	much	 harder	when	 they	 do.	 Schaffa	 shudders	 each
time.	She’s	hurting	him.	She’s	making	it	worse.



There’s	no	other	choice.	She	wraps	her	own	threads	around	his	corestone
to	perform	the	surgery	he	would	not	permit	her	to	do	a	few	months	before.	If
it	shortens	his	life,	at	least	he	will	not	suffer	for	what	is	left	of	it.



But	another	ripple	of	amusement	makes	the	vehimal	shudder,	and	a	flare
of	silver	blazes	through	Schaffa	that	shrugs	off	her	paltry	threads.	The	surgery
fails.	 The	 corestone	 is	 seated	 as	 firmly	 as	 ever	 amid	 the	 lobes	 of	 his
sessapinae,	like	the	parasitic	thing	it	is.



Nassun	 shakes	 her	 head	 and	 looks	 around	 for	 something,	 anything	 else,
that	might	help.	She	is	distracted	momentarily	by	the	boil	and	shift	of	faces	in
the	 surface	 of	 the	 rusty	 dark.	 Who	 are	 these	 people?	 Why	 are	 they	 here,
churning	amid	the	Earth’s	heart?



Obligation,	 the	Earth	 returns,	 in	wavelets	of	heat	and	crushing	pressure.
Nassun	bares	her	 teeth,	 struggling	 against	 the	weight	 of	 its	 contempt.	What
was	stolen,	or	lent,	must	be	recompensed.



And	Nassun	cannot	help	but	understand	 this	 too,	here	within	 the	Earth’s
embrace,	with	its	meaning	thrumming	through	her	bones.	The	silver	–	magic
–	comes	from	life.	Those	who	made	the	obelisks	sought	to	harness	magic,	and
they	 succeeded;	 oh,	 how	 they	 succeeded.	 They	 used	 it	 to	 build	 wonders
beyond	imagining.	But	then	they	wanted	more	magic	than	just	what	their	own
lives,	or	the	accumulated	aeons	of	life	and	death	on	the	Earth’s	surface,	could
provide.	 And	 when	 they	 saw	 how	 much	 magic	 brimmed	 just	 beneath	 that
surface,	ripe	for	the	taking…



It	may	 never	 have	 occurred	 to	 them	 that	 so	much	magic,	 so	much	 life,
might	 be	 an	 indicator	 of…	 awareness.	 The	 Earth	 does	 not	 speak	 in	words,
after	all	–	and	perhaps,	Nassun	realizes,	having	seen	entirely	too	much	of	the
world	to	still	have	much	of	a	child’s	innocence,	perhaps	these	builders	of	the
great	 obelisk	 network	were	 not	 used	 to	 respecting	 lives	 different	 from	 their
own.	Not	so	very	different,	really,	from	the	people	who	run	the	Fulcrums,	or
raiders,	or	her	father.	So	where	they	should	have	seen	a	living	being,	they	saw
only	 another	 thing	 to	 exploit.	Where	 they	 should	 have	 asked,	 or	 left	 alone,
they	raped.



For	some	crimes,	there	is	no	fitting	justice	–	only	reparation.	So	for	every
iota	of	 life	 siphoned	 from	beneath	 the	Earth’s	 skin,	 the	Earth	has	dragged	a
million	human	remnants	into	its	heart.	Bodies	rot	 in	soil,	after	all	–	and	soil
sits	 upon	 tectonic	 plates,	 plates	 eventually	 subduct	 into	 the	 fire	 under	 the
Earth’s	crust,	which	convect	endlessly	through	the	mantle…	and	there	within
itself,	 the	 Earth	 eats	 everything	 they	 were.	 This	 is	 only	 fair,	 it	 reasons	 –
coldly,	 with	 an	 anger	 that	 still	 shudders	 up	 from	 the	 depths	 to	 crack	 the
world’s	skin	and	touch	off	Season	after	Season.	It	is	only	right.	The	Earth	did
not	start	this	cycle	of	hostilities,	it	did	not	steal	the	Moon,	it	did	not	burrow
into	 anyone	 else’s	 skin	 and	 snatch	 bits	 of	 its	 still-living	 flesh	 to	 keep	 as
trophies	 and	 tools,	 it	 did	 not	 plot	 to	 enslave	 humans	 in	 an	 unending
nightmare.	It	did	not	start	this	war,	but	it	will	rusting	well	have.	Its.	Due.



And	oh.	Does	Nassun	not	understand	this?	Her	hands	tighten	in	Schaffa’s
shirt,	trembling	as	her	hatred	wavers.	Can	she	not	empathize?



For	the	world	has	taken	so	much	from	her.	She	had	a	brother	once.	And	a
father,	and	a	mother	whom	she	also	understands	but	wishes	she	did	not.	And	a
home,	and	dreams.	The	people	of	the	Stillness	have	long	since	robbed	her	of
childhood	and	any	hope	of	a	real	future,	and	because	of	this	she	is	so	angry
that	she	cannot	think	beyond	THIS	MUST	STOP	and	I	WILL	STOP	IT	—



—	so	does	she	not	resonate	with	the	Evil	Earth’s	wrath,	herself?



She	does.



Earth	eat	her,	she	does.



Schaffa	has	gone	still	in	her	lap.	There	is	wetness	beneath	one	of	her	legs;
he’s	urinated	on	himself.	His	eyes	are	still	open,	and	he	breathes	 in	shallow
gasps.	His	taut	muscles	still	twitch	now	and	again.	Everyone	breaks,	if	torture
goes	 on	 long	 enough.	 The	 mind	 bears	 the	 unbearable	 by	 going	 elsewhere.
Nassun	is	ten	years	old,	going	on	a	hundred,	but	she	has	seen	enough	of	the
world’s	 evil	 to	 know	 this.	 Her	 Schaffa.	 Has	 gone	 away.	 And	 might	 never,
ever,	come	back.



The	vehimal	speeds	onward.



The	view	begins	to	grow	bright	again	as	it	emerges	from	the	core.	Interior
lights	 resume	 their	pleasant	glow.	Nassun’s	 fingers	curl	 loosely	 in	Schaffa’s
clothes	now.	She	gazes	back	at	the	turning	mass	of	the	core	until	the	stuff	of
the	sidewall	turns	opaque	again.	The	forward	view	lingers,	but	it,	too,	begins
to	 darken.	 They	 have	 entered	 another	 tunnel,	 this	 one	 wider	 than	 the	 first,
with	solid	black	walls	somehow	holding	back	the	churning	heat	of	the	outer
core	and	mantle.	Now	Nassun	senses	that	the	vehimal	is	tilted	up,	away	from
the	core.	Headed	back	 toward	 the	surface,	but	 this	 time	on	 the	other	side	of
the	planet.



Nassun	 whispers,	 to	 herself	 since	 Schaffa	 has	 gone	 away,	 “This	 has	 to
stop.	I	will	stop	it.”	She	closes	her	eyes	and	the	lashes	stick	together,	wet.	“I
promise.”



She	 does	 not	 know	 to	whom	 she	makes	 this	 promise.	 It	 doesn’t	matter,
really.



Not	long	after,	the	vehimal	reaches	Corepoint.



Syl	Anagist:	One
	

They	take	Kelenli	away	in	the	morning.



It	 is	 unexpected,	 at	 least	 by	 us.	 It	 also	 isn’t	 really	 about	 us,	we	 realize
fairly	 quickly.	 Conductor	 Gallat	 arrives	 first,	 although	 I	 see	 several	 other
high-ranking	conductors	 talking	 in	 the	house	above	the	garden.	He	does	not
look	displeased	 as	 he	 calls	Kelenli	 outside	 and	 speaks	 to	 her	 in	 a	 quiet	 but
intent	 voice.	 We	 all	 get	 up,	 vibrating	 guilt	 though	 we	 have	 done	 nothing
wrong,	 just	 spent	 a	 night	 lying	 on	 a	 hard	 floor	 and	 listening	 to	 the	 strange
sound	of	others’	breath	and	occasional	movement.	I	watch	Kelenli,	fearing	for
her,	wanting	 to	 protect	 her,	 though	 this	 is	 inchoate;	 I	 don’t	 know	what	 the
danger	 is.	 She	 stands	 straight	 and	 tall,	 like	 one	 of	 them,	 as	 she	 speaks	 to
Gallat.	I	sess	her	tension,	like	a	fault	line	poised	to	slip.



They	are	outside	of	 the	 little	garden	house,	 fifteen	 feet	 away,	but	 I	hear
Gallat’s	voice	rise	for	a	moment.	“How	much	longer	do	you	mean	to	keep	up
this	foolishness?	Sleeping	in	the	shed?”



Kelenli	says,	calmly,	“Is	there	a	problem?”



Gallat	is	the	highest	ranked	of	the	conductors.	He	is	also	the	cruelest.	We
don’t	 think	 he	 means	 it.	 It’s	 just	 that	 he	 does	 not	 seem	 to	 understand	 that
cruelty	is	possible,	with	us.	We	are	the	machine’s	tuners;	we	ourselves	must
be	 attuned	 for	 the	 good	 of	 the	 project.	 That	 this	 process	 sometimes	 causes
pain	or	fear	or	decommissioning	to	the	briar	patch	is…	incidental.



We	have	wondered	if	Gallat	has	feelings	himself.	He	does,	I	see	when	he
draws	back	now,	expression	all	a-ripple	with	hurt,	as	if	Kelenli’s	words	have
struck	him	 some	 sort	 of	 blow.	 “I’ve	 been	good	 to	 you,”	 he	 says.	His	 voice
wavers.



“And	I’m	grateful.”	Kelenli	hasn’t	shifted	the	inflection	of	her	voice	at	all,
or	a	muscle	of	her	face.	She	looks	and	sounds,	for	the	first	time,	like	one	of
us.	 And	 as	 we	 so	 often	 do,	 she	 and	 he	 are	 having	 a	 conversation	 that	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 words	 coming	 from	 their	 mouths.	 I	 check;	 there’s
nothing	in	the	ambient,	save	the	fading	vibrations	of	their	voices.	And	yet.



Gallat	 stares	 at	 her.	 Then	 the	 hurt	 and	 anger	 fade	 from	 his	 expression,
replaced	by	weariness.	He	turns	away	and	snaps,	“I	need	you	back	at	the	lab
today.	There	are	fluctuations	in	the	subgrid	again.”



Kelenli’s	face	finally	moves,	her	brows	drawing	down.	“I	was	told	I	had
three	days.”



“Geoarcanity	 takes	 precedence	 over	 your	 leisure	 plans,	 Kelenli.”	 He
glances	toward	the	little	house	where	I	and	the	others	cluster,	and	catches	me
staring	 at	 him.	 I	 don’t	 look	 away,	mostly	 because	 I’m	 so	 fascinated	 by	 his
anguish	that	I	don’t	think	to.	He	looks	fleetingly	embarrassed,	then	irritated.
He	 says	 to	 her,	with	 his	 usual	 air	 of	 impatience,	 “Biomagestry	 can	only	 do
distance	 scans	 outside	 of	 the	 compound,	 but	 they	 say	 they’re	 actually
detecting	some	interesting	flow	clarification	in	the	tuners’	network.	Whatever
you’ve	been	doing	with	 them	obviously	 isn’t	 a	 complete	waste	of	 time.	 I’ll
take	them,	then,	to	wherever	you	were	planning	to	go	today.	Then	you	can	go
back	to	the	compound.”



She	glances	around	at	us.	At	me.	My	thinker.



“It	should	be	an	easy	enough	trip,”	she	says	to	him,	while	looking	at	me.
“They	need	to	see	the	local	engine	fragment.”



“The	amethyst?”	Gallat	stares	at	her.	“They	live	in	its	shadow.	They	see	it
constantly.	How	does	that	help?”



“They	haven’t	seen	 the	socket.	They	need	to	fully	understand	its	growth
process	–	more	than	theoretically.”	All	at	once	she	turns	away	from	me,	and
from	him,	 and	 begins	walking	 toward	 the	 big	 house.	 “Just	 show	 them	 that,
and	then	you	can	drop	them	off	at	the	compound	and	be	done	with	them.”



I	understand	precisely	why	Kelenli	has	spoken	in	this	dismissive	tone,	and
why	she	hasn’t	bothered	to	say	farewell	before	leaving.	It’s	no	more	than	any
of	us	do,	when	we	must	watch	or	sess	another	of	our	network	punished;	we
pretend	 not	 to	 care.	 (Tetlewha.	 Your	 song	 is	 toneless,	 but	 not	 silent.	 From
where	do	you	 sing?)	That	 shortens	 the	punishment	 for	 all,	 and	prevents	 the
conductors	from	focusing	on	another,	in	their	anger.	Understanding	this,	and
feeling	nothing	as	she	walks	away,	are	two	very	different	things,	however.



Conductor	Gallat	 is	 in	a	terrible	mood	after	this.	He	orders	us	to	get	our
things	so	we	can	go.	We	have	nothing,	though	some	of	us	need	to	eliminate
waste	before	we	 leave,	 and	 all	 of	 us	need	 food	 and	water.	He	 lets	 the	ones
who	need	it	use	Kelenli’s	small	toilet	or	a	pile	of	leaves	out	back	(I	am	one	of
these;	it	is	very	strange	to	squat,	but	also	a	profoundly	enriching	experience),
then	tells	us	to	ignore	our	hunger	and	thirst	and	come	on,	so	we	do.	He	walks
us	very	 fast,	even	 though	our	 legs	are	shorter	 than	his	and	still	aching	 from
the	day	before.	We	are	 relieved	 to	see	 the	vehimal	he’s	 summoned,	when	 it
comes,	so	that	we	can	sit	and	be	carried	back	toward	the	center	of	town.



The	other	conductors	ride	along	with	us	and	Gallat.	They	keep	speaking	to
him	 and	 ignoring	 us;	 he	 answers	 in	 terse,	 one-word	 replies.	 They	 ask	 him
mostly	 about	 Kelenli	 –	 whether	 she	 is	 always	 so	 intransigent,	 whether	 he
believes	 this	 is	 an	unforeseen	genegineering	defect,	why	he	even	bothers	 to
allow	her	input	on	the	project	when	she	is,	for	all	intents	and	purposes,	just	an
obsolete	prototype.



“Because	 she’s	 been	 right	 in	 every	 suggestion	 she’s	made	 thus	 far,”	 he
snaps,	after	the	third	such	question.	“Which	is	the	very	reason	we	developed
the	tuners,	after	all.	The	Plutonic	Engine	would	need	another	seventy	years	of
priming	before	even	a	 test-firing	could	be	attempted,	without	 them.	When	a
machine’s	sensors	are	capable	of	telling	you	exactly	what’s	wrong	and	exactly
how	 to	make	 the	 whole	 thing	 work	more	 efficiently,	 it’s	 stupid	 not	 to	 pay
heed.”



That	seems	to	mollify	them,	so	they	leave	him	alone	and	resume	talking	–
though	to	each	other,	not	to	him.	I	am	sitting	near	Conductor	Gallat.	I	notice
how	 the	 other	 conductors’	 disdain	 actually	 increases	 his	 tension,	 making
anger	radiate	off	his	skin	like	the	residual	heat	of	sunlight	from	a	rock,	long
after	 night	 has	 fallen.	 There	 have	 always	 been	 odd	 dynamics	 to	 the
conductors’	relationships;	we’ve	puzzled	them	out	as	best	we	could,	while	not
really	 understanding.	 Now,	 however,	 thanks	 to	 Kelenli’s	 explanation,	 I
remember	that	Gallat	has	undesirable	ancestry.	We	were	made	this	way,	but
he	was	simply	born	with	pale	skin	and	icewhite	eyes	–	traits	common	among
the	 Niess.	 He	 isn’t	 Niess;	 the	 Niess	 are	 gone.	 There	 are	 other	 races,
Sylanagistine	 races,	 with	 pale	 skin.	 The	 eyes	 suggest,	 however,	 that
somewhere	 in	 his	 family’s	 history	 –	 distant,	 or	 he	 would	 not	 have	 been
permitted	 schooling	 and	medical	 care	 and	 his	 prestigious	 current	 position	 –
someone	made	children	with	a	Niesperson.	Or	not;	the	trait	could	be	a	random
mutation	or	happenstance	of	pigment	expression.	Apparently	no	one	thinks	it
is,	though.



This	 is	 why,	 though	Gallat	 works	 harder	 and	 spends	more	 hours	 at	 the
compound	than	anyone,	and	is	in	charge,	the	other	conductors	treat	him	as	if
he	is	less	than	what	he	is.	If	he	did	not	pass	on	the	favor	in	his	dealings	with
us,	I	would	pity	him.	As	it	is,	I	am	afraid	of	him.	I	always	have	been	afraid	of
him.	But	for	Kelenli,	I	decide	to	be	brave.



“Why	are	you	angry	with	her?”	I	ask.	My	voice	is	soft,	and	hard	to	hear
over	 the	 humming	 metabolic	 cycle	 of	 the	 vehimal.	 Few	 of	 the	 other
conductors	notice	my	comment.	None	of	them	care.	I	have	timed	the	asking
well.



Gallat	starts,	then	stares	at	me	as	if	he	has	never	seen	me	before.	“What?”



“Kelenli.”	I	turn	my	eyes	to	meet	his,	although	we	have	learned	over	time
that	 the	 conductors	do	not	 like	 this.	They	 find	 eye	 contact	 challenging.	But
they	also	dismiss	us	more	easily	when	we	do	not	 look	at	 them,	and	 I	don’t
want	 to	 be	 dismissed	 in	 this	moment.	 I	want	 him	 to	 feel	 this	 conversation,
even	 if	his	weak,	primitive	 sessapinae	cannot	 tell	him	 that	my	 jealousy	and
resentment	 have	 raised	 the	 temperature	 of	 the	 city’s	 water	 table	 by	 two
degrees.



He	glares	at	me.	I	gaze	impassively	back.	I	sense	tension	in	the	network.
The	 others,	 who	 of	 course	 have	 noticed	 what	 the	 conductors	 ignore,	 are
suddenly	afraid	for	me…	but	I	am	almost	distracted	from	their	concern	by	the
difference	 I	 suddenly	 perceive	 in	 us.	 Gallat	 is	 right:	 We	 are	 changing,
complexifying,	our	ambient	influence	strengthening,	as	a	result	of	the	things
Kelenli	has	shown	us.	Is	this	an	improvement?	I’m	not	certain	yet.	For	now,
we	are	confused	where	before,	we	were	mostly	unified.	Remwha	and	Gaewha
are	angry	at	me	for	taking	this	risk	without	seeking	consensus	first	–	and	this
recklessness,	 I	 suppose,	 is	 my	 own	 symptom	 of	 change.	 Bimniwha	 and
Salewha	are,	irrationally,	angry	at	Kelenli	for	the	strange	way	she	is	affecting
me.	Dushwha	is	done	with	all	of	us	and	just	wants	to	go	home.	Beneath	her
anger,	Gaewha	 is	 afraid	 for	me	 but	 she	 also	 pities	me,	 because	 I	 think	 she
understands	 that	 my	 recklessness	 is	 a	 symptom	 of	 something	 else.	 I	 have
decided	that	I	am	in	love,	but	love	is	a	painful	hotspot	roil	beneath	the	surface
of	me	 in	 a	place	where	once	 there	was	 stability,	 and	 I	 do	not	 like	 it.	Once,
after	all,	 I	believed	I	was	 the	finest	 tool	ever	created	by	a	great	civilization.
Now,	I	have	learned	that	I	am	a	mistake	cobbled	together	by	paranoid	thieves
who	were	terrified	of	their	own	mediocrity.	I	don’t	know	how	to	feel,	except
reckless.



None	of	them	are	angry	at	Gallat	for	being	too	dangerous	to	have	a	simple
conversation	with,	though.	There’s	something	very	wrong	with	that.



Finally,	Gallat	 says,	 “What	makes	you	 think	 I’m	angry	with	Kelenli?”	 I
open	my	mouth	to	point	out	the	tension	in	his	body,	his	vocal	stress,	the	look
on	his	face,	and	he	makes	an	irritated	sound.	“Never	mind.	I	know	how	you
process	information.”	He	sighs.	“And	I	suppose	you’re	right.”



I	 am	 definitely	 right,	 but	 I	 know	 better	 than	 to	 remind	 him	 of	what	 he
doesn’t	want	to	know.	“You	want	her	to	live	in	your	house.”	I	was	unsure	that
it	was	Gallat’s	house	until	the	morning’s	conversation.	I	should	have	guessed,
though;	 it	 smelled	 like	 him.	None	 of	 us	 is	 good	 at	 using	 senses	 other	 than
sesuna.



“It’s	her	house,”	he	snaps.	“She	grew	up	there,	same	as	me.”



Kelenli	 has	 told	 me	 this.	 Raised	 alongside	 Gallat,	 thinking	 she	 was
normal,	until	someone	finally	told	her	why	her	parents	did	not	love	her.	“She
was	part	of	the	project.”



He	nods	once,	tightly,	his	mouth	twisted	in	bitterness.	“So	was	I.	A	human
child	 was	 a	 necessary	 control,	 and	 I	 had…	 useful	 characteristics	 for
comparison.	 I	 thought	 of	 her	 as	my	 sister	 until	we	 both	 reached	 the	 age	 of
fifteen.	Then	they	told	us.”



Such	 a	 long	 time.	 And	 yet	 Kelenli	 must	 have	 suspected	 that	 she	 was
different.	 The	 silver	 glimmer	 of	 magic	 flows	 around	 us,	 through	 us,	 like
water.	Everyone	can	sess	it,	but	we	tuners,	we	live	it.	It	lives	in	us.	She	cannot
have	ever	thought	herself	normal.



Gallat,	however,	had	been	completely	surprised.	Perhaps	his	view	of	 the
world	 had	 been	 as	 thoroughly	 upended	 as	 mine	 has	 been	 now.	 Perhaps	 he
floundered	–	 flounders	–	 in	 the	same	way,	struggling	 to	 resolve	his	 feelings
with	reality.	I	feel	a	sudden	sympathy	for	him.



“I	never	mistreated	her.”	Gallat’s	voice	has	gone	soft,	and	I’m	not	certain
he’s	still	speaking	to	me.	He	has	folded	his	arms	and	crossed	his	legs,	closing
in	 on	 himself	 as	 he	 gazes	 steadily	 through	 one	 of	 the	 vehimal’s	 windows,
seeing	 nothing.	 “Never	 treated	 her	 like…”	 Suddenly	 he	 blinks	 and	 darts	 a
hooded	 glance	 at	 me.	 I	 start	 to	 nod	 to	 show	 that	 I	 understand,	 but	 some
instinct	warns	me	 against	 doing	 this.	 I	 just	 look	 back	 at	 him.	He	 relaxes.	 I
don’t	know	why.



He	doesn’t	want	you	to	hear	him	say	“like	one	of	you,”	Remwha	signals,
humming	with	irritation	at	my	obtuseness.	And	he	doesn’t	want	you	to	know
what	it	means,	if	he	says	it.	He	reassures	himself	that	he	is	not	like	the	people
who	made	his	own	life	harder.	 It’s	a	 lie,	but	he	needs	 it,	and	he	needs	us	 to
support	that	lie.	She	should	not	have	told	us	that	we	were	Niess.



We	aren’t	Niess,	I	gravitic-pulse	back.	Mostly	I’m	annoyed	that	he	had	to
point	this	out.	Gallat’s	behavior	is	obvious,	now	that	Remwha	has	explained.



To	 them	 we	 are.	 Gaewha	 sends	 this	 as	 a	 single	 microshake	 whose
reverberations	she	kills,	so	that	we	sess	only	cold	silence	afterward.	We	stop
arguing	because	she’s	right.



Gallat	continues,	oblivious	to	our	identity	crisis,	“I’ve	given	her	as	much
freedom	as	I	can.	Everyone	knows	what	she	is,	but	I’ve	allowed	her	the	same
privileges	 that	 any	 normal	 woman	 would	 have.	 Of	 course	 there	 are
restrictions,	limitations,	but	that’s	reasonable.	I	can’t	be	seen	to	be	lax,	if…”
He	trails	off,	into	his	own	thoughts.	Muscles	along	his	jaw	flex	in	frustration.
“She	acts	as	if	she	can’t	understand	that.	As	if	I’m	the	problem,	not	the	world.
I’m	trying	to	help	her!”	And	then	he	lets	out	a	heavy	breath	of	frustration.



We	have	heard	enough,	however.	Later,	when	we	process	all	 this,	 I	will
tell	the	others,	She	wants	to	be	a	person.



She	wants	the	impossible,	Dushwha	will	say.	Gallat	thinks	it	better	to	own
her	himself,	rather	than	allow	Syl	Anagist	to	do	the	same.	But	for	her	to	be	a
person,	she	must	stop	being…	ownable.	By	anyone.



Then	Syl	Anagist	must	stop	being	Syl	Anagist,	Gaewha	will	add	sadly.



Yes.	They	will	all	be	right,	too,	my	fellow	tuners…	but	that	does	not	mean
Kelenli’s	 desire	 to	 be	 free	 is	 wrong.	 Or	 that	 something	 is	 impossible	 just
because	it	is	very,	very	hard.



The	vehimal	stops	in	a	part	of	town	that,	amazingly,	looks	familiar.	I	have
seen	this	area	only	once	and	yet	I	recognize	the	pattern	of	the	streets,	and	the
vineflowers	 on	 one	 greenstrate	 wall.	 The	 quality	 of	 the	 light	 through	 the
amethyst,	as	the	sun	slants	toward	setting,	stirs	a	feeling	of	longing	and	relief
in	me	that	I	will	one	day	learn	is	called	homesickness.



The	 other	 conductors	 leave	 and	 head	 back	 to	 the	 compound.	 Gallat
beckons	 to	us.	He’s	still	angry,	and	wants	 this	over	with.	So	we	follow,	and
fall	 slowly	 behind	 because	 our	 legs	 are	 shorter	 and	 the	muscles	 burn,	 until
finally	he	notices	that	we	and	our	guards	are	ten	feet	behind	him.	He	stops	to
let	us	catch	up,	but	his	 jaw	is	 tight	and	one	hand	taps	a	brisk	pattern	on	his
folded	arms.



“Hurry	up,”	he	says.	“I	want	to	do	start-up	trials	tonight.”



We	 know	 better	 than	 to	 complain.	 Distraction	 is	 often	 useful,	 however.
Gaewha	says,	“What	are	we	hurrying	to	see?”



Gallat	shakes	his	head	impatiently,	but	answers.	As	Gaewha	planned,	he
walks	slower	so	 that	he	can	speak	 to	us,	which	allows	us	 to	walk	slower	as
well.	We	desperately	catch	our	breath.	“The	socket	where	this	fragment	was
grown.	You’ve	been	told	the	basics.	For	the	time	being	each	fragment	serves
as	the	power	plant	for	a	node	of	Syl	Anagist	–	taking	in	magic,	catalyzing	it,
returning	 some	 to	 the	 city	 and	 storing	 the	 surplus.	 Until	 the	 Engine	 is
activated,	of	course.”



Abruptly	 he	 stops,	 distracted	by	our	 surroundings.	We	have	 reached	 the
restricted	 zone	 around	 the	 base	 of	 the	 fragment	 –	 a	 three-tiered	 park	 with
some	 administrative	 buildings	 and	 a	 stop	 on	 the	 vehimal	 line	 that	 (we	 are
told)	 does	 a	 weekly	 run	 to	 Corepoint.	 It’s	 all	 very	 utilitarian,	 and	 a	 little
boring.



Still.	Above	us,	filling	the	sky	for	nearly	as	high	as	the	eye	can	see,	is	the
amethyst	fragment.	Despite	Gallat’s	impatience,	all	of	us	stop	and	stare	up	at
it	 in	 awe.	We	 live	 in	 its	 colored	 shadow,	 and	were	made	 to	 respond	 to	 its
needs	and	control	its	output.	It	is	us;	we	are	it.	Yet	rarely	do	we	get	to	see	it
like	 this,	 directly.	 The	 windows	 in	 our	 cells	 all	 point	 away	 from	 it.
(Connectivity,	 harmony,	 lines	 of	 sight	 and	 waveform	 efficiency;	 the
conductors	want	to	risk	no	accidental	activation.)	It	 is	a	magnificent	thing,	I
think,	both	in	its	physical	state	and	its	magical	superposition.	It	glows	in	the
latter	state,	crystalline	lattice	nearly	completely	charged	with	the	stored	magic
power	that	we	will	soon	use	to	ignite	Geoarcanity.	When	we	have	shunted	the
world’s	 power	 systems	 over	 from	 the	 limited	 storage-and-generation	 of	 the
obelisks	 to	 the	 unlimited	 streams	within	 the	 earth,	 and	when	Corepoint	 has
gone	fully	online	to	regulate	it,	and	when	the	world	has	finally	achieved	the
dream	of	Syl	Anagist’s	greatest	leaders	and	thinkers	—



—	well.	 Then	 I,	 and	 the	 others,	 will	 no	 longer	 be	 needed.	We	 hear	 so
many	 things	 about	 what	 will	 happen	 once	 the	 world	 has	 been	 freed	 from
scarcity	and	want.	People	 living	 forever.	Travel	 to	other	worlds,	 far	beyond
our	star.	The	conductors	have	assured	us	that	we	won’t	be	killed.	We	will	be
celebrated,	in	fact,	as	the	pinnacle	of	magestry,	and	as	living	representations
of	 what	 humanity	 can	 achieve.	 Is	 that	 not	 a	 thing	 to	 look	 forward	 to,	 our
veneration?	Should	we	not	be	proud?



But	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 I	 think	 of	what	 life	 I	might	want	 for	myself,	 if	 I
could	have	a	choice.	I	think	of	the	house	that	Gallat	lives	in:	huge,	beautiful,
cold.	I	think	of	Kelenli’s	house	in	the	garden,	which	is	small	and	surrounded
by	 small	 growing	magics.	 I	 think	 of	 living	with	Kelenli.	 Sitting	 at	 her	 feet
every	 night,	 speaking	with	 her	 as	much	 as	 I	want,	 in	 every	 language	 that	 I
know,	without	fear.	I	think	of	her	smiling	without	bitterness	and	this	thought
gives	 me	 incredible	 pleasure.	 Then	 I	 feel	 shame,	 as	 if	 I	 have	 no	 right	 to
imagine	these	things.



“Waste	 of	 time,”	 Gallat	 mutters,	 staring	 at	 the	 obelisk.	 I	 flinch,	 but	 he
does	not	notice.	“Well.	Here	it	is.	I’ve	no	idea	why	Kelenli	wanted	you	to	see
it,	but	now	you	see	it.”



We	admire	it	as	bidden.	“Can	we…	go	closer?”	Gaewha	asks.	Several	of
us	groan	through	the	earth;	our	legs	hurt	and	we	are	hungry.	But	she	replies
with	frustration.	While	we’re	here,	we	might	as	well	get	the	most	out	of	it.



As	 if	 in	 agreement,	 Gallat	 sighs	 and	 starts	 forward,	 walking	 down	 the
sloping	road	toward	the	base	of	the	amethyst,	where	it	has	been	firmly	lodged
in	its	socket	since	the	first	growth-medium	infusion.	I	have	seen	the	top	of	the
amethyst	 fragment,	 lost	 amid	 scuds	 of	 cloud	 and	 sometimes	 framed	 by	 the
white	light	of	the	Moon,	but	this	part	of	it	is	new	to	me.	About	its	base	are	the
transformer	pylons,	 I	know	from	what	 I	have	been	 taught,	which	siphon	off
some	of	 the	magic	 from	 the	generative	 furnace	 at	 the	 amethyst’s	 core.	This
magic	–	a	 tiny	 fraction	of	 the	 incredible	amount	 that	 the	Plutonic	Engine	 is
capable	of	producing	–	 is	 redistributed	via	countless	conduits	 to	houses	and
buildings	 and	 machinery	 and	 vehimal	 feeding	 stations	 throughout	 the	 city-
node.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 in	every	city-node	of	Syl	Anagist,	 all	over	 the	world	–
two	hundred	and	fifty-six	fragments	in	total.



My	attention	is	suddenly	caught	by	an	odd	sensation	–	the	strangest	thing
I	have	ever	sessed.	Something	diffuse…	something	nearby	generates	a	force
that…	 I	 shake	 my	 head	 and	 stop	 walking.	 “What	 is	 that?”	 I	 ask,	 before	 I
consider	whether	it	is	wise	to	speak	again,	with	Gallat	in	this	mood.



He	stops,	glowers	at	me,	then	apparently	understands	the	confusion	in	my
face.	“Oh,	I	suppose	you’re	close	enough	to	detect	it	here.	That’s	just	sinkline
feedback.”



“And	what	is	a	sinkline?”	asks	Remwha,	now	that	I	have	broken	the	ice.
This	causes	Gallat	to	glare	at	him	in	fractionally	increased	annoyance.	We	all
tense.



“Evil	Death,”	Gallat	 sighs	 at	 last.	 “Fine,	 easier	 to	 show	 than	 to	 explain.
Come	on.”



He	speeds	up	again,	and	this	time	none	of	us	dares	complain	even	though
we	 are	 pushing	 our	 aching	 legs	 on	 low	 blood	 sugar	 and	 some	 dehydration.
Following	Gallat,	we	reach	the	bottommost	tier,	cross	the	vehimal	track,	and
pass	between	two	of	the	huge,	humming	pylons.



And	there…	we	are	destroyed.



Beyond	 the	 pylons,	 Conductor	 Gallat	 explains	 to	 us	 in	 a	 tone	 of
unconcealed	 impatience,	 is	 the	 start-up	 and	 translation	 system	 for	 the
fragment.	He	slips	into	a	detailed	technical	explanation	that	we	absorb	but	do
not	really	hear.	Our	network,	the	nigh-constant	system	of	connections	through
which	 we	 six	 communicate	 and	 assess	 each	 other’s	 health	 and	 rumble
warnings	or	reassure	with	songs	of	comfort,	has	gone	utterly	silent	and	still.
This	is	shock.	This	is	horror.



The	 gist	 of	 Gallat’s	 explanation	 is	 this:	 The	 fragments	 could	 not	 have
begun	the	generation	of	magic	on	their	own,	decades	ago	when	they	were	first
grown.	Nonliving,	inorganic	things	like	crystal	are	inert	to	magic.	Therefore,
in	order	to	help	the	fragments	initiate	the	generative	cycle,	raw	magic	must	be
used	as	a	catalyst.	Every	engine	needs	a	starter.	Enter	the	sinklines:	They	look
like	 vines,	 thick	 and	 gnarled,	 twisting	 and	 curling	 to	 form	 a	 lifelike	 thicket
around	the	fragment’s	base.	And	ensnared	in	these	vines	—



We’re	 going	 to	 see	 them,	 Kelenli	 told	me,	 when	 I	 asked	 her	 where	 the
Niess	were.



They	are	still	alive,	I	know	at	once.	Though	they	sprawl	motionless	amid
the	thicket	of	vines	(lying	atop	the	vines,	twisted	among	them,	wrapped	up	in
them,	speared	by	them	where	the	vines	grow	through	flesh),	it	 is	impossible
not	to	sess	the	delicate	threads	of	silver	darting	between	the	cells	of	this	one’s
hand,	or	dancing	along	the	hairs	of	that	one’s	back.	Some	of	them	we	can	see
breathing,	 though	 the	motion	 is	 so	 very	 slow.	Many	wear	 tattered	 rags	 for
clothes,	dry-rotted	with	years;	a	few	are	naked.	Their	hair	and	nails	have	not
grown,	 and	 their	 bodies	 have	 not	 produced	waste	 that	we	 can	 see.	Nor	 can
they	 feel	 pain,	 I	 sense	 instinctively;	 this,	 at	 least,	 is	 a	 kindness.	 That	 is
because	the	sinklines	take	all	the	magic	of	life	from	them	save	the	bare	trickle
needed	to	keep	them	alive.	Keeping	them	alive	keeps	them	generating	more.



It	 is	 the	 briar	 patch.	Back	when	we	were	 newly	 decanted,	 still	 learning
how	 to	 use	 the	 language	 that	 had	 been	 written	 into	 our	 brains	 during	 the
growth	phase,	one	of	the	conductors	told	us	a	story	about	where	we	would	be
sent	if	we	became	unable	to	work	for	some	reason.	That	was	when	there	were
fourteen	of	us.	We	would	be	retired,	she	said,	to	a	place	where	we	could	still
serve	 the	 project	 indirectly.	 “It’s	 peaceful	 there,”	 the	 conductor	 said.	 I
remember	it	clearly.	She	smiled	as	she	said	it.	“You’ll	see.”



The	 briar	 patch’s	 victims	 have	 been	 here	 for	 years.	Decades.	 There	 are
hundreds	 of	 them	 in	 view,	 and	 thousands	more	 out	 of	 sight	 if	 the	 sinkline
thicket	 extends	 all	 the	 way	 around	 the	 amethyst’s	 base.	 Millions,	 when
multiplied	 by	 two	 hundred	 and	 fifty-six.	 We	 cannot	 see	 Tetlewha,	 or	 the
others,	but	we	know	 that	 they,	 too,	 are	here	 somewhere.	Still	 alive,	 and	yet
not.



Gallat	 finishes	up	as	we	stare	 in	silence.	“So	after	system	priming,	once
the	 generative	 cycle	 is	 established,	 there’s	 only	 an	 occasional	 need	 to
reprime.”	He	sighs,	bored	with	his	own	voice.	We	stare	in	silence.	“Sinklines
store	magic	 against	 any	possible	 need.	On	Launch	Day,	 each	 sink	 reservoir
should	 have	 approximately	 thirty-seven	 lammotyrs	 stored,	 which	 is	 three
times…”



He	stops.	Sighs.	Pinches	the	bridge	of	his	nose.	“There’s	no	point	to	this.
She’s	playing	you,	fool.”	It	is	as	if	he	does	not	see	what	we’re	seeing.	As	if
these	stored,	componentized	lives	mean	nothing	to	him.	“Enough.	It’s	time	we
got	all	of	you	back	to	the	compound.”



So	we	go	home.



And	we	begin,	at	last,	to	plan.
***

Thresh	them	in
Line	them	neat
Make	them	part	of	the	winter	wheat!
Tamp	them	down
Shut	them	up
Just	a	hop,	a	skip,	and	a	jump!
Seal	those	tongues
Shut	those	eyes
Never	you	stop	until	they	cry!
Nothing	you	hear
Not	one	you’ll	see
This	is	the	way	to	our	victory!

—	Pre-Sanze	children’s	rhyme	popular	in	Yumenes,	Haltolee,
Nianon,	and	Ewech	Quartents,	origin	unknown.	Many	variants	exist.

This	appears	to	be	the	baseline	text.



11
you’re	almost	home

The	guards	at	the	node	station	actually	seem	to	think	they	can	fight	when	you
and	the	other	Castrimans	walk	out	of	the	ashfall.	You	suppose	that	the	lot	of
you	do	 look	like	a	larger-than-usual	raider	band,	given	your	ashy,	acid-worn
clothing	and	skeletal	looks.	Ykka	doesn’t	even	have	time	to	get	Danel	to	try
to	 talk	 them	down	before	 they	start	 firing	crossbows.	They’re	 terrible	shots,
which	is	lucky	for	you;	the	law	of	averages	is	on	their	side,	which	isn’t.	Three
Castrimans	go	down	beneath	 the	bolts	before	you	 realize	Ykka	hasn’t	got	a
clue	how	 to	use	a	 torus	as	a	 shield	–	but	after	you’ve	 remembered	 that	you
can’t	do	it,	either,	without	Consequences.	So	you	shout	at	Maxixe	and	he	does
it	 with	 diamond	 precision,	 shredding	 the	 incoming	 bolts	 into	wood-flecked
snow,	not	so	differently	from	the	way	you	started	things	off	in	Tirimo	that	last
day.



He’s	not	as	skilled	now	as	you	were	then.	Part	of	the	torus	remains	around
him;	he	just	stretches	and	reshapes	its	forward	edge	to	form	a	barrier	between
Castrima	and	the	big	scoria	gates	of	 the	node	station.	Fortunately	 there’s	no
one	in	front	of	him	(after	you	shouted	at	people	to	get	out	of	the	way).	Then
with	a	final	flick	of	redirected	kinetics	he	smashes	the	gates	apart	and	ices	the
crossbow	wielders	before	letting	the	torus	spin	away.	Then	while	Castrima’s
Strongbacks	 charge	 in	 and	 take	 care	 of	 things,	 you	 go	 over	 to	 find	Maxixe
sprawled	in	the	wagon	bed,	panting.



“Sloppy,”	you	say,	catching	one	of	his	hands	and	pulling	it	 to	you,	since
you	can’t	exactly	chafe	it	between	your	own.	You	can	feel	the	cold	of	his	skin
through	four	layers	of	clothing.	“Should’ve	anchored	that	torus	ten	feet	away,
at	least.”



He	 grumbles,	 eyes	 drifting	 shut.	His	 stamina’s	 gone	 completely	 to	 rust,
but	that’s	probably	because	starvation	and	orogeny	don’t	mix	well.	“Haven’t
needed	 to	do	anything	 fancier	 than	 just	 freeze	people,	 for	a	couple	of	years
now.”	Then	he	glowers	at	you.	“You	didn’t	bother,	I	see.”



You	smile	wearily.	“That’s	because	I	knew	you	had	it.”	Then	you	scrape
away	a	patch	of	 ice	 from	 the	wagon	bed	so	you	can	have	somewhere	 to	 sit
until	the	fighting’s	done.



When	it’s	over,	you	pat	Maxixe	–	who’s	fallen	asleep	–	and	then	get	up	to
go	 find	 Ykka.	 She’s	 just	 inside	 the	 gates	 with	 Esni	 and	 a	 couple	 of	 other
Strongbacks,	 all	 of	 them	 looking	 at	 the	 tiny	 paddock	 in	 wonder.	 There’s	 a
goat	in	there,	eying	everyone	with	indifference	as	it	chews	on	some	hay.	You
haven’t	seen	a	goat	since	Tirimo.



First	 things	 first,	 though.	 “Make	 sure	 they	 don’t	 kill	 the	 doctor,	 or
doctors,”	you	say	to	Ykka	and	Esni.	“They’re	probably	barricaded	in	with	the
node	maintainer.	 Lerna	 won’t	 know	 how	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the	 maintainer;	 it
takes	special	skills.”	You	pause.	“If	you’re	still	committed	to	this	plan.”



Ykka	nods	and	glances	at	Esni,	who	nods	and	glances	at	another	woman,
who	eyeballs	a	young	man,	who	 then	 runs	 into	 the	node	 facility.	 “What	are
the	chances	the	doctor	will	kill	the	maintainer?”	Esni	asks.	“For	mercy?”



You	resist	the	urge	to	say,	Mercy	is	for	people.	That	way	of	thinking	needs
to	die,	even	if	you’re	thinking	it	in	bitterness.	“Slim.	Explain	through	the	door
that	you’re	not	planning	to	kill	anyone	who	surrenders,	if	you	think	that	will
help.”	Esni	sends	another	runner	to	do	this.



“Of	course	I’m	still	committed	to	the	plan,”	Ykka	says.	She’s	rubbing	her
face,	leaving	streaks	in	the	ash.	Beneath	the	ash	there’s	just	more	ash,	deeper
ingrained.	 You’re	 forgetting	 what	 her	 natural	 coloring	 looks	 like,	 and	 you
can’t	 tell	 if	 she’s	 wearing	 eye	 makeup	 anymore.	 “I	 mean,	 most	 of	 us	 can
handle	shakes	in	a	controlled	way,	even	the	kids	by	now,	but…”	She	looks	up
at	 the	 sky.	 “Well.	 There’s	 that.”	 You	 follow	 her	 gaze,	 but	 you	 know	 what
you’ll	see	already.	You’ve	been	trying	not	to	see	it.	Everyone	has	been.



The	Rifting.



On	this	side	of	the	Merz,	the	sky	doesn’t	exist.	Further	south,	the	ash	that
the	Rifting	pumps	forth	has	had	time	to	rise	into	the	atmosphere	and	thin	out
somewhat,	forming	the	rippling	clouds	that	have	dominated	the	sky	as	you’ve
known	 it	 for	 the	past	 two	years.	Here,	 though.	Here	you	 try	 to	 look	up,	but
before	you	even	get	to	the	sky,	what	grabs	your	eyes	is	something	like	a	slow-
boiling	wall	of	black	and	red	across	 the	entire	visible	northern	horizon.	In	a
volcano,	 what	 you’re	 seeing	 would	 be	 called	 an	 eruption	 column,	 but	 the
Rifting	 is	not	 just	some	solitary	vent.	 It	 is	a	 thousand	volcanoes	put	end-to-
end,	an	unbroken	line	of	earthfire	and	chaos	from	one	coast	of	the	Stillness	to
the	other.	Tonkee’s	been	trying	to	get	everyone	to	call	what	you’re	seeing	by
its	proper	term:	Pyrocumulonimbus,	a	massive	stormwall	cloud	of	ash	and	fire
and	lightning.	You’ve	already	heard	people	using	a	different	term,	however	–
simply,	the	Wall.	You	think	that’s	going	to	stick.	You	suspect,	 in	fact,	 that	 if
anybody’s	still	alive	in	a	generation	or	two	to	name	this	Season,	they’ll	call	it
something	like	the	Season	of	the	Wall.



You	 can	 hear	 it,	 faint	 but	 omnipresent.	 A	 rumble	 in	 the	 earth.	 A	 low,
ceaseless	snarl	against	your	middle	ear.	The	Rifting	isn’t	just	a	shake;	it	is	the
still-ongoing,	 dynamic	 divergence	 of	 two	 tectonic	 plates	 along	 a	 newly
created	fault	line.	The	aftershakes	from	the	initial	Rifting	won’t	stop	for	years.
Your	sessapinae	have	been	all	a-jangle	for	days	now,	warning	you	to	brace	or
run,	 twitching	with	 the	 need	 to	do	something	 about	 the	 seismic	 threat.	You
know	 better,	 but	 here’s	 the	 problem:	 Every	 orogene	 in	 Castrima	 is	 sessing
what	you’re	sessing.	Feeling	the	same	twitchy	urge	to	react.	And	unless	they
happen	 to	 be	 Fulcrum-precise	 highringers	 able	 to	 yoke	 other	 highringers
before	 activating	 an	 ancient	 network	 of	 deadciv	 artifacts,	 doing	 something
will	kill	them.



So	Ykka	is	now	coming	to	terms	with	a	truth	you’ve	understood	since	you
woke	 up	with	 a	 stone	 arm:	To	 survive	 in	Rennanis,	Castrima	will	 need	 the
node	maintainers.	 It	 will	 need	 to	 take	 care	 of	 them.	And	when	 those	 node
maintainers	 die,	 Castrima	will	 need	 to	 find	 some	way	 to	 replace	 them.	No
one’s	talking	about	that	last	part	yet.	First	things	first.



After	 a	 while,	 Ykka	 sighs	 and	 glances	 at	 the	 open	 doorway	 of	 the
building.	“Sounds	like	the	fighting’s	done.”



“Sounds	 like,”	 you	 say.	Silence	 stretches.	A	muscle	 in	 her	 jaw	 tightens.
You	add,	“I’ll	go	with	you.”



She	glances	at	you.	“You	don’t	have	to.”	You’ve	told	her	about	your	first
time	seeing	a	node	maintainer.	She	heard	the	still-fresh	horror	in	your	voice.



But	no.	Alabaster	showed	you	the	way,	and	you	no	longer	shirk	the	duty
he’s	bestowed	upon	you.	You’ll	 turn	the	maintainer’s	head,	 let	Ykka	see	the
scarring	in	the	back,	explain	about	the	lesioning	process.	You’ll	need	to	show
her	 how	 the	wire	minimizes	 bedsores.	 Because	 if	 she’s	 going	 to	make	 this
choice,	then	she	needs	to	know	exactly	what	price	she	–	and	Castrima	–	must
pay.



You	will	do	this	–	make	her	see	these	things,	make	yourself	face	it	again,
because	this	is	the	whole	truth	of	what	orogenes	are.	The	Stillness	fears	your
kind	 for	 good	 reason,	 true.	 Yet	 it	 should	 also	 revere	 your	 kind	 for	 good
reason,	and	it	has	chosen	to	do	only	one	of	these	things.	Ykka,	of	all	people,
needs	to	hear	everything.



Her	jaw	tightens,	but	she	nods.	Esni	watches	you	both,	curious,	but	then
she	 shrugs	 and	 turns	 away	 as	 you	 and	 Ykka	 walk	 into	 the	 node	 facility,
together.

***
The	node	has	a	fully	stocked	storeroom,	which	you	guess	 is	meant	 to	be	an
auxiliary	 storage	 site	 for	 the	 comm	 itself.	 It’s	 more	 than	 even	 hungry,
commless	 Castrima	 can	 eat,	 and	 it	 includes	 things	 everyone’s	 been
increasingly	desperate	for,	like	dried	red	and	yellow	fruit	and	canned	greens.
Ykka	 stops	 people	 from	 turning	 the	 occasion	 into	 an	 impromptu	 feast	 –
you’ve	still	got	 to	make	the	stores	 last	for	Earth	knows	how	long	–	but	 that
doesn’t	prevent	the	bulk	of	the	comm	from	getting	into	a	nearly	festive	mood
as	everyone	bunkers	for	the	night	with	full	bellies	for	the	first	time	in	months.



Ykka	 posts	 guards	 at	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 node	 maintainer’s	 chamber	 –
“Nobody	but	us	needs	to	see	that	shit,”	she	declares,	and	by	this	you	suspect
that	 she	 doesn’t	 want	 any	 of	 the	 comm’s	 stills	 getting	 ideas	 –	 and	 on	 the
storeroom.	She	puts	a	triple	guard	on	the	goat.	There’s	an	Innovator	girl	from
a	farming	comm	who’s	been	assigned	to	figure	out	how	to	milk	the	creature;
she	manages.	The	pregnant	woman,	who	lost	one	of	her	household	mates	in
the	desert,	gets	first	dibs	on	the	milk.	This	might	be	pointless.	Starvation	and
pregnancy	don’t	mesh,	 either,	 and	 she	 says	 the	 baby	hasn’t	moved	 in	 days.
Probably	best	 that	she	 lose	 it	now,	 if	she’s	going	 to,	here	where	Lerna’s	got
antibiotics	and	sterile	instruments	available	and	can	at	least	save	the	mother’s
life.	Still,	you	 see	her	 take	 the	 little	pot	of	milk	when	 it’s	given	 to	her,	 and
drink	it	down	even	though	she	grimaces	at	the	taste.	Her	jaw	is	set	and	hard.
There’s	a	chance.	That’s	what	matters.



Ykka	also	sets	up	monitors	at	the	node	station’s	shower	room.	They’re	not
guards,	exactly,	but	they’re	necessary,	because	a	lot	of	people	in	Castrima	are
from	rough	little	Midlatter	comms	and	they	don’t	know	how	indoor	plumbing
works.	Also,	some	people	have	been	just	standing	under	the	hot	spray	for	an
hour	 or	more,	 weeping	 as	 the	 ash	 and	 leftover	 desert	 sand	 comes	 off	 their
acid-dried	 skins.	Now,	 after	 ten	minutes,	 the	monitors	 gently	 nudge	 people
out	 and	 over	 to	 benches	 along	 the	 sides	 of	 the	 room,	where	 they	 can	 keep
crying	while	others	get	their	turn.



You	 take	 a	 shower	 and	 feel	 nothing,	 except	 clean.	 When	 you	 claim	 a
corner	of	the	station’s	mess	hall	–	which	has	been	emptied	of	furnishings	so
that	 several	 hundred	 people	 can	 sleep	 ash-free	 for	 the	 night	 –	 you	 sit	 there
atop	your	bedroll,	leaning	against	the	scoria	wall,	letting	your	thoughts	drift.
It’s	impossible	not	to	notice	the	mountain	lurking	within	the	stone	just	behind
you.	You	don’t	call	him	out	because	the	other	people	of	Castrima	are	leery	of
Hoa.	 He’s	 the	 only	 stone	 eater	 still	 around,	 and	 they	 remember	 that	 stone
eaters	 are	not	neutral,	harmless	parties.	You	do	 reach	back	and	pat	 the	wall
with	 your	 one	 hand,	 however.	 The	 mountain	 stirs	 a	 little,	 and	 you	 feel
something	–	a	hard	nudge	–	against	the	small	of	your	back.	Message	received
and	returned.	It’s	surprising	how	good	this	private	moment	of	contact	makes
you	feel.



You	need	 to	 feel	 again,	 you	 think,	 as	 you	watch	 a	dozen	 small	 tableaus
play	out	before	you.	Two	women	argue	over	which	of	them	gets	to	eat	the	last
piece	of	dried	fruit	in	their	comm	share.	Two	men,	just	beyond	them,	furtively
exchange	 whispers	 while	 one	 passes	 over	 a	 small	 soft	 sponge	 –	 the	 kind
Equatorials	like	to	use	for	wiping	after	defecation.	Everyone	likes	their	little
luxuries,	 when	 fortune	 provides.	 Temell,	 the	 man	 who	 now	 teaches	 the
comm’s	orogene	children,	lies	buried	in	them	as	he	snores	on	his	bedroll.	One
boy	is	nestled	in	a	curl	at	his	belly;	meanwhile,	Penty’s	sock-clad	foot	rests	on
the	back	of	his	neck.	Across	the	room,	Tonkee	stands	with	Hjarka	–	or	rather,
Hjarka’s	 holding	 her	 hands	 and	 trying	 to	 coax	 her	 into	 some	 kind	 of	 slow
dance,	while	Tonkee	stands	still	and	tries	to	just	roll	her	eyes	and	not	smile.



You’re	not	sure	where	Ykka	is.	Probably	spending	the	night	in	one	of	the
sheds	or	 tents	outside,	knowing	her,	but	you	hope	she	lets	one	of	her	 lovers
stay	with	her	this	time.	She’s	got	a	rotating	stable	of	young	women	and	men,
some	of	 them	 time-sharing	with	 other	 partners	 and	 some	 singles	who	don’t
seem	to	mind	Ykka	using	 them	for	occasional	stress	 relief.	Ykka	needs	 that
now.	Castrima	needs	to	take	care	of	its	headwoman.



Castrima	needs,	and	you	need,	and	just	as	you	think	this,	Lerna	comes	out
of	nowhere	and	settles	beside	you.



“Had	 to	 end	Chetha,”	 he	 says	 quietly.	 Chetha,	 you	 know,	 is	 one	 of	 the
three	Strongbacks	shot	by	 the	Rennies	–	 ironically,	a	former	Rennie	herself,
conscripted	 into	 the	 army	 along	 with	 Danel.	 “The	 other	 two	 will	 make	 it,
probably,	but	the	bolt	perforated	Chetha’s	bowel.	It	would’ve	been	slow	and
awful.	 Plenty	 of	 painkillers	 here,	 though.”	 He	 sighs	 and	 rubs	 his	 eyes.
“You’ve	seen	that…	thing…	in	the	wire	chair.”



You	 nod,	 hesitate,	 then	 reach	 for	 his	 hand.	 He’s	 not	 particularly
affectionate,	you’ve	been	relieved	to	discover,	but	he	does	need	little	gestures
sometimes.	A	 reminder	 that	he	 is	not	 alone,	 and	 that	 all	 is	not	hopeless.	To
this	end	you	say,	“If	I	succeed	in	shutting	down	the	Rifting,	you	may	not	need
to	keep	the	node	maintainers.”	You’re	not	sure	that’s	true,	but	you	hope	it	is.



He	clasps	your	hand	lightly.	It’s	been	fascinating	to	realize	that	he	never
initiates	 contact	 between	you.	He	waits	 for	 you	 to	 offer,	 and	 then	he	meets
your	 gestures	 with	 as	 much	 or	 as	 little	 intensity	 as	 you’ve	 brought	 to	 the
effort.	Respecting	your	boundaries,	which	are	sharp-edged	and	hair-triggered.
You	 never	 knew	 he	 was	 so	 observant,	 all	 these	 years	 –	 but	 then,	 you
should’ve	guessed.	He	figured	out	you	were	an	orogene	just	by	watching	you,
years	ago.	Innon	would’ve	liked	him,	you	decide.



As	 if	he	has	heard	your	 thoughts,	Lerna	 then	 looks	over	at	you,	and	his
gaze	is	troubled.



“I’ve	been	thinking	about	not	telling	you	something,”	he	says.	“Or	rather,
not	pointing	out	something	you’ve	probably	chosen	not	to	notice.”



“What	an	opening.”



He	smiles	a	 little,	 then	sighs	and	 looks	down	at	your	clasped	hands,	 the
smile	fading.	The	moment	attenuates;	the	tension	grows	in	you,	because	this
is	so	unlike	him.	Finally,	 though,	he	sighs.	“How	long	has	it	been	since	you
last	menstruated?”



“How	—”	You	stop	talking.



Shit.



Shit.	



In	your	silence,	Lerna	sighs	and	leans	his	head	back	against	the	wall.



You	 try	 to	 make	 excuses	 in	 your	 own	 head.	 Starvation.	 Extraordinary
physical	effort.	You’re	forty-four	years	old	–	you	think.	Can’t	remember	what
month	 it	 is.	The	chances	are	 slimmer	 than	Castrima’s	were	of	 surviving	 the
desert.	But…	your	menses	 have	 run	 strong	 and	 regular	 for	 your	 entire	 life,
stopping	 only	 on	 three	 prior	 occasions.	 Three	 significant	 occasions.	 That’s
why	 the	 Fulcrum	 decided	 to	 breed	 you.	 Half-decent	 orogeny,	 and	 good
Midlatter	hips.



You	knew.	Lerna’s	right.	On	some	level,	you	noticed.	And	then	chose	not
to	notice,	because	—



Lerna	 has	 been	 silent	 beside	 you	 for	 some	 while,	 watching	 the	 comm
unwind,	 his	 hand	 limp	 in	 yours.	 Very	 softly	 he	 says,	 “Am	 I	 correct	 in
understanding	that	you	need	to	finish	your	business	at	Corepoint	within	a	time
frame?”



His	tone	is	too	formal.	You	sigh,	shutting	your	eyes.	“Yes.”



“Soon?”



Hoa	has	told	you	that	perigee	–	when	the	Moon	is	closest	–	will	be	in	a
few	days.	After	that,	it	will	pass	the	Earth	and	pick	up	velocity,	slingshotting
back	 into	 the	 distant	 stars	 or	 wherever	 it’s	 been	 all	 this	 time.	 If	 you	 don’t
catch	it	now,	you	won’t.



“Yes,”	you	say.	You’re	tired.	You…	hurt.	“Very	soon.”



It	is	a	thing	you	haven’t	discussed,	and	probably	should	have	for	the	sake
of	your	relationship.	It	is	a	thing	you	never	needed	to	discuss,	because	there
was	nothing	 to	be	 said.	Lerna	 says,	 “Using	all	 the	obelisks	once	did	 that	 to
your	arm.”



You	glance	at	the	stump	unnecessarily.	“Yes.”	You	know	where	he’s	going
with	the	conversation,	so	you	decide	to	skip	to	the	end.	“You’re	the	one	who
asked	what	I	was	going	to	do	about	the	Season.”



He	sighs.	“I	was	angry.”



“But	not	wrong.”



His	hand	twitches	a	little	on	your	own.	“What	if	I	asked	you	not	to	do	it?”



You	don’t	laugh.	If	you	did,	it	would	be	bitter,	and	he	doesn’t	deserve	that.
Instead,	you	sigh	and	shift	 to	 lie	down,	pushing	him	until	he	does	 the	same
thing.	He’s	a	 little	shorter	 than	you,	so	you’re	 the	big	spoon.	This	of	course
puts	your	face	in	his	gray	hair,	but	he’s	availed	himself	of	the	shower,	too,	so
you	don’t	mind.	He	smells	good.	Healthy.



“You	wouldn’t	ask,”	you	say	against	his	scalp.



“But	what	if	I	did?”	It’s	weary	and	heatless.	He	doesn’t	mean	it.



You	kiss	the	back	of	his	neck.	“I’d	say,	‘Okay,’	and	then	there	would	be
three	of	us,	and	we’d	all	stay	together	until	we	die	of	ash	lung.”



He	 takes	your	hand	 again.	You	didn’t	 initiate	 it	 this	 time,	 but	 it	 doesn’t
bother	you.	“Promise,”	he	says.



He	doesn’t	wait	for	your	answer	before	falling	asleep.
***

Four	days	later,	you	reach	Rennanis.



The	good	news	is	that	you’re	no	longer	plagued	by	ashfall.	The	Rifting’s
too	close,	and	the	Wall	is	busy	carrying	the	lighter	particulates	upward;	you’ll
never	 have	 to	 worry	 about	 that	 again.	What	 you	 have	 instead	 are	 periodic
gusts	 laden	with	 incendiary	material	 –	 lapilli,	 tiny	 bits	 of	 volcanic	material
that	are	too	big	to	inhale	easily	but	are	still	burning	as	they	come	down.	Danel
says	the	Rennies	called	it	sparkfall,	and	that	it’s	mostly	harmless,	though	you
should	keep	spare	canteens	of	water	situated	at	strategic	points	throughout	the
caravan	in	case	any	of	the	sparks	should	catch	and	smolder.



More	 dramatic	 than	 the	 sparkfall,	 however,	 is	 the	way	 lightning	 dances
over	the	city’s	skyline,	this	close	to	the	Wall.	The	Innovators	are	excited	about
this.	Tonkee	says	there	are	all	sorts	of	uses	for	reliable	lightning.	(This	would
have	made	you	stare	at	her,	if	it	hadn’t	come	from	Tonkee.)	None	of	it	strikes
the	ground,	though	–	only	the	taller	buildings,	which	have	all	been	fitted	with
lightning	rods	by	the	city’s	previous	denizens.	It’s	harmless.	You’ll	just	have
to	get	used	to	it.



Rennanis	 isn’t	 what	 you	 were	 expecting,	 quite.	 Oh,	 it’s	 a	 huge	 city:
Equatorial	styling	all	over	the	place,	still-functioning	hydro	and	filtered	well
water	 running	 smoothly,	 tall	 black	 obsidian	 walls	 etched	 over	 with	 dire
images	of	what	happens	 to	 the	 city’s	 enemies.	 Its	buildings	aren’t	nearly	 as
beautiful	 or	 impressive	 as	 those	 of	 Yumenes,	 but	 then	 Yumenes	 was	 the
greatest	of	the	Equatorial	cities,	and	Rennanis	barely	merited	the	title.	“Only
half	a	million	people,”	you	remember	someone	sneering,	a	lifetime	ago.	But
two	 lives	 ago,	 you	 were	 born	 in	 a	 humble	 Nomidlats	 village,	 and	 to	 what
remains	of	Damaya,	Rennanis	is	still	a	sight	to	behold.



There	 are	 less	 than	 a	 thousand	 of	 you	 to	 occupy	 a	 city	 that	 once	 held
hundreds	of	thousands.	Ykka	orders	everyone	to	take	over	a	small	complex	of
buildings	 near	 one	 of	 the	 city’s	 greenlands.	 (It	 has	 sixteen.)	 The	 former
inhabitants	 have	 conveniently	 labeled	 the	 city’s	 buildings	with	 a	 color	 code
based	on	 their	 structural	 soundness,	 since	 the	city	didn’t	 survive	 the	Rifting
entirely	unscathed.	Buildings	marked	with	a	green	X	are	known	to	be	safe.	A
yellow	 X	 means	 damage	 that	 could	 spell	 a	 collapse,	 especially	 if	 another
major	shake	hits	the	city.	Red-marked	buildings	are	noticeably	damaged	and
dangerous,	 though	 you	 see	 signs	 that	 they	 were	 inhabited,	 too,	 perhaps	 by
those	willing	to	take	any	shelter	rather	than	be	ashed	out.	There	are	more	than
enough	green-X	 buildings	 for	Castrima,	 so	 every	 household	 gets	 its	 pick	 of
apartments	that	are	furnished,	sound,	and	still	have	working	hydro	and	geo.



There	are	several	wild	flocks	of	chickens	running	about,	and	more	goats,
which	 have	 actually	 been	 breeding.	 The	 greenlands’	 crops	 are	 all	 dead,
however,	 having	gone	months	unwatered	 and	untended	between	you	killing
the	Rennies	and	Castrima’s	arrival.	Despite	this,	 the	seed	stocks	contain	lots
of	dandelion	and	other	hardy,	low-light-tolerant	edibles,	including	Equatorial
staples	 like	 taro.	 Meanwhile,	 the	 city’s	 storecaches	 are	 overflowing	 with
cachebread,	 cheeses,	 fat-flecked	 spicy	 sausages,	 grains	 and	 fruit,	 herbs	 and
leaves	preserved	in	oil,	more.	Some	of	it’s	fresher	than	the	rest,	brought	back
by	the	marauding	army.	All	of	it	is	more	than	the	people	of	Castrima	could	eat
if	they	threw	a	feast	every	night	for	the	next	ten	years.



It’s	amazing.	But	there	are	a	few	catches.



The	first	 is	 that	 it’s	more	complicated	 to	 run	Rennanis’s	water	 treatment
facility	 than	anyone	expected.	 It’s	 running	automatically	and	 thus	 far	hasn’t
broken	down,	but	no	one	knows	how	to	work	the	machinery	if	it	does.	Ykka
sets	 the	 Innovators	 to	 the	 task	 of	 figuring	 that	 out,	 or	 coming	 up	 with	 a
workable	 alternative	 if	 the	 equipment	 fails.	 Tonkee	 is	 highly	 annoyed:	 “I
trained	for	six	years	at	Seventh	to	learn	how	to	clean	shit	out	of	sewer	water?”
But	despite	her	complaining,	she’s	on	it.



The	second	catch	is	that	Castrima	cannot	possibly	guard	the	city’s	walls.
The	city	is	simply	too	big,	and	there	are	too	few	of	you.	You’re	protected,	for
now,	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 no	 one	 comes	 north	 if	 they	 can	 possibly	 help	 it.	 If
anyone	 does	 come	 a-conquering,	 however,	 nothing	 will	 stand	 between	 the
comm	and	conquest	except	its	wall.



There’s	no	solution	to	this	problem.	Even	orogenes	can	only	do	so	much
in	 the	 martial	 sense,	 here	 in	 the	 shadow	 of	 the	 Rifting	 where	 orogeny	 is
dangerous.	Danel’s	army	was	Rennanis’s	surplus	population,	and	it’s	currently
feeding	 a	 boilbug	 boom	down	 in	 the	 southeastern	Midlats	 –	 not	 that	 you’d
want	 them	 here,	 anyway,	 treating	 you	 like	 the	 interlopers	 you	 are.	 Ykka
orders	 the	Breeders	 to	 ramp	up	 to	 replacement-level	production,	but	even	 if
they	 recruit	 every	 healthy	 comm	 member	 to	 assist,	 Castrima	 won’t	 have
enough	people	to	secure	the	comm	for	generations.	Nothing	to	do	but	at	least
guard	the	portion	of	the	city	that	the	comm	now	occupies,	as	best	you	can.



“And	 if	 another	 army	 comes	 along,”	 you	 catch	Ykka	muttering,	 “we’ll
just	invite	them	in	and	assign	them	each	a	room.	That	ought	to	settle	it.”



The	third	catch	–	and	the	biggest	one,	existentially	if	not	logistically	–	is
this:	Castrima	must	live	amid	the	corpses	of	its	conquered.



The	 statues	 are	 everywhere.	 Standing	 in	 apartment	 kitchens	 washing
dishes.	Lying	in	beds	that	have	sagged	or	broken	beneath	their	stone	weight.
Walking	up	 the	parapet	 steps	 to	 take	over	 from	other	 statues	on	guard	duty.
Sitting	in	communal	kitchens	sipping	tea	long	since	dried	to	dregs.	They	are
beautiful	 in	 their	 way,	 with	 wild	 smoky-quartz	 manes	 of	 hair	 and	 smooth
jasper	skin	and	clothes	of	 tourmaline	or	 turquoise	or	garnet	or	citrine.	They
wear	expressions	that	are	smiles	or	eye	rolls	or	yawns	of	boredom	–	because
the	 shockwave	 of	 Obelisk	 Gate	 power	 that	 transformed	 them	 was	 fast,
mercifully.	They	didn’t	even	have	time	to	be	afraid.



The	first	day,	everyone	edges	around	the	statues.	Tries	not	 to	sit	 in	 their
line	of	sight.	To	do	anything	else	would	be…	disrespectful.	And	yet.	Castrima
has	 survived	 both	 a	 war	 that	 these	 people	 initiated,	 and	 life	 as	 that	 war’s
refugees.	 It	 would	 be	 equally	 disrespectful	 of	 Castrima’s	 dead	 to	 let	 guilt
eclipse	 this	 truth.	So	after	a	day	or	 two,	people	start	 to	simply…	accept	 the
statues.	Can’t	do	anything	else,	really.



Something	about	it	bothers	you,	though.



You	find	yourself	wandering	one	night.	There’s	a	yellow-X	building	that’s
not	 too	 far	 from	 the	 complex,	 and	 it’s	 beautiful,	 with	 a	 facade	 covered	 in
etched	vinework	and	 floral	motifs,	 some	glimmering	with	peeling	gold	 foil.
The	 foil	 catches	 the	 light	 and	 flickers	 a	 little	 as	 you	 move,	 its	 angles	 of
reflection	shifting	to	create	the	overall	illusion	of	a	building	covered	in	living,
moving	greenery.	It’s	an	older	building	than	most	of	those	in	Rennanis.	You
like	 it,	 though	you’re	not	 sure	why.	You	go	up	 to	 the	 roof,	 finding	only	 the
usual	 apartments	 inhabited	 by	 statues	 along	 the	 way.	 The	 door	 here	 is
unlocked	and	stands	open;	maybe	someone	was	on	the	roof	when	the	Rifting
struck.	You	 check	 to	make	 sure	 there’s	 a	 lightning	 rod	 in	 place	 before	 you
step	through	the	door,	of	course;	this	is	one	of	the	taller	buildings	of	the	city,
though	it’s	only	six	or	seven	stories	altogether.	 (Only,	sneers	Syenite.	Only?
thinks	 Damaya,	 in	 wonder.	 Yes,	 only,	 you	 snap	 at	 both,	 to	 shut	 them	 up.)
There’s	not	only	a	rod,	there’s	an	empty	water	tower,	so	as	long	as	you	don’t
go	leaning	on	any	metal	surfaces	or	linger	in	the	rod’s	immediate	vicinity,	you
probably	won’t	die.	Probably.



And	here,	poised	to	face	the	Rifting	cloudwall	as	if	he	were	built	up	here,
gazing	north	since	the	building’s	floral	motifs	were	new,	Hoa	awaits.



“There	 aren’t	 as	many	 statues	 here	 as	 there	 should	 be,”	 you	 say	 as	 you
stop	beside	him.



You	 can’t	 help	 following	Hoa’s	 gaze.	 From	here,	 you	 still	 can’t	 see	 the
Rifting	 itself;	 looks	 like	 there’s	 a	 dead	 rainforest	 and	 some	 hilly	 ridges
between	the	city	and	the	monster.	The	Wall	is	bad	enough,	however.



And	maybe	one	existential	horror	 is	easier	 to	 face	 than	another,	but	you
remember	 using	 the	 Obelisk	 Gate	 on	 these	 people,	 twisting	 the	 magic
between	 their	 cells	 and	 transmuting	 the	 infinitesimal	 parts	 of	 them	 from
carbon	to	silicate.	Danel	told	you	how	crowded	Rennanis	was	–	so	much	that
it	had	to	send	out	a	conquering	army	to	survive.	Now,	however,	the	city	is	not
crowded	 with	 statues.	 There	 are	 signs	 that	 it	 was,	 once:	 statues	 deep	 in
conversation	with	partners	that	seem	to	be	missing;	only	two	people	sitting	at
a	table	set	for	six.	In	one	of	the	bigger	green-X	buildings	there’s	a	statue	that
is	 lying	 naked	 in	 bed,	 mouth	 open	 and	 penis	 permanently	 stiff	 and	 hips
thrusting	up,	hands	positioned	in	just	the	right	places	to	grip	someone’s	legs.
He’s	alone,	though.	Someone’s	horrible,	morbid	joke.



“My	kind	are	opportunistic	feeders,”	Hoa	says.



Yeah,	that’s	exactly	what	you	were	afraid	he	would	say.



“And	apparently	very	damned	hungry?	There	were	a	 lot	of	people	here.
Most	of	them	must	be	missing.”



“We,	too,	put	aside	surplus	resources	for	later,	Essun.”



You	rub	your	face	with	your	one	remaining	hand,	trying	and	failing	to	not
visualize	a	gigantic	stone	eater	larder	somewhere,	now	stuffed	full	of	brightly
colored	statues.	“Evil	Earth.	Why	do	you	bother	with	me,	then?	I’m	not	as	–
easy	a	meal	as	those.”



“Lesser	 members	 of	 my	 kind	 need	 to	 strengthen	 themselves.	 I	 don’t.”
There	is	a	very	slight	shift	in	the	inflection	of	Hoa’s	voice.	By	this	point	you
know	 him;	 that	 was	 contempt.	 He’s	 a	 proud	 creature	 (even	 he	will	 admit).
“They	are	poorly	made,	weak,	little	better	than	beasts.	We	were	so	lonely	in
those	early	years,	and	at	first	we	had	no	idea	what	we	were	doing.	The	hungry
ones	are	the	result	of	our	fumbling.”



You	 waver,	 because	 you	 don’t	 really	 want	 to	 know…	 but	 you	 haven’t
been	a	coward	for	some	years	now.	So	you	steel	yourself	and	turn	to	him	and
then	say,	“You’re	making	another	one	now.	Aren’t	you?	From	–	from	me.	If
it’s	not	about	food	for	you,	then	it’s…	reproduction.”	Horrifying	reproduction,
if	 it	 is	dependent	on	 the	death-by-petrification	of	a	human	being.	And	 there
must	 be	 more	 to	 it	 than	 just	 turning	 people	 to	 stone.	 You	 think	 about	 the
kirkhusa	at	 the	roadhouse,	and	Jija,	and	the	woman	back	in	Castrima	whom
you	killed.	You	think	about	how	you	hit	her,	smashed	her	with	magic,	for	the
not-crime	 of	 making	 you	 relive	 Uche’s	 murder.	 But	 Alabaster	 was	 not	 the
same,	in	the	end,	as	what	you	did	to	that	woman.	She	was	a	shining,	brightly
colored	collection	of	gemstones.	He	was	an	ugly	 lump	of	brown	rock	–	and
yet	 the	 brown	 rock	 was	 finely	 made,	 precisely	 crafted,	 careful,	 where	 the
woman	was	a	disorderly	mess	beneath	her	surface	beauty.



Hoa	is	silent	in	answer	to	your	question,	which	is	an	answer	in	itself.	And
then	 you	 finally	 remember.	Antimony,	 in	 the	moments	 after	 you	 closed	 the
Obelisk	Gate,	but	before	you	teetered	into	magic-traumatized	slumber.	Beside
her,	another	stone	eater,	strange	in	his	whiteness,	disturbing	in	his	familiarity.
Oh,	Evil	Earth,	you	don’t	want	to	know,	but	–	“Antimony	used	that…”	Too-
small	lump	of	brown	stone.	“Used	Alabaster.	As	raw	material	to	–	to,	oh	rust,
to	 make	 another	 stone	 eater.	 And	 she	 made	 it	 look	 like	 him.”	 You	 hate
Antimony	all	over	again.



“He	chose	his	own	shape.	We	all	do.”



This	slaps	your	rage	out	of	its	spiral.	Your	stomach	clenches,	this	time	in
something	 other	 than	 revulsion.	 “That	 –	 then	—”	You	 have	 to	 take	 a	 deep
breath.	 “Then	 it’s	him?	Alabaster.	He’s…	 he’s…”	You	 can’t	make	 yourself
say	the	word.



Flick	 and	 Hoa	 faces	 you,	 expression	 compassionate,	 but	 somehow	 also
warning.	 “The	 lattice	 doesn’t	 always	 form	 perfectly,	 Essun,”	 he	 says.	 The
tone	is	gentle.	“Even	when	it	does,	there	is	always…	loss	of	data.”



You	 have	 no	 idea	 what	 this	 means	 and	 yet	 you’re	 shaking.	Why?	 You
know	why.	Your	voice	rises.	“Hoa,	if	that’s	Alabaster,	if	I	can	talk	to	him	—”



“No.”



“Why	the	rust	not?”	



“Because	 it	must	 be	 his	 choice,	 first.”	Harder	 voice	 here.	A	 reprimand.
You	flinch.	“More	 importantly,	because	we	are	fragile	at	 the	beginning,	 like
all	new	creatures.	It	takes	centuries	for	us,	the	who	of	us,	to…	cool.	Even	the
slightest	of	pressures	–	like	you,	demanding	that	he	fit	himself	to	your	needs
rather	than	his	own	–	can	damage	the	final	shape	of	his	personality.”



You	take	a	step	back,	which	surprises	you	because	you	hadn’t	realized	you
were	getting	in	his	face.	And	then	you	sag.	Alabaster	is	alive,	but	not.	Is	Stone
Eater	 Alabaster	 even	 remotely	 the	 same	 as	 the	 flesh-and-blood	 man	 you
knew?	 Does	 that	 even	 matter	 anymore,	 now	 that	 he	 has	 transformed	 so
completely?	“I’ve	lost	him	again,	then,”	you	murmur.



Hoa	doesn’t	seem	to	move	at	first,	but	there’s	a	brief	flit	of	wind	against
your	side,	and	abruptly	a	hard	hand	nudges	the	back	of	your	soft	one.	“He	will
live	for	an	eternity,”	Hoa	says,	as	softly	as	his	hollow	voice	can	manage.	“For
as	long	as	the	Earth	exists,	something	of	who	he	was	will,	too.	You’re	the	one
still	in	danger	of	being	lost.”	He	pauses.	“But	if	you	choose	not	to	finish	what
we	have	begun,	I	will	understand.”



You	look	up	and	then,	for	only	maybe	the	second	or	third	time,	you	think
you	understand	him.	He	knows	you’re	pregnant.	Maybe	he	knew	it	before	you
did,	 though	 what	 that	 means	 to	 him,	 you	 cannot	 guess.	 He	 knows	 what
underlies	 your	 thoughts	 about	 Alabaster,	 too,	 and	 he’s	 saying…	 that	 you
aren’t	 alone.	 That	 you	 don’t	 have	 nothing.	 You	 have	 Hoa,	 and	 Ykka	 and
Tonkee	 and	 maybe	 Hjarka,	 friends,	 who	 know	 you	 in	 all	 your	 rogga
monstrosity	 and	 accept	 you	 despite	 it.	 And	 you	 have	 Lerna	 –	 quietly
demanding,	relentless	Lerna,	who	does	not	give	up	and	does	not	tolerate	your
excuses	 and	 does	 not	 pretend	 that	 love	 precludes	 pain.	 He	 is	 the	 father	 of
another	child	that	will	probably	be	beautiful.	All	of	your	children	so	far	have
been.	Beautiful,	and	powerful.	You	close	your	eyes	against	regret.



But	that	brings	the	sounds	of	the	city	to	your	ears,	and	you	are	startled	to
catch	 laughter	on	 the	wind,	 loud	enough	 to	carry	up	 from	 the	ground	 level,
probably	 over	 by	 one	 of	 the	 communal	 fires.	Which	 reminds	 you	 that	 you
have	Castrima,	too,	if	you	want	it.	This	ridiculous	comm	of	unpleasant	people
who	are	impossibly	still	together,	which	you	have	fought	for	and	which	has,
however	grudgingly,	fought	for	you	in	return.	It	pulls	your	mouth	into	a	smile.



“No,”	you	say.	“I’ll	do	what	needs	doing.”



Hoa	considers	you.	“You’re	certain.”



Of	course	you	are.	Nothing	has	changed.	The	world	is	broken	and	you	can
fix	 it;	 that’s	what	Alabaster	 and	Lerna	 both	 charged	 you	 to	 do.	Castrima	 is
more	 reason	 for	 you	 to	 do	 it,	 not	 less.	 And	 it’s	 time	 you	 stopped	 being	 a
coward,	too,	and	went	to	find	Nassun.	Even	if	she	hates	you.	Even	if	you	left
her	 to	 face	 a	 terrible	world	 alone.	 Even	 if	 you	 are	 the	worst	mother	 in	 the
world…	you	did	your	best.



And	maybe	it	means	you’re	choosing	one	of	your	children	–	the	one	who
has	the	best	chance	of	survival	–	over	the	other.	But	that’s	no	different	from
what	mothers	have	had	to	do	since	the	dawn	of	time:	sacrifice	the	present,	in
hopes	of	a	better	future.	If	the	sacrifice	this	time	has	been	harder	than	most…
Fine.	So	be	it.	This	is	a	mother’s	job,	too,	after	all,	and	you’re	a	rusting	ten-
ringer.	You’ll	see	to	it.



“So	what	are	we	waiting	for?”	you	ask.



“Only	you,”	Hoa	replies.



“Right.	How	much	time	do	we	have?”



“Perigee	is	in	two	days.	I	can	get	you	to	Corepoint	in	one.”



“Okay.”	You	take	a	deep	breath.	“I	need	to	say	some	goodbyes.”



With	perfect	bland	casualness,	Hoa	says,	“I	can	carry	others	with	us.”



Oh.



You	want	it,	don’t	you?	To	not	be	alone	at	the	end.	To	have	Lerna’s	quiet
implacable	 presence	 at	 your	 back.	 Tonkee	 will	 be	 furious	 at	 not	 getting	 a
chance	to	see	Corepoint,	if	you	leave	her	behind.	Hjarka	will	be	furious	if	you
take	Tonkee	without	her.	Danel	wants	to	chronicle	the	world’s	transformation,
for	obscure	Equatorial	lorist	reasons.



Ykka,	though	—



“No.”	You	sober	and	sigh.	“I’m	being	selfish	again.	Castrima	needs	Ykka.
And	they’ve	all	suffered	enough.”



Hoa	 just	 looks	 at	 you.	 How	 the	 rust	 does	 he	 manage	 to	 convey	 such
emotion	with	 a	 stone	 face?	 Even	 if	 that	 emotion	 is	 dry	 skepticism	 of	 your
self-abnegating	bullshit.	You	laugh	–	once,	and	it’s	rusty.	Been	a	while.



“I	 think,”	Hoa	 says	 slowly,	 “that	 if	 you	 love	 someone,	 you	don’t	 get	 to
choose	how	they	love	you	back.”



So	many	layers	in	the	strata	of	that	statement.



Okay,	though.	Right.	This	isn’t	just	about	you,	and	it	never	has	been.	All
things	 change	 in	 a	 Season	 –	 and	 some	 part	 of	 you	 is	 tired,	 finally,	 of	 the
lonely,	 vengeful	 woman	 narrative.	 Maybe	 Nassun	 isn’t	 the	 only	 one	 you
needed	a	home	for.	And	maybe	not	even	you	should	try	to	change	the	world
alone.



“Let’s	go	ask	them,	then,”	you	say.	“And	then	let’s	go	get	my	little	girl.”
***

	
To:	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars
From:	Alma	Innovator	Dibars
I’ve	been	asked	to	inform	you	that	your	funding	has	been	cut.	You	are
to	return	to	the	University	forthwith	by	the	least	expensive	means
possible.
And	since	I	know	you,	old	friend,	let	me	add	this.	You	believe	in
logic.	You	think	even	our	esteemed	colleagues	are	immune	to
prejudice,	or	politics,	in	the	face	of	hard	facts.	This	is	why	you’ll
never	be	allowed	within	a	mile	of	the	Funding	and	Allocations
committee,	no	matter	how	many	masterships	you	earn.
Our	funding	comes	from	Old	Sanze.	From	families	so	ancient	that
they	have	books	in	their	collections	older	than	all	the	Universities	–
and	they	won’t	let	us	touch	them.	How	do	you	think	those	families	got
to	be	so	old,	Yaetr?	Why	has	Sanze	lasted	this	long?	It’s	not	because
of	stonelore.
You	cannot	go	to	people	like	that	and	ask	them	to	fund	a	research
project	that	makes	heroes	of	roggas!	You	just	can’t.	They’ll	faint,	and
when	they	wake	up,	they’ll	have	you	killed.	They’ll	destroy	you	as
surely	as	they	would	any	threat	to	their	livelihoods	and	legacy.	Yes,	I
know	that’s	not	what	you	think	you’re	doing,	but	it	is.
And	if	that	isn’t	enough,	here	is	a	fact	that	might	be	logical	enough
even	for	you:	The	Guardians	are	starting	to	ask	questions.	I	don’t
know	why.	No	one	knows	what	drives	those	monsters.	But	that’s	why
I	voted	with	the	committee	majority,	even	if	it	means	you	hate	me
from	here	on.	I	want	you	alive,	old	friend,	not	dead	in	an	alley	with	a
glass	poniard	through	your	heart.	I’m	sorry.
Safe	travels	homeward.



12
Nassun,	not	alone

Corepoint	is	silent.



Nassun	notices	this	when	the	vehimal	in	which	she’s	traversed	the	planet
emerges	 in	 its	 corresponding	station,	on	 the	other	 side	of	 the	world.	This	 is
located	in	one	of	the	strange,	slanting	buildings	that	encircle	the	massive	hole
at	 Corepoint’s	 center.	 She	 cries	 for	 help,	 cries	 for	 someone,	 cries,	 as	 the
vehimal’s	 door	 opens	 and	 she	 drags	 Schaffa’s	 limp,	 unresponsive	 body
through	the	silent	corridors	and	then	the	silent	streets.	He’s	big	and	heavy,	so
although	 she	 tries	 in	 various	ways	 to	 use	magic	 to	 assist	with	 dragging	 his
weight	 –	 badly;	magic	 is	 not	meant	 to	 be	 used	 for	 something	 so	 gross	 and
localized,	and	her	concentration	is	poor	in	the	moment	–	she	makes	it	only	a
block	 or	 so	 away	 from	 the	 compound	 before	 she,	 too,	 collapses,	 in
exhaustion.

***
Somerusting	day,	somerusting	year.	



Found	these	books,	blank.	The	stuff	 they’re	made	of	 isn’t	paper.	Thicker.
Doesn’t	bend	easily.	Good	thing,	maybe,	or	would	be	dust	by	now.	Preserve
my	words	for	eternity!	Ha!	Longer	than	my	rusting	sanity.	



Don’t	know	what	to	write.	Innon	would	laugh	and	tell	me	to	write	about
sex.	Right,	so:	I	jerked	off	today,	for	the	first	time	since	A	dragged	me	to	this
place.	Thought	about	him	in	 the	middle	of	 it	and	couldn’t	come.	Maybe	I’m
too	old?	That’s	what	Syen	would	 say.	She’s	 just	mad	 I	 could	 still	 knock	her
up.	



Forgetting	how	Innon	used	to	smell.	Everything	smells	 like	 the	sea	here,
but	it’s	not	like	the	sea	near	Meov.	Different	water?	Innon	used	to	smell	like
the	water	there.	Every	time	the	wind	blows	I	lose	a	little	more	of	him.	



Corepoint.	How	I	hate	this	place.	
***

Corepoint	isn’t	a	ruin,	quite.	That	is,	it	isn’t	ruined,	and	it	isn’t	uninhabited.



On	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 open,	 endless	 ocean,	 the	 city	 is	 an	 anomaly	 of
buildings	–	not	very	tall	compared	to	either	the	recently	lost	Yumenes	or	the
longer-lost	Syl	Anagist.	Corepoint	 is	unique,	however,	among	both	past	and
present	 cultures.	 The	 structures	 of	 Corepoint	 are	 sturdily	 built,	 of	 rustless
metal	and	strange	polymers	and	other	materials	 that	can	withstand	 the	often
hurricane-force	salt	winds	that	dominate	this	side	of	the	world.	The	few	plants
that	grow	here,	in	the	parks	that	were	constructed	so	long	ago,	are	no	longer
the	 lovely,	 designer,	 hothouse	 things	 favored	 by	 Corepoint’s	 builders.
Corepoint	trees	–	hybridized	and	feral	descendants	of	the	original	landscaping
–	are	huge,	woody	things,	twisted	into	artful	shapes	by	the	wind.	They	have
long	since	broken	free	of	their	orderly	beds	and	containers	and	now	gnarl	over
the	pressed-fiber	sidewalks.	Unlike	the	architecture	of	Syl	Anagist,	here	there
are	many	more	sharp	angles,	meant	 to	minimize	 the	buildings’	 resistance	 to
the	wind.



But	there	is	more	to	the	city	than	what	can	be	seen.



Corepoint	sits	at	the	peak	of	an	enormous	underwater	shield	volcano,	and
the	 first	 few	miles	 of	 the	 hole	 drilled	 at	 its	 center	 are	 actually	 lined	with	 a
hollowed-out	 complex	 of	 living	 quarters,	 laboratories,	 and	 manufactories.
These	 underground	 facilities,	 originally	 meant	 to	 house	 Corepoint’s
geomagests	 and	 genegineers,	 have	 long	 since	 been	 turned	 to	 a	 wholly
different	 purpose	 –	 because	 this	 flip	 side	 of	 Corepoint	 is	 Warrant,	 where
Guardians	are	made	and	dwell	between	Seasons.



We	will	speak	more	of	this	later.



Above	the	surface	in	Corepoint,	though,	it’s	late	afternoon,	beneath	a	sky
whose	clouds	are	sparse	amid	a	shockingly	bright	blue	sky.	(Seasons	that	start
in	the	Stillness	rarely	have	a	severe	impact	on	the	weather	in	this	hemisphere,
or	at	least	not	for	several	months	or	years	after.)	As	befits	the	bright	day,	there
are	people	in	the	streets	around	Nassun	as	she	struggles	and	weeps,	but	they
do	 not	move	 to	 help.	They	 do	 not	move	 at	 all,	mostly	 –	 for	 they	 are	 stone
eaters,	with	rose-marble	lips	and	shining	mica	eyes	and	braids	woven	in	pyrite
gold	or	clear	quartz.	They	stand	on	the	steps	of	buildings	that	have	not	known
human	feet	 for	 tens	of	 thousands	of	years.	They	sit	along	window	ledges	of
stone	 or	 metal	 that	 have	 begun	 to	 deform	 under	 the	 pressure	 of	 incredible
weight	applied	over	decades.	One	sits	with	knees	upraised	and	arms	propped
across	 them,	 leaning	 against	 a	 tree	 whose	 roots	 have	 grown	 around	 her;
mosses	line	the	upper	surfaces	of	her	arms	and	hair.	She	watches	Nassun,	only
her	eyes	moving,	in	what	might	be	interest.



They	all	watch,	doing	nothing,	as	 this	quick-moving,	noisy	human	child
sobs	into	the	salt-laden	wind	until	she	is	exhausted,	and	then	just	sits	there	in
a	huddle	with	her	fingers	still	tangled	in	the	cloth	of	Schaffa’s	shirt.

***
Another	day,	same	(?)	year	



No	writing	about	Innon	or	Coru.	Off-limits	from	now	on.	



Syen.	I	can	still	feel	her	–	not	sess,	feel.	There’s	an	obelisk	here,	I	think	it’s
a	 spinel.	When	 I	canneck	 connect	 to	 it,	 it’s	 like	 I	 can	 feel	 anything	 they’re
connected	to.	The	amethyst	is	following	Syen.	Wonder	if	she	knows.



Antimony	 says	 Syen	 made	 it	 to	 the	 mainland	 and	 is	wannr	wandering.
That’s	why	I	feel	like	I’m	wandering,	I	guess?	She’s	all	that’s	left	but	she	ki	–
fuck.



This	place	is	ridiculous.	Anniemony	was	right	that	it’s	a	way	to	trigger	the
Obelisk	Gate	without	control	cab?	(Onyx.	Too	powerful,	can’t	 risk	 it,	would
trigger	 alignment	 too	 quickly	 and	 then	 who’s	 to	 make	 the	 second	 traj
change?)	But	 the	rusters	 that	buildt	 it	put	everything	 into	 tht	 stupid	hole.	A
told	me	some	of	it.	Great	project,	my	ass.	It’s	worse	to	see,	though.	This	whole
rusting	 city	 is	 a	 crime	 scene.	 Tooted	 around	 and	 found	 great	 big	 pipes
running	along	the	bottom	of	the	ocean.	hu	HUGE,	ready	to	pump	something
from	 the	 hole	 all	 the	 way	 to	 the	 continent.	Magic,	 Animony	 says,	 did	 they
really	need	so	much?????	More	than	the	Gate!



Asked	Tinimony	to	take	me	into	the	hole	today	and	she	said	no.	What’s	in
the	hole,	huh?	What’s	in	the	hole.	

***
Near	 sunset,	 another	 stone	 eater	 appears.	 Here	 amid	 the	 elegantly	 gowned,
colorful	variety	of	his	people,	he	stands	out	even	more	with	his	gray	coloring
and	 bare	 chest:	 Steel.	 He	 stands	 over	 Nassun	 for	 several	 minutes,	 perhaps
expecting	her	to	lift	her	gaze	and	notice	him,	but	she	does	not.	Presently,	he
says,	“The	ocean	winds	can	be	cold	at	night.”



Silence.	 Her	 hands	 clench	 and	 unclench	 on	 Schaffa’s	 clothes,	 not	 quite
spasmodically.	She’s	just	tired.	She’s	been	holding	him	since	the	center	of	the
Earth.



After	 a	 while	 longer,	 as	 the	 sun	 inches	 toward	 the	 horizon,	 Steel	 says,
“There’s	 a	 livable	 apartment	 in	 a	 building	 two	 blocks	 from	 here.	 The	 food
stored	in	it	should	still	be	edible.”



Nassun	 says,	 “Where?”	 Her	 voice	 is	 hoarse.	 She	 needs	 water.	 There’s
some	in	her	canteen,	and	in	Schaffa’s	canteen,	but	she	hasn’t	opened	either.



Steel	shifts	posture,	pointing.	Nassun	lifts	her	head	to	follow	this	and	sees
a	 street,	 unnaturally	 straight,	 seemingly	 paved	 straight	 toward	 the	 horizon.
Wearily	 she	 gets	 up,	 takes	 a	 better	 grip	 on	 Schaffa’s	 clothes,	 and	 begins
dragging	him	again.

***
Who’s	in	the	hole,	what’s	in	the	whole,	where	goes	the	hole,	how	holed	am	I!	



SEs	 brought	 better	 food	 today	 because	 I	 don’t	 eat	 enough.	So	 special,
delivery	 fressssh	 from	 the	 other	 sigh	 of	 the	 world.	Going	 to	 dry	 the	 seeds,
plant	them.	Remember	to	scrrrape	up	tomato	I	threw	at	A.	



Book	 language	 looks	 almost	 like	 Sanze-mat.	 Characters	 similar?
Precursor?	Some	words	I	almost	recognize.	Some	old	Eturpic,	some	Hladdac,
a	little	early-dynasty	Regwo.	Wish	Shinash	was	here.	He	would	scream	to	see
me	putting	my	 feet	up	on	books	older	 than	 forever.	Always	so	easy	 to	 tease.
Miss	him.	



Miss	 everyone,	 even	 people	 at	 the	 rusting	Fulcrum	 (!)	Miss	 voices	 that
come	out	of	rusting	mouths.	SYENITE	could	make	me	eat,	you	 talking	rock.
SYENITE	gave	a	shit	about	me	and	not	 just	whether	I	could	fix	 this	world	I
don’t	 give	 a	 shit	 about.	 SYENITE	 should	 be	 here	 with	 me,	 I	 would	 give
anything	to	have	her	here	with	me



No.	She	should	forget	me	and	In	Meov.	Find	some	boring	fool	she	actually
wants	to	sleep	with.	Have	a	boring	life.	She	deserves	that.

***
Night	falls	in	the	time	it	takes	Nassun	to	reach	the	building.	Steel	repositions,
appearing	in	front	of	a	strange	asymmetrical	building,	wedge-shaped,	whose
high	end	 faces	 the	wind.	The	 sloping	 roof	of	 the	building,	 in	 the	 lee	of	 the
wind,	 is	 scraggly	with	overgrown,	 twisted	vegetation.	There’s	plenty	of	 soil
on	 the	 roof,	 more	 than	 is	 likely	 to	 have	 accumulated	 from	 the	 wind	 over
centuries.	It	looks	planned,	though	overgrown.	Yet	amid	the	mess,	Nassun	can
see	 that	 someone	 has	 hacked	 out	 a	 garden.	 Recently;	 the	 plants	 are
overgrown,	 too,	 new	 growth	 springing	 up	 from	 dropped	 fruit	 and	 split,
untended	vines,	but	given	the	relative	dearth	of	weeds	and	the	still-neat	rows,
this	garden	can’t	be	more	 than	a	year	or	 two	neglected.	The	Season	 is	now
almost	two	years	old.



Later.	 The	 building’s	 door	 moves	 on	 its	 own,	 sliding	 aside	 as	 Nassun
approaches.	 It	 closes	 on	 its	 own,	 too,	 once	 she’s	 gotten	Schaffa	 far	 enough
within.	Steel	moves	inside,	pointing	upstairs.	She	drags	Schaffa	to	the	foot	of
the	 stairs	 and	 then	 drops	 beside	 him,	 shaking,	 too	 tired	 to	 think	 or	 go	 any
farther.



Schaffa’s	heart	is	still	strong,	she	thinks,	as	she	uses	his	chest	for	a	pillow.
With	her	eyes	shut,	she	can	almost	imagine	that	he’s	holding	her,	rather	than
the	other	way	around.	It	is	paltry	comfort,	but	enough	to	let	her	sleep	without
dreams.

***

	
***

In	the	morning,	Nassun	gets	Schaffa	up	the	steps.	The	apartment	is	thankfully
on	 only	 the	 second	 floor;	 the	 stairwell	 door	 opens	 right	 into	 it.	 Everything
inside	is	strange,	to	her	eye,	yet	familiar	in	purpose.	There’s	a	couch,	though
its	back	is	at	one	end	of	the	long	seat,	rather	than	behind	it.	There	are	chairs,
one	fused	to	some	kind	of	big	slanted	table.	For	drawing,	maybe.	The	bed,	in
the	attached	 room,	 is	 the	 strangest	 thing:	a	big	wide	hemisphere	of	brightly
colored	cushion	without	sheets	or	pillows.	When	Nassun	tentatively	lies	down
on	it,	though,	she	finds	that	it	flattens	and	conforms	to	her	body	in	ways	that
are	stunningly	comfortable.	It’s	warm,	too	–	actively	heating	up	beneath	her
until	 the	 aches	 of	 sleeping	 in	 a	 cold	 stairwell	 go	 away.	 Fascinated	 despite
herself,	Nassun	 examines	 the	 bed	 and	 is	 shocked	 to	 realize	 that	 it	 is	 full	of
magic,	 and	has	covered	her	 in	 same.	Threads	of	 silver	 roam	over	her	body,
determining	 her	 discomfort	 by	 touching	 her	 nerves	 and	 then	 repairing	 her
bruises	and	scrapes;	other	threads	whip	the	particles	of	the	bed	until	friction



warms	them;	yet	more	threads	search	her	skin	for	infinitesimal	dry	flakes	and
flecks	of	dust,	and	scrub	them	away.	It’s	like	what	she	does	when	she	uses	the
silver	to	heal	or	cut	things,	but	automatic,	somehow.	She	can’t	imagine	who
would	make	 a	 bed	 that	 could	 do	magic.	 She	 can’t	 imagine	why.	 She	 can’t
fathom	 how	 anyone	 could	 have	 convinced	 all	 this	 silver	 to	 do	 such	 nice
things,	 but	 that’s	 what’s	 happening.	 No	 wonder	 the	 people	 who	 built	 the
obelisks	needed	so	much	silver,	if	they	used	it	in	lieu	of	wearing	blankets,	or
taking	baths,	or	letting	themselves	heal	over	time.



Schaffa	 has	 soiled	 himself,	 Nassun	 finds.	 It	makes	 her	 feel	 ashamed	 to
have	to	pull	his	clothes	off	and	clean	him,	using	stretchy	cloths	she	finds	 in
the	bathroom,	but	 it	would	be	worse	 to	 leave	him	in	his	own	filth.	His	eyes
are	open	again,	 though	he	does	not	move	while	she	works.	They’ve	opened
during	 the	 day,	 and	 they	 close	 at	 night,	 but	 though	Nassun	 talks	 to	Schaffa
(pleads	 for	 him	 to	wake	 up,	 asks	 him	 to	 help	 her,	 tells	 him	 that	 she	 needs
him),	he	does	not	respond.



She	gets	him	into	the	bed,	leaving	a	pad	of	cloths	under	his	bare	bottom.
She	trickles	water	from	their	canteens	into	his	mouth,	and	when	that	runs	out,
she	cautiously	tries	to	get	more	from	the	strange	water	pump	in	the	kitchen.
There	are	no	levers	or	handles	on	it,	but	when	she	puts	her	canteen	beneath
the	spigot,	water	comes	out.	She’s	a	diligent	girl.	First	she	uses	the	powder	in
her	 runny-sack	 to	 make	 a	 cup	 of	 safe	 from	 the	 water,	 checking	 for
contaminants.	 The	 safe	 dissolves	 but	 stays	 cloudy	 and	white,	 so	 she	 drinks
that	herself	and	then	brings	more	water	to	Schaffa.	He	drinks	readily,	which
probably	means	he	was	really	thirsty.	She	gives	him	raisins	that	she	first	soaks
in	 water,	 and	 he	 chews	 and	 swallows,	 although	 slowly	 and	 without	 much
vigor.	She	hasn’t	done	a	good	job	of	taking	care	of	him.



She	will	 do	 better,	 she	 decides,	 and	heads	 outside	 to	 the	 garden	 to	 pick
food	for	them	both.

***
Syenite	 told	me	 the	date.	Six	years.	 It’s	been	six	years?	No	wonder	 she’s	 so
angry.	Told	me	to	go	jump	in	a	hole,	since	it’s	been	so	long.	She	doesn’t	want
to	see	me	again.	Such	a	steelheart.	Told	her	I	was	sorry.	My	fault,	all	of	it.	



My	fault.	My	Moon.	Turned	the	spare	key	 today.	 (Lines	of	sight,	 lines	of
force,	three	by	three	by	three?	Cubical	arrangement,	like	a	good	little	crystal
lattice.)	 The	 key	 unlocks	 the	Gate.	Dangerous	 to	 bring	 so	many	obelisks	 to
Yumenes,	though;	Guardians	everywhere.	Wouldn’t	have	time	before	they	got
me.	Better	to	make	a	spare	key	out	of	orogenes,	and	who	can	I	use?	Who	is
strong	enough.	Syen	isn’t,	almost	but	not	quite.	Innon	isn’t.	Coru	is	but	I	can’t
find	 him.	He’s	 just	 a	 baby	 anyway,	 not	 right.	 Babies.	Lots	 of	 babies.	Node
maintainers?	Node	maintainers!	



No.	They’ve	suffered	enough.	Use	the	Fulcrum	seniors	instead.	



Or	the	node	maintainers.	



Why	should	I	do	it	here?	Plugs	the	hole.	Do	it	there,	tho…	Get	Yumenes.
Get	the	Fulcrum.	Get	a	lot	of	the	Guardians.	



Stop	nagging	me,	woman.	Go	tell	Innon	to	fuck	you,	or	something.	You’re
always	 so	 cranky	 when	 you	 haven’t	 gotten	 laid.	 I’ll	 jump	 in	 the	 hole
tomorrow.	

***
It	becomes	a	routine.



She	takes	care	of	Schaffa	in	the	mornings,	then	goes	out	in	the	afternoon
to	 explore	 the	 city	 and	 find	 things	 they	 need.	 There’s	 no	 need	 to	 bathe
Schaffa,	or	 to	clean	up	his	waste	again;	astonishingly,	 the	bed	 takes	care	of
that,	too.	So	Nassun	can	spend	her	time	with	him	talking,	and	asking	him	to
wake	up,	and	telling	him	that	she	doesn’t	know	what	to	do.



Steel	vanishes	again.	She	doesn’t	care.



Other	stone	eaters	periodically	show	up,	however,	or	at	least	she	feels	the
impact	of	their	presence.	She	sleeps	on	the	couch,	and	one	morning	wakes	to
find	a	blanket	covering	her.	 It’s	 just	a	 simple	gray	 thing,	but	 it’s	warm,	and
she’s	grateful.	When	she	starts	picking	apart	one	of	her	sausages	to	get	the	fat
out	 of	 it,	 intending	 to	 make	 tallow	 –	 the	 candles	 from	 her	 runny-sack	 are
getting	 low	 –	 she	 finds	 a	 stone	 eater	 in	 the	 stairwell,	 its	 finger	 curled	 in	 a
beckoning	 gesture.	When	 she	 follows	 it,	 it	 stops	 beside	 a	 panel	 covered	 in
curious	symbols.	The	stone	eater	is	pointing	toward	one	in	particular.	Nassun
touches	 it	 and	 it	 alights	 with	 silver,	 glowing	 golden	 and	 sending	 threads
questing	over	her	skin.	The	stone	eater	says	something	in	a	language	Nassun
does	not	understand	before	it	vanishes,	but	when	she	returns	to	the	apartment,
it’s	warmer,	and	soft	white	 lights	have	come	on	overhead.	Touching	squares
on	the	wall	makes	the	lights	go	off.



One	afternoon	she	walks	into	the	apartment	to	find	a	stone	eater	crouched
beside	a	pile	of	things	that	look	to	have	come	from	some	comm’s	storecache:
burlap	 sacks	 full	 of	 root	 vegetables	 and	 mushrooms	 and	 dried	 fruit,	 a	 big
round	of	sharp	white	cheese,	hide	bags	of	packed	pemmican,	satchels	of	dried
rice	and	beans,	and	–	precious	–	a	small	cask	of	salt.	The	stone	eater	vanishes
when	Nassun	 approaches	 the	 pile,	 so	 she	 cannot	 even	 thank	 it.	 She	 has	 to
blow	ash	off	of	everything	before	she	puts	it	away.



Nassun	has	figured	out	that	the	apartment,	like	the	garden,	must	have	been
used	until	recently.	The	detritus	of	another	person’s	life	is	everywhere:	pants
much	 too	big	 for	 her	 in	 the	drawers,	 a	man’s	underwear	beside	 them.	 (One
day	these	are	replaced	with	clothing	that	fits	Nassun.	Another	stone	eater?	Or
maybe	 the	 magic	 in	 the	 apartment	 is	 even	 more	 sophisticated	 than	 she
thought.)	 Books	 are	 piled	 in	 one	 of	 the	 rooms,	 many	 of	 them	 native	 to
Corepoint	–	she’s	beginning	to	recognize	the	peculiar,	clean,	not-quite-natural
look	of	Corepoint	things.	A	few,	however,	are	normal-looking,	with	covers	of
cracking	 leather	 and	 pages	 still	 stinky	with	 chemicals	 and	 handwritten	 ink.
Some	of	the	books	are	in	a	language	she	can’t	read.	Something	Coaster.



One,	however,	is	made	of	the	Corepoint	material,	but	its	blank	pages	have
been	handwritten	over,	 in	Sanze-mat.	Nassun	opens	this	one,	sits	down,	and
begins	to	read.

***
WENT	



IN	THE	HOLE	



DON’T	



don’t	bury	me	



please	DON’T,	Syen,	I	love	you,	I’m	sorry,	keep	me	safe,	watch	my	back
and	 I’ll	watch	 yours,	 there’s	 no	 one	 else	who’s	 as	 strong	 as	 you,	 I	wish	 so
much	that	you	were	here,	please	DON’T	

***
Corepoint	is	a	city	in	still	life.



Nassun	begins	losing	track	of	time.	The	stone	eaters	occasionally	speak	to
her,	but	most	of	them	don’t	know	her	language,	and	she	doesn’t	hear	enough
of	 theirs	 to	 pick	 it	 up.	 She	 watches	 them	 sometimes,	 and	 is	 fascinated	 to
realize	 that	 some	of	 them	are	performing	 tasks.	She	watches	one	malachite-
green	woman	who	 stands	 amid	 the	windblown	 trees,	 and	 belatedly	 realizes
the	 woman	 is	 holding	 a	 branch	 up	 and	 to	 one	 side,	 to	 make	 it	 grow	 in	 a
particular	way.	All	of	the	trees,	which	look	windblown	and	yet	are	a	little	too
dramatic,	 a	 little	 too	artful	 in	 their	 splaying	and	bending,	have	been	 shaped
thus.	It	must	take	years.



And	near	the	edge	of	the	city,	down	by	one	of	the	strange	spokelike	things
that	jut	out	into	the	water	from	its	edge	–	not	piers,	really,	just	straight	pieces
of	metal	that	make	no	sense	–	another	stone	eater	stands	every	day	with	one
hand	upraised.	Nassun	just	happens	 to	be	around	when	the	stone	eater	blurs
and	there	is	a	splash	and	suddenly	his	upraised	hand	holds	by	the	tail	a	huge,
wriggling	fish	that	is	as	long	as	his	body.	His	marble	skin	is	sheened	with	wet.
Nassun	has	 nowhere	 in	 particular	 to	 be,	 so	 she	 sits	 down	 to	watch.	After	 a
time,	an	ocean	mammal	–	Nassun	has	read	of	 these,	creatures	 that	 look	 like
fish	 but	 breathe	 air	 –	 sidles	 up	 to	 the	 city’s	 edge.	 It	 is	 gray-skinned,	 tube-
shaped;	there	are	sharp	teeth	along	its	jaw,	but	these	are	small.	When	it	pushes
up	out	of	the	water,	Nassun	sees	that	it	is	very	old,	and	something	about	the
questing	movements	of	its	head	makes	her	realize	it	has	gone	blind.	There’s
old	scarring	on	its	forehead	as	well;	something	has	injured	the	creature’s	head
badly.	The	creature	nudges	the	stone	eater,	who	of	course	does	not	move,	and
then	nips	at	the	fish	in	its	hand,	tearing	off	chunks	and	swallowing	them	until
the	stone	eater	releases	the	tail.	When	it	is	done,	the	creature	utters	a	complex,
high-pitched	sound,	like	a…	chitter?	Or	a	laugh.	Then	it	slides	further	into	the
water	and	swims	away.



The	stone	eater	flickers	and	faces	Nassun.	Curious,	Nassun	gets	to	her	feet
to	 go	 over	 and	 speak	 to	 him.	 By	 the	 time	 she’s	 standing,	 though,	 he	 has
vanished.



This	 is	 what	 she	 comes	 to	 understand:	 There	 is	 life	 here,	 among	 these
people.	 It	 isn’t	 life	 as	 she	 knows	 it,	 or	 a	 life	 she	 would	 choose,	 but	 life
nevertheless.	That	gives	her	comfort,	when	she	no	longer	has	Schaffa	to	tell
her	that	she	is	good	and	safe.	That,	and	the	silence,	give	her	time	to	mourn.
She	did	not	understand	before	now	that	she	needed	this.

***
I’ve	decided.	



It’s	wrong.	Everything’s	wrong.	Some	things	are	so	broken	that	they	can’t
be	 fixed.	You	 just	 have	 to	 finish	 them	off,	 sweep	away	 the	 rubble,	 and	 start
over.	Antimony	agrees.	Some	of	the	other	SEs	do,	too.	Some	don’t.	



Rust	 those.	They	killed	my	 life	 to	make	me	 their	weapon,	 so	 that’s	what
I’m	 going	 to	 be.	My	 choice.	My	 commandment.	 We’ll	 do	 it	 in	 Yumenes.	 A
commandment	is	set	in	stone.



I	asked	after	Syen	today.	Don’t	know	why	I	care	anymore.	Antimony’s	been
keeping	tabs,	though.	(For	me?)	Syenite	is	living	in	some	little	shithole	comm
in	the	Somidlats,	I	forget	the	name,	playing	creche	teacher.	Playing	the	happy
little	still.	Married	with	two	new	children.	How	about	that.	Not	sure	about	the
daughter	but	the	boy	is	pulling	on	the	aquamarine.	



Amazing.	 No	wonder	 the	 Fulcrum	 bred	 you	 to	me.	 And	we	 did	make	 a
beautiful	child	in	spite	of	everything,	didn’t	we?	My	boy.	



I	won’t	let	them	find	your	boy,	Syen.	I	won’t	let	them	take	him,	and	burn
his	brain,	and	put	him	in	the	wire	chair.	I	won’t	let	them	find	your	girl,	either,
if	 she’s	 one	 of	 us,	 or	 even	 if	 she’s	 Guardian-potential.	 There	 won’t	 be	 a
Fulcrum	 left	by	 the	 time	 I’m	done.	What	 follows	won’t	be	good,	but	 it’ll	be
bad	 for	 everyone	–	 rich	 and	 poor,	 Equatorials	 and	 commless,	 Sanzeds	 and
Arctics,	 now	 they’ll	 all	 know.	 Every	 season	 is	 the	 Season	 for	 us.	 The
apocalypse	that	never	ends.	They	could’ve	chosen	a	different	kind	of	equality.
We	 could’ve	 all	 been	 safe	 and	 comfortable	 together,	 surviving	 together,	 but
they	didn’t	want	 that.	Now	nobody	gets	 to	be	safe.	Maybe	that’s	what	 it	will
take	for	them	to	finally	realize	things	have	to	change.



Then	I’ll	shut	it	down	and	put	the	Moon	back.	(It	shouldn’t	stone	me,	the
first	trajectory	adjustment.	Unless	I	underestimate	Shouldn’t.)	All	I’m	rusting
good	for	anyway.



After	 that…	 it’ll	be	up	 to	you,	Syen.	Make	 it	better.	 I	 know	 I	 told	you	 it
wasn’t	 possible,	 that	 there	was	 no	way	 to	make	 the	world	 better,	 but	 I	was
wrong.	 I’m	 breaking	 it	 because	 I	 was	 wrong.	 Start	 it	 over,	 you	 were	 right,
change	 it.	 Make	 it	 better	 for	 the	 children	 you	 have	 left.	 Make	 a	 world
Corundum	could	have	been	happy	in.	Make	a	world	where	people	like	us,	you
and	me	and	 Innon	and	our	 sweet	 boy,	 our	beautiful	 boy,	 could	have	 stayed
whole.



Antimony	says	I	might	get	to	see	that	world.	Guess	we’ll	see.	Rust	it.	I’m
procrastinating.	She’s	waiting.	Back	to	Yumenes	today.	



For	you,	Innon.	For	you,	Coru.	For	you,	Syen.	
***

At	night,	Nassun	can	see	the	Moon.



This	was	terrifying,	on	the	first	night	that	she	looked	outside	and	noticed	a
strange	 pale	 whiteness	 outlining	 the	 streets	 and	 trees	 of	 the	 city,	 and	 then
looked	 up	 to	 see	 a	 great	 white	 sphere	 in	 the	 sky.	 It	 is	 enormous,	 to	 her	 –
bigger	 than	 the	 sun,	 far	 larger	 than	 the	 stars,	 trailed	 by	 a	 faint	 streak	 of
luminescence	that	she	does	not	know	is	the	off-gassing	of	ice	that	has	adhered
to	 the	 lunar	surface	over	 the	course	of	 its	 travels.	The	white	of	 it	 is	 the	 true
surprise.	She	knows	very	little	of	the	Moon	–	only	what	Schaffa	told	her.	It	is
a	satellite,	he	said,	Father	Earth’s	 lost	child,	a	 thing	whose	 light	 reflects	 the
sun.	She	expected	it	 to	be	yellow,	given	that.	It	disturbs	her	to	have	been	so
wrong.



It	 disturbs	 her	more	 that	 there	 is	 a	hole	 in	 the	 thing,	 at	 nearly	 its	 dead
center:	 a	 great,	 yawning	darkness	 like	 the	 pinpoint	 pupil	 of	 an	 eye.	 It’s	 too
small	 to	 tell	 for	 now,	 but	Nassun	 thinks	 that	maybe	 if	 she	 stares	 at	 it	 long
enough,	she	will	see	stars	on	the	other	side	of	the	Moon,	through	this	hole.



Somehow	 it’s	 fitting.	Whatever	happened	ages	 ago	 to	 cause	 the	Moon’s
loss	 was	 surely	 cataclysmic	 on	 multiple	 levels.	 If	 the	 Earth	 suffered	 the
Shattering,	then	the	fact	that	the	Moon	also	bears	scars	feels	normal	and	right.
With	a	thumb,	Nassun	rubs	the	palm	of	her	hand	where	her	mother	broke	the
bones,	a	lifetime	ago.



And	 yet,	 when	 she	 stands	 in	 the	 roof	 garden	 and	 stares	 at	 it	 for	 long
enough,	she	begins	to	find	the	Moon	beautiful.	It	is	an	icewhite	eye,	and	she
has	 no	 reason	 to	 think	 badly	 of	 those.	 Like	 the	 silver	 when	 it	 swirls	 and
whorls	within	something	like	a	snail’s	shell.	It	makes	her	think	of	Schaffa	–
that	he	is	watching	over	her	in	his	way	–	and	this	makes	her	feel	less	alone.



Over	time,	Nassun	discovers	that	she	can	use	the	obelisks	to	get	a	feel	for
the	Moon.	The	sapphire	is	on	the	other	side	of	the	world,	but	there	are	others
here	above	 the	ocean,	drawn	near	 in	 response	 to	her	 summons,	and	she	has
been	 tapping	 and	 taming	 each	 in	 turn.	The	obelisks	help	her	 feel	 (not	 sess)
that	 the	Moon	will	soon	be	at	 its	closest	point.	 If	she	 lets	 it	go,	 it	will	pass,
and	begin	to	rapidly	diminish	until	it	vanishes	from	the	sky.	Or	she	can	open
the	Gate,	and	tug	on	it,	and	change	everything.	The	cruelty	of	the	status	quo,
or	the	comfort	of	oblivion.	The	choice	feels	clear	to	her…	but	for	one	thing.



One	 night,	 as	Nassun	 sits	 gazing	 up	 at	 the	 great	white	 sphere,	 she	 says
aloud,	“It	was	on	purpose,	wasn’t	it?	You	not	telling	me	what	would	happen
to	Schaffa.	So	you	could	get	rid	of	him.”



The	mountain	that	has	been	lingering	nearby	shifts	slightly,	to	a	position
behind	her.	“I	did	try	to	warn	you.”



She	turns	to	look	at	him.	At	the	look	on	her	face,	he	utters	a	soft	laugh	that
sounds	 self-deprecating.	This	 stops,	 though,	when	 she	 says,	 “If	 he	 dies,	 I’ll
hate	you	more	than	I	hate	the	world.”



It	 is	a	war	of	attrition,	she’s	begun	to	realize,	and	she’s	going	to	lose.	In
the	 weeks	 (?)	 or	 months	 (?)	 since	 they	 came	 to	 Corepoint,	 Schaffa	 has
noticeably	deteriorated,	his	skin	developing	an	ugly	pallor,	his	hair	brittle	and
dull.	 People	 aren’t	 meant	 to	 lie	 unmoving,	 blinking	 but	 not	 thinking,	 for
weeks	on	end.	She	had	to	cut	his	hair	earlier	that	day.	The	bed	cleans	the	dirt
out	of	it,	but	it’s	gotten	oily	and	lately	it	keeps	getting	tangled	–	and	the	day
before,	some	of	it	must	have	wrapped	around	his	arm	when	she	wrestled	him
onto	 his	 belly,	 cutting	 off	 his	 circulation	 in	 a	 way	 she	 didn’t	 notice.	 (She
keeps	a	sheet	over	him,	even	though	the	bed	is	warm	and	does	not	need	it.	It
bothers	her	that	he	is	naked	and	undignified.)	This	morning	when	she	finally
noticed	the	problem,	the	arm	was	pale	and	a	little	gray.	She’s	loosed	it,	chafed
it	hoping	to	bring	the	color	back,	but	it	doesn’t	look	good.	She	doesn’t	know
what	she’ll	do	if	something’s	really	wrong	with	his	arm.	She	might	lose	all	of
him	like	this,	slowly	but	surely,	little	bits	of	him	dying	because	she	was	only
almost-nine	when	 this	 Season	 began	 and	 she’s	 only	 almost-eleven	 now	 and
taking	care	of	invalids	wasn’t	something	anyone	taught	her	in	creche.



“If	 he	 lives,”	 Steel	 replies	 in	 his	 colorless	 voice,	 “he	 will	 never	 again
experience	a	moment	without	agony.”	He	pauses,	gray	eyes	fixed	on	her	face,
as	Nassun	 reverberates	with	 his	words,	with	 her	 own	 denial,	 with	 her	 own
growing	sick	fear	that	Steel	is	right.



Nassun	gets	to	her	feet.	“I	n-need	to	know	how	to	fix	him.”



“You	can’t.”



She	 tightens	 her	 hands	 into	 fists.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 what	 feels	 like
centuries,	part	of	her	reaches	for	the	strata	around	her.	This	means	the	shield
volcano	beneath	Corepoint…	but	when	she	“grasps”	it	orogenically,	she	finds
with	 some	 surprise	 that	 it	 is	 anchored,	 somehow.	 This	 distracts	 her	 for	 a
moment	as	she	has	to	alter	her	perception	to	shift	to	the	silver	–	and	there	she
finds	solid,	scintillating	pillars	of	magic	driven	into	the	volcano’s	foundations,
pinning	 it	 in	 place.	 It’s	 still	 active,	 but	 it	will	 never	 erupt	 because	 of	 those
pillars.	It	is	as	stable	as	bedrock	despite	the	hole	at	its	core	burrowing	down	to
the	Earth’s	heart.



She	 shakes	 this	off	 as	 irrelevant,	 and	 finally	voices	 the	 thought	 that	 has
been	gathering	 in	her	mind	over	all	 the	days	she	has	dwelled	 in	 this	city	of
stone	people.	“If…	if	 I	 turn	him	into	a	stone	eater,	he’ll	 live.	And	he	won’t
have	 any	 pain.	 Right?”	 Steel	 does	 not	 reply.	 In	 the	 lengthening	 silence,
Nassun	bites	her	lip.	“So	you	have	to	tell	me	how	to	–	to	make	him	like	you.	I
bet	I	can	do	it	if	I	use	the	Gate.	I	can	do	anything	with	that.	Except…”



Except.	The	Obelisk	Gate	doesn’t	do	 small	 things.	 Just	 as	Nassun	 feels,
sesses,	 knows	 that	 the	Gate	makes	 her	 temporarily	 omnipotent,	 she	 knows,
too,	that	she	cannot	use	it	to	transform	just	one	man.	If	she	makes	Schaffa	into
a	 stone	 eater…	 every	 human	 being	 on	 the	 planet	 will	 change	 in	 the	 same
manner.	 Every	 comm,	 every	 commless	 band,	 every	 starving	wanderer:	 Ten
thousand	 still-life	 cities,	 instead	of	 just	one.	All	 the	world	will	become	 like
Corepoint.



But	is	that	really	so	terrible	a	thing?	If	everyone	is	a	stone	eater,	there	will
be	no	more	orogenes	and	stills.	No	more	children	to	die,	no	more	fathers	 to
murder	them.	The	Seasons	could	come	and	go,	and	they	wouldn’t	matter.	No
one	would	starve	to	death	ever	again.	To	make	the	whole	world	as	peaceful	as
Corepoint…	would	that	not	be	a	kindness?



Steel’s	face,	which	has	been	 tilted	up	 toward	 the	Moon	even	as	his	eyes
watch	 her,	 now	 slowly	 pivots	 to	 face	 her.	 It’s	 always	 unnerving	 to	 see	 him
move	slowly.	“Do	you	know	what	it	feels	like	to	live	forever?”



Nassun	blinks,	thrown.	She’s	been	expecting	a	fight.	“What?”



The	 moonlight	 has	 transformed	 Steel	 into	 a	 thing	 of	 starkest	 shadows,
white	and	ink	against	 the	dimness	of	 the	garden.	“I	asked,”	he	says,	and	his
voice	is	almost	pleasant,	“if	you	know	what	it	feels	like	to	live	forever.	Like
me.	Like	your	Schaffa.	Do	you	have	any	inkling	as	to	how	old	he	is?	Do	you
care?”



“I	—”	About	to	say	that	she	does,	Nassun	falters.	No.	This	is	not	a	thing
she	has	ever	considered.	“I	–	I	don’t	—”



“I	would	estimate,”	Steel	continues,	“that	Guardians	typically	last	three	or
four	thousand	years.	Can	you	imagine	that	length	of	time?	Think	of	the	past
two	years.	Your	life	since	the	beginning	of	the	Season.	Imagine	another	year.
You	can	do	that,	can’t	you?	Every	day	feels	like	a	year	here	in	Corepoint,	or
so	your	kind	tell	me.	Now	put	all	three	years	together,	and	imagine	them	times
one	thousand.”	The	emphasis	he	puts	on	this	is	sharp,	precisely	enunciated.	In
spite	of	herself,	Nassun	jumps.



But	 also	 in	 spite	 of	 herself…	 she	 thinks.	 She	 feels	 old,	 Nassun,	 at	 the
world-weary	 age	 of	 not-quite-eleven.	 So	much	 has	 happened	 since	 the	 day
she	came	home	to	find	her	little	brother	dead	on	the	floor.	She	is	a	different
person	 now,	 hardly	 Nassun	 at	 all;	 sometimes	 she	 is	 surprised	 to	 realize
Nassun	is	still	her	name.	How	much	more	different	will	she	be	in	three	years?
Ten?	Twenty?



Steel	pauses	until	he	sees	some	change	in	her	expression	–	some	evidence,
perhaps,	that	she	is	listening	to	him.	Then	he	says,	“I	have	reason	to	believe,
however,	 that	 your	 Schaffa	 is	 much,	 much	 older	 than	 most	 Guardians.	 He
isn’t	 quite	 first-generation;	 those	 have	 all	 long	 since	 died.	 Couldn’t	 take	 it.
He’s	one	of	the	very	early	ones,	though,	still.	The	languages,	you	see;	that’s
how	 you	 can	 always	 tell.	 They	 never	 quite	 lose	 those,	 even	 after	 they’ve
forgotten	the	names	they	were	born	with.”



Nassun	remembers	how	Schaffa	knew	the	language	of	the	earth-traversing
vehicle.	 It	 is	 strange	 to	 think	 of	 Schaffa	 having	 been	 born	 back	when	 that
tongue	was	 still	 spoken.	 It	would	make	him…	she	 can’t	 even	 imagine.	Old
Sanze	 is	 supposed	 to	 be	 seven	 Seasons	 old,	 eight	 if	 one	 counts	 the	 present
Season.	Almost	three	thousand	years.	The	Moon’s	cycle	of	return	and	retreat
is	much	older	than	that,	and	Schaffa	remembers	it,	so…	yes.	He’s	very,	very
old.	She	frowns.



“It’s	 rare	 to	 find	 one	 of	 them	 who	 can	 really	 go	 the	 distance,”	 Steel
continues.	 His	 tone	 is	 casual,	 conversational;	 he	 could	 be	 talking	 about
Nassun’s	old	neighbors	back	 in	 Jekity.	 “The	corestone	hurts	 them	so	much,
you	see.	They	get	tired,	and	then	they	get	sloppy,	and	then	the	Earth	begins	to
contaminate	them,	eating	away	at	their	will.	They	don’t	usually	last	long	once
that	starts.	The	Earth	uses	them,	or	their	fellow	Guardians	use	them,	until	they
outlive	their	usefulness	and	one	side	or	the	other	kills	them.	It’s	a	testament	to
your	 Schaffa’s	 strength	 that	 he	 lasted	 so	 much	 longer.	 Or	 a	 testament	 to
something	else,	maybe.	What	kills	the	rest,	you	see,	is	losing	the	things	that
ordinary	people	need	to	be	happy.	Imagine	what	that’s	like,	Nassun.	Watching
everyone	you	know	and	care	about	die.	Watching	your	home	die,	and	having
to	find	a	new	one	–	again,	and	again,	and	again.	Imagine	never	daring	to	get
close	 to	 another	 person.	Never	 having	 friends,	 because	 you’ll	 outlive	 them.
Are	you	lonely,	little	Nassun?”



She	has	 forgotten	her	anger.	“Yes,”	she	admits,	before	she	can	 think	not
to.



“Imagine	being	lonely	forever.”	There’s	a	very	slight	smile	on	his	lips,	she
sees.	 It’s	 been	 there	 the	 whole	 while.	 “Imagine	 living	 here	 in	 Corepoint
forever,	with	no	one	 to	 talk	 to	but	me	–	when	I	bother	 to	respond.	What	do
you	think	that	will	feel	like,	Nassun?”



“Terrible,”	she	says.	Quietly	now.



“Yes.	So	here	is	my	theory:	I	believe	your	Schaffa	survived	by	loving	his
charges.	You,	and	others	like	you,	soothed	his	loneliness.	He	truly	does	love
you;	never	doubt	that	about	him.”	Nassun	swallows	back	a	dull	ache.	“But	he
also	needs	you.	You	keep	him	happy.	You	keep	him	human,	where	otherwise
time	would	have	long	since	transformed	him	into	something	else.”



Then	Steel	moves	 again.	 It’s	 inhuman	because	 of	 its	 steadiness,	Nassun
finally	realizes.	People	are	quick	to	do	big	movements	and	then	slower	with
fine	adjustment.	Steel	does	everything	at	the	same	pace.	Watching	him	move
is	like	watching	a	statue	melt.	But	then	he	stands	with	arms	outstretched	as	if
to	say,	Take	a	look	at	me.



“I	 am	 forty	 thousand	 years	 old,”	 Steel	 says.	 “Give	 or	 take	 a	 few
millennia.”



Nassun	 stares	 at	 him.	The	words	 are	 like	 the	gibberish	 that	 the	vehimal
spoke	–	almost	comprehensible,	but	not	really.	Not	real.



What	does	that	feel	like,	though?



“You’re	 going	 to	 die	when	 you	 open	 the	Gate,”	 Steel	 says,	 after	 giving
Nassun	a	moment	to	absorb	what	he’s	said.	“Or	if	not	then,	sometime	after.	A
few	decades,	a	few	minutes,	it’s	all	the	same.	And	whatever	you	do,	Schaffa
will	lose	you.	He’ll	lose	the	one	thing	that	has	kept	him	human	throughout	the
Earth’s	efforts	to	devour	his	will.	He’ll	find	no	one	new	to	love,	either	–	not
here.	And	he	won’t	be	able	to	return	to	the	Stillness	unless	he’s	willing	to	risk
the	Deep	Earth	route	again.	So	whether	he	heals	somehow,	or	you	change	him
into	 one	 of	my	kind,	 he	will	 have	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 go	 on,	 alone,	 endlessly
yearning	for	what	he	will	never	again	have.”	Slowly,	Steel’s	arms	lower	to	his
sides.	“You	have	no	idea	what	that’s	like.”



And	 then,	 suddenly,	 shockingly,	 he	 is	 right	 in	 front	 of	 Nassun.	 No
blurring,	no	warning,	just	flick	and	he	is	there,	bent	at	the	waist	to	put	his	face
right	in	front	of	hers,	so	close	that	she	feels	the	wind	of	the	air	he’s	displaced
and	smells	the	whiff	of	loam	and	she	can	even	see	that	the	irises	of	his	eyes
are	striated	in	layers	of	gray.



“BUT	I	DO,”	he	shouts.



Nassun	 stumbles	 back	 and	 cries	 out.	 Between	 one	 blink	 and	 the	 next,
however,	 Steel	 returns	 to	 his	 former	 position,	 upright,	 arms	 at	 his	 sides,	 a
smile	on	his	lips.



“So	 think	 carefully,”	 Steel	 says.	His	 voice	 is	 conversational	 again,	 as	 if
nothing	has	happened.	“Think	with	something	more	than	the	selfishness	of	a
child,	 little	 Nassun.	 And	 ask	 yourself:	 Even	 if	 I	 could	 help	 you	 save	 that
controlling,	sadistic	sack	of	shit	that	currently	passes	for	your	adoptive	father
figure,	why	would	I?	Not	even	my	enemy	deserves	that	fate.	No	one	does.”



Nassun’s	 still	 shaking.	 She	 blurts,	 bravely,	 “Sch-Schaffa	 might	 want	 to
live.”



“He	might.	But	should	he?	Should	anyone,	forever?	That	is	the	question.”



She	feels	the	absent	weight	of	countless	years,	and	is	obliquely	ashamed
of	being	a	child.	But	at	her	core,	she	is	a	kind	child,	and	it’s	impossible	for	her
to	 have	 heard	 Steel’s	 story	 without	 feeling	 something	 other	 than	 her	 usual
anger	at	him.	She	looks	away	twitchily.	“I’m…	sorry.”



“So	am	I.”	There’s	a	moment’s	silence.	In	it,	Nassun	pulls	herself	together
slowly.	By	the	time	she	focuses	on	him	again,	Steel’s	smile	has	vanished.



“I	 cannot	 stop	 you,	 once	 you’ve	 opened	 the	 Gate,”	 he	 says.	 “I’ve
manipulated	 you,	 yes,	 but	 the	 choice	 is	 still	 ultimately	 yours.	 Consider,
however.	Until	the	Earth	dies,	I	live,	Nassun.	That	was	its	punishment	for	us:
We	became	a	part	of	 it,	chained	fate	 to	fate.	The	Earth	forgets	neither	 those
who	stabbed	it	in	the	back…	nor	those	who	put	the	knife	in	our	hand.”



Nassun	 blinks	 at	 our.	 But	 she	 loses	 this	 thought	 amid	 misery	 at	 the
realization	that	there	can	be	no	fixing	Schaffa.	Until	now,	some	part	of	her	has
nursed	 the	 irrational	 hope	 that	 Steel,	 as	 an	 adult,	 had	 all	 the	 answers,
including	some	sort	of	cure.	Now	she	knows	that	her	hope	has	been	foolish.
Childish.	She	is	a	child.	And	now	the	only	adult	she	has	ever	been	able	to	rely
on	 will	 die	 naked	 and	 hurt	 and	 helpless,	 without	 ever	 being	 able	 to	 say
goodbye.



It’s	 too	much	 to	bear.	She	 sinks	 into	a	 crouch,	wrapping	one	arm	 round
her	knees	and	folding	 the	other	over	her	head,	so	 that	Steel	will	not	see	her
cry	even	if	he	knows	that’s	exactly	what’s	happening.



He	lets	out	a	soft	laugh	at	this.	Surprisingly,	it	does	not	sound	cruel.



“You	 achieve	 nothing	 by	 keeping	 any	 of	 us	 alive,”	 he	 says,	 “except
cruelty.	 Put	 us	 broken	 monsters	 out	 of	 our	 misery,	 Nassun.	 The	 Earth,
Schaffa,	me,	you…	all	of	us.”



Then	 he	 vanishes,	 leaving	 Nassun	 alone	 beneath	 the	 white,	 burgeoning
Moon.



Syl	Anagist:	Zero
	

A	moment	in	the	present,	before	I	speak	again	of	the	past.



Amid	the	heated,	fuming	shadows	and	unbearable	pressure	of	a	place	that
has	no	name,	I	open	my	eyes.	I’m	no	longer	alone.



Out	 of	 the	 stone,	 another	 of	my	 kind	 pushes	 forth.	Her	 face	 is	 angular,
cool,	as	patrician	and	elegant	as	any	statue’s	 should	be.	She’s	 shed	 the	 rest,
but	kept	 the	pallor	of	her	original	coloring;	I	notice	this	at	 last,	after	 tens	of
thousands	of	years.	All	this	reminiscing	has	made	me	nostalgic.



In	token	of	which,	I	say	aloud,	“Gaewha.”



She	 shifts	 slightly,	 as	 close	 as	 any	 of	 us	 gets	 to	 an	 expression	 of…
recognition?	 Surprise?	 We	 were	 siblings	 once.	 Friends.	 Since	 then,	 rivals,
enemies,	 strangers,	 legends.	 Lately,	 cautious	 allies.	 I	 find	 myself
contemplating	some	of	what	we	were,	but	not	all.	I’ve	forgotten	the	all,	just	as
much	as	she	has.



She	says,	“Was	that	my	name?”



“Close	enough.”



“Hmm.	And	you	were…?”



“Houwha.”



“Ah.	Of	course.”



“You	prefer	Antimony?”



Another	 slight	 movement,	 the	 equivalent	 of	 a	 shrug.	 “I	 have	 no
preference.”



I	think,	Nor	do	I,	but	that	is	a	lie.	I	would	never	have	given	my	new	name
to	you,	Hoa,	if	not	in	homage	to	what	I	remember	of	that	old	name.	But	I’m
woolgathering.



I	say,	“She	is	committed	to	the	change.”



Gaewha,	 Antimony,	 whoever	 and	 whatever	 she	 is	 now,	 replies,	 “I
noticed.”	She	pauses.	“Do	you	regret	what	you	did?”



It’s	a	foolish	question.	All	of	us	regret	that	day,	in	different	ways	and	for
different	reasons.	But	I	say,	“No.”



I	expect	comment	in	return,	but	I	suppose	there’s	really	nothing	to	be	said
anymore.	 She	 makes	 minute	 sounds,	 settling	 into	 the	 rock.	 Getting
comfortable.	 She	 means	 to	 wait	 here	 with	 me.	 I’m	 glad.	 Some	 things	 are
easier	when	not	faced	alone.

***
There	are	things	Alabaster	never	told	you,	about	himself.



I	know	these	things	because	I	studied	him;	he	is	part	of	you,	after	all.	But
not	 every	 teacher	needs	 every	protégé	 to	know	of	his	 every	 stumble	on	 the
journey	to	mastery.	What	would	be	the	point?	None	of	us	got	here	overnight.
There	 are	 stages	 to	 the	 process	 of	 being	 betrayed	 by	 your	 society.	 One	 is
jolted	 from	 a	 place	 of	 complacency	 by	 the	 discovery	 of	 difference,	 by
hypocrisy,	 by	 inexplicable	 or	 incongruous	 ill	 treatment.	 What	 follows	 is	 a
time	of	confusion	–	unlearning	what	one	 thought	 to	be	 the	 truth.	 Immersing
oneself	in	the	new	truth.	And	then	a	decision	must	be	made.



Some	accept	their	fate.	Swallow	their	pride,	forget	the	real	truth,	embrace
the	 falsehood	 for	 all	 they’re	 worth	 –	 because,	 they	 decide,	 they	 cannot	 be
worth	much.	If	a	whole	society	has	dedicated	itself	to	their	subjugation,	after
all,	 then	 surely	 they	 deserve	 it?	 Even	 if	 they	 don’t,	 fighting	 back	 is	 too
painful,	too	impossible.	At	least	this	way	there	is	peace,	of	a	sort.	Fleetingly.



The	alternative	 is	 to	demand	 the	 impossible.	 It	 isn’t	 right,	 they	whisper,
weep,	shout;	what	has	been	done	to	 them	is	not	right.	They	are	not	 inferior.
They	do	not	deserve	it.	And	so	it	is	the	society	that	must	change.	There	can	be
peace	this	way,	too,	but	not	before	conflict.



No	one	reaches	this	place	without	a	false	start	or	two.



When	Alabaster	was	a	young	man,	he	 loved	easily	and	casually.	Oh,	he
was	angry,	even	then;	of	course	he	was.	Even	children	notice	when	they	are
not	treated	fairly.	He	had	chosen	to	cooperate,	however,	for	the	time	being.



He	 met	 a	 man,	 a	 scholar,	 during	 a	 mission	 he’d	 been	 assigned	 by	 the
Fulcrum.	Alabaster’s	 interest	was	prurient;	 the	 scholar	was	quite	handsome,
and	charmingly	shy	in	response	to	Alabaster’s	flirtations.	If	the	scholar	hadn’t
been	busy	excavating	what	turned	out	to	be	an	ancient	lore	cache,	there	would
be	nothing	more	 to	 the	story.	Alabaster	would	have	 loved	him	and	left	him,
perhaps	with	regret,	more	likely	with	no	hard	feelings.



Instead,	 the	 scholar	 showed	 Alabaster	 his	 findings.	 There	 were	 more,
Alabaster	 told	 you,	 than	 just	 three	 tablets	 of	 stonelore,	 originally.	Also,	 the
current	Tablet	Three	was	rewritten	by	Sanze.	It	was	actually	rewritten	again
by	Sanze;	it	had	been	rewritten	several	times	prior	to	that.	The	original	Tablet
Three	 spoke	 of	 Syl	 Anagist,	 you	 see,	 and	 how	 the	 Moon	 was	 lost.	 This
knowledge,	for	many	reasons,	has	been	deemed	unacceptable	again	and	again
down	the	millennia	since.	No	one	really	wants	to	face	the	fact	that	the	world
is	 the	way	 it	 is	 because	 some	 arrogant,	 self-absorbed	 people	 tried	 to	 put	 a
leash	on	the	rusting	planet.	And	no	one	was	ready	to	accept	that	the	solution
to	the	whole	mess	was	simply	to	let	orogenes	live	and	thrive	and	do	what	they
were	born	to	do.



For	Alabaster,	the	lore	cache’s	knowledge	was	overwhelming.	He	fled.	It
was	 too	much	 for	 him,	 the	knowledge	 that	 all	 of	 this	 had	happened	before.
That	he	was	the	scion	of	a	people	abused;	that	those	people’s	forebears	were,
too,	 in	 their	 turn;	 that	 the	 world	 as	 he	 knew	 it	 could	 not	 function	 without
forcing	someone	into	servitude.	At	the	time	he	could	see	no	end	to	the	cycle,
no	way	to	demand	the	impossible	of	society.	So	he	broke,	and	he	ran.



His	Guardian	found	him,	of	course,	 three	quartents	away	from	where	he
was	 supposed	 to	 be	 and	with	no	 inkling	of	where	he	was	going.	 Instead	of
breaking	 his	 hand	 –	 they	 used	 different	 techniques	 with	 highringers	 like
Alabaster	–	Guardian	Leshet	took	him	to	a	tavern	and	bought	him	a	drink.	He
wept	into	his	wine	and	confessed	to	her	 that	he	couldn’t	 take	much	more	of
the	world	as	 it	was.	He	had	 tried	 to	submit,	 tried	 to	embrace	 the	 lies,	but	 it
was	not	right.



Leshet	soothed	him	and	took	him	back	to	the	Fulcrum,	and	for	one	year
they	allowed	Alabaster	time	to	recover.	To	accept	again	the	rules	and	role	that
had	 been	 created	 for	 him.	 He	 was	 content	 during	 this	 year,	 I	 believe;
Antimony	 believes	 it,	 in	 any	 case,	 and	 she	 is	 the	 one	 who	 knew	 him	 best
during	 this	 time.	 He	 settled,	 did	 what	 was	 expected	 of	 him,	 sired	 three
children,	 and	 even	 volunteered	 to	 be	 an	 instructor	 for	 the	 higher-ringed
juniors.	 He	 never	 got	 the	 chance	 to	 act	 on	 this,	 however,	 because	 the
Guardians	 had	 decided	 already	 that	 Alabaster	 could	 not	 go	 unpunished	 for
running	away.	When	he	met	and	fell	 in	 love	with	an	older	 ten-ringer	named
Hessionite	—



I	have	told	you	already	that	they	use	different	methods	on	highringers.



I	ran	away,	too,	once.	In	a	way.
***

It	is	the	day	after	our	return	from	Kelenli’s	tuning	mission,	and	I	am	different.
I	look	through	the	nematode	window	at	the	garden	of	purple	light,	and	it	is	no
longer	beautiful	 to	me.	The	winking	of	 the	white	 star-flowers	 lets	me	know
that	some	genegineer	made	them,	tying	them	into	the	city	power	network	so
that	they	can	be	fed	by	a	bit	of	magic.	How	else	to	get	that	winking	effect?	I
see	 the	 elegant	 vinework	 on	 the	 surrounding	 buildings	 and	 I	 know	 that
somewhere,	a	biomagest	is	tabulating	how	many	lammotyrs	of	magic	can	be
harvested	 from	 such	 beauty.	 Life	 is	 sacred	 in	 Syl	 Anagist	 –	 sacred,	 and
lucrative,	and	useful.



So	 I	 am	 thinking	 this,	 and	 I	 am	 in	a	 foul	mood,	when	one	of	 the	 junior
conductors	comes	in.	Conductor	Stahnyn,	she	is	called,	and	ordinarily	I	 like
her.	 She’s	 young	 enough	 to	 have	 not	 yet	 picked	 up	 the	 worst	 of	 the	 more
experienced	 conductors’	 habits.	And	now	as	 I	 turn	 to	gaze	 at	 her	with	 eyes
that	Kelenli	has	opened,	I	notice	something	new	about	her.	A	bluntness	to	her
features,	a	smallness	to	her	mouth.	Yes,	it’s	much	more	subtle	than	Conductor
Gallat’s	 icewhite	 eyes,	 but	 here	 is	 another	 Sylanagistine	 whose	 ancestors
clearly	didn’t	understand	the	whole	point	of	genocide.



“How	are	you	feeling	today,	Houwha?”	she	asks,	smiling	and	glancing	at
her	noteboard	as	she	comes	in.	“Up	to	a	medical	check?”



“I’m	feeling	up	to	a	walk,”	I	say.	“Let’s	go	out	to	the	garden.”



Stahnyn	starts,	blinking	at	me.	“Houwha,	you	know	that’s	not	possible.”



They	keep	such	lax	security	on	us,	I	have	noticed.	Sensors	to	monitor	our
vitals,	cameras	to	monitor	our	movements,	microphones	to	record	our	sounds.
Some	of	 the	sensors	monitor	our	magic	usage	–	and	none	of	 them,	not	one,
can	measure	even	a	 tenth	of	what	we	really	do.	I	would	be	 insulted	 if	 I	had
not	 just	 been	 shown	 how	 important	 it	 is	 to	 them	 that	 we	 be	 lesser.	 Lesser
creatures	 don’t	 need	 better	monitoring,	 do	 they?	Creations	 of	 Sylanagistine
magestry	 cannot	 possibly	 have	 abilities	 that	 surpass	 it.	 Unthinkable!
Ridiculous!	Don’t	be	foolish.



Fine,	I	am	insulted.	And	I	no	longer	have	the	patience	for	Stahnyn’s	polite
patronization.



So	I	find	the	lines	of	magic	that	run	to	the	cameras,	and	I	entangle	them
with	the	lines	of	magic	that	run	to	their	own	storage	crystals,	and	I	loop	these
together.	Now	the	cameras	will	display	only	footage	that	they	filmed	over	the
last	 few	 hours	 –	which	mostly	 consists	 of	me	 looking	 out	 the	window	 and
brooding.	I	do	the	same	to	the	audio	equipment,	taking	care	to	erase	that	last
exchange	between	me	and	Stahnyn.	I	do	all	of	this	with	barely	a	flick	of	my
will,	 because	 I	 was	 designed	 to	 affect	 machines	 the	 size	 of	 skyscrapers;
cameras	are	nothing.	I	use	more	magic	reaching	for	the	others	to	tell	a	joke.



The	others	sess	what	I	am	doing,	however.	Bimniwha	gets	a	taste	of	my
mood	and	immediately	alerts	the	others	–	because	I	am	the	nice	one,	usually.
I’m	the	one	who,	until	recently,	believed	in	Geoarcanity.	Usually	Remwha	is
the	resentful	one.	But	right	now	Remwha	is	coldly	silent,	stewing	on	what	we
have	 learned.	 Gaewha	 is	 quiet,	 too,	 in	 despair,	 trying	 to	 fathom	 how	 to
demand	 the	 impossible.	 Dushwha	 is	 hugging	 themselves	 for	 comfort	 and
Salewha	 is	 sleeping	 too	much.	 Bimniwha’s	 alert	 falls	 on	 weary,	 frustrated,
self-absorbed	ears,	and	goes	ignored.



Meanwhile,	Stahnyn’s	smile	has	begun	to	falter,	as	she	only	now	realizes
I’m	serious.	She	shifts	her	stance,	putting	hands	on	her	hips.	“Houwha,	 this
isn’t	funny.	I	understand	you	got	the	chance	to	leave	the	other	day	—”



I	have	considered	the	most	efficient	way	to	shut	her	up.	“Does	Conductor
Gallat	know	that	you	find	him	attractive?”



Stahnyn	freezes,	eyes	going	wide	and	round.	Brown	eyes	in	her	case,	but
she	 likes	 icewhite.	 I’ve	 seen	how	 she	 looks	 at	Gallat,	 though	 I	 never	much
cared	before.	 I	don’t	 really	care	now.	But	 I	 imagine	 that	 finding	Niess	eyes
attractive	is	a	taboo	thing	in	Syl	Anagist,	and	neither	Gallat	nor	Stahnyn	can
afford	to	be	accused	of	that	particular	perversion.	Gallat	would	fire	Stahnyn	at
the	first	whisper	of	it	–	even	a	whisper	from	me.



I	go	over	to	her.	She	draws	back	a	little,	frowning	at	my	forwardness.	We
do	not	assert	ourselves,	we	constructs.	We	tools.	My	behavior	is	anomalous	in
a	way	that	she	should	report,	but	that	isn’t	what	has	her	so	worried.	“No	one
heard	me	say	that,”	I	tell	her,	very	gently.	“No	one	can	see	what’s	happening
in	this	room	right	now.	Relax.”



Her	bottom	lip	trembles,	just	a	little,	before	she	speaks.	I	feel	bad,	just	a
little,	 for	having	disturbed	her	 so.	She	says,	“You	can’t	get	 far.	Th-there’s	a
vitamin	deficiency…	You	and	the	others	were	built	that	way.	Without	special
food	–	the	food	we	serve	you	–	you’ll	die	in	just	a	few	days.”



It	only	now	occurs	to	me	that	Stahnyn	thinks	I	mean	to	run	away.



It	only	now	occurs	to	me	to	run	away.



What	the	conductor	has	just	told	me	isn’t	an	insurmountable	hurdle.	Easy
enough	to	steal	food	to	take	with	me,	though	I	would	die	when	it	ran	out.	My
life	would	be	 short	 regardless.	But	 the	 thing	 that	 truly	 troubles	me	 is	 that	 I
have	nowhere	to	go.	All	the	world	is	Syl	Anagist.



“The	 garden,”	 I	 repeat,	 at	 last.	 This	 will	 be	 my	 grand	 adventure,	 my
escape.	I	consider	laughing,	but	the	habit	of	appearing	emotionless	keeps	me
from	doing	so.	I	don’t	really	want	to	go	anywhere,	to	be	honest.	I	just	want	to
feel	like	I	have	some	control	over	my	life,	if	only	for	a	few	moments.	“I	want
to	see	the	garden	for	five	minutes.	That’s	all.”



Stahnyn	 shifts	 from	 foot	 to	 foot,	 visibly	 miserable.	 “I	 could	 lose	 my
position	 for	 this,	 especially	 if	 any	 of	 the	 senior	 conductors	 see.	 I	 could	 be
imprisoned.”



“Perhaps	 they	 will	 give	 you	 a	 nice	 window	 overlooking	 a	 garden,”	 I
suggest.	She	winces.



And	then,	because	I	have	left	her	no	choice,	she	leads	me	out	of	my	cell
and	downstairs,	and	outside.



The	garden	of	purple	flowers	looks	strange	from	this	angle,	I	find,	and	it
is	an	altogether	different	thing	to	smell	the	star-flowers	up	close.	They	smell
strange	–	oddly	sweet,	almost	sugary,	with	a	hint	of	fermentation	underneath
where	 some	 of	 the	 older	 flowers	 have	 wilted	 or	 been	 crushed.	 Stahnyn	 is
fidgety,	looking	around	too	much,	while	I	stroll	slowly,	wishing	I	did	not	need
her	 beside	me.	But	 this	 is	 fact:	 I	 cannot	 simply	wander	 the	 grounds	 of	 the
compound	alone.	If	guards	or	attendants	or	other	conductors	see	us,	they	will
think	Stahnyn	is	on	official	business,	and	not	question	me…	if	she	will	only
be	still.



But	then	I	stop	abruptly,	behind	a	lilting	spider	tree.	Stahnyn	stops	as	well,
frowning	and	plainly	wondering	what’s	happening	–	and	 then	she,	 too,	 sees
what	I	have	seen,	and	freezes.



Up	ahead,	Kelenli	has	come	out	of	 the	compound	 to	stand	between	 two
curling	bushes,	beneath	a	white	rose	arch.	Conductor	Gallat	has	followed	her
out.	She	stands	with	her	arms	folded.	He’s	behind	her,	shouting	at	her	back.
We	 aren’t	 close	 enough	 for	me	 to	 hear	what	 he’s	 saying,	 though	 his	 angry
tone	is	indisputable.	Their	bodies,	however,	are	a	story	as	clear	as	strata.



“Oh,	no,”	mutters	Stahnyn.	“No,	no,	no.	We	should	—”



“Still,”	I	murmur.	I	mean	to	say	be	still,	but	she	quiets	anyway,	so	at	least
I	got	the	point	across.



And	then	we	stand	 there,	watching	Gallat	and	Kelenli	 fight.	 I	can’t	hear
her	voice	at	all,	and	it	occurs	to	me	that	she	cannot	raise	her	voice	to	him;	it
isn’t	safe.	But	when	he	grabs	her	arm	and	yanks	her	around	to	face	him,	she
automatically	 claps	 a	hand	over	her	belly.	The	hand	on	 the	belly	 is	 a	quick
thing.	Gallat	lets	go	at	once,	seemingly	surprised	by	her	reaction	and	his	own
violence,	and	she	moves	the	hand	smoothly	back	to	her	side.	I	don’t	think	he
noticed.	 They	 resume	 arguing,	 and	 this	 time	Gallat	 spreads	 his	 hands	 as	 if
offering	something.	There	is	pleading	in	his	posture,	but	I	notice	how	stiff	his
back	 is.	He	 begs	 –	 but	 he	 thinks	 he	 shouldn’t	 have	 to.	 I	 can	 tell	 that	when
begging	fails,	he	will	resort	to	other	tactics.



I	close	my	eyes,	aching	as	I	finally,	finally,	understand.	Kelenli	is	one	of
us	in	every	way	that	matters,	and	she	always	has	been.



Slowly,	 though,	 she	 unbends.	 Ducks	 her	 head,	 pretends	 reluctant
capitulation,	says	something	back.	It	isn’t	real.	The	earth	reverberates	with	her
anger	 and	 fear	 and	 unwillingness.	 Still,	 some	 of	 the	 stiffness	 goes	 out	 of
Gallat’s	back.	He	smiles,	gestures	more	broadly.	Comes	back	to	her,	takes	her
by	the	arms,	speaks	to	her	gently.	I	marvel	that	she	has	disarmed	his	anger	so
effectively.	 It’s	 as	 if	 he	 doesn’t	 see	 the	way	 her	 eyes	 drift	 away	while	 he’s
talking,	or	how	she	does	not	reciprocate	when	he	pulls	her	closer.	She	smiles
at	 something	 he	 says,	 but	 even	 from	 fifty	 feet	 away	 I	 can	 see	 that	 it	 is	 a
performance.	Surely	he	can	see	it,	too?	But	I	am	also	beginning	to	understand
that	people	believe	what	they	want	to	believe,	not	what	is	actually	there	to	be
seen	and	touched	and	sessed.



So,	mollified,	he	turns	to	leave	–	thankfully	via	a	different	path	out	of	the
garden	 than	 the	 one	 Stahnyn	 and	 I	 currently	 lurk	 upon.	 His	 posture	 has
changed	completely;	he’s	visibly	in	a	better	mood.	I	should	be	glad	for	that,
shouldn’t	I?	Gallat	heads	the	project.	When	he’s	happy,	we	are	all	safer.



Kelenli	stands	gazing	after	him	until	he	is	gone.	Then	her	head	turns	and
she	looks	right	at	me.	Stahnyn	makes	a	choked	sound	beside	me,	but	she	is	a
fool.	Of	course	Kelenli	will	not	report	us.	Why	would	she?	Her	performance
was	never	for	Gallat.



Then	she,	too,	leaves	the	garden,	following	Gallat.



It	was	a	last	lesson.	The	one	I	needed	most,	I	think.	I	tell	Stahnyn	to	take
me	back	to	my	cell,	and	she	practically	moans	with	relief.	When	I’m	back	and
I	have	unwoven	the	magics	of	the	monitoring	equipment,	and	sent	Stahnyn	on
her	way	with	a	gentle	reminder	not	 to	be	a	fool,	I	 lie	down	on	my	couch	to
ponder	this	new	knowledge.	It	sits	in	me,	an	ember	causing	everything	around
it	to	smolder	and	smoke.

***
And	 then,	 several	 nights	 after	we	 return	 from	Kelenli’s	 tuning	mission,	 the
ember	catches	fire	in	all	of	us.



It	 is	 the	 first	 time	 that	 all	 of	 us	 have	 come	 together	 since	 the	 trip.	We
entwine	 our	 presences	 in	 a	 layer	 of	 cold	 coal,	 which	 is	 perhaps	 fitting	 as
Remwha	sends	a	hiss	through	all	of	us	like	sand	grinding	amid	cracks.	It’s	the
sound/feel/sess	of	the	sinklines,	the	briar	patch.	It’s	also	an	echo	of	the	static
emptiness	in	our	network	where	Tetlewha	–	and	Entiwha,	and	Arwha,	and	all
the	others	–	once	existed.



This	is	what	awaits	us	when	we	have	given	them	Geoarcanity,	he	says.



Gaewha	replies,	Yes.



He	hisses	again.	I	have	never	sessed	him	so	angry.	He	has	spent	the	days
since	our	 trip	getting	angrier	and	angrier.	But	 then,	 so	have	 the	 rest	of	us	–
and	 now	 it’s	 time	 for	 us	 to	 demand	 the	 impossible.	We	 should	 give	 them
nothing,	he	declares,	and	then	I	feel	his	resolve	sharpen,	turn	vicious.	No.	We
should	give	back	what	they	have	taken.



Eerie	 minor-note	 pulses	 of	 impression	 and	 action	 ripple	 through	 our
network:	a	plan,	at	last.	A	way	to	create	the	impossible,	if	we	cannot	demand
it.	The	right	sort	of	power	surge	at	just	the	right	moment,	after	the	fragments
have	 been	 launched	 but	 before	 the	 Engine	 has	 been	 spent.	 All	 the	 magic
stored	within	the	fragments	–	decades’	worth,	a	civilization’s	worth,	millions
of	lives’	worth	–	will	flood	back	into	the	systems	of	Syl	Anagist.	First	it	will
burn	out	 the	briar	patches	and	 their	pitiful	crop,	 letting	 the	dead	rest	at	 last.
Next	the	magic	will	blast	through	us,	the	most	fragile	components	of	the	great
machine.	 We’ll	 die	 when	 that	 happens,	 but	 death	 is	 better	 than	 what	 they
intended	for	us,	so	we	are	content.



Once	 we’re	 dead,	 the	 Plutonic	 Engine’s	 magic	 will	 surge	 unrestricted
down	all	 the	conduits	of	 the	city,	 frying	 them	beyond	 repair.	Every	node	of
Syl	 Anagist	 will	 shut	 down	 –	 vehimals	 dying	 unless	 they	 have	 backup
generators,	lights	going	dark,	machinery	stilling,	all	the	infinite	conveniences
of	modern	magestry	 erased	 from	 furnishings	 and	 appliances	 and	 cosmetics.
Generations	 of	 effort	 spent	 preparing	 for	 Geoarcanity	 will	 be	 lost.	 The
Engine’s	crystalline	fragments	will	become	so	many	oversized	rocks,	broken
and	burnt	and	powerless.



We	need	not	be	as	cruel	as	 they.	We	can	 instruct	 the	 fragments	 to	come
down	away	from	the	most	inhabited	areas.	We	are	the	monsters	they	created,
and	more,	but	we	will	be	the	sort	of	monsters	we	wish	to	be,	in	death.



And	are	we	agreed,	then?



Yes.	Remwha,	furious.



Yes.	Gaewha,	sorrowful.



Yes.	Bimniwha,	resigned.



Yes.	Salewha,	righteous.



Yes.	Dushwha,	weary.



And	I,	heavy	as	lead,	say,	Yes.



So	we	are	agreed.



Only	to	myself	do	I	think,	No,	with	Kelenli’s	face	in	my	mind’s	eye.	But
sometimes,	when	the	world	is	hard,	love	must	be	harder	still.

***
Launch	Day.



We	are	brought	nourishment	–	protein	with	a	side	of	fresh	sweet	fruit,	and
a	drink	 that	we	are	 told	 is	a	popular	delicacy:	sef,	which	 turns	pretty	colors
when	 various	 vitamin	 supplements	 are	 added	 to	 it.	 A	 special	 drink	 for	 a
special	day.	It’s	chalky.	I	don’t	like	it.	Then	it	is	time	to	travel	to	Zero	Site.



Here	is	how	the	Plutonic	Engine	works,	briefly	and	simply.



First	we	will	 awaken	 the	 fragments,	which	 have	 sat	 in	 their	 sockets	 for
decades	 channeling	 life-energy	 through	 each	 node	 of	 Syl	 Anagist	 –	 and
storing	 some	of	 it	 for	 later	use,	 including	 that	which	was	 force-fed	 to	 them
through	 the	 briar	 patches.	 They	 have	 now	 reached	 optimum	 storage	 and
generation,	 however,	 each	 becoming	 a	 self-contained	 arcane	 engine	 of	 its
own.	Now	when	we	summon	them,	the	fragments	will	rise	from	their	sockets.
We’ll	join	their	power	together	in	a	stable	network	and,	after	bouncing	it	off	a
reflector	 that	will	 amplify	 and	 concentrate	 the	magic	 still	 further,	 pour	 this
into	the	onyx.	The	onyx	will	direct	this	energy	straight	into	the	Earth’s	core,
causing	 an	 overflow	 –	 which	 the	 onyx	 will	 then	 shunt	 into	 Syl	 Anagist’s
hungry	conduits.	 In	effect,	 the	Earth	will	become	a	massive	plutonic	engine
too,	the	dynamo	that	is	its	core	churning	forth	far	more	magic	than	is	put	into
it.	 From	 there,	 the	 system	 will	 become	 self-perpetuating.	 Syl	 Anagist	 will
feed	upon	the	life	of	the	planet	itself,	forever.



(Ignorance	is	an	inaccurate	term	for	what	this	was.	True,	no	one	thought
of	the	Earth	as	alive	in	those	days	–	but	we	should	have	guessed.	Magic	is	the
by-product	of	life.	That	there	was	magic	in	the	Earth	to	take…	We	should	all
have	guessed.)



Everything	we	have	done,	up	to	now,	has	been	practice.	We	could	never
have	 activated	 the	 full	 Plutonic	 Engine	 here	 on	 Earth	 –	 too	 many
complications	 involving	 the	 obliqueness	 of	 angles,	 signal	 speed	 and
resistance,	the	curvature	of	the	hemisphere.	So	awkwardly	round,	planets.	Our
target	is	the	Earth,	after	all;	lines	of	sight,	lines	of	force	and	attraction.	If	we
stay	on	the	planet,	all	we	can	really	affect	is	the	Moon.



Which	is	why	Zero	Site	has	never	been	on	Earth.



Thus	in	the	small	hours	of	the	morning	we	are	brought	to	a	singular	sort	of
vehimal,	 doubtless	 genegineered	 from	 grasshopper	 stock	 or	 something
similar.	 It	 is	 diamond-winged	but	 also	has	great	 carbon-fiber	 legs,	 steaming
now	 with	 coiled,	 stored	 power.	 As	 the	 conductors	 usher	 us	 aboard	 this
vehimal,	I	see	other	vehimals	being	made	ready.	A	large	party	means	to	come
with	us	to	watch	the	great	project	conclude	at	last.	I	sit	where	I	am	told,	and
all	of	us	are	strapped	in	because	the	vehimal’s	thrust	can	sometimes	overcome
geomagestric	inertial…	Hmm.	Suffice	it	to	say,	the	launch	can	be	somewhat
alarming.	 It	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 plunging	 into	 the	 heart	 of	 a	 living,
churning	fragment,	but	I	suppose	the	humans	think	it	a	grand,	wild	thing.	The
six	of	us	sit,	still	and	cold	with	purpose	as	they	chatter	around	us,	while	the
vehimal	leaps	up	to	the	Moon.



On	 the	Moon	 is	 the	moonstone	 –	 a	massive,	 iridescent	white	 cabochon
embedded	in	the	thin	gray	soil	of	the	place.	It	is	the	largest	of	the	fragments,
fully	 as	 big	 as	 a	 node	 of	 Syl	 Anagist	 itself;	 the	 whole	 of	 the	Moon	 is	 its
socket.	Arranged	 around	 its	 edges	 sits	 a	 complex	 of	 buildings,	 each	 sealed
against	the	airless	dark,	which	are	not	so	very	different	from	the	buildings	we
just	 left.	They’re	 just	on	 the	Moon.	This	 is	Zero	Site,	where	history	will	be
made.



We	are	led	inside,	where	permanent	Zero	Site	staff	line	the	halls	and	stare
at	us	in	proud	admiration,	as	one	admires	precision-made	instruments.	We	are
led	 to	 cradles	 that	 look	 precisely	 like	 the	 cradles	 used	 every	 day	 for	 our
practices	–	although	 this	 time,	each	of	us	 is	 taken	 to	a	separate	 room	of	 the
compound.	 Adjoining	 each	 room	 is	 the	 conductors’	 observation	 chamber,
connected	 via	 a	 clear	 crystal	 window.	 I’m	 used	 to	 being	 observed	 while	 I
work	 –	 but	 not	 used	 to	 being	 brought	 into	 the	 observation	 room	 itself,	 as
happens	today	for	the	very	first	time.



There	I	stand,	short	and	plainly	dressed	and	palpably	uncomfortable	amid
tall	people	in	rich,	complex	clothing,	while	Gallat	introduces	me	as	“Houwha,
our	finest	tuner.”	This	statement	alone	proves	that	either	the	conductors	really
have	 no	 clue	 how	 we	 function,	 or	 that	 Gallat	 is	 nervous	 and	 groping	 for
something	 to	 say.	 Perhaps	 both.	Dushwha	 laughs	 a	 cascading	microshake	 –
the	Moon’s	strata	are	thin	and	dusty	and	dead,	but	not	much	different	from	the
Earth’s	–	while	I	stand	there	and	mouth	pleasant	greetings,	as	I	am	expected
to	 do.	Maybe	 that’s	what	Gallat	 really	means:	 I’m	 the	 tuner	who	 is	 best	 at
pretending	that	he	cares	about	conductor	nonsense.



Something	 catches	 my	 attention,	 though,	 as	 the	 introductions	 are	 made
and	 small	 talk	 is	 exchanged	 and	 I	 concentrate	 on	 saying	 correct	 things	 at
correct	 times.	 I	 turn	 and	 notice	 a	 stasis	 column	 near	 the	 back	 of	 the	 room,
humming	faintly	and	flickering	with	its	own	plutonic	energies,	generating	the
field	 that	 keeps	 something	within	 stable.	 And	 floating	 above	 its	 cut-crystal
surface	—



There	is	a	woman	in	the	room	who	is	taller	and	more	elaborately	dressed
than	everyone	else.	She	follows	my	gaze	and	says	to	Gallat,	“Do	they	know
about	the	test	bore?”



Gallat	twitches	and	looks	at	me,	then	at	the	stasis	column.	“No,”	he	says.
He	doesn’t	name	the	woman	or	give	her	a	title,	but	his	tone	is	very	respectful.
“They’ve	been	told	only	what’s	necessary.”



“I	would	think	context	is	necessary,	even	with	your	kind.”	Gallat	bristles
at	being	lumped	in	with	us,	but	he	says	nothing	in	response	to	it.	The	woman
looks	 amused.	She	bends	down	 to	peer	 into	my	 face,	 although	 I’m	not	 that
much	 shorter	 than	 her.	 “Would	 you	 like	 to	 know	what	 that	 artifact	 is,	 little
tuner?”



I	immediately	hate	her.	“Yes,	please,”	I	say.



She	takes	my	hand	before	Gallat	can	stop	her.	It	isn’t	uncomfortable.	Her
skin	is	dry.	She	leads	me	over	near	the	stasis	column,	so	that	I	can	now	get	a
good	look	at	the	thing	that	floats	above	it.



At	first	I	think	that	what	I’m	seeing	is	nothing	more	than	a	spherical	lump
of	iron,	hovering	a	few	inches	above	the	stasis	column’s	surface	and	underlit
by	its	white	glow.	It	 is	only	a	 lump	of	 iron,	 its	surface	crazed	with	slanting,
circuitous	 lines.	 A	 meteor	 fragment?	 No.	 I	 realize	 the	 sphere	 is	 moving	 –
spinning	 slowly	 on	 a	 slightly	 tilted	 north-south	 axis.	 I	 look	 at	 the	 warning
symbols	 around	 the	 column’s	 rim	 and	 see	 markers	 for	 extreme	 heat	 and
pressure,	and	a	caution	against	breaching	the	stasis	field.	Within,	the	markers
say,	it	has	re-created	the	object’s	native	environment.



No	 one	 would	 do	 this	 for	 a	 mere	 lump	 of	 iron.	 I	 blink,	 adjust	 my
perception	to	the	sesunal	and	magical,	and	draw	back	quickly	as	searing	white
light	 blazes	 at	 and	 through	 me.	 The	 iron	 sphere	 is	 full	 of	 magic	 –
concentrated,	crackling,	overlapping	threads	upon	threads	of	it,	some	of	them
even	extending	beyond	its	surface	and	outward	and…	away.	I	can’t	follow	the
ones	that	whitter	away	beyond	the	room;	they	extend	beyond	my	reach.	I	can
see	that	they	stretch	off	toward	the	sky,	though,	for	some	reason.	And	written
in	the	jittering	threads	that	I	can	see…	I	frown.



“It’s	angry,”	 I	 say.	And	familiar.	Where	have	 I	 seen	something	 like	 this,
this	magic,	before?



The	woman	blinks	at	me.	Gallat	groans	under	his	breath.	“Houwha	—”



“No,”	the	woman	says,	holding	up	a	hand	to	quell	him.	She	focuses	on	me
again	with	 a	 gaze	 that	 is	 intent	 now,	 and	 curious.	 “What	 did	 you	 say,	 little
tuner?”



I	face	her.	She	is	obviously	important.	Perhaps	I	should	be	afraid,	but	I’m
not.	 “That	 thing	 is	 angry,”	 I	 say.	 “Furious.	 It	 doesn’t	want	 to	 be	 here.	You
took	it	from	somewhere	else,	didn’t	you?”



Others	 in	 the	 room	 have	 noticed	 this	 exchange.	 Not	 all	 of	 them	 are
conductors,	but	all	of	them	look	at	the	woman	and	me	in	palpable	unease	and
confusion.	I	hear	Gallat	holding	his	breath.



“Yes,”	 she	 says	 to	 me,	 finally.	 “We	 drilled	 a	 test	 bore	 at	 one	 of	 the
Antarctic	 nodes.	 Then	we	 sent	 in	 probes	 that	 took	 this	 from	 the	 innermost
core.	 It’s	 a	 sample	 of	 the	 world’s	 own	 heart.”	 She	 smiles,	 proud.	 “The
richness	of	magic	at	the	core	is	precisely	what	will	enable	Geoarcanity.	That
test	is	why	we	built	Corepoint,	and	the	fragments,	and	you.”



I	look	at	the	iron	sphere	again	and	marvel	that	she	stands	so	close	to	it.	It
is	angry,	I	think	again,	without	really	knowing	why	these	words	come	to	me.
It	will	do	what	it	has	to	do.



Who?	Will	do	what?



I	shake	my	head,	inexplicably	annoyed,	and	turn	to	Gallat.	“Shouldn’t	we
get	started?”



The	 woman	 laughs,	 delighted.	 Gallat	 glowers	 at	 me,	 but	 he	 relaxes
fractionally	 when	 it	 becomes	 obvious	 that	 the	 woman	 is	 amused.	 Still,	 he
says,	“Yes,	Houwha.	I	think	we	should.	If	you	don’t	mind	—”



(He	addresses	the	woman	by	some	title,	and	some	name.	I	will	forget	both
with	 the	 passage	 of	 time.	 In	 forty	 thousand	 years	 I	will	 remember	 only	 the
woman’s	 laugh,	 and	 the	way	 she	considers	Gallat	no	different	 from	us,	 and
how	carelessly	she	stands	near	an	iron	sphere	that	radiates	pure	malice	–	and
enough	magic	to	destroy	every	building	in	Zero	Site.



And	 I	 will	 remember	 how	 I,	 too,	 dismissed	 every	 possible	 warning	 of
what	was	to	come.)



Gallat	 takes	me	back	 into	 the	 cradle	 room,	where	 I	 am	bidden	 to	 climb
into	my	wire	chair.	My	limbs	are	strapped	down,	which	I’ve	never	understood
because	when	I’m	in	the	amethyst,	I	barely	notice	my	body,	let	alone	move	it.
The	sef	has	made	my	lips	tingle	in	a	way	that	suggests	a	stimulant	was	added.
I	didn’t	need	it.



I	reach	for	the	others,	and	find	them	granite-steady	with	resolve.	Yes.



Images	appear	on	the	viewing	wall	before	me,	displaying	the	blue	sphere
of	 the	Earth,	 each	of	 the	other	 five	 tuners’	 cradles,	 and	 a	 shot	of	Corepoint
with	the	onyx	hovering	ready	above	it.	The	other	tuners	look	back	at	me	from
their	 images.	Gallat	 comes	 over	 and	makes	 a	 show	of	 checking	 the	 contact
points	 of	 the	 wire	 chair,	 which	 are	 meant	 to	 send	 measurements	 to	 the
Biomagestric	division.	“You’re	to	hold	the	onyx,	today,	Houwha.”



From	 another	 building	 of	 Zero	 Site,	 I	 feel	 Gaewha’s	 small	 twitch	 of
surprise.	We’re	 very	 attuned	 to	 one	 another	 today.	 I	 say,	 “Kelenli	 holds	 the
onyx.”



“Not	anymore.”	Gallat	keeps	his	head	down	as	he	speaks,	unnecessarily
reaching	over	to	check	my	straps,	and	I	remember	him	reaching	the	same	way
to	 pull	Kelenli	 back	 to	 him,	 in	 the	 garden.	Ah,	 I	 understand,	 now.	All	 this
while	he	has	been	afraid	to	lose	her…	to	us.	Afraid	to	make	her	just	another
tool	in	the	eyes	of	his	superiors.	Will	they	let	him	keep	her,	after	Geoarcanity?
Or	does	he	 fear	 that	 she,	 too,	will	be	 thrown	 into	 the	briar	patch?	He	must.
Why	 else	make	 such	 a	 significant	 change	 to	 our	 configuration	 on	 the	most
important	day	in	human	history?



As	 if	 to	 confirm	my	 guess,	 he	 says,	 “Biomagestry	 says	 you	 now	 show
more	 than	 sufficient	 compatibility	 to	 hold	 the	 connection	 for	 the	 required
length	of	time.”



He’s	watching	me,	hoping	I	won’t	protest.	I	realize	suddenly	that	I	can	do
so.	With	so	much	scrutiny	on	Gallat’s	every	decision	today,	important	people
will	notice	if	I	insist	that	the	new	configuration	is	a	bad	idea.	I	can,	simply	by
raising	my	voice,	take	Kelenli	from	Gallat.	I	can	destroy	him,	as	he	destroyed
Tetlewha.



But	 that’s	 a	 foolish,	 pointless	 thought,	 because	 how	 can	 I	 exercise	 my
power	over	him	without	hurting	her?	 I’m	going	 to	 hurt	 her	 enough	 as	 it	 is,
when	 we	 turn	 the	 Plutonic	 Engine	 back	 on	 itself.	 She	 should	 survive	 the
initial	convulsion	of	magic;	even	 if	 she’s	 in	contact	with	any	of	 the	devices
that	flux,	she	has	more	than	enough	skill	to	shunt	the	feedback	away.	Then	in
the	aftermath,	she’ll	be	just	another	survivor,	made	equal	in	suffering.	No	one
will	know	what	she	really	is	–	or	her	child,	if	it	ends	up	like	her.	Like	us.	We
will	have	set	her	free…	to	struggle	for	survival	along	with	everyone	else.	But
that	is	better	than	the	illusion	of	safety	in	a	gilded	cage,	is	it	not?



Better	than	you	could	ever	have	given	her,	I	think	at	Gallat.



“All	right,”	I	say.	He	relaxes	minutely.



Gallat	 leaves	my	chamber	and	goes	back	into	the	observation	room	with
the	other	conductors.	 I	 am	alone.	 I	 am	never	alone;	 the	others	are	with	me.
The	 signal	 comes	 that	 we	 should	 begin,	 as	 the	 moment	 seems	 to	 hold	 its
breath.	We	are	ready.



First	the	network.



Attuned	as	we	are,	it	is	easy,	pleasurable,	to	modulate	our	silverflows	and
cancel	out	resistance.	Remwha	plays	yoke,	but	he	hardly	needs	to	goad	any	of
us	to	resonate	higher	or	lower	or	to	pull	at	the	same	pace;	we	are	aligned.	We
all	want	this.



Above	 us,	 yet	 easily	 within	 our	 range,	 the	 Earth	 seems	 to	 hum,	 too.
Almost	like	a	thing	alive.	We	have	been	to	Corepoint	and	back,	in	our	early
training;	we	have	traveled	through	the	mantle	and	seen	the	massive	flows	of
magic	that	churn	naturally	up	from	the	iron-nickel	core	of	the	planet.	To	tap
that	bottomless	font	will	be	the	greatest	feat	of	human	accomplishment,	ever.
Once,	 that	 thought	would	 have	made	me	 proud.	Now	 I	 share	 this	with	 the
others	 and	 a	 shiverstone	 micaflake	 glimmer	 of	 bitter	 amusement	 ripples
through	all	of	us.	They	have	never	believed	us	human,	but	we	will	prove	by
our	actions	 today	that	we	are	more	than	tools.	Even	if	we	aren’t	human,	we
are	people.	They	will	never	be	able	to	deny	us	this	again.



Enough	frivolity.



First	 the	network,	 then	 the	 fragments	of	 the	Engine	must	 be	 assembled.
We	reach	for	the	amethyst	because	it	is	nearest	on	the	globe.	Though	we	are	a
world	away	from	it,	we	know	that	it	utters	a	low	held	note,	its	storage	matrix
glowing	 and	 brimful	 with	 energy	 as	 we	 dive,	 up,	 into	 its	 torrential	 flow.
Already	it	has	stopped	suckling	the	last	dregs	from	the	briar	patch	at	its	roots,
becoming	a	closed	system	in	 itself;	now	it	 feels	almost	alive.	As	we	coax	it
from	quiescence	into	resonant	activity,	it	begins	to	pulse,	and	then	finally	to
shimmer	 in	patterns	 that	 emulate	 life,	 like	 the	 firing	of	neurotransmitters	or
the	 contractions	of	 peristalsis.	 Is	 it	 alive?	 I	wonder	 this	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 a
question	triggered	by	Kelenli’s	lessons.	It	is	a	thing	of	high-state	matter,	but	it
coexists	simultaneously	with	a	thing	of	high-state	magic	made	in	its	image	–
and	taken	from	the	bodies	of	people	who	once	laughed	and	raged	and	sang.	Is
there	anything	left	of	their	will	in	the	amethyst?



If	 so…	would	 the	 Niess	 approve	 of	 what	 we,	 their	 caricature	 children,
mean	to	do?



I	can	spare	no	more	time	for	such	thoughts.	The	decision	has	been	made.



So	we	expand	this	macro-level	start-up	sequence	throughout	the	network.
We	sess	without	sessapinae.	We	 feel	 the	change.	We	know	it	 in	our	bones	–
because	we	are	part	of	this	engine,	components	of	humanity’s	greatest	marvel.
On	Earth,	at	the	heart	of	every	node	of	Syl	Anagist,	klaxons	echo	across	the
city	and	warning	pylons	blaze	red	warnings	that	can	be	seen	from	far	away	as
one	by	one,	the	fragments	begin	to	thrum	and	shimmer	and	detach	from	their
sockets.	 My	 breath	 quickens	 when	 I,	 resonant	 within	 each,	 feel	 the	 first
peeling-away	of	crystal	from	rougher	stone,	 the	drag	as	we	alight	and	begin
pulsing	with	the	state-change	of	magic	and	then	begin	to	rise	—



(There	is	a	stutter	here,	quick	and	barely	noticeable	in	the	heady	moment,
though	glaring	 through	 the	 lens	of	memory.	Some	of	 the	 fragments	hurt	us,
just	a	little,	when	they	detach	from	their	sockets.	We	feel	the	scrape	of	metal
that	should	not	be	there,	the	scratch	of	needles	against	our	crystalline	skin.	We
smell	a	whiff	of	rust.	It’s	quick	pain	and	quickly	forgotten,	as	with	any	needle.
Only	later	will	we	remember,	and	lament.)



—	 rise,	 and	 hum,	 and	 turn.	 I	 inhale	 deeply	 as	 the	 sockets	 and	 their
surrounding	cityscapes	fall	away	below	us.	Syl	Anagist	shunts	over	to	backup
power	systems;	 those	should	hold	until	Geoarcanity.	But	 they	are	 irrelevant,
these	mundane	concerns.	I	flow,	fly,	fall	up	into	rushing	light	that	is	purple	or
indigo	 or	 mauve	 or	 gold,	 the	 spinel	 and	 the	 topaz	 and	 the	 garnet	 and	 the
sapphire	–	so	many,	so	bright!	So	alive	with	building	power.



(So	alive,	 I	 think	 again,	 and	 this	 thought	 sends	 a	 shudder	 through	 the
network,	 because	 Gaewha	 was	 thinking	 it,	 too,	 and	 Dushwha,	 and	 it	 is
Remwha	who	 takes	us	 to	 task	with	a	crack	 like	a	 slipstrike	 fault:	Fools,	we
will	die	if	you	don’t	focus!	So	I	let	this	thought	go.)



And	–	ah,	yes,	framed	there	on-screen,	centered	in	our	perception	like	an
eye	glaring	down	at	 its	quarry:	 the	onyx.	Positioned,	as	Kelenli	 last	bade	 it,
above	Corepoint.



I	am	not	nervous,	I	tell	myself	as	I	reach	for	it.



The	onyx	isn’t	like	the	other	fragments.	Even	the	moonstone	is	quiescent
by	 comparison;	 it	 is	 only	 a	 mirror,	 after	 all.	 But	 the	 onyx	 is	 powerful,
frightening,	the	darkest	of	dark,	unknowable.	Where	the	other	fragments	must
be	 sought	 and	 actively	 engaged,	 it	 snatches	 at	 my	 awareness	 the	 instant	 I
come	near,	 trying	 to	pull	me	deeper	 into	 its	 rampant,	convecting	currents	of
silver.	When	I	have	connected	to	it	before,	the	onyx	has	rejected	me,	as	it	has
done	 for	 all	 the	others	 in	 turn.	The	 finest	magests	 in	Syl	Anagist	 could	not
fathom	why	–	but	now,	when	I	offer	myself	and	the	onyx	claims	me,	suddenly
I	know.	The	onyx	is	alive.	What	is	just	a	question	in	the	other	fragments	has
been	answered	here:	It	sesses	me.	It	learns	me,	touching	me	with	a	presence
that	is	suddenly	undeniable.



And	 in	 the	 very	 moment	 when	 I	 realize	 this	 and	 have	 enough	 time	 to
wonder	fearfully	what	these	presences	think	of	me,	their	pathetic	descendant
made	from	the	fusion	of	their	genes	with	their	destroyers’	hate	—



—	 I	 perceive	 at	 last	 a	 secret	 of	 magestry	 that	 even	 the	 Niess	 simply
accepted	 rather	 than	understood.	This	 is	magic,	 after	 all,	 not	 science.	There
will	always	be	parts	of	it	that	no	one	can	fathom.	But	now	I	know:	Put	enough
magic	into	something	nonliving,	and	it	becomes	alive.	Put	enough	lives	into	a
storage	 matrix,	 and	 they	 retain	 a	 collective	 will,	 of	 sorts.	 They	 remember
horror	and	atrocity,	with	whatever	is	left	of	them	–	their	souls,	if	you	like.



So	the	onyx	yields	to	me	now	because,	it	senses	at	last,	I	too	have	known
pain.	My	eyes	have	been	opened	 to	my	own	exploitation	and	degradation.	 I
am	afraid,	of	course,	and	angry,	and	hurt,	but	 the	onyx	does	not	scorn	these
feelings	within	me.	 It	 seeks	 something	 else,	 however,	 something	more,	 and
finally	 finds	what	 it	 seeks	 nestled	 in	 a	 little	 burning	 knot	 behind	my	 heart:
determination.	 I	 have	 committed	 myself	 to	 making,	 of	 all	 this	 wrongness,
something	right.



That’s	what	the	onyx	wants.	Justice.	And	because	I	want	that	too	—



I	open	my	eyes	in	flesh.	“I’ve	engaged	the	control	cabochon,”	I	report	for
the	conductors.



“Confirmed,”	 says	 Gallat,	 looking	 at	 the	 screen	 where	 Biomagestry
monitors	 our	 neuroarcanic	 connections.	 Applause	 breaks	 out	 among	 our
observers,	and	I	feel	sudden	contempt	for	them.	Their	clumsy	instruments	and
their	weak,	simple	sessapinae	have	finally	told	them	what	is	as	obvious	to	us
as	breathing.	The	Plutonic	Engine	is	up	and	running.



Now	 that	 the	 fragments	 have	 all	 launched,	 each	 one	 rising	 to	 hum	 and
flicker	 and	hover	over	 two	hundred	and	 fifty-six	 city-nodes	 and	 seismically
energetic	points,	we	begin	the	ramp-up	sequence.	Among	the	fragments,	 the
pale-colored	flow	buffers	ignite	first,	then	we	upcycle	the	deeper	jewel	tones
of	 the	 generators.	 The	 onyx	 acknowledges	 sequence	 initialization	 with	 a
single,	heavy	blat	of	sound	that	sends	ripples	across	the	Hemispheric	Ocean.



My	skin	is	tight,	my	heart	a-thud.	Somewhere,	in	another	existence,	I	have
clenched	 my	 fists.	 We	 have	 done	 so,	 across	 the	 paltry	 separation	 of	 six
different	 bodies	 and	 two	hundred	 and	 fifty-six	 arms	 and	 legs	 and	one	 great
black	pulsing	heart.	My	mouth	opens	 (our	mouths	open)	as	 the	onyx	aligns
itself	perfectly	 to	 tap	 the	ceaseless	churn	of	earth-magic	where	 the	core	 lies
exposed	far,	far	below.	Here	is	the	moment	that	we	were	made	for.



Now,	we	are	meant	to	say.	This,	here,	connect,	and	we	will	lock	the	raw
magical	flows	of	the	planet	into	an	endless	cycle	of	service	to	humankind.



Because	 this	 is	 what	 the	 Sylanagistines	 truly	 made	 us	 for:	 to	 affirm	 a
philosophy.	Life	is	sacred	in	Syl	Anagist	–	as	it	should	be,	for	the	city	burns
life	as	the	fuel	for	its	glory.	The	Niess	were	not	the	first	people	chewed	up	in
its	maw,	just	the	latest	and	cruelest	extermination	of	many.	But	for	a	society
built	 on	 exploitation,	 there	 is	 no	 greater	 threat	 than	 having	 no	 one	 left	 to
oppress.	And	now,	if	nothing	else	is	done,	Syl	Anagist	must	again	find	a	way
to	fission	its	people	into	subgroupings	and	create	reasons	for	conflict	among
them.	There’s	not	enough	magic	to	be	had	just	from	plants	and	genegineered
fauna;	someone	must	suffer,	if	the	rest	are	to	enjoy	luxury.



Better	the	earth,	Syl	Anagist	reasons.	Better	to	enslave	a	great	inanimate
object	 that	cannot	feel	pain	and	will	not	object.	Better	Geoarcanity.	But	 this
reasoning	is	still	flawed,	because	Syl	Anagist	is	ultimately	unsustainable.	It	is
parasitic;	its	hunger	for	magic	grows	with	every	drop	it	devours.	The	Earth’s
core	is	not	limitless.	Eventually,	if	it	takes	fifty	thousand	years,	that	resource
will	be	exhausted,	too.	Then	everything	dies.



What	we	are	doing	 is	pointless	and	Geoarcanity	 is	a	 lie.	And	if	we	help
Syl	Anagist	further	down	this	path,	we	will	have	said,	What	was	done	 to	us
was	right	and	natural	and	unavoidable.



No.



So.	Now,	we	say	instead.	This,	here,	connect:	pale	fragments	to	dark,	all
fragments	 to	 the	 onyx,	 and	 the	 onyx…	back	 to	Syl	Anagist.	We	detach	 the
moonstone	 from	 the	 circuit	 entirely.	 Now	 all	 the	 power	 stored	 in	 the
fragments	will	blast	 through	the	city,	and	when	the	Plutonic	Engine	dies,	so
will	Syl	Anagist.



It	begins	and	ends	long	before	the	conductors’	instruments	even	register	a
problem.	With	the	others	joined	to	me,	our	tune	gone	silent	as	we	settle	and
wait	for	the	feedback	loop	to	hit	us,	I	find	myself	content.	It	will	be	good	not
to	die	alone.

***
But.



But.	



Remember.	We	were	not	the	only	ones	who	chose	to	fight	back	that	day.



This	 is	 a	 thing	 I	 will	 realize	 only	 later,	 when	 I	 visit	 the	 ruins	 of	 Syl
Anagist	and	look	into	empty	sockets	to	see	iron	needles	protruding	from	their
walls.	This	is	an	enemy	I	will	understand	only	after	I	have	been	humbled	and
remade	at	its	feet…	but	I	will	explain	it	now,	so	that	you	may	learn	from	my
suffering.



I	spoke	to	you,	not	long	ago,	of	a	war	between	the	Earth	and	the	life	upon
its	 surface.	 Here	 is	 some	 enemy	 psychology:	 The	 Earth	 sees	 no	 difference
between	 any	 of	 us.	Orogene,	 still,	 Sylanagistine,	Niess,	 future,	 past	 –	 to	 it,
humanity	 is	 humanity.	 And	 even	 if	 others	 had	 commanded	 my	 birth	 and
development;	even	if	Geoarcanity	has	been	a	dream	of	Syl	Anagist	since	long
before	 even	my	 conductors	were	 born;	 even	 if	 I	was	 just	 following	 orders;
even	if	the	six	of	us	meant	to	fight	back…	the	Earth	did	not	care.	We	were	all
guilty.	All	complicit	in	the	crime	of	attempting	to	enslave	the	world	itself.



Now,	 though,	 having	 pronounced	 us	 all	 guilty,	 the	 Earth	 handed	 out
sentences.	Here,	at	least,	it	was	somewhat	willing	to	offer	credit	for	intent	and
good	behavior.



This	 is	 what	 I	 remember,	 and	 what	 I	 pieced	 together	 later,	 and	 what	 I
believe.	But	remember	–	never	forget	–	that	this	was	only	the	beginning	of	the
war.

***
We	perceive	the	disruption	first	as	a	ghost	in	the	machine.



A	presence	alongside	us,	inside	us,	intense	and	intrusive	and	immense.	It
slaps	the	onyx	from	my	grasp	before	I	know	what’s	happening,	and	silences
our	 startled	 signals	 of	What?	 and	 Something	 is	 wrong	 and	 How	 did	 that
happen?	with	a	shockwave	of	earthtalk	as	stunning	 to	us	as	 the	Rifting	will
one	day	be	to	you.



Hello,	little	enemies.	



In	 the	 conductors’	 observation	 chamber,	 alarms	 finally	 blare.	 We	 are
frozen	 in	 our	 wire	 chairs,	 shouting	 without	 words	 and	 being	 answered	 by
something	 beyond	 our	 comprehension,	 so	 Biomagestry	 only	 notices	 a
problem	when	suddenly	nine	percent	of	 the	Plutonic	Engine	–	 twenty-seven
fragments	–	goes	offline.	I	do	not	see	Conductor	Gallat	gasp	and	exchange	a
horrified	 look	 with	 the	 other	 conductors	 and	 their	 esteemed	 guests;	 this	 is
speculation,	 knowing	what	 I	 know	of	 him.	 I	 imagine	 that	 at	 some	 point	 he
turns	to	a	console	to	abort	the	launch.	I	also	do	not	see,	behind	them,	the	iron
sphere	 pulse	 and	 swell	 and	 shatter,	 destroying	 its	 stasis	 field	 and	peppering
everyone	 in	 the	 chamber	 with	 hot,	 needle-sharp	 iron	 shards.	 I	 do	 hear	 the
screaming	 that	 follows	 while	 the	 iron	 shards	 burn	 their	 way	 up	 veins	 and
arteries,	and	 the	ominous	silence	afterward,	but	 I	have	my	own	problems	 to
deal	with	in	this	particular	moment.



Remwha,	 he	 of	 the	 quickest	 wit,	 slaps	 us	 from	 our	 shock	 with	 the
realization	that	something	else	 is	controlling	 the	Engine.	No	 time	 to	wonder
who	or	why.	Gaewha	perceives	how	and	signals	frantically:	The	twenty-seven
“offline”	 fragments	 are	 still	 active.	 In	 fact,	 they	 have	 formed	 a	 kind	 of
subnetwork	 –	 a	 spare	 key.	 This	 is	 how	 the	 other	 presence	 has	managed	 to
dislodge	 the	 onyx’s	 control.	 Now	 all	 of	 the	 fragments,	 which	 generate	 and
contain	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 Plutonic	 Engine’s	 power,	 are	 under	 hostile	 foreign
control.



I	am	a	proud	creature	at	my	core;	this	is	intolerable.	The	onyx	was	given
to	me	to	hold	–	and	so	I	seize	it	again	and	shove	it	back	into	the	connections
that	comprise	the	Engine,	dislodging	the	false	control	at	once.	Salewha	slams
down	 the	 shockwaves	of	magic	 that	 this	violent	disruption	causes,	 lest	 they
ricochet	throughout	the	Engine	and	touch	off	a	resonance	that	will	–	well,	we
don’t	 actually	 know	what	 such	 resonance	would	 do,	 but	 it	would	 be	 bad.	 I
hold	on	throughout	the	reverberations	of	this,	my	teeth	bared	back	in	the	real
world,	listening	while	my	siblings	cry	out	or	snarl	with	me	or	gasp	amid	the
aftershakes	of	 the	 initial	 upheaval.	Everything	 is	 confusion.	 In	 the	 realm	of
flesh	 and	 blood,	 the	 lights	 of	 our	 chambers	 have	 gone	 out,	 leaving	 only
emergency	panels	to	glow	around	the	edges	of	the	room.	The	warning	klaxons
are	incessant,	and	elsewhere	in	Zero	Site	I	can	hear	equipment	snapping	and
rattling	with	the	overload	that	we	have	put	 into	 the	system.	The	conductors,
screaming	 in	 the	 observation	 chamber,	 cannot	 help	 us	 –	 not	 that	 they	 ever
could.	 I	don’t	know	what’s	happening,	not	 really.	 I	know	only	 that	 this	 is	 a
battle,	full	of	moment-to-moment	confusion	as	all	battles	are,	and	from	here
forth	nothing	is	quite	clear	—



That	strange	presence	that	has	attacked	us	pulls	hard	against	the	Plutonic
Engine,	 trying	 to	 dislodge	 our	 control	 once	more.	 I	 shout	 at	 it	 in	wordless
geyserboil	magmacrack	fury.	Get	out	of	here!	I	rage.	Leave	us	alone!



You	 started	 this,	 it	 hisses	 into	 the	 strata,	 trying	 again.	When	 this	 fails,
however,	it	snarls	in	frustration	–	and	then	locks,	instead,	into	those	twenty-
seven	fragments	that	have	gone	so	mysteriously	offline.	Dushwha	senses	the
hostile	 entity’s	 intent	 and	 tries	 to	 grasp	 some	 of	 the	 twenty-seven,	 but	 the
fragments	slip	 through	their	grasp	as	 if	coated	with	oil.	This	 is	 true	enough,
figuratively	 speaking;	 something	 has	 contaminated	 these	 fragments,	 leaving
them	 fouled	 and	 nearly	 impossible	 to	 grasp.	 We	 might	 manage	 it	 with
concerted	effort,	one	by	one	–	but	there	is	no	time.	And	until	then,	the	enemy
holds	the	twenty-seven.



Stalemate.	We	 still	 hold	 the	 onyx.	We	 hold	 the	 other	 two	 hundred	 and
twenty-nine	 fragments,	which	 are	 ready	 to	 fire	 the	 feedback	 pulse	 that	will
destroy	Syl	Anagist	–	and	ourselves.	We’ve	postponed	that,	however,	because
we	 cannot	 leave	 matters	 like	 this.	 Where	 did	 this	 entity,	 so	 angry	 and
phenomenally	powerful,	come	from?	What	will	it	do	with	the	obelisks	that	it
holds?	Long	moments	pass	in	pent	silence.	I	cannot	speak	for	the	others,	but	I,
at	 least,	 begin	 to	 think	 there	will	 be	 no	 further	 attacks.	 I	 have	 always	 been
such	a	fool.



Into	 the	 silence	 comes	 the	 amused,	 malicious	 challenge	 of	 our	 enemy,
ground	forth	in	magic	and	iron	and	stone.



Burn	for	me,	says	Father	Earth.
***

I	 must	 speculate	 on	 some	 of	 what	 follows,	 even	 after	 all	 these	 ages	 spent
seeking	answers.



I	 can	 narrate	 no	 more	 because	 in	 the	 moment	 everything	 was	 nigh-
instantaneous,	 and	 confusing,	 and	 devastating.	 The	 Earth	 changes	 only
gradually,	until	it	doesn’t.	And	when	it	fights	back,	it	does	so	decisively.



Here	 is	 the	 context.	 That	 first	 test	 bore	 that	 initiated	 the	 Geoarcanity
project	also	alerted	the	Earth	to	humanity’s	efforts	to	take	control	of	it.	Over
the	decades	that	followed,	it	studied	its	enemy	and	began	to	understand	what
we	meant	to	do.	Metal	was	its	instrument	and	ally;	never	trust	metal	for	this
reason.	 It	 sent	 splinters	 of	 itself	 to	 the	 surface	 to	 examine	 the	 fragments	 in
their	sockets	–	for	here,	at	least,	was	life	stored	in	crystal,	comprehensible	to
an	entity	of	inorganic	matter	in	a	way	that	mere	flesh	was	not.	Only	gradually
did	it	learn	how	to	take	control	of	individual	human	lives,	though	it	required
the	 medium	 of	 the	 corestones	 to	 do	 so.	 We	 are	 such	 small,	 hard-to-grasp
creatures,	 otherwise.	 Such	 insignificant	 vermin,	 apart	 from	 our	 unfortunate
tendency	to	sometimes	make	ourselves	dangerously	significant.	The	obelisks,
though,	were	a	more	useful	tool.	Easy	to	turn	back	on	us,	like	any	carelessly
held	weapon.



Burndown.	



Remember	Allia?	 Imagine	 that	disaster	 times	 two	hundred	and	 fifty-six.
Imagine	 the	Stillness	 perforated	 at	 every	 nodal	 point	 and	 seismically	 active
site,	 and	 the	 ocean,	 too	 –	 hundreds	 of	 hot	 spots	 and	 gas	 pockets	 and	 oil
reservoirs	breached,	and	the	entire	plate-tectonic	system	destabilized.	There	is
no	word	 for	 such	 a	 catastrophe.	 It	 would	 liquefy	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 planet,
vaporizing	 the	 oceans	 and	 sterilizing	 everything	 from	 the	 mantle	 up.	 The
world,	for	us	and	any	possible	creature	that	might	ever	evolve	in	the	future	to
hurt	the	Earth,	would	end.	The	Earth	itself	would	be	fine,	however.



We	could	stop	it.	If	we	wanted	to.



I	will	not	 say	we	weren’t	 tempted,	when	 faced	with	 the	choice	between
permitting	 the	 destruction	 of	 a	 civilization,	 or	 of	 all	 life	 on	 the	 planet.	 Syl
Anagist’s	 fate	was	 sealed.	Make	 no	mistake:	We	 had	meant	 to	 seal	 it.	 The
difference	between	what	the	Earth	wanted	and	what	we	wanted	was	merely	a
matter	 of	 scale.	But	which	 is	 the	way	 the	world	 ends?	We	 tuners	would	 be
dead;	 the	distinction	mattered	 little	 to	me	in	 that	moment.	 It’s	never	wise	 to
ask	such	a	question	of	people	who	have	nothing	to	lose.



Except.	I	did	have	something	to	lose.	In	those	eternal	instants,	I	thought	of
Kelenli,	and	her	child.



Thus	it	was	that	my	will	took	precedence	within	the	network.	If	you	have
any	doubt,	I’ll	say	it	plainly	now:	I	am	the	one	who	chose	the	way	the	world
ended.



I	am	the	one	who	took	control	of	the	Plutonic	Engine.	We	could	not	stop
Burndown,	 but	 we	 could	 insert	 a	 delay	 into	 the	 sequence	 and	 redirect	 the
worst	of	its	energy.	After	the	Earth’s	tampering,	the	power	was	too	volatile	to
simply	 pour	 back	 into	 Syl	 Anagist	 as	 we’d	 originally	 planned;	 that	 would
have	 done	 the	 Earth’s	 work	 for	 us.	 That	 much	 kinetic	 force	 had	 to	 be
expended	 somewhere.	 Nowhere	 on	 the	 planet,	 if	 I	 meant	 for	 humanity	 to
survive	–	but	here	were	the	Moon	and	the	moonstone,	ready	and	waiting.



I	was	in	a	hurry.	There	was	no	time	to	second-guess.	The	power	could	not
reflect	from	the	moonstone,	as	it	was	meant	to;	that	would	only	increase	the
power	of	Burndown.	Instead,	with	a	snarl	as	I	grabbed	the	others	and	forced
them	to	help	me	–	they	were	willing,	just	slow	–	we	shattered	the	moonstone
cabochon.



In	the	next	instant,	the	power	struck	the	broken	stone,	failed	to	reflect,	and
began	to	chew	its	way	through	the	Moon.	Even	with	this	to	mitigate	the	blow,
the	 force	of	 impact	was	devastating	 in	 itself.	More	 than	enough	 to	slam	 the
Moon	out	of	orbit.



The	backlash	of	misusing	the	Engine	this	way	should	have	simply	killed
us,	but	 the	Earth	was	still	 there,	 the	ghost	 in	the	machine.	As	we	writhed	in
our	death	 throes,	 all	of	Zero	Site	crumbling	apart	 around	us,	 it	 took	control
again.



I	have	said	that	it	held	us	responsible	for	the	attempt	on	its	life,	and	it	did
–	but	somehow,	perhaps	through	its	years	of	study,	it	understood	that	we	were
tools	of	others,	not	actors	of	our	own	volition.	Remember,	too,	that	the	Earth
does	not	fully	understand	us.	It	looks	upon	human	beings	and	sees	short-lived,
fragile	 creatures,	 puzzlingly	 detached	 in	 substance	 and	 awareness	 from	 the
planet	on	which	their	lives	depend,	who	do	not	understand	the	harm	they	tried
to	do	–	perhaps	because	they	are	so	short-lived	and	fragile	and	detached.	And
so	it	chose	for	us	what	seemed,	to	it,	a	punishment	leavened	with	meaning:	It
made	 us	 part	 of	 it.	 In	 my	 wire	 chair,	 I	 screamed	 as	 wave	 upon	 wave	 of
alchemy	worked	over	me,	changing	my	flesh	into	raw,	living,	solidified	magic
that	looks	like	stone.



We	 didn’t	 get	 the	 worst	 of	 it;	 that	 was	 reserved	 for	 those	 who	 had
offended	 the	 Earth	 the	most.	 It	 used	 the	 corestone	 fragments	 to	 take	 direct
control	of	these	most	dangerous	vermin	–	but	this	did	not	work	as	it	intended.
Human	will	is	harder	to	anticipate	than	human	flesh.	They	were	never	meant
to	continue.



I	will	not	describe	the	shock	and	confusion	I	felt,	in	those	first	hours	after
my	change.	I	will	not	ever	be	able	to	answer	the	question	of	how	I	returned	to
Earth	 from	 the	Moon;	 I	 remember	 only	 a	 nightmare	 of	 endless	 falling	 and
burning,	which	may	have	been	delirium.	I	will	not	ask	you	to	imagine	how	it
felt	to	suddenly	find	oneself	alone,	and	tuneless,	after	a	lifetime	spent	singing
to	others	like	myself.	This	was	justice.	I	accept	it;	I	admit	my	crimes.	I	have
sought	to	make	up	for	them.	But…



Well.	What’s	done	is	done.



In	those	last	moments	before	we	transformed,	we	did	successfully	manage
to	cancel	the	Burndown	command	to	the	two	hundred	and	twenty-nine.	Some
fragments	were	shattered	by	the	stress.	Others	would	die	over	the	subsequent
millennia,	 their	matrices	disrupted	by	 incomprehensible	arcane	 forces.	Most
went	into	standby	mode,	to	continue	drifting	for	millennia	over	a	world	that
no	longer	needed	their	power	–	until,	on	occasion,	one	of	the	fragile	creatures
below	might	send	a	confused,	directionless	request	for	access.



We	could	not	stop	the	Earth’s	twenty-seven.	We	did,	however,	manage	to
insert	a	delay	into	their	command	lattices:	one	hundred	years.	What	the	tales
get	wrong	is	only	the	timing,	you	see?	One	hundred	years	after	Father	Earth’s
child	 was	 stolen	 from	 him,	 twenty-seven	 obelisks	 did	 burn	 down	 to	 the
planet’s	core,	leaving	fiery	wounds	all	over	its	skin.	It	was	not	the	cleansing
fire	 that	 the	Earth	 sought,	but	 it	was	 still	 the	 first	 and	worst	Fifth	Season	–
what	you	call	the	Shattering.	Humankind	survives	because	one	hundred	years
is	nothing	to	the	Earth,	or	even	to	the	expanse	of	human	history,	but	to	those
who	survived	the	fall	of	Syl	Anagist,	it	was	just	time	enough	to	prepare.



The	Moon,	bleeding	debris	from	a	wound	through	its	heart,	vanished	over
a	period	of	days.



And…



I	never	saw	Kelenli,	or	her	child,	again.	Too	ashamed	of	the	monster	I’d
become,	I	never	sought	them	out.	She	lived,	though.	Now	and	again	I	heard
the	grind	and	grumble	of	her	stone	voice,	and	those	of	her	several	children	as
they	were	born.	They	were	not	wholly	alone;	with	the	last	of	their	magestric
technology,	the	survivors	of	Syl	Anagist	decanted	a	few	more	tuners	and	used
them	 to	 build	 shelters,	 contingencies,	 systems	 of	 warning	 and	 protection.
Those	 tuners	 died	 in	 time,	 however,	 as	 their	 usefulness	 ended,	 or	 as	 others
blamed	them	for	the	Earth’s	wrath.	Only	Kelenli’s	children,	who	did	not	stand
out,	whose	strength	hid	in	plain	sight,	continued.	Only	Kelenli’s	legacy,	in	the
form	 of	 the	 lorists	 who	went	 from	 settlement	 to	 settlement	 warning	 of	 the
coming	 holocaust	 and	 teaching	 others	 how	 to	 cooperate,	 adapt,	 and
remember,	remains	of	the	Niess.



It	all	worked,	though.	You	survive.	That	was	my	doing,	too,	isn’t	it?	I	did
my	best.	Helped	where	I	could.	And	now,	my	love,	we	have	a	second	chance.



Time	for	you	to	end	the	world	again.
***

2501:	Fault	line	shift	along	the	Minimal-Maximal:	massive.
Shockwave	swept	through	half	the	Nomidlats	and	Arctics,	but	stopped
at	outer	edge	of	Equatorial	node	network.	Food	prices	rose	sharply
following	year,	but	famine	prevented.

—	Project	notes	of	Yaetr	Innovator	Dibars



13
Nassun	and	Essun,	on	the	dark	side	of	the	world

It’s	sunset	when	Nassun	decides	to	change	the	world.



She	has	spent	the	day	curled	beside	Schaffa,	using	his	still-ash-flecked	old
clothes	as	a	pillow,	breathing	his	scent	and	wishing	for	things	that	cannot	be.
Finally	she	gets	up	and	very	carefully	feeds	him	the	last	of	the	vegetable	broth
she	has	made.	She	gives	him	a	lot	of	water,	too.	Even	after	she	has	dragged
the	Moon	 into	a	collision	course,	 it	will	 take	a	 few	days	for	 the	Earth	 to	be
smashed	apart.	She	doesn’t	want	Schaffa	to	suffer	too	much	in	that	time,	since
she	will	no	longer	be	around	to	help	him.



(She	is	such	a	good	child,	at	her	core.	Don’t	be	angry	with	her.	She	can
only	make	choices	within	 the	 limited	set	of	her	experiences,	and	 it	 isn’t	her
fault	that	so	many	of	those	experiences	have	been	terrible.	Marvel,	instead,	at
how	easily	she	loves,	how	thoroughly.	Love	enough	to	change	the	world!	She
learned	how	to	love	like	this	from	somewhere.)



As	she	uses	a	cloth	to	dab	spilled	broth	from	his	lips,	she	reaches	up	and
begins	 activation	 of	 her	 network.	 Here	 at	 Corepoint,	 she	 can	 do	 it	 without
even	the	onyx,	but	start-up	will	take	time.



“‘A	commandment	is	set	 in	stone,’”	she	tells	Schaffa	solemnly.	His	eyes
are	open	again.	He	blinks,	perhaps	in	reaction	to	the	sound,	though	she	knows
this	is	meaningless.



The	words	are	a	thing	she	read	in	the	strange	handwritten	book	–	the	one
that	 told	 her	 how	 to	 use	 a	 smaller	 network	 of	 obelisks	 as	 a	 “spare	 key”	 to
subvert	 the	onyx’s	power	over	 the	Gate.	The	man	who	wrote	 the	book	was
probably	 crazy,	 as	 evidenced	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 he	 apparently	 loved	Nassun’s
mother	 long	ago.	That	 is	 strange	and	wrong	and	yet	 somehow	unsurprising.
As	big	as	 the	world	 is,	Nassun	 is	beginning	 to	 realize	 it’s	also	 really	 small.
The	 same	 stories,	 cycling	 around	 and	 around.	The	 same	endings,	 again	 and
again.	The	same	mistakes	eternally	repeated.



“Some	 things	 are	 too	 broken	 to	 be	 fixed,	 Schaffa.”	 Inexplicably,	 she
thinks	of	Jija.	The	ache	of	this	silences	her	for	a	moment.	“I…	I	can’t	make
anything	better.	But	I	can	at	least	make	sure	the	bad	things	stop.”	With	that,
she	gets	up	to	leave.



She	does	not	see	Schaffa’s	face	turn,	like	the	Moon	sliding	into	shadow,	to
watch	her	go.

***
It’s	 dawn	 when	 you	 decide	 to	 change	 the	 world.	 You’re	 still	 asleep	 in	 the
bedroll	 that	Lerna	has	brought	up	 to	 the	 roof	of	 the	yellow-X	 building.	You
and	 he	 spent	 the	 night	 under	 the	 water	 tower,	 listening	 to	 the	 ever-present
rumble	of	 the	Rifting	and	 the	 snap	of	occasional	 lightning	 strikes.	Probably
should’ve	had	sex	there	one	more	time,	but	you	didn’t	 think	about	it	and	he
didn’t	 suggest,	 so	 oh	well.	 That’s	 gotten	 you	 into	 enough	 trouble,	 anyway.
Had	no	business	relying	solely	on	middle	age	and	starvation	for	birth	control.



He	watches	 as	 you	 stand	 and	 stretch,	 and	 it’s	 a	 thing	 you’ll	 never	 fully
understand	or	be	comfortable	with	–	the	admiration	in	his	gaze.	He	makes	you
feel	 like	 a	 better	 person	 than	 you	 are.	 And	 this	 is	 what	 makes	 you	 regret,
again,	 endlessly,	 that	 you	 cannot	 stay	 to	 see	 his	 child	 born.	 Lerna’s	 steady,
relentless	goodness	is	a	thing	that	should	be	preserved	in	the	world,	somehow.
Alas.



You	haven’t	earned	his	admiration.	But	you	intend	to.



You	 head	 downstairs	 and	 stop.	 Last	 night,	 in	 addition	 to	 Lerna,	 you	 let
Tonkee	and	Hjarka	and	Ykka	know	that	 it	was	 time	–	 that	you	would	 leave
after	 breakfast	 in	 the	morning.	You	 left	 the	 question	 of	whether	 they	 could
come	with	you	or	not	open	and	unstated.	If	they	volunteer,	it’s	one	thing,	but
you’re	not	going	to	ask.	What	kind	of	person	would	you	be	to	pressure	them
into	that	kind	of	danger?	They’ll	be	in	enough,	just	like	the	rest	of	humanity,
as	it	is.



You	weren’t	counting	on	finding	all	of	them	in	the	lobby	of	the	yellow-X
building	as	you	come	downstairs.	All	of	them	busy	tucking	away	bedrolls	and
yawning	 and	 frying	 sausages	 and	 complaining	 loudly	 about	 somebody
drinking	up	all	 the	 rusting	 tea.	Hoa	 is	 there,	perfectly	positioned	 to	 see	you
come	 downstairs.	 There’s	 a	 rather	 smug	 smile	 on	 his	 stone	 lips,	 but	 that
doesn’t	 surprise	 you.	Danel	 and	Maxixe	 do,	 the	 former	 up	 and	 doing	 some
kind	of	martial	exercises	in	a	corner	while	the	latter	dices	another	potato	for
the	pan	–	and	yes,	he’s	built	a	campfire	in	the	building	lobby,	because	that’s
what	commless	people	do	sometimes.	Some	of	 the	windows	are	broken;	 the
smoke’s	 going	 out	 through	 them.	 Hjarka	 and	 Tonkee	 are	 a	 surprise,	 too;
they’re	still	asleep,	curled	together	in	a	pile	of	furs.



But	you	 really,	 really	weren’t	 expecting	Ykka	 to	walk	 in,	with	an	air	of
something	like	her	old	brashness	and	with	her	eye	makeup	perfectly	applied,
once	again.	She	looks	around	the	lobby,	taking	you	in	along	with	the	rest,	and
puts	her	hands	on	her	hips.	“Catch	you	rusters	at	a	bad	time?”



“You	 can’t,”	 you	 blurt.	 It’s	 hard	 to	 talk.	 Knot	 in	 your	 throat.	 Ykka
especially;	you	stare	at	her.	Evil	Earth,	she’s	wearing	her	fur	vest	again.	You
thought	 she’d	 left	 that	 behind	 in	 Castrima-under.	 “You	 can’t	 come.	 The
comm.”



Ykka	 rolls	 her	 dramatically	 decorated	 eyes.	 “Well,	 fuck	 you,	 too.	 But
you’re	 right,	 I’m	not	 coming.	 Just	 here	 to	 see	 you	 off,	 along	with	whoever
goes	with	you.	I	really	should	be	having	you	killed,	since	you’re	effectively
ashing	yourselves	out,	but	 I	 suppose	we	can	overlook	 that	 little	 technicality
for	now.”



“What,	 we	 can’t	 come	 back?”	 Tonkee	 blurts.	 She’s	 sitting	 up	 finally,
though	 at	 a	 distinct	 lean,	 and	with	 her	 hair	 badly	 askew.	Hjarka,	muttering
imprecations	at	being	awake,	has	gotten	up	and	handed	her	a	plate	of	potato
hash	from	the	pile	Maxixe	has	already	cooked.



Ykka	 eyes	 her.	 “You?	 You’re	 traveling	 to	 an	 enormous,	 perfectly
preserved	obelisk-builder	 ruin.	 I’ll	never	 see	you	again.	But	 sure,	 I	 suppose
you	could	come	back,	 if	Hjarka	manages	 to	drag	you	to	your	senses.	I	need
her,	at	least.”



Maxixe	yawns	 loudly	 enough	 to	 draw	 everyone’s	 attention.	He’s	 naked,
which	 lets	you	 see	 that	he’s	 looking	better	 at	 last	–	 still	nearly	 skeletal,	but
that’s	 half	 the	 comm	 these	 days.	He’s	 coughing	 less,	 though,	 and	his	 hair’s
starting	 to	grow	 fuller,	 although	 so	 far	 it’s	only	at	 that	hilarious	bottlebrush
stage	before	 ashblow	hair	 develops	 enough	weight	 to	 flop	decently.	 It’s	 the
first	time	you’ve	seen	his	leg-stumps	unclothed,	and	you	belatedly	realize	the
scars	 are	 far	 too	 neat	 to	 have	 been	 done	 by	 some	 commless	 raider	 with	 a
hacksaw.	Well,	that’s	his	story	to	tell.	You	say	to	him,	“Don’t	be	stupid.”



Maxixe	looks	mildly	annoyed.	“I’m	not	going,	no.	But	I	could	be.”



“No,	you	 rusting	 couldn’t,”	Ykka	 snaps.	 “I	 already	 told	you,	we	need	 a
Fulcrum	rogga	here.”



He	 sighs.	 “Fine.	 But	 no	 reason	 I	 can’t	 at	 least	 see	 you	 off.	 Now	 stop
asking	 questions	 and	 come	 get	 some	 food.”	He	 reaches	 for	 his	 clothes	 and
starts	to	pull	them	on.	You	obediently	go	over	to	the	fire	to	eat	something.	No
morning	sickness	yet;	that’s	a	bit	of	luck.



As	you	eat,	you	watch	everyone	and	find	yourself	overwhelmed,	and	also
a	 little	 frustrated.	Of	 course	 it’s	 touching	 that	 they’ve	 come	 like	 this	 to	 say
goodbye.	You’re	glad	of	it;	you	can’t	even	pretend	otherwise.	When	have	you
ever	left	a	place	this	way	–	openly,	nonviolently,	amid	laughter?	It	feels…	you
don’t	know	how	it	feels.	Good?	You	don’t	know	what	to	do	with	that.



You	 hope	more	 of	 them	 decide	 to	 stay	 behind,	 though.	 As	 it	 is,	 Hoa’s
going	to	be	hauling	a	rusting	caravan	through	the	earth.



But	when	you	eye	Danel,	you	blink	in	surprise.	She’s	cut	her	hair	again;
really	doesn’t	 seem	 to	 like	 it	 long.	Fresh	 shaving	on	 the	 sides,	 and…	black
tint,	on	her	lips.	Earth	knows	where	she	found	it,	or	maybe	she	made	it	herself
out	of	 charcoal	 and	 fat.	But	 it’s	 suddenly	hard	 to	 see	her	 as	 the	Strongback
general	she	was.	Wasn’t.	It	changes	things,	somehow,	to	understand	that	you
go	to	face	a	fate	 that	an	Equatorial	 lorist	wants	 to	record	for	posterity.	Now
it’s	not	just	a	caravan.	It’s	a	rusting	quest.



The	thought	pulls	a	snort-laugh	out	of	you,	and	everyone	pauses	in	what
they’re	 doing	 to	 stare.	 “Nothing,”	 you	 say,	 waving	 a	 hand	 and	 setting	 the
empty	plate	aside.	“Just…	shit.	Come	on,	then,	whoever’s	coming.”



Someone’s	brought	Lerna	his	pack,	which	he	dons	quietly,	watching	you.
Tonkee	 curses	 and	 starts	 rushing	 to	 get	 herself	 together,	 while	 Hjarka
patiently	helps.	Danel	uses	a	rag	to	mop	sweat	from	her	face.



You	 go	 over	 to	 Hoa,	 who	 has	 shaped	 his	 expression	 into	 one	 of	 wry
amusement,	 and	 stand	 beside	 him	 to	 sigh	 at	 the	mess.	 “Can	 you	 bring	 this
many?”



“As	 long	as	 they	 remain	 in	contact	with	me	or	someone	who’s	 touching
me,	yes.”



“Sorry.	I	wasn’t	expecting	this.”



“Weren’t	you?”



You	 look	 at	 him,	 but	 then	 Tonkee	 –	 still	 chewing	 something	 and
shouldering	her	pack	with	her	good	arm	–	grabs	his	upraised	hand,	though	she
pauses	to	blatantly	stare	at	it	in	fascination.	The	moment	passes.



“So	 how’s	 this	 supposed	 to	 work?”	 Ykka	 paces	 the	 room,	 watching
everyone	 and	 folding	 her	 arms.	 She’s	 noticeably	 more	 restless	 than	 usual.
“You	get	there,	grab	the	Moon,	shove	it	into	position,	and	then	what?	Will	we
see	any	sign	of	the	change?”



“The	Rifting	will	go	cold,”	you	say.	“That	won’t	change	much	in	the	short
term	because	there’s	too	much	ash	in	the	air	already.	This	Season	will	have	to
play	itself	out,	and	it’s	going	to	be	bad	no	matter	what.	The	Moon	might	even
make	 things	 worse.”	 You	 can	 sess	 it	 pulling	 on	 the	 world	 already;	 yeah,
you’re	pretty	sure	it’ll	make	things	worse.	Ykka	nods,	though.	She	can	sess	it,
too.



But	there’s	a	long-term	loose	end	that	you	haven’t	been	able	to	figure	out
yourself.	 “If	 I	 can	do	 it,	 though,	 restore	 the	Moon…”	You	 shrug	helplessly
and	look	at	Hoa.



“It	 opens	 room	 for	 negotiation,”	 he	 says	 in	 his	 hollow	 voice.	 Everyone
pauses	to	stare	at	him.	By	the	flinches,	you	can	tell	who’s	used	to	stone	eaters
and	who	isn’t.	“And	perhaps,	a	truce.”



Ykka	grimaces.	“‘Perhaps’?	So	we’ve	gone	through	all	this	and	you	can’t
even	be	sure	it	will	stop	the	Seasons?	Evil	Earth.”



“No,”	you	admit.	“But	it	will	stop	this	Season.”	That	much	you’re	sure	of.
That	much,	alone,	is	worth	it.



Ykka	subsides,	but	she	keeps	muttering	to	herself	now	and	again.	This	is
how	you	know	she	wants	to	go,	too	–	but	you’re	very	glad	she	seems	to	have
talked	herself	out	of	it.	Castrima	needs	her.	You	need	to	know	that	Castrima
will	be	here	after	you’re	gone.



Finally	 everyone	 is	 ready.	 You	 take	 Hoa’s	 right	 hand	 with	 your	 left.
You’ve	got	no	other	arm	to	spare	for	Lerna,	so	he	wraps	an	arm	around	your
waist;	when	you	glance	at	him	he	nods,	steady,	determined.	On	Hoa’s	other
side	are	Tonkee	and	Hjarka	and	Danel,	chain-linked	hand	to	hand.



“This	is	going	to	blow,	isn’t	it?”	Hjarka	asks.	She	alone	looks	nervous,	of
the	 set.	 Danel’s	 radiating	 calm,	 at	 peace	 with	 herself	 at	 last.	 Tonkee’s	 so
excited	she	can’t	stop	grinning.	Lerna’s	 just	 leaning	on	you,	rock-steady	the
way	he	always	is.



“Probably!”	Tonkee	says,	bouncing	a	little.



“This	 seems	 like	 a	 spectacularly	 bad	 idea,”	 Ykka	 says.	 She’s	 leaned
against	 a	 wall	 of	 the	 room,	 arms	 folded,	 watching	 the	 group	 assemble.
“Essie’s	got	to	go,	I	mean,	but	the	rest	of	you…”	She	shakes	her	head.



“Would	 you	 be	 coming,	 if	 you	 weren’t	 headwoman?”	 Lerna	 asks.	 It’s
quiet.	He	always	drops	his	biggest	rocks	like	that,	quietly	and	out	of	nowhere.



She	 scowls	 and	 glares	 at	 him.	 Then	 throws	 you	 a	 look	 that’s	wary	 and
maybe	a	little	embarrassed,	before	she	sighs	and	pushes	away	from	the	wall.
You	saw,	though.	The	lump	is	back	in	your	throat.



“Hey,”	you	say,	before	she	can	flee.	“Yeek.”



She	glares	at	you.	“I	hate	that	rusting	nickname.”



You	ignore	this.	“You	told	me	a	while	back	that	you	had	a	stash	of	seredis.
We	were	supposed	to	get	drunk	after	I	beat	the	Rennanis	army.	Remember?”



Ykka	blinks,	and	then	a	slow	smile	spreads	across	her	face.	“You	were	in
a	coma	or	something.	I	drank	it	all	myself.”



You	glare	at	her,	surprised	to	find	yourself	honestly	annoyed.	She	laughs
in	your	face.	So	much	for	tender	farewells.



But…	well.	It	feels	good	anyway.



“Close	your	eyes,”	Hoa	says.



“He’s	not	joking,”	you	add,	in	warning.	You	keep	yours	open,	though,	as
the	world	goes	dark	and	strange.	You	feel	no	fear.	You	are	not	alone.

***
It’s	nighttime.	Nassun	stands	on	what	she	thinks	of	as	Corepoint’s	town	green.
It	 isn’t;	a	city	built	before	 the	Seasons	would	have	no	need	of	such	a	 thing.
It’s	just	a	place	near	the	enormous	hole	that	is	Corepoint’s	heart.	Around	the
hole	are	strangely	slanted	buildings,	like	the	pylons	she	saw	in	Syl	Anagist	–
but	these	ones	are	huge,	stories	high	and	a	block	wide	apiece.	She’s	learned
that	when	 she	gets	 too	near	 these	buildings,	which	don’t	have	any	doors	or
windows	that	she	can	see,	it	sets	off	warnings	composed	of	bright	red	words
and	 symbols,	 several	 feet	 high	 apiece,	which	 blaze	 in	 the	 air	 over	 the	 city.
Worse	are	 the	 low,	blatting	alarm-sounds	 that	echo	 through	 the	streets	–	not
loud,	but	insistent,	and	they	make	her	teeth	feel	loose	and	itchy.



(She’s	looked	into	the	hole,	despite	all	this.	It’s	enormous	compared	to	the
one	that	was	in	the	underground	city	–	many	times	that	one’s	circumference,
so	big	that	 it	would	take	her	an	hour	or	more	to	walk	all	 the	way	around	it.
Yet	 for	 all	 its	 grandeur,	 despite	 the	 evidence	 it	 offers	 of	 feats	 of	 geneering
long	 lost	 to	 humankind,	Nassun	 cannot	 bring	 herself	 to	 be	 impressed	 by	 it.
The	hole	 feeds	no	one,	provides	no	shelter	against	ash	or	assault.	 It	doesn’t
even	 scare	 her	 –	 though	 that	 is	meaningless.	After	 her	 journey	 through	 the
underground	city	and	the	core	of	the	world,	after	losing	Schaffa,	nothing	will
ever	frighten	her	again.)



The	 spot	 Nassun	 has	 found	 is	 a	 perfectly	 circular	 patch	 of	 ground	 just
beyond	 the	hole’s	warning	 radius.	 It’s	odd	ground,	slightly	soft	 to	 the	 touch
and	springy	beneath	her	feet,	not	like	any	material	she’s	ever	touched	before	–
but	here	in	Corepoint,	that	sort	of	experience	isn’t	rare.	There’s	no	actual	soil
in	this	circle,	aside	from	a	bit	of	windblown	stuff	piled	up	along	the	edges	of
the	circle;	a	few	seagrasses	have	 taken	root	here,	and	 there’s	 the	desiccated,
spindly	 trunk	 of	 a	 dead	 sapling	 that	 did	 its	 best	 before	 being	 blown	 over,
many	years	before.	That’s	all.



A	number	of	stone	eaters	have	appeared	around	the	circle,	she	notes	as	she
takes	up	position	at	 its	center.	No	sign	of	Steel,	but	there	must	be	twenty	or
thirty	others	on	street	corners	or	in	the	street,	sitting	on	stairs,	leaning	against
walls.	 A	 few	 turned	 their	 heads	 or	 eyes	 to	 watch	 as	 she	 passed,	 but	 she
ignored	and	ignores	them.	Perhaps	they	have	come	to	witness	history.	Maybe
some	are	like	Steel,	hoping	for	an	end	to	their	horrifyingly	endless	existence;
maybe	 the	 ones	 who’ve	 helped	 her	 have	 done	 so	 because	 of	 that.	 Maybe
they’re	just	bored.	Not	the	most	exciting	town,	Corepoint.



Nothing	 matters,	 right	 now,	 except	 the	 night	 sky.	 And	 in	 that	 sky,	 the
Moon	is	beginning	to	rise.



It	sits	 low	on	 the	horizon,	seemingly	bigger	 than	 it	was	 the	night	before
and	made	oblong	by	the	distortions	of	the	air.	White	and	strange	and	round,	it
hardly	seems	worth	all	the	pain	and	struggle	that	its	absence	has	symbolized
for	the	world.	And	yet	–	it	pulls	on	everything	within	Nassun	that	is	orogene.
It	pulls	on	the	whole	world.



Time	for	the	world,	then,	to	pull	back.



Nassun	shuts	her	eyes.	They	are	all	around	Corepoint	now	–	the	spare	key,
three	by	three	by	three,	twenty-seven	obelisks	that	she	has	spent	the	past	few
weeks	 touching	and	 taming	and	coaxing	 into	orbit	nearby.	She	can	still	 feel
the	sapphire,	but	it	is	far	away	and	not	in	sight;	she	can’t	use	it,	and	it	would
take	months	 to	arrive	 if	she	summoned	 it.	These	others	will	do,	 though.	 It’s
strange	 to	 see	 so	many	of	 the	 things	 in	 the	 sky	all	 together,	 after	 a	 lifetime
with	only	one	–	or	no	–	obelisks	in	sight	at	any	given	time.	Stranger	to	feel
them	all	connected	to	her,	thrumming	at	slightly	different	speeds,	their	wells
of	 power	 each	 at	 slightly	 different	 depths.	 The	 darker	 ones	 are	 deeper.	 No
telling	why,	but	it	is	a	noticeable	difference.



Nassun	 lifts	 her	 hands,	 splaying	 her	 fingers	 in	 unconscious	 imitation	 of
her	mother.	Very	 carefully,	 she	 begins	 connecting	 each	 of	 the	 twenty-seven
obelisks	–	one	to	one,	then	those	to	two	apiece,	then	others.	She	is	compelled
by	 lines	of	 sight,	 lines	of	 force,	 strange	 instincts	 that	 demand	mathematical
relationships	 she	 does	 not	 understand.	 Each	 obelisk	 supports	 the	 forming
lattice,	 rather	 than	 disrupting	 or	 canceling	 it	 out.	 It’s	 like	 putting	 horses	 in
harness,	sort	of,	when	you’ve	got	one	with	a	naturally	quick	gait	and	another
that	 plods	 along.	 This	 is	 yoking	 twenty-seven	 high-strung	 racehorses…	but
the	principle	is	the	same.



And	it	is	beautiful,	the	moment	when	all	of	the	flows	stop	fighting	Nassun
and	 shift	 into	 lockstep.	 She	 inhales,	 smiling	 in	 spite	 of	 herself,	 feeling
pleasure	 again	 for	 the	 first	 time	 since	 Father	 Earth	 destroyed	 Schaffa.	 It
should	be	 scary,	 shouldn’t	 it?	So	much	power.	 It	 isn’t,	 though.	She	 falls	 up
through	torrents	of	gray	or	green	or	mauve	or	clear	white;	parts	of	her	that	she
has	never	known	the	words	for	move	and	adjust	 in	a	dance	of	 twenty-seven
parts.	Oh,	it	is	so	lovely!	If	only	Schaffa	could	—



Wait.



Something	 makes	 the	 hairs	 on	 the	 back	 of	 Nassun’s	 neck	 prickle.
Dangerous	 to	 lose	 concentration	 now,	 so	 she	 forces	 herself	 to	methodically
touch	each	obelisk	in	turn	and	soothe	it	back	into	something	like	an	idle	state.
They	mostly	tolerate	this,	though	the	opal	bucks	a	little	and	she	has	to	force	it
into	quiescence.	When	all	are	finally	stable,	though,	she	cautiously	opens	her
eyes	and	looks	around.



At	first	the	black-and-white	moonlit	streets	are	as	before:	silent	and	still,
despite	 the	crowd	of	stone	eaters	 that	has	assembled	 to	watch	her	work.	 (In
Corepoint,	 it	 is	easy	 to	feel	alone	 in	a	crowd.)	Then	she	spies…	movement.
Something	–	someone	–	lurching	from	one	shadow	to	another.



Startled,	Nassun	takes	a	step	toward	that	moving	figure.	“H-hello?”



The	 figure	 staggers	 toward	 some	 kind	 of	 small	 pillar	 whose	 purpose
Nassun	has	 never	 understood,	 though	 there	 seems	 to	 be	one	on	 every	other
corner	of	 the	city.	Nearly	falling	as	 it	grabs	 the	pillar	for	support,	 the	figure
twitches	and	looks	up	at	the	sound	of	her	voice.	Icewhite	eyes	spear	at	Nassun
from	the	shadows.



Schaffa.



Awake.	Moving.



Without	thinking,	Nassun	begins	to	trot,	then	run	after	him.	Her	heart	is	in
her	mouth.	She’s	heard	people	say	 things	 like	 that	and	 thought	nothing	of	 it
before	–	just	poetry,	just	silliness	–	but	now	she	knows	what	it	means	as	her
mouth	goes	 so	dry	 that	 she	can	 feel	her	own	pulse	 through	her	 tongue.	Her
eyes	blur.	“Schaffa!”



He’s	thirty,	forty	feet	away,	near	one	of	the	pylon	buildings	that	surround
Corepoint’s	hole.	Close	enough	to	recognize	her	–	and	yet	there	is	nothing	in
his	 gaze	 that	 seems	 to	 know	who	 she	 is.	Quite	 the	 contrary;	 he	 blinks,	 and
then	smiles	in	a	slow,	cold	way	that	makes	her	stumble	to	a	halt	in	deep,	skin-
twitching	unease.



“Sch-Schaffa?”	she	says	again.	Her	voice	is	very	thin	in	the	silence.



“Hello,	 little	 enemy,”	 Schaffa	 says,	 in	 a	 voice	 that	 reverberates	 through
Corepoint	 and	 the	 mountain	 below	 it	 and	 the	 ocean	 for	 a	 thousand	 miles
around.



Then	he	turns	to	the	pylon	building	behind	him.	A	high,	narrow	opening
appears	at	his	touch;	he	stagger-stumbles	through.	It	vanishes	behind	him	in
an	instant.



Nassun	screams	and	flings	herself	after	him.
***

You	are	deep	in	the	lower	mantle,	halfway	through	the	world,	when	you	sense
the	activation	of	part	of	the	Obelisk	Gate.



Or	 so	 your	mind	 interprets	 it,	 at	 first,	 until	 you	master	 your	 alarm	 and
reach	forth	to	confirm	what	you’re	feeling.	It’s	hard.	Here	in	the	deep	earth,
there	is	so	much	magic;	trying	to	sift	through	it	for	whatever	is	happening	on
the	 surface	 is	 like	 trying	 to	 hear	 a	 distant	 creek	 over	 a	 hundred	 thundering
waterfalls	nearby.	It’s	worse	the	deeper	Hoa	takes	you,	until	finally	you	have
to	 “close	 your	 eyes”	 and	 stop	 perceiving	 magic	 entirely	 –	 because	 there’s
something	immense	nearby	that	is	“blinding”	you	with	its	brightness.	It	is	as
if	 there’s	a	sun	underground,	silver-white	and	swirling	with	an	unbelievably
intense	 concentration	 of	 magic…	 but	 you	 can	 also	 feel	 Hoa	 skirting	 wide
around	this	sun,	even	though	that	means	the	overall	journey	has	taken	longer
than	absolutely	necessary.	You’ll	have	to	ask	him	why	later.



You	can’t	see	much	besides	churning	red	here	in	the	depths.	How	fast	are
you	 going?	Without	 referents,	 it’s	 impossible	 to	 tell.	Hoa	 is	 an	 intermittent
shadow	 in	 the	 redness	 beside	 you,	 shimmering	 on	 the	 rare	 occasions	when
you	catch	a	glimpse	of	him	–	but	then,	you’re	probably	shimmering,	too.	He
isn’t	 pushing	 through	 the	 earth,	 but	 becoming	 part	 of	 it	 and	 transiting	 the
particles	of	himself	around	 its	particles,	becoming	a	waveform	 that	you	can
sess	like	sound	or	light	or	heat.	Disturbing	enough	if	you	don’t	think	about	the
fact	that	he’s	doing	it	 to	you,	too.	You	can’t	feel	anything	like	this,	except	a
hint	 of	 pressure	 from	 his	 hand,	 and	 the	 suggestion	 of	 tension	 from	Lerna’s
arm.	There’s	no	sound	other	than	an	omnipresent	rumble,	no	smell	of	sulfur	or
anything	 else.	 You	 don’t	 know	 if	 you’re	 breathing,	 and	 you	 don’t	 feel	 the
need	for	air.



But	the	distant	awakening	of	multiple	obelisks	panics	you,	nearly	makes
you	try	to	pull	away	from	Hoa	so	you	can	concentrate,	even	though	–	stupid	–
that	would	not	 just	kill	you	but	annihilate	 you,	 turning	you	 to	ash	and	 then
vaporizing	the	ashes	and	then	setting	the	vapor	on	fire.	“Nassun!”	you	cry,	or
try	to	cry,	but	words	are	lost	in	the	deep	roar.	There	is	no	one	to	hear	your	cry.



Except.	There	is.



Something	shifts	around	you	–	or,	you	realize	belatedly,	you	are	shifting
relative	 to	 it.	 It	 isn’t	 something	you	 think	 about	 until	 it	 happens	 again,	 and
you	think	you	feel	Lerna	jerk	against	your	side.	Then	it	finally	occurs	to	you
to	look	at	the	silver	wisps	of	your	companions’	bodies,	which	at	least	you	can
make	out	against	the	dense	red	material	of	the	earth	around	you.



There	is	a	human-shaped	blaze	linked	to	your	hand,	heavy	as	a	mountain
upon	your	perception	as	 it	 forges	swiftly	upward:	Hoa.	He	is	moving	oddly,
however,	 periodically	 shifting	 to	 one	 side	 or	 another;	 that’s	 what	 you
perceived	before.	Beside	Hoa	are	faint	shimmers,	delicately	etched.	One	has	a
palpable	interruption	in	the	silverflow	of	one	arm;	that	has	to	be	Tonkee.	You
cannot	distinguish	Hjarka	 from	Danel	because	you	can’t	 see	hair	or	 relative
size	or	anything	so	detailed	as	teeth.	Only	knowing	that	Lerna	is	closer	to	you
makes	him	distinct.	And	beyond	Lerna	—



Something	flashes	past,	mountain-heavy	and	magic-bright,	human	shaped
but	not	human.	And	not	Hoa.



Another	 flash.	 Something	 streaks	 on	 a	 perpendicular	 trajectory,
intercepting	and	driving	it	away,	but	there	are	more.	Hoa	lunges	aside	again,
and	a	new	flash	misses.	But	it’s	close.	Lerna	seems	to	twitch	beside	you.	Can
he	see	it,	too?



You	really	hope	not,	because	now	you	understand	what’s	happening.	Hoa
is	dodging.	And	you	can	do	nothing,	nothing,	but	trust	Hoa	to	keep	you	safe
from	the	stone	eaters	who	are	trying	to	rip	you	away	from	him.



No.	It’s	hard	to	concentrate	when	you’re	this	afraid	–	when	you’ve	been
merged	into	the	high-pressure	semisolid	rock	of	the	planet’s	mantle,	and	when
everyone	you	love	will	die	in	slow	horror	should	you	fail	in	your	quest,	and
when	you’re	surrounded	by	currents	of	magic	that	are	so	much	more	powerful
than	anything	you’ve	ever	seen,	and	when	you’re	under	attack	by	murderous
stone	eaters.	But.	You	did	not	spend	your	childhood	learning	to	perform	under
the	threat	of	death	for	nothing.



Mere	 threads	 of	 magic	 aren’t	 enough	 to	 stop	 stone	 eaters.	 The	 earth’s
winding	 rivers	of	 the	 stuff	are	all	you	have	 to	hand.	Reaching	 for	one	 feels
like	 plunging	 your	 awareness	 into	 a	 lava	 tube,	 and	 for	 an	 instant	 you’re
distracted	by	wondering	whether	this	is	what	it	will	feel	like	if	Hoa	lets	go	–	a
flash	 of	 terrible	 heat	 and	 pain,	 and	 then	 oblivion.	 You	 push	 that	 aside.	 A
memory	 comes	 to	 you.	 Meov.	 Driving	 a	 wedge	 of	 ice	 into	 a	 cliff	 face,
shearing	it	off	at	just	the	precise	time	to	smash	a	ship	full	of	Guardians	—



You	 shape	 your	 will	 into	 a	 wedge	 and	 splint	 it	 into	 the	 nearest	 magic
torrent,	a	great	crackling,	wending	coil	of	a	 thing.	 It	works,	but	your	aim	is
wild;	magic	 sprays	 everywhere,	 and	Hoa	must	 dodge	 again,	 this	 time	 from
your	 efforts.	 Fuck!	 You	 try	 again,	 concentrating	 this	 time,	 letting	 your
thoughts	loosen.	You’re	already	in	the	earth,	red	and	hot	instead	of	dark	and
warm,	but	how	is	this	any	different?	You’re	still	in	the	crucible,	just	literally
instead	of	a	symbolic	mosaic.	You	need	to	drive	your	wedge	in	here	and	aim
it	 there	 as	 another	 flash	 of	 person-shaped	mountain	 starts	 to	 pace	 you	 and
darts	in	for	the	kill	—



—	just	 as	 you	 shunt	 a	 stream	of	 purest,	 brightest	 silver	 directly	 into	 its
path.	 It	 doesn’t	 hit.	You’re	 still	 not	 good	 at	 aiming.	You	 glimpse	 the	 stone
eater	stop	short,	however,	as	the	magic	all	but	blazes	past	its	nose.	Here	in	the
deep	red	it	is	impossible	to	see	expressions,	but	you	imagine	that	the	creature
is	surprised,	maybe	even	alarmed.	You	hope	it	is.



“Next	one’s	for	you,	bastard	cannibalson	ruster!”	you	try	to	shout,	but	you
are	no	 longer	 in	a	purely	physical	space.	Sound	and	air	are	extraneous.	You
imagine	the	words,	then,	and	hope	the	ruster	in	question	gets	the	gist.



You	do	not	 imagine,	however,	 the	fact	 that	 the	flitting,	 fleeting	glimpses
of	 stone	 eaters	 stop.	Hoa	 keeps	 going,	 but	 there	 are	 no	more	 attacks.	Well,
then.	It’s	good	to	be	of	some	use.



He’s	 rising	 faster	 now	 that	 he	 is	 unimpeded.	 Your	 sessapinae	 start	 to
perceive	depth	as	a	rational,	calculable	thing	again.	The	deep	red	turns	deep
brown,	then	cools	to	deep	black.	And	then	—



Air.	Light.	Solidity.	You	become	real	again,	flesh	and	blood	unadulterated
by	 other	 matter,	 upon	 a	 road	 between	 strange,	 smooth	 buildings,	 tall	 as
obelisks	beneath	a	night	sky.	The	return	of	sensation	is	stunning,	profound	–
but	nothing	compared	to	the	absolute	shock	you	feel	when	you	look	up.



Because	you	have	spent	the	past	two	years	beneath	a	sky	of	variable	ash,
and	until	now	you	had	no	idea	that	the	Moon	had	come.



It	is	an	icewhite	eye	against	the	black,	an	ill	omen	writ	vast	and	terrifying
upon	the	tapestry	of	stars.	You	can	see	what	it	is,	even	without	sessing	it	–	a
giant	round	rock.	Deceptively	small	against	the	expanse	of	the	sky;	you	think
you’ll	need	the	obelisks	to	sess	it	completely,	but	you	can	see	on	its	surface
things	that	might	be	craters.	You’ve	traveled	across	craters.	The	craters	on	the
Moon	are	big	enough	to	see	from	here,	big	enough	to	take	years	to	cross	on
foot,	and	that	tells	you	the	whole	thing	is	incomprehensibly	huge.



“Fuck,”	says	Danel,	which	makes	you	drag	your	eyes	from	the	sky.	She’s
on	 her	 hands	 and	 knees,	 as	 if	 clinging	 to	 the	 ground	 and	 grateful	 for	 its
solidity.	Maybe	 she’s	 regretting	 her	 choice	 of	 duty	 now,	 or	maybe	 she	 just
didn’t	understand	before	 this	 that	being	a	 lorist	 could	be	 fully	as	 awful	 and
dangerous	as	being	a	general.	“Fuck!	Fuck.”



“That’s	it,	then.”	Tonkee.	She’s	staring	up	at	the	Moon,	too.



You	turn	to	see	Lerna’s	reaction,	and	—



Lerna.	The	space	beside	you,	where	he	held	on	to	you,	is	empty.



“I	didn’t	expect	 the	attack,”	Hoa	says.	You	can’t	 turn	 to	him.	Can’t	 turn
away	from	the	empty	space	where	Lerna	should	be.	Hoa’s	voice	 is	 its	usual
inflectionless,	hollow	tenor	–	but	is	he	shaken?	Shocked?	You	don’t	want	him
to	be	shocked.	You	want	him	to	say	something	like,	But	of	course	I	was	able
to	keep	everyone	safe,	Lerna	is	just	over	there,	don’t	worry.



Instead	 he	 says,	 “I	 should	 have	 guessed.	 The	 factions	 that	 don’t	 want
peace…”	He	 trails	 off.	Falls	 silent,	 just	 like	 an	ordinary	person	who	 is	 at	 a
loss	for	words.



“Lerna.”	That	last	jolt.	The	one	you	thought	was	a	near	miss.



It	 isn’t	 what	 should	 have	 happened.	 You’re	 the	 one	 nobly	 sacrificing
yourself	for	the	future	of	the	world.	He	was	supposed	to	survive	this.



“What	 about	 him?”	 That’s	 Hjarka,	 who’s	 standing	 but	 bent	 over	 with
hands	on	her	knees,	as	if	she’s	thinking	about	throwing	up.	Tonkee’s	rubbing
the	small	of	her	back	as	if	this	will	somehow	help,	but	Hjarka’s	attention	is	on
you.	She’s	frowning,	and	you	see	the	moment	when	she	realizes	what	you’re
talking	about,	and	her	expression	melts	into	shock.



You	 feel…	 numb.	 Not	 the	 usual	 non-feeling	 that	 comes	 of	 you	 being
halfway	to	a	statue.	This	is	different.	This	is	—



“I	didn’t	even	think	I	loved	him,”	you	murmur.



Hjarka	winces,	but	then	makes	herself	straighten	and	take	a	deep	breath.
“All	of	us	knew	this	might	be	a	one-way	trip.”



You	shake	your	head	in…	confusion?	“He’s…	he	was…	so	much	younger
than	me.”	You	expected	him	 to	outlive	you.	That’s	how	 it	was	 supposed	 to
work.	You’re	supposed	to	die	feeling	guilty	for	leaving	him	behind	and	killing
his	unborn	child.	He’s	supposed	to	—



“Hey.”	 Hjarka’s	 voice	 sharpens.	 You	 know	 that	 look	 on	 her	 face	 now,
though.	It’s	a	Leadership	look,	or	one	reminding	you	that	you	are	the	leader
here.	 But	 that’s	 right,	 isn’t	 it?	 You’re	 the	 one	 who’s	 running	 this	 little
expedition.	 You’re	 the	 one	 who	 didn’t	 make	 Lerna,	 or	 any	 of	 them,	 stay
home.	You’re	the	one	who	didn’t	have	the	courage	to	do	this	by	yourself	the
way	you	damn	well	should	have,	if	you	really	didn’t	want	them	hurt.	Lerna’s
death	is	on	you,	not	Hoa.



You	look	away	from	them	and	involuntarily	reach	for	 the	stump	of	your
arm.	 This	 is	 irrational.	 You’re	 expecting	 battle	 wounds,	 scorch	 marks,
something	 else	 to	 show	 that	Lerna	was	 lost.	But	 it’s	 fine.	You’re	 fine.	You
look	back	at	the	others;	they’re	all	fine,	too,	because	battles	with	stone	eaters
aren’t	things	that	anyone	walks	away	from	with	mere	flesh	wounds.



“It’s	prewar.”	While	you	stand	there	bereft,	Tonkee	has	half	turned	away
from	Hjarka,	which	 is	a	problem	because	Hjarka’s	currently	 leaning	on	her.
Hjarka	 grumbles	 and	 hooks	 an	 arm	 around	 Tonkee’s	 neck	 to	 keep	 her	 in
place.	 Tonkee	 doesn’t	 seem	 to	 notice,	 so	 wide	 are	 her	 eyes	 as	 she	 looks
around.	“Evil,	eating	Earth,	look	at	this	place.	Completely	intact!	Not	hidden
at	 all,	 no	 defensive	 structuring	 or	 camouflage,	 but	 then	 not	 nearly	 enough
green	space	to	make	this	place	self-sufficient…”	She	blinks.	“They	would’ve
needed	regular	supply	shipments	to	survive.	The	place	isn’t	built	for	survival.
That	means	it’s	from	before	the	Enemy!”	She	blinks.	“The	people	here	must
have	 come	 from	 the	 Stillness.	Maybe	 there’s	 some	means	 of	 transportation
around	here	that	we	haven’t	seen	yet.”	She	subsides	into	thought,	muttering	to
herself	as	she	crouches	to	finger	the	substance	of	the	ground.



You	don’t	care.	But	you	don’t	have	time	to	mourn	Lerna	or	hate	yourself,
not	now.	Hjarka’s	right.	You	have	a	job	to	do.



And	 you’ve	 seen	 the	 other	 things	 in	 the	 sky	 besides	 the	 Moon	 –	 the
dozens	 of	 obelisks	 that	 hover	 so	 close,	 so	 low,	 their	 energy	 pent	 and	 not	 a
single	one	of	them	acknowledging	your	touch	when	you	reach	for	them.	They
aren’t	 yours.	 But	 although	 they’ve	 been	 primed	 and	 readied,	 yoked	 to	 one
another	 in	 a	way	 that	 you	 immediately	 recognize	 as	Bad	News,	 they’re	 not
doing	anything.	Something’s	put	them	on	hold.



Focus.	You	clear	your	throat.	“Hoa,	where	is	she?”



When	you	glance	at	him,	you	see	he’s	adopted	a	new	stance:	expression
blank,	 body	 facing	 slightly	 south	 and	 east.	 You	 follow	 his	 gaze,	 and	 see
something	that	at	first	awes	you:	a	bank	of	buildings,	six	or	seven	stories	high
that	you	can	see,	wedge-shaped	and	blank	of	feature.	It’s	easy	to	tell	that	they
form	a	ring,	and	it’s	easy	to	guess	what’s	at	the	heart	of	that	ring,	even	though
you	 can’t	 see	 it	 because	 of	 the	 angle	 of	 the	 buildings.	 Alabaster	 told	 you,
though,	didn’t	he?	The	city	exists	to	contain	the	hole.



Your	throat	locks	your	breath.



“No,”	Hoa	says.	Okay.	You	make	yourself	breathe.	She’s	not	in	the	hole.



“Where,	then?”



Hoa	 turns	 to	 look	 at	 you.	 He	 does	 this	 slowly.	 His	 eyes	 are	 wide.
“Essun…	she’s	gone	into	Warrant.”

***
As	Corepoint	above,	so	Warrant	below.



Nassun	 runs	 through	 obsidian-carved	 corridors,	 close	 and	 low	 ceilinged
and	 claustrophobic.	 It’s	 warm	 down	 here	 –	 not	 oppressively	 so,	 but	 the
warmth	 is	 close	 and	 omnipresent.	 The	warmth	 of	 the	 volcano,	 radiating	 up
through	the	old	stone	from	its	heart.	She	can	sess	echoes	of	what	was	done	to
create	 this	place,	because	 it	was	orogeny,	not	magic,	 though	a	more	precise
and	powerful	orogeny	than	anything	she’s	ever	seen.	She	doesn’t	care	about
any	of	that,	though.	She	needs	to	find	Schaffa.



The	 corridors	 are	 empty,	 lit	 above	 by	 more	 of	 the	 strange	 rectangular
lights	 that	 she	 saw	 in	 the	 underground	 city.	 Nothing	 else	 about	 this	 place
looks	like	that	place.	The	underground	city	felt	 leisurely	in	its	design.	There
are	 hints	 of	 beauty	 in	 the	 way	 the	 station	 was	 built	 that	 suggest	 it	 was
developed	 gradually,	 piece	 by	 piece,	 with	 time	 for	 contemplation	 between
each	phase	of	construction.	Warrant	is	dark,	utilitarian.	As	Nassun	runs	down
sloping	 ramps,	 past	 conference	 rooms,	 classrooms,	mess	 halls,	 lounges,	 she
sees	 that	 all	 of	 them	 are	 empty.	 This	 facility’s	 corridors	 were	 beaten	 and
clawed	out	of	the	shield	volcano	over	a	period	of	days	or	weeks	–	hurriedly,
though	 it	 isn’t	 clear	 why.	 Nassun	 can	 tell	 the	 hurried	 nature	 of	 the	 place,
somehow,	to	her	own	amazement.	Fear	has	soaked	into	the	walls.



But	 none	 of	 that	 matters.	 Schaffa	 is	 here,	 somewhere.	 Schaffa,	 who’s
barely	moved	for	weeks	and	yet	is	now	somehow	running,	his	body	driven	by
something	other	than	his	own	mind.	Nassun	tracks	the	silver	of	him,	amazed
that	he’s	managed	to	get	so	far	in	the	moments	that	it	took	her	to	try	to	reopen
the	door	he	used	and	then,	when	it	would	not	open	for	her,	to	use	the	silver	to
rip	it	open.	But	now	he	is	up	ahead	and	—



—	so	are	others.	She	stops	for	a	moment,	panting,	suddenly	uneasy.	Many
of	them.	Dozens…	no.	Hundreds.	And	all	are	like	Schaffa,	their	silver	thinner,
stranger,	and	also	bolstered	from	elsewhere.



Guardians.	This,	then,	is	where	they	go	during	Seasons…	but	Schaffa	has
said	they	will	kill	him	because	he	is	“contaminated.”



They	will	not.	She	clenches	her	fists.



(It	 does	not	 occur	 to	her	 that	 they	will	 kill	 her,	 too.	Rather,	 it	 does,	 but
They	will	not	looms	larger	in	the	scope	of	her	reality.)



When	Nassun	runs	through	a	door	at	the	top	of	a	short	stair,	however,	the
close	corridor	suddenly	opens	out	into	a	narrow	but	very	long	high-ceilinged
chamber.	 It’s	 high	 enough	 that	 its	 ceiling	 is	 nearly	 lost	 in	 shadow,	 and	 its
length	stretches	farther	 than	her	eye	can	see.	And	all	along	the	walls	of	 this
chamber,	in	neat	rows	that	stack	up	to	the	ceiling,	there	are	dozens	–	hundreds
–	of	strange,	square	holes.	She	is	reminded	of	the	chambers	in	a	wasp’s	nest,
except	the	shape	is	wrong.



And	in	every	one	of	them	is	a	body.



Schaffa	 isn’t	 far	 ahead.	 Somewhere	 in	 this	 room,	 no	 longer	 moving
forward.	 Nassun	 stops	 too,	 apprehension	 finally	 overwhelming	 her	 driving
need	to	find	Schaffa.	The	silence	makes	her	skin	prickle.	She	cannot	help	fear.
The	 analogy	of	 the	wasp’s	 nest	 has	 stayed	with	her,	 and	on	 some	 level	 she
fears	looking	into	the	cells	to	find	a	grub	staring	back	at	her,	perhaps	atop	the
corpse	of	some	creature	(person)	it	has	parasitized.



Inadvertently,	 she	 looks	 into	 the	 nearest	 cell.	 It’s	 barely	wider	 than	 the
shoulders	of	 the	man	within,	who	 seems	 to	be	asleep.	He’s	youngish,	gray-
haired,	a	Midlatter,	wearing	 the	burgundy	uniform	 that	Nassun	has	heard	of
but	never	seen.	He’s	breathing,	although	slowly.	The	woman	in	the	cell	beside
him	is	wearing	the	same	uniform,	though	she’s	completely	different	in	every
other	 way:	 an	 Eastcoaster	 with	 completely	 black	 skin,	 hair	 that	 has	 been
braided	along	her	scalp	in	intricate	patterns,	and	wine-dark	lips.	There	is	the
slightest	of	smiles	on	those	lips	–	as	if,	even	in	sleep,	she	cannot	lose	the	habit
of	it.



Asleep,	and	more	than	asleep.	Nassun	follows	the	silver	in	the	people	in
the	 cells,	 feeling	out	 their	 nerves	 and	 circulation,	 and	understands	 then	 that
each	is	in	something	like	a	coma.	She	thinks	maybe	normal	comas	aren’t	like
this,	though.	None	of	these	people	seems	to	be	hurt	or	sick.	And	within	each
Guardian,	there	is	that	shard	of	corestone	–	quiescent	here,	instead	of	angrily
flaring	like	the	one	in	Schaffa.	Strangely,	the	silver	threads	in	each	Guardian
are	 reaching	 out	 to	 the	 ones	 around	 them.	 Networking	 together.	 Bolstering
each	other,	maybe?	Charging	one	another	to	perform	some	sort	of	work,	the
way	a	network	of	obelisks	does?	She	cannot	guess.



(They	were	never	meant	to	continue.)



But	 then,	 from	 the	 center	 of	 the	 vaulted	 room,	 perhaps	 a	 hundred	 feet
farther	in,	she	hears	a	sharp	mechanical	whirr.



She	jumps	and	stumbles	away	from	the	cells,	darting	a	quick,	frightened
look	around	to	see	if	the	noise	has	awakened	any	of	the	cells’	occupants.	They
don’t	stir.	She	swallows	and	calls,	softly,	“Schaffa?”



Her	answer,	echoing	through	the	high	chamber,	is	a	low,	familiar	groan.



Nassun	stumbles	forward,	her	breath	catching.	It’s	him.	Down	the	middle
of	the	strange	chamber	stand	contraptions,	arranged	in	rows.	Each	consists	of
a	chair	attached	to	a	complex	arrangement	of	silver	wire	in	loops	and	spars;
she’s	 never	 seen	 anything	 like	 it.	 (You	 have.)	 Each	 contraption	 seems	 big
enough	to	hold	one	person,	but	they’re	all	empty.	And	–	Nassun	leans	closer
for	a	better	look,	then	shivers	–	each	rests	against	a	stone	pillar	that	holds	an
obscenely	 complicated	 mechanism.	 It’s	 impossible	 not	 to	 notice	 the	 tiny
scalpels,	 the	 delicate	 forcepslike	 attachments	 of	 varying	 sizes,	 and	 other
instruments	clearly	meant	for	cutting	and	drilling…



Somewhere	nearby,	Schaffa	groans.	Nassun	pushes	the	cutting	things	out
of	her	thoughts	and	hurries	down	the	row	—



—	to	stop	in	front	of	the	room’s	lone	occupied	wire	chair.



The	 chair	 has	 been	 adjusted	 somehow.	 Schaffa	 sits	 in	 it,	 but	 he	 is
facedown,	 his	 body	 suspended	 by	 the	 wires,	 his	 chopped-off	 hair	 parting
around	his	neck.	The	mechanism	behind	the	chair	has	come	alive,	extending
up	and	over	his	body	in	a	way	that	feels	predatory	 to	her	–	but	 it	 is	already
retracting	 as	 she	 approaches.	 The	 bloodied	 instruments	 disappear	 into	 the
mechanism;	she	hears	more	faint	whirring	sounds.	Cleaning,	maybe.	One	tiny,
tweezer-like	 attachment	 remains,	 however,	 holding	 up	 a	 prize	 that	 still
glistens,	faintly,	with	Schaffa’s	blood.	A	little	metal	shard,	irregular	and	dark.



Hello,	little	enemy.



Schaffa	isn’t	moving.	Nassun	stares	at	his	body,	shaking.	She	cannot	bring
herself	to	shift	her	perception	back	to	the	silver	threads,	back	to	magic,	to	see
if	he	is	alive.	The	bloody	wound	high	on	the	back	of	his	neck	has	been	neatly
stitched,	right	over	the	other	old	scar	that	she	has	always	wondered	about.	It’s
still	bleeding,	but	it’s	clear	the	wound	was	inflicted	quickly	and	sealed	nearly
as	fast.



Like	a	child	willing	the	monster	under	the	bed	to	not	exist,	Nassun	wills
Schaffa’s	back	and	sides	to	move.



They	do,	as	he	draws	in	a	breath.	“N-Nassun,”	he	croaks.



“Schaffa!	Schaffa.”	She	flings	herself	to	her	knees	and	scooches	forward
to	look	at	his	face	from	underneath	the	wire	contraption,	heedless	of	the	blood
still	 dripping	 down	 the	 sides	 of	 his	 neck	 and	 face.	 His	 eyes,	 his	 beautiful
white	 eyes,	 are	 half-open	 –	 and	 they	 are	 him	 this	 time!	 She	 sees	 that	 and
bursts	into	tears	herself.	“Schaffa?	Are	you	okay?	Are	you	really	okay?”



His	speech	is	slow,	slurred.	Nassun	will	not	think	about	why.	“Nassun.	I.”
Even	more	 slowly,	 his	 expression	 shifts,	 a	 seaquake	 in	his	brows	 sending	 a
tsunami	 of	 slow	 realization	 across	 the	 rest.	 His	 eyes	 widen.	 “There’s.	 No
pain.”



She	touches	his	face.	“The	–	the	thing	is	out	of	you,	Schaffa.	That	metal
thing.”



He	 shuts	 his	 eyes	 and	 her	 belly	 clenches,	 but	 then	 the	 furrow	 vanishes
from	his	brow.	He	smiles	again	–	and	for	the	first	time	since	Nassun	met	him,
there	is	nothing	of	tension	or	falsehood	in	it.	He	isn’t	smiling	to	ease	his	pain
or	 others’	 fears.	 His	 mouth	 opens.	 She	 can	 see	 all	 his	 teeth,	 he’s	 laughing
although	weakly,	 he’s	 weeping,	 too,	 with	 relief	 and	 joy,	 and	 it	 is	 the	most
beautiful	 thing	she’s	ever	seen.	She	cups	his	 face,	mindful	of	 the	wound	on
the	back	of	his	neck,	and	presses	her	 forehead	against	his,	 shaking	with	his
soft	laughter.	She	loves	him.	She	just	loves	him	so	much.



And	because	she	is	 touching	him,	because	she	loves	him,	because	she	is
so	 attuned	 to	his	needs	 and	his	pain	 and	making	him	happy,	her	perception
slips	into	the	silver.	She	doesn’t	mean	for	it	to.	She	just	wants	to	use	her	eyes
to	savor	the	sight	of	him	looking	back	at	her,	and	her	hands	to	touch	his	skin,
and	her	ears	to	hear	his	voice.



But	she	is	orogene,	and	she	can	no	longer	shut	off	the	sesuna	than	she	can
sight	or	sound	or	touch.	Which	is	why	her	smile	falters,	and	her	joy	vanishes,
because	the	instant	she	sees	how	the	network	of	threads	within	him	is	already
beginning	to	fade,	she	can	no	longer	deny	that	he	is	dying.



It’s	slow.	He	could	last	a	few	weeks	or	months,	perhaps	as	much	as	a	year,
with	what’s	left.	But	where	every	other	living	thing	churns	forth	its	own	silver
almost	 by	 accident,	 where	 it	 flows	 and	 stutters	 and	 gums	 up	 the	 works
between	cells,	 there	is	nothing	between	his	cells	but	a	trickle.	What’s	left	 in
him	mostly	runs	along	his	nervous	system,	and	she	can	see	a	glaring,	gaping
emptiness	at	what	used	to	be	the	core	of	his	silver	network,	in	his	sessapinae.
Without	his	corestone,	as	he	warned	her,	he	will	not	last	long.



Schaffa’s	 eyes	 have	 drifted	 shut.	He’s	 asleep,	 exhausted	 by	 pushing	 his
weakened	body	through	the	streets.	But	he	isn’t	the	one	who	did	that,	is	he?
Nassun	gets	 to	her	 feet,	 shaking,	keeping	her	hands	on	Schaffa’s	 shoulders.
His	heavy	head	presses	against	her	chest.	She	stares	at	 the	 little	metal	shard
bitterly,	understanding	at	once	why	Father	Earth	did	this	to	him.



It	knows	she	means	 to	bring	 the	Moon	down,	and	 that	 this	will	create	a
cataclysm	 far	 worse	 than	 the	 Shattering.	 It	 wants	 to	 live.	 It	 knows	Nassun
loves	 Schaffa,	 and	 that	 until	 now	 she	 has	 seen	 destroying	 the	world	 as	 the
only	way	 to	give	him	peace.	Now,	however,	 it	has	 remade	Schaffa,	offering
him	to	Nassun	as	a	kind	of	living	ultimatum.



Now	he	is	free,	the	Earth	taunts	by	this	wordless	gesture.	Now	he	can	have
peace	without	death.	And	 if	you	want	him	 to	 live,	 little	enemy,	 there	 is	only
one	way.



Steel	never	said	it	couldn’t	be	done,	only	that	it	shouldn’t.	Maybe	Steel	is
wrong.	Maybe,	as	a	stone	eater,	Schaffa	won’t	be	alone	and	sad	forever.	Steel
is	mean	and	awful,	which	is	why	no	one	wants	to	be	with	him.	But	Schaffa	is
good	and	kind.	Surely	he	will	find	someone	else	to	love.



Especially	if	all	the	world	is	stone	eaters,	too.



Humanity,	she	decides,	is	a	small	price	to	pay	for	Schaffa’s	future.
***

Hoa	says	that	Nassun	has	gone	underground,	to	Warrant	where	the	Guardians
lie,	 and	 the	panic	of	 this	 is	 sour	 in	your	mouth	as	you	 trot	around	 the	hole,
looking	for	a	way	in.	You	don’t	dare	ask	Hoa	to	simply	transport	you	to	her;
Gray	Man’s	 allies	 lurk	 everywhere	 now,	 and	 they	will	 kill	 you	 as	 surely	 as
they	did	Lerna.	Allies	of	Hoa	are	present,	too;	you	have	a	blurry	memory	of
seeing	two	streaking	mountains	crash	into	one	another,	one	driving	the	other
off.	But	until	this	business	with	the	Moon	is	settled,	going	into	the	Earth	is	too
dangerous.	All	of	the	stone	eaters	are	here,	you	sess;	a	thousand	human-sized
mountains	 in	 and	 underneath	 Corepoint,	 some	 of	 them	 watching	 you	 run
through	the	streets	looking	for	your	daughter.	All	of	their	ancient	factions	and
private	battles	will	come	to	a	head	tonight,	one	way	or	another.



Hjarka	and	the	others	have	followed	you,	though	more	slowly;	they	do	not
feel	your	panic.	At	last	you	spot	one	pylon	building	that’s	been	opened	–	cut
open,	it	seems,	as	if	with	an	enormous	knife;	three	irregular	slashes	and	then
someone	has	made	the	door	fall	outward.	It’s	a	foot	thick.	But	beyond	it	is	a
wide,	low-ceilinged	corridor	going	down	into	darkness.



Someone’s	 climbing	 out	 of	 it,	 though,	 as	 you	 reach	 it	 and	 stumble	 to	 a
halt.



“Nassun!”	you	blurt,	because	it’s	her.



The	girl	 framed	by	 the	doorway	 is	 taller	 than	you	 remember	by	 several
inches.	Her	hair	is	longer	now,	braided	back	in	two	plaits	that	fall	behind	her
shoulders.	 You	 barely	 recognize	 her.	 She	 stops	 short	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 you,	 a
faint	wrinkle	of	 confusion	between	her	brows,	 and	you	 realize	 she’s	having
trouble	recognizing	you,	too.	Then	realization	comes,	and	she	stares	as	if	you
are	the	last	thing	in	the	world	she	expected	to	see.	Because	you	are.



“Hi,	Mama,”	Nassun	says.



14
I,	at	the	end	of	days

I	am	a	witness	to	what	follows.	I	will	tell	this	as	such.



I	watch	you	 and	your	 daughter	 face	 each	other	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 two
years,	 across	 a	 gulf	 of	 hardship.	 Only	 I	 know	 what	 you	 both	 have	 been
through.	 Each	 of	 you	 can	 judge	 the	 other	 only	 on	 presences,	 actions,	 and
scars,	at	least	for	now.	You:	much	thinner	than	the	mother	she	last	saw	when
she	 decided	 to	 skip	 creche	 one	 day.	 The	 desert	 has	 weathered	 you,	 drying
your	 skin;	 the	acid	 rain	has	bleached	your	 locks	 to	a	paler	brown	 than	 they
should	be,	and	 the	gray	shows	more.	The	clothes	 that	hang	from	your	body
are	also	bleached	by	ash	and	acid,	and	the	empty	right	sleeve	of	your	shirt	has
been	knotted;	it	dangles,	obviously	empty,	as	you	catch	your	breath.	And,	also
a	part	of	Nassun’s	first	impression	of	the	post-Rifting	you:	Behind	you	stands
a	 group	 of	 people	 who	 all	 stare	 at	 Nassun,	 some	 of	 them	 with	 palpable
wariness.	You,	though,	show	only	anguish.



Nassun	is	as	still	as	a	stone	eater.	She’s	grown	only	four	inches	since	the
Rifting,	but	it	looks	to	you	like	a	foot.	You	can	see	the	advent	of	adolescence
upon	her	–	early,	but	 that	 is	 the	nature	of	 life	 in	 lean	 times.	The	body	 takes
advantage	 of	 safety	 and	 abundance	 when	 it	 can,	 and	 the	 nine	 months	 she
spent	in	Jekity	were	good	for	her.	She’s	probably	going	to	start	menstruating
within	 the	 next	 year,	 if	 she	 can	 find	 enough	 food.	 The	 biggest	 changes	 are
immaterial,	though.	The	wariness	in	her	gaze,	nothing	like	the	shy	diffidence
you	remember.	Her	posture:	shoulders	back,	feet	braced	and	square.	You	told
her	 to	 stop	 slouching	 a	million	 times,	 and	 yes,	 she	 looks	 so	 tall	 and	 strong
now	that	she’s	standing	up	straight.	So	beautifully	strong.



Her	orogeny	sits	on	your	awareness	 like	a	weight	upon	 the	world,	 rock-
steady	and	precise	as	a	diamond	drill.	Evil	Earth,	you	 think.	She	sesses	 just
like	you.



It’s	 over	 before	 it’s	 begun.	 You	 sense	 that	 as	 surely	 as	 you	 sess	 her
strength,	and	both	make	you	desperate.	“I’ve	been	looking	for	you,”	you	say.
You’ve	 raised	 your	 hand	 without	 thinking	 about	 it.	 Your	 fingers	 open	 and
twitch	and	close	and	open	again	in	a	gesture	that	is	half	grasping,	half	plea.



Her	gaze	goes	hooded.	“I	was	with	Daddy.”



“I	know.	I	couldn’t	 find	you.”	It’s	 redundant,	obvious;	you	hate	yourself
for	babbling.	“Are	you…	all	right?”



She	 looks	away,	 troubled,	and	 it	bothers	you	 that	her	concern	so	plainly
isn’t	you.	“I	need	to…	My	Guardian	needs	help.”



You	go	stiff.	Nassun	has	heard	from	Schaffa	of	what	he	was	like,	before
Meov.	She	knows,	 intellectually,	 that	 the	Schaffa	you	knew	and	 the	Schaffa
she	loves	are	wholly	different	people.	She’s	seen	a	Fulcrum,	and	the	ways	in
which	it	warped	its	inmates.	She	remembers	how	you	used	to	go	stiff,	just	the
way	you	are	now,	at	even	a	glimpse	of	the	color	burgundy	–	and	finally,	here
at	the	end	of	the	world,	she	understands	why.	She	knows	you	better	now	than
ever	before	in	her	life.



And	yet.	To	her,	Schaffa	is	the	man	who	protected	her	from	raiders	–	and
from	her	father.	He	is	the	man	who	soothed	her	when	she	was	afraid,	tucked
her	 into	bed	at	night.	She	has	seen	him	fight	his	own	brutal	nature,	and	 the
Earth	 itself,	 in	order	 to	be	 the	parent	 she	needs.	He	has	helped	her	 learn	 to
love	herself	for	what	she	is.



Her	mother?	You.	Have	done	none	of	these	things.



And	in	that	pent	moment,	as	you	fight	past	the	memory	of	Innon	falling	to
pieces	and	the	burning	ache	of	broken	bones	in	a	hand	you	no	longer	possess,
with	Never	say	no	to	me	 ringing	 in	your	head,	she	 intuits	 the	 thing	 that	you
have,	until	now,	denied:



That	 it	 is	 hopeless.	That	 there	 can	 be	 no	 relationship,	 no	 trust,	 between
you	 and	 her,	 because	 the	 two	 of	 you	 are	what	 the	 Stillness	 and	 the	 Season
have	 made	 you.	 That	 Alabaster	 was	 right,	 and	 some	 things	 really	 are	 too
broken	to	fix.	Nothing	to	do	but	destroy	them	entirely,	for	mercy’s	sake.



Nassun	shakes	her	head	once	while	you	stand	there	twitching.	She	looks
away.	Shakes	her	head	again.	Her	shoulders	bow	a	little,	not	in	a	lazy	slouch,
but	weariness.	She	does	not	blame	you,	but	neither	does	she	expect	anything
from	you.	And	right	now,	you’re	just	in	the	way.



So	 she	 turns	 to	 walk	 away,	 and	 that	 shocks	 you	 out	 of	 your	 fugue.
“Nassun?”



“He	needs	help,”	 she	 says	again.	Her	head	 is	down,	her	 shoulders	 tight.
She	doesn’t	stop	walking.	You	inhale	and	start	after	her.	“I	have	to	help	him.”



You	 know	what’s	 happening.	You’ve	 felt	 it,	 feared	 it,	 all	 along.	Behind
you,	you	hear	Danel	stop	the	others.	Maybe	she	thinks	you	and	your	daughter
need	space.	You	ignore	them	and	run	after	Nassun.	You	grab	her	shoulder,	try
to	 turn	her	around.	“Nassun,	what	—”	She	shrugs	you	off,	 so	hard	 that	you
stagger.	Your	balance	has	been	shot	since	you	lost	the	arm,	and	she’s	stronger
than	she	was.	She	doesn’t	notice	you	almost	fall.	She	keeps	going.	“Nassun!”
She	doesn’t	even	look	back.



You’re	 desperate	 to	 get	 her	 attention,	 to	 get	 her	 to	 react,	 something.
Anything.	You	grope	and	then	say,	to	her	back,	“I	–	I	–	I	know	about	Jija!”



That	makes	her	falter	to	a	halt.	Jija’s	death	is	still	a	raw	wound	within	her
that	 Schaffa	 has	 cleaned	 and	 stitched,	 but	 that	will	 not	 heal	 for	 some	 time.
That	 you	 know	what	 she	 has	 done	makes	 her	 hunch	 in	 shame.	That	 it	was
necessary,	 self-defense,	 frustrates	 her.	 That	 you	 have	 reminded	 her	 of	 this,
now,	tips	the	shame	and	frustration	into	anger.



“I	have	to	help	Schaffa,”	she	says	again.	Her	shoulders	are	going	up	in	a
way	that	you	recognize	from	a	hundred	afternoons	in	your	makeshift	crucible,
and	 from	when	she	was	 two	and	 learned	 the	word	no.	There’s	no	reasoning
with	 her	 when	 she	 gets	 like	 this.	 Words	 become	 irrelevant.	 Actions	 mean
more.	 But	 what	 actions	 could	 possibly	 convey	 the	morass	 of	 your	 feelings
right	now?	You	look	back	at	 the	others	helplessly.	Hjarka	is	holding	Tonkee
back;	 Tonkee’s	 gaze	 is	 fixed	 on	 the	 sky	 and	 the	 assemblage	 there	 of	more
obelisks	than	you’ve	seen	in	your	whole	life.	Danel	is	a	little	apart	from	the
rest,	her	hands	behind	her	back,	her	black	lips	moving	in	what	you	recognize
as	 a	 lorist	 mnemonic	 exercise	 to	 help	 her	 absorb	 everything	 she	 sees	 and
hears,	verbatim.	Lerna	—



You	forgot.	Lerna	is	not	here.	But	if	he	were	here,	you	suspect,	he	would
be	warning	you.	He	was	a	doctor.	Wounds	of	the	family	weren’t	really	within
his	purview…	but	anyone	can	see	that	something	here	has	festered.



You	 trot	 after	 her	 again.	 “Nassun.	Nassun,	 rust	 it,	 look	 at	me	when	 I’m
talking	 to	you!”	She	 ignores	you,	 and	 it’s	 a	 slap	 in	 the	 face	–	 the	kind	 that
clears	your	head,	though,	and	not	the	kind	that	makes	you	want	to	fight.	Okay.
She	won’t	hear	you	until	she’s	helped…	Schaffa.	You	push	past	this	thought,
though	it	 is	 like	plodding	through	muck	full	of	bones.	Okay.	“L-let	me	help
you!”



This	actually	gets	Nassun	to	slow	down,	and	then	stop.	Her	expression	is
wary,	so	wary,	when	she	turns	back.	“Help	me?”



You	look	beyond	her	and	see	then	that	she	was	heading	for	another	of	the
pylon	buildings	–	this	one	with	a	broad,	railed	staircase	going	up	its	sloping
side.	 The	 view	 of	 the	 sky	would	 be	 excellent	 at	 the	 top…	 Irrationally	 you
conclude	that	you	have	to	keep	her	from	going	up	there.	“Yes.”	You	hold	out
your	hand	again.	Please.	“Tell	me	what	you	need.	I’ll…	Nassun.”	You’re	out
of	words.	You’re	willing	her	to	feel	what	you	feel.	“Nassun.”



It’s	not	working.	She	says,	in	a	voice	as	hard	as	stone,	“I	need	to	use	the
Obelisk	Gate.”



You	flinch.	I	told	you	this	already,	weeks	ago,	but	apparently	you	did	not
believe.	“What?	You	can’t.”



You’re	thinking:	It	will	kill	you.



Her	jaw	tightens.	“I	will.”



She’s	thinking:	I	don’t	need	your	permission.



You	shake	your	head,	incredulous.	“To	do	what?”	But	it’s	too	late.	She’s
done.	You	said	you	would	help	but	then	hesitated.	She	is	Schaffa’s	daughter,
too,	 in	 her	 heart	 of	 hearts;	 Earthfires,	 two	 fathers	 and	 you	 of	 all	 people	 to
shape	 her,	 is	 it	 any	wonder	 that	 she’s	 turned	 out	 the	way	 she	 has?	 To	 her,
hesitation	is	the	same	thing	as	no.	She	doesn’t	like	it	when	people	say	no	to
her.



So	 Nassun	 turns	 her	 back	 on	 you	 again	 and	 says,	 “Don’t	 follow	 me
anymore,	Mama.”



You	immediately	start	after	her	again,	of	course.	“Nassun	—”



She	whips	back	around.	She’s	in	the	ground,	you	sess	it,	and	she’s	in	the
air,	you	see	the	lines	of	magic,	and	suddenly	the	two	weave	together	in	a	way
that	 you	 can’t	 even	 comprehend.	The	 stuff	 of	Corepoint’s	 ground,	which	 is
metals	 and	 pressed	 fibers	 and	 substances	 for	 which	 you	 have	 no	 name,
layered	over	volcanic	rock,	heaves	beneath	your	feet.	Out	of	old	habit,	years
spent	 containing	 your	 children’s	 orogenic	 tantrums,	 you	 react	 even	 as	 you
stagger,	setting	a	torus	into	the	ground	that	you	can	use	to	cancel	her	orogeny.
It	doesn’t	work,	because	she	isn’t	just	using	orogeny.



She	sesses	it,	though,	and	her	eyes	narrow.	Your	gray	eyes,	like	ash.	And
an	instant	later,	a	wall	of	obsidian	slams	up	from	the	ground	in	front	of	you,
tearing	 through	 the	 fiber	 and	 metal	 of	 the	 city’s	 infrastructure,	 forming	 a
barrier	between	you	and	her	that	spans	the	road.



The	force	of	this	upheaval	flings	you	to	the	ground.	When	the	stars	clear
from	your	vision	and	 the	dust	dissipates	enough,	you	stare	up	at	 the	wall	 in
shock.	Your	daughter	did	this.	To	you.



Someone	grabs	you	and	you	flinch.	It’s	Tonkee.



“I	don’t	know	if	it’s	occurred	to	you,”	she	says,	hauling	you	to	your	feet,
“but	your	child	seems	like	she’s	got	your	temper.	So,	you	know,	maybe	you
shouldn’t	get	too	pushy.”



“I	don’t	even	know	what	 she	did,”	you	murmur,	dazed,	 though	you	nod
thanks	to	Tonkee	for	helping	you	up.	“That	wasn’t…	I	don’t…”	There	was	no
Fulcrum-esque	 precision	 in	 what	 Nassun	 did,	 even	 though	 you	 taught	 her
Fulcrum	fundamentals.	You	lay	your	hand	against	the	wall	in	confusion,	and
feel	the	lingering	flickers	of	magic	within	its	substance,	dancing	from	particle
to	particle	as	they	fade.	“She’s	blending	magic	and	orogeny.	I’ve	never	seen
that	before.”



I	have.	We	called	it	tuning.



Meanwhile.	No	 longer	hampered	by	you,	Nassun	has	climbed	 the	pylon
steps.	 She	 stands	 atop	 it	 now,	 surrounded	 by	 turning,	 bright	 red	 warning
symbols	that	dance	in	the	air.	A	heavy,	faintly	sulfurous	breeze	wafts	up	from
Corepoint’s	 great	 hole,	 lifting	 the	 stray	 hairs	 from	 her	 twin	 plaits.	 She
wonders	 if	Father	Earth	 is	 relieved	 to	have	manipulated	her	 into	 sparing	 its
life.



Schaffa	will	 live	if	she	turns	every	person	in	the	world	into	stone	eaters.
That	is	all	that	matters.



“First,	 the	 network,”	 she	 says,	 lifting	 her	 eyes	 to	 the	 sky.	 The	 twenty-
seven	obelisks	flicker	from	solid	to	magic	in	unison	as	she	reignites	them.	She
spreads	her	hands	before	her.



On	the	ground	below	her,	you	flinch	as	you	sess	–	feel	–	are	attuned	to	–
the	lightning-fast	activation	of	twenty-seven	obelisks.	They	act	as	one	in	this
instant,	 thrumming	 so	 powerfully	 together	 that	 your	 teeth	 itch.	You	wonder
why	Tonkee	isn’t	grimacing	the	way	you	are,	but	Tonkee	is	only	a	still.



Tonkee’s	not	stupid,	though,	and	this	is	her	life’s	work.	While	you	stare	at
your	daughter	 in	 awe,	 she	narrows	her	 eyes	 at	 the	obelisks.	 “Three	 cubed,”
she	murmurs.	You	shake	your	head,	mute.	She	glares	at	you,	irritated	by	your
slowness.	 “Well,	 if	 I	 was	 going	 to	 emulate	 a	 big	 crystal,	 I	 would	 start	 by
putting	smaller	crystals	into	a	cubiform	lattice	configuration.”



Then	you	understand.	The	big	crystal	that	Nassun	means	to	emulate	is	the
onyx.	You	need	a	key	 to	 initialize	 the	Gate;	 that’s	what	Alabaster	 told	you.
What	 Alabaster	 didn’t	 tell	 you,	 the	 useless	 ass,	 was	 that	 there	 are	 many
possible	kinds	of	keys.	When	he	tore	the	Rifting	across	the	Stillness,	he	used
a	 network	 composed	 of	 all	 the	 node	 maintainers	 in	 his	 vicinity,	 probably
because	 the	 onyx	 itself	would	 have	 turned	 him	 to	 stone	 at	 once.	 The	 node
maintainers	were	 a	 lesser	 substitute	 for	 the	 onyx	 –	 a	 spare	 key.	You	 didn’t
know	what	you	were	doing	 that	 first	 time,	when	you	yoked	 the	orogenes	 in
Castrima-under	into	a	network,	but	he	knew	the	onyx	was	too	much	for	you	to
just	 grab	 directly,	 back	 then.	 You	 didn’t	 have	 Alabaster’s	 flexibility	 or
creativity.	He	taught	you	a	safer	way.



Nassun,	though,	is	the	student	Alabaster	always	wanted.	She	cannot	have
ever	accessed	the	Obelisk	Gate	before	–	it’s	been	yours,	till	now	–	but	as	you
observe	 in	 shock,	 in	 horror,	 she	 reaches	 beyond	 her	 spare-key	 network,
finding	other	obelisks	one	by	one	and	binding	them.	It’s	slower	than	it	would
be	with	the	onyx,	but	you	can	tell	that	it’s	just	as	effective.	It’s	working.	The
apatite,	 connected	 and	 locked.	 The	 sardonyx,	 sending	 a	 little	 pulse	 from
where	it	hovers	out	of	sight,	somewhere	over	the	southern	sea.	The	jade	—



Nassun	will	open	the	Gate.



You	shove	Tonkee	away.	“Get	as	far	from	me	as	you	can.	All	of	you.”



Tonkee	doesn’t	waste	 time	arguing.	Her	eyes	widen;	she	 turns	and	 runs.
You	hear	her	shouting	 to	 the	others.	You	hear	Danel	arguing.	And	 then	you
can	no	longer	pay	heed	to	them.



Nassun	will	open	the	Gate,	turn	to	stone,	and	die.



Only	one	thing	can	stop	Nassun’s	network	of	obelisks:	the	onyx.	You	need
to	reach	it	first,	though,	and	right	now	it’s	all	the	way	on	the	other	side	of	the
planet,	halfway	between	Castrima	and	Rennanis	where	you	left	it.	Once,	long
ago	at	Castrima-over,	it	called	you	to	itself.	But	do	you	dare	wait	for	it	to	do
that,	now,	with	Nassun	grabbing	control	of	every	part	of	the	Gate?	You	need
to	get	to	the	onyx	first.	For	that,	you	need	magic	–	much	more	of	it	than	you
can	muster	just	by	yourself,	here	without	a	single	obelisk	to	your	name.



The	beryl,	the	hematite,	the	iolite	—	



She’s	going	to	die	right	in	front	of	you	if	you	don’t	do	something.



Frantically	you	 throw	your	awareness	 into	 the	earth.	Corepoint	 sits	on	a
volcano,	maybe	you	can	—



Wait.	 Something	 pulls	 your	 attention	 back	 up	 to	 the	 volcano’s	 mouth.
Underground,	 but	 closer	 by.	 Somewhere	 underneath	 this	 city,	 you	 sense	 a
network.	Lines	of	magic	woven	together,	supporting	one	another,	rooted	deep
to	draw	up	more…	It’s	faint.	It’s	slow.	And	there	is	a	familiar,	ugly	buzz	at	the
back	of	your	mind	when	you	touch	this	network.	Buzz	upon	buzz	upon	buzz.



Ah,	 yes.	 The	 network	 you’ve	 found	 is	Guardians,	 nearly	 a	 thousand	 of
them.	 Of	 rusting	 course.	 You	 have	 never	 consciously	 sought	 the	 magic	 of
them	before,	but	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	understand	what	 that	buzz	 is	–	 some
part	of	you,	even	before	Alabaster’s	training,	felt	the	foreignness	of	the	magic
within	 them.	The	 knowledge	 sends	 a	 sharp,	 nearly	 paralyzing	 lance	 of	 fear
through	you.	The	network	of	them	is	close	by,	easy	to	grab,	but	if	you	do	this,
what’s	to	stop	all	these	Guardians	from	boiling	up	out	of	Warrant	like	angry
wasps	from	a	disturbed	nest?	Don’t	you	have	enough	problems?



Nassun	groans,	up	on	her	pylon.	To	your	shock,	you	can…	Evil	Earth,	you
can	see	 the	magic	around	her,	in	her,	beginning	to	flare	up	like	a	fire	hitting
oiled	kindling.	She	burns	against	your	perception,	the	weight	of	her	growing
heavier	upon	the	world	by	the	instant.	The	kyanite	the	orthoclase	the	scapolite
—



And	suddenly	your	fear	is	gone,	because	your	baby	needs	you.



So	you	set	your	feet.	You	reach	for	that	network	you	found,	Guardians	or
no	 Guardians.	 You	 growl	 through	 your	 teeth	 and	 grab	 everything.	 The
Guardians.	The	threads	that	trail	from	their	sessapinae	away	into	the	depths,
and	 as	much	 of	 the	magic	 coming	 through	 these	 as	 you	 can	 pull.	 The	 iron
shards	themselves,	tiny	depositories	of	the	Evil	Earth’s	will.



You	make	it	all	yours,	yoke	it	tight,	and	then	you	take	it.



And	somewhere	down	in	Warrant	there	are	Guardians	screaming,	coming
awake	 and	writhing	 in	 their	 cells	 and	 grabbing	 at	 their	 heads	 as	 you	 do	 to
every	single	one	of	them	what	Alabaster	once	did	to	his	Guardian.	It	is	what
Nassun	 yearned	 to	 do	 for	 Schaffa…	 only	 there	 is	 no	 kindness	 in	 the	 way
you’re	doing	it.	You	don’t	hate	them;	you	just	don’t	care.	You	snatch	the	iron
from	their	brains	and	every	bit	of	silvery	light	from	between	their	cells	–	and
as	 you	 feel	 them	 crystallize	 and	 die,	 you	 finally	 have	 enough	magic,	 from
your	makeshift	network,	to	reach	the	onyx.



It	listens	at	your	touch,	far	away	above	the	ashscape	of	the	Stillness.	You
fall	 into	 it,	diving	desperately	 into	 the	dark,	 to	make	your	case.	Please,	you
beg.



It	 considers	 the	 request.	 This	 is	 not	 in	 words	 or	 sensation.	 You	 simply
know	its	consideration.	It	examines	you	in	turn	–	your	fear,	your	anger,	your
determination	to	put	things	right.



Ah	–	 this	 last	 has	 resonance.	You	 know	yourself	 examined	 again,	more
closely	 and	 with	 skepticism,	 since	 your	 last	 request	 was	 for	 something	 so
frivolous.	(Merely	wiping	out	a	city?	You	of	all	people	did	not	need	the	Gate
for	that.)	What	the	onyx	finds	within	you,	however,	is	something	different	this
time:	 Fear	 for	 kin.	 Fear	 of	 failure.	 The	 fear	 that	 accompanies	 all	 necessary
change.	And	underneath	it	all,	a	driving	need	to	make	the	world	better.



Somewhere	 far	 away,	 a	 billion	 dying	 things	 shiver	 as	 the	 onyx	 utters	 a
low,	earthshaking	blast	of	sound,	and	comes	online.



Atop	her	pylon,	beneath	the	pulse	of	the	obelisks,	Nassun	feels	that	distant
upcycling	darkness	as	a	warning.	But	she	is	too	deep	in	her	summoning;	too
many	obelisks	now	fill	her.	She	cannot	spare	any	attention	from	her	work.



And	 as	 each	 of	 the	 two	 hundred	 and	 sixteen	 remaining	 obelisks	 in	 turn
submits	to	her,	and	as	she	opens	her	eyes	to	stare	at	the	Moon	that	she’s	going
to	let	fly	past	untouched,	and	as	she	instead	prepares	to	turn	all	the	might	of
the	 great	 Plutonic	Engine	 back	upon	 the	world	 and	 its	 people,	 to	 transform
them	as	I	was	once	transformed	—



—	she	thinks	of	Schaffa.



Impossible	to	delude	oneself	in	a	moment	like	this.	Impossible	to	see	only
what	one	wants	to	see,	when	the	power	to	change	the	world	ricochets	through
mind	 and	 soul	 and	 the	 spaces	 between	 cells;	 oh,	 I	 learned	 this	 long	 before
both	of	you.	Impossible	not	to	understand	that	Nassun	has	known	Schaffa	for
barely	more	 than	 a	 year,	 and	does	 not	 truly	know	 him,	 given	 how	much	 of
himself	he	has	 lost.	 Impossible	not	 to	 realize	 that	she	clings	 to	him	because
she	has	nothing	else	—



But	through	her	determination,	there	is	a	glimmer	of	doubt	in	her	mind.	It
is	 nothing	more	 than	 that.	 Barely	 even	 a	 thought.	 But	 it	 whispers,	Do	 you
really	have	nothing	else?



Is	 there	 not	 one	 person	 in	 this	 world	 besides	 Schaffa	 who	 cares	 about
you?



And	I	watch	Nassun	hesitate,	fingers	curling	and	small	face	tightening	in	a
frown	 even	 as	 the	Obelisk	Gate	weaves	 itself	 into	 completion.	 I	watch	 the
shiver	of	energies	beyond	comprehension	as	they	begin	to	align	within	her.	I
lost	 the	power	 to	manipulate	 these	 energies	 tens	 of	 thousands	of	 years	 ago,
but	 I	 can	 still	 see	 them.	The	 arcanochemical	 lattice	 –	what	 you	 think	 of	 as
mere	brown	stone,	and	the	energetic	state	that	produces	it	–	is	forming	nicely.



I	 watch	 as	 you	 see	 this,	 too,	 and	 understand	 instantly	 what	 it	 means.	 I
watch	you	snarl	and	smash	apart	the	wall	between	you	and	your	daughter,	not
even	noticing	that	your	fingers	have	turned	to	stone	as	you	do	it.	I	watch	you
run	to	the	foot	of	the	pylon	steps	and	shout	at	her.	“Nassun!”



And	in	response	 to	your	sudden,	raw,	 incontrovertible	demand,	 the	onyx
blasts	out	of	nowhere	to	appear	overhead.



The	sound	of	it	–	a	low,	bone-shaking	blat	–	is	titanic.	The	blast	of	air	that
it	displaces	 is	 thunderous	enough	 to	knock	both	you	and	Nassun	down.	She
cries	out	and	slides	down	a	few	steps,	coming	dangerously	close	to	losing	her
grip	 on	 the	 Gate	 as	 the	 impact	 jolts	 her	 concentration.	 You	 cry	 out	 as	 the
impact	makes	 you	notice	 your	 left	 forearm,	which	 is	 stone,	 and	 collarbone,
which	is	stone,	and	left	foot	and	ankle.



But	you	set	your	teeth.	There	is	no	pain	in	you	anymore,	save	anguish	for
your	daughter.	No	need	within	you	but	one.	She	has	 the	Gate,	but	you	have
the	onyx	–	and	as	you	 look	up	at	 it,	 at	 the	Moon	glaring	 through	 its	murky
translucence,	icewhite	iris	in	a	scleral	sea	of	black,	you	know	what	you	have
to	do.



With	the	onyx’s	help,	you	reach	half	a	planet	away	and	stab	the	fulcrum	of
your	 intention	 into	 the	 wound	 of	 the	 world.	 The	 Rifting	 shudders	 as	 you
demand	every	iota	of	its	heat	and	kinetic	churn,	and	you	shudder	beneath	the
flux	of	so	much	power	that	for	a	moment	you	think	it’s	just	going	to	vomit	out
of	you	as	a	column	of	lava,	consuming	all.



But	the	onyx	is	part	of	you,	too,	right	now.	Indifferent	to	your	convulsions
–	 because	 you’re	 doing	 that,	 flopping	 along	 the	 ground	 and	 frothing	 at	 the
mouth	–	it	takes	and	taps	and	balances	the	power	of	the	Rifting	with	an	ease
that	 humbles	 you.	 Automatically	 it	 links	 into	 the	 obelisks	 so	 conveniently
nearby,	 the	 network	 that	 Nassun	 assembled	 in	 order	 to	 try	 to	 replicate	 the
onyx’s	 power.	 But	 a	 replica	 has	 only	 power,	 no	 will,	 unlike	 the	 onyx.	 A
network	 has	 no	 agenda.	 The	 onyx	 takes	 the	 twenty-seven	 obelisks	 and
immediately	begins	eating	into	the	rest	of	Nassun’s	obelisk	network.



Here,	 though,	 its	will	 is	no	 longer	paramount.	Nassun	 feels	 it.	Fights	 it.
She	is	just	as	determined	as	you.	Just	as	driven	by	love	–	you	for	her,	and	she
for	Schaffa.



I	love	you	both.	How	can	I	not,	after	all	this?	I	am	still	human,	after	all,
and	this	is	a	battle	for	the	fate	of	the	world.	Such	a	terrible	and	magnificent
thing	to	witness.



It	is	a	battle,	though,	line	by	line,	tendril	by	tendril	of	magic.	The	titanic
energies	 of	 the	Gate,	 of	 the	Rifting,	whip	 and	 shiver	 around	 you	 both	 in	 a
cylindrical	 aurora	 borealis	 of	 energies	 and	 colors,	 visible	 light	 ranging	 to
wavelengths	beyond	the	spectrum.	(Those	energies	resonate	in	you,	where	the
alignment	 is	 already	 complete,	 and	 still	 oscillate	 in	 Nassun	 –	 though	 her
waveform	 has	 begun	 to	 collapse.)	 It	 is	 the	 onyx	 and	 the	Rifting	 versus	 the
Gate,	you	against	her,	and	all	Corepoint	trembles	with	the	sheer	force	of	it	all.
In	 the	 dark	 halls	 of	Warrant,	 among	 the	 jeweled	 corpses	 of	 the	Guardians,
walls	groan	and	ceilings	crack,	spilling	dirt	and	pebbles.	Nassun	is	straining
to	pull	the	magic	down	from	what’s	left	of	the	Gate,	to	target	everyone	around
you	 and	 everyone	 beyond	 them	 –	 and	 finally,	 finally,	 you	 understand	 that
she’s	trying	to	turn	everyone	into	rusting	stone	eaters.	You,	meanwhile,	have
reached	up.	To	catch	the	Moon,	and	perhaps	earn	humanity	a	second	chance.
But	for	either	of	you	to	achieve	your	respective	goals,	you	will	need	to	claim
both	Gate	and	onyx,	and	the	additional	fuel	that	the	Rifting	provides.



It	 is	 a	 stalemate	 that	 cannot	 continue.	 The	 Gate	 cannot	 maintain	 its
connections	 forever,	 and	 the	 onyx	 cannot	 contain	 the	 chaos	 of	 the	 Rifting
forever	–	and	two	human	beings,	however	powerful	and	strong-willed,	cannot
survive	so	much	magic	for	long.



And	then	 it	happens.	You	cry	out	as	you	feel	a	change,	a	snapping-into-
line:	 Nassun.	 The	 magics	 of	 her	 substance	 are	 fully	 aligned;	 her
crystallization	has	begun.	In	desperation	and	pure	 instinct	you	grab	some	of
the	 energy	 that	 seeks	 to	 transform	 her	 and	 fling	 it	 away,	 though	 this	 only
delays	the	inevitable.	In	the	ocean	too	near	Corepoint,	there	is	a	deep	judder
that	 even	 the	mountain’s	 stabilizers	 cannot	 contain.	To	 the	west	 a	mountain
shaped	 like	 a	 knife	 jolts	 up	 from	 the	 ocean	 floor;	 to	 the	 east	 another	 rises,
hissing	 steam	 from	 the	newness	of	 its	 birth.	Nassun,	 snarling	 in	 frustration,
latches	onto	 these	as	new	sources	of	power,	dragging	 the	heat	 and	violence
from	them;	both	crack	and	crumble	away.	The	stabilizers	push	the	ocean	flat,
preventing	 tsunami,	 but	 they	 can	do	only	 so	much.	They	were	not	 built	 for
this.	Much	more	and	even	Corepoint	will	crumble.



“Nassun!”	you	shout	again,	anguished.	She	cannot	hear	you.	But	you	see,
even	 from	 where	 you	 are,	 that	 the	 fingers	 of	 her	 left	 hand	 have	 turned	 as
brown	 and	 stony	 as	 your	 own.	 She’s	 aware	 of	 it,	 you	 know	 somehow.	 She
made	this	choice.	She	is	prepared	for	the	inevitability	of	her	own	death.



You	aren’t.	Oh,	Earth,	you	just	can’t	watch	another	of	your	children	die.



So…	you	give	up.



I	 ache	with	 the	 look	on	your	 face,	 because	 I	 know	what	 it	 costs	 you	 to
give	up	Alabaster’s	dream	–	and	your	own.	You	so	wanted	to	make	a	better
world	 for	Nassun.	But	more	 than	 anything	 else,	 you	want	 this	 last	 child	 of
yours	to	live…	and	so	you	make	a	choice.	To	keep	fighting	will	kill	you	both.
The	only	way	to	win,	then,	is	not	to	fight	anymore.



I’m	sorry,	Essun.	I’m	so	sorry.	Goodbye.



Nassun	gasps,	her	eyes	snapping	open	as	she	feels	your	pressure	upon	the
Gate	–	upon	her,	while	you	dragged	all	of	 the	 terrible	 transforming	curls	of
magic	 toward	 yourself	 –	 suddenly	 relax.	 The	 onyx	 pauses	 in	 its	 onslaught,
shimmering	in	tandem	with	the	dozens	of	obelisks	it	has	claimed;	it	is	full	of
power	that	must,	must	be	expended.	For	the	moment,	however,	it	holds.	The
stabilizing	magics	finally	settle	the	churning	ocean	around	Corepoint.	For	this
one,	pent	moment,	the	world	waits,	still	and	taut.



She	turns.



“Nassun,”	you	say.	It’s	a	whisper.	You’re	on	the	bottom	steps	of	the	pylon,
trying	 to	 reach	 her,	 but	 that	won’t	 be	 happening.	Your	 arm	 has	 completely
solidified,	 and	 your	 torso	 is	 going.	 Your	 stone	 foot	 slides	 uselessly	 on	 the
slick	material,	 then	 locks	as	 the	rest	of	your	 leg	freezes	up.	With	your	good
foot,	 you	 can	 still	 push,	 but	 the	 stone	 of	 you	 is	 heavy;	 as	 crawling	 goes,
you’re	not	doing	a	very	good	job	of	it.



Her	brow	furrows.	You	look	up	at	her,	and	it	strikes	you.	Your	little	girl.
So	big,	here	beneath	the	onyx	and	the	Moon.	So	powerful.	So	beautiful.	And
you	cannot	help	it:	You	burst	into	tears	at	the	sight	of	her.	You	laugh,	though
one	of	your	 lungs	has	gone	 to	stone	and	 it’s	only	a	 soft	wheeze	 instead.	So
rusting	amazing,	your	little	girl.	You	are	proud	to	lose	to	her	strength.



She	inhales,	her	eyes	widening	as	if	she	cannot	believe	what	she	is	seeing:
her	mother,	so	fearsome,	on	the	ground.	Trying	to	crawl	on	stone	limbs.	Face
wet	with	tears.	Smiling.	You	have	never,	ever	smiled	at	her	before.



And	 then	 the	 line	 of	 transformation	moves	 over	 your	 face,	 and	 you	 are
gone.



Still	there	physically,	a	brown	sandstone	lump	frozen	on	the	lower	steps,
with	only	the	barest	suggestion	of	a	smile	on	half-formed	lips.	Your	tears	are
still	there,	glistening	upon	stone.	She	stares	at	these.



She	 stares	 at	 these	 and	 sucks	 in	 a	 long	 hollow	breath	 because	 suddenly
there	is	nothing,	nothing	inside	her,	she	has	killed	her	father	and	she	has	killed
her	mother	and	Schaffa	is	dying	and	there	is	nothing	left,	nothing,	the	world
just	takes	and	takes	and	takes	from	her	and	leaves	nothing	—



But	she	cannot	stop	staring	at	your	drying	tears.



Because	 the	world	 took	 and	 took	 and	 took	 from	you,	 too,	 after	 all.	 She
knows	 this.	 And	 yet,	 for	 some	 reason	 that	 she	 does	 not	 think	 she’ll	 ever
understand…	even	as	you	died,	you	were	reaching	for	the	Moon.



And	for	her.



She	screams.	Clutches	her	head	 in	her	hands,	one	of	 them	now	halfway
stone.	Drops	 to	her	knees,	 crushed	beneath	 the	weight	of	grief	 as	 if	 it	 is	 an
entire	planet.



The	onyx,	patient	 but	not,	 aware	but	 indifferent,	 touches	her.	She	 is	 the
only	remaining	component	of	the	Gate	that	has	a	functioning,	complementary
will.	 Through	 this	 touch	 she	 perceives	 your	 plan	 as	 commands	 locked	 and
aimed	but	unfired.	Open	the	Gate,	pour	the	Rifting’s	power	through	it,	catch
the	Moon.	End	the	Seasons.	Fix	the	world.	This,	Nassun	sesses-feels-knows,
was	your	last	wish.



The	onyx	says,	in	its	ponderous,	wordless	way:	Execute	Y/N?



And	in	the	cold	stone	silence,	alone,	Nassun	chooses.



YES	



coda
me,	and	you

You	are	dead.	But	not	you.



The	 recapture	 of	 the	 Moon	 is	 undramatic,	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 the
people	standing	beneath	it.	At	the	top	of	the	apartment	building	where	Tonkee
and	the	others	have	taken	shelter,	she’s	used	an	ancient	writing	instrument	–
long	gone	dry,	but	resurrected	with	a	bit	of	spit	and	blood	at	the	tip	–	to	try	to
track	 the	Moon’s	movement	between	one	hour	and	 the	next.	 It	doesn’t	help
because	 she	hasn’t	observed	enough	variables	 to	do	 the	math	correctly,	 and
because	she’s	not	 some	rusting	hack	astronomest,	 for	Earth’s	sake.	She	also
isn’t	sure	if	she	got	 the	first	measurement	right	because	of	 the	fiver	or	sixer
shake	that	occurred	right	around	that	moment,	just	before	Hjarka	dragged	her
away	 from	 the	 window.	 “Obelisk-builder	 windows	 don’t	 shatter,”	 she
complains	afterward.



“My	 rusting	 temper	 does,”	 Hjarka	 retorts,	 and	 that	 ends	 the	 argument
before	 it	 can	 begin.	 Tonkee	 is	 learning	 to	 compromise	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 a
healthy	relationship.



But	the	Moon	has	indeed	changed,	they	see	as	days	and	then	weeks	pass.
It	does	not	vanish.	It	fluxes	through	shapes	and	colors	in	a	pattern	that	does
not	 initially	 make	 sense,	 but	 it	 grows	 no	 smaller	 in	 the	 sky	 on	 successive
nights.



The	dismantling	of	the	Obelisk	Gate	is	somewhat	more	dramatic.	Having
expended	its	full	capability	in	the	achievement	of	something	just	as	powerful
as	Geoarcanity,	the	Gate	proceeds	as	designed	through	its	shutdown	protocol.
One	 by	 one,	 the	 dozens	 of	 obelisks	 floating	 around	 the	world	 drift	 toward
Corepoint.	 One	 by	 one,	 the	 obelisks	 –	 wholly	 dematerialized	 now,	 all
quantum	states	 sublimated	 into	potential	 energy,	you	need	not	understand	 it
beyond	that	–	drop	into	the	black	chasm.	This	takes	several	days.



The	onyx,	however,	last	and	greatest	of	the	obelisks,	instead	drifts	out	to
sea,	its	hum	deepening	as	its	altitude	decreases.	It	enters	the	sea	gently,	on	a
preplanned	course	 to	minimize	damage	–	 since	unlike	 its	 fellow	obelisks,	 it
alone	 has	 retained	 material	 existence.	 This,	 as	 the	 conductors	 long	 ago
intended,	preserves	the	onyx	against	future	need.	It	also	puts	the	last	remnants
of	the	Niess	to	rest,	finally,	deep	in	a	watery	grave.



I	suppose	we	must	hope	that	no	intrepid	young	future	orogene	ever	finds
and	raises	it.



Tonkee	is	 the	one	to	go	and	find	Nassun.	It’s	 later	 in	the	morning,	some
hours	 after	 your	 death,	 under	 a	 sun	 that	 has	 risen	 bright	 and	 warm	 in	 the
ashless	blue	 sky.	After	pausing	 for	 a	moment	 to	 stare	at	 this	 sky	 in	wonder
and	longing	and	fascination,	Tonkee	goes	back	to	the	edge	of	the	hole,	and	to
the	pylon	stair.	Nassun’s	still	 there,	sitting	on	one	of	 the	 lower	steps	next	 to
the	 brown	 lump	 of	 you.	 Her	 knees	 are	 drawn	 up,	 her	 head	 bowed,	 her
completely	solidified	hand	–	frozen	in	the	splayed	gesture	that	she	used	while
activating	the	Gate	–	resting	awkwardly	on	the	step	beside	her.



Tonkee	 sits	down	on	your	other	 side,	 gazing	at	 you	 for	 a	 long	moment.
Nassun	 starts	 and	 looks	 up	 as	 she	 becomes	 aware	 of	 another	 presence,	 but
Tonkee	only	smiles	at	her,	and	awkwardly	rests	a	hand	on	what	was	once	your
hair.	Nassun	 swallows	hard,	 scrubs	 at	 the	dried	 tear-tracks	on	her	 face,	 and
then	nods	to	Tonkee.	They	sit	together,	with	you,	grieving	for	a	time.



Danel	 is	 the	one	who	goes	with	Nassun,	 later,	 to	 fetch	Schaffa	 from	the
dead	darkness	of	Warren.	The	other	Guardians,	who	still	had	corestones,	have
turned	to	jewel.	Most	seem	to	have	simply	died	where	they	lay,	though	some
fell	 out	 of	 their	 cells	 in	 their	 thrashing,	 and	 their	 glittering	 bodies	 sprawl
awkwardly	against	the	wall	or	along	the	floor.



Schaffa	 alone	 still	 lives.	 He’s	 disoriented,	 weak.	 As	 Danel	 and	 Nassun
help	him	back	up	into	 the	surface	 light,	 it	becomes	clear	 that	his	hacked-off
hair	is	already	streaked	with	gray.	Danel’s	worried	about	the	stitched	wound
on	 the	back	of	his	neck,	 though	 it	has	stopped	bleeding	and	seems	 to	cause
Schaffa	no	pain.	That	isn’t	what’s	going	to	kill	him.



Nevertheless.	 Once	 he’s	 capable	 of	 standing	 and	 the	 sun	 has	 helped	 to
clear	his	mind	somewhat,	Schaffa	holds	Nassun,	there	beside	what	remains	of
you.	She	doesn’t	weep.	Mostly	she’s	just	numb.	The	others	come	out,	Tonkee
and	Hjarka	joining	Danel,	and	they	stand	with	Schaffa	and	Nassun	while	the
sun	 sets	 and	 the	 Moon	 rises	 again.	 Maybe	 it’s	 a	 silent	 memorial	 service.
Maybe	they	just	need	time	and	company	to	recover	from	events	too	vast	and
strange	to	comprehend.	I	don’t	know.



Elsewhere	 in	Corepoint,	 in	 a	garden	 long	 since	gone	 to	wild	meadow,	 I
and	Gaewha	face	Remwha	–	Steel,	Gray	Man,	whatever	–	beneath	the	now-
waning	Moon.



He’s	been	here	since	Nassun	made	her	choice.	When	he	finally	speaks,	I
find	myself	 thinking	 that	his	voice	has	become	so	 thin	and	weary.	Once,	he
made	the	very	stones	ripple	with	the	wry,	edged	humor	of	his	earthtalk.	Now
he	 sounds	 old.	 Thousands	 of	 years	 of	 ceaseless	 existence	will	 do	 that	 to	 a
man.



He	says:	“I	only	wanted	it	to	end.”



Gaewha	 –	Antimony,	whatever	 –	 says,	 “That	 isn’t	 what	we	were	made
for.”



He	turns	his	head,	slowly,	to	look	at	her.	It	is	tiring	just	to	watch	him	do
this.	Stubborn	 fool.	There	 is	 the	despair	 of	 ages	on	his	 face,	 all	 because	he
refuses	to	admit	that	there’s	more	than	one	way	to	be	human.



Gaewha	 offers	 a	 hand.	 “We	were	made	 to	make	 the	world	 better.”	Her
gaze	 slides	 to	me	 for	 support.	 I	 sigh	 inwardly,	 but	 offer	 a	 hand	 in	 truce	 as
well.



Remwha	looks	at	our	hands.	Somewhere,	perhaps	among	the	others	of	our
kind	who	have	gathered	to	watch	this	moment,	are	Bimniwha	and	Dushwha
and	Salewha.	They	forgot	who	they	were	long	ago,	or	else	they	simply	prefer
to	embrace	who	 they	are	now.	Only	we	 three	have	 retained	anything	of	 the
past.	This	is	both	a	good	and	bad	thing.



“I’m	tired,”	he	admits.



“A	nap	might	help,”	I	suggest.	“There	is	the	onyx,	after	all.”



Well!	Something	of	the	old	Remwha	remains.	I	don’t	think	I	deserved	that
look.



But	he	takes	our	hands.	Together,	the	three	of	us	–	and	the	others,	too,	all
who	have	come	to	understand	that	the	world	has	to	change,	the	war	must	end
–	descend	into	the	boiling	depths.



The	 heart	 of	 the	 world	 is	 quieter	 than	 usual,	 we	 find	 as	 we	 take	 up
positions	 around	 it.	 That	 is	 a	 good	 sign.	 It	 does	 not	 rage	 us	 away	 at	 once,
which	 is	 a	 better	 one.	 We	 spell	 out	 the	 terms	 in	 placatory	 fluxes	 of
reverberation:	The	Earth	keeps	 its	 life-magic,	 and	 the	 rest	of	us	get	 to	keep
ours	without	 interference.	We	have	given	 it	back	 the	Moon,	and	 thrown	 the
obelisks	in	as	a	surety	of	good	faith.	But	in	exchange,	the	Seasons	must	cease.



There	is	a	period	of	stillness.	I	know	only	later	that	this	is	several	days.	In
the	moment,	it	feels	like	another	millennium.



Then	a	heavy,	lurching	jolt	of	gravitation.	Accepted.	And	–	the	best	sign
of	all	–	it	sets	loose	the	numberless	presences	that	it	has	ingested	over	the	past
epoch.	 They	 spin	 away,	 vanishing	 into	 the	 currents	 of	 magic,	 and	 I	 don’t
know	what	happens	to	them	beyond	that.	I	won’t	ever	know	what	happens	to
souls	after	death	–	or	at	least,	I	won’t	know	for	another	seven	billion	years	or
so,	whenever	the	Earth	finally	dies.



An	 intimidating	 thing	 to	 contemplate.	 It’s	 been	 a	 challenging	 first	 forty
thousand	years.



On	the	other	hand…	nowhere	to	go,	but	up.
***

I	go	back	to	them,	your	daughter	and	your	old	enemy	and	your	friends,	to	tell
them	the	news.	Somewhat	to	my	surprise,	several	months	have	passed	in	the
interim.	 They’ve	 settled	 into	 the	 building	 that	 Nassun	 occupied,	 living	 off
Alabaster’s	old	garden	and	the	supplies	that	we	brought	for	him	and	Nassun.
That	won’t	be	enough	 long	 term,	of	course,	 though	 they’ve	supplemented	 it
admirably	 with	 improvised	 fishing	 lines	 and	 bird-catching	 traps	 and	 dried
edible	 seaweed,	 which	 Tonkee	 seems	 to	 have	 figured	 out	 a	 means	 of
cultivating	 down	 at	 the	water’s	 edge.	 So	 resourceful,	 these	modern	 people.
But	 it	 is	 becoming	 increasingly	 clear	 that	 they’ll	 have	 to	 go	 back	 to	 the
Stillness	soon,	if	they	want	to	keep	living.



I	find	Nassun,	who	is	sitting	alone	at	the	pylon	again.	Your	body	remains
where	it	fell,	but	someone	has	tucked	fresh	wildflowers	into	its	one	remaining
hand.	There’s	another	hand	beside	it,	I	notice,	positioned	like	an	offering	near
the	stump	of	your	arm.	It’s	too	small	for	you,	but	she	meant	well.	She	doesn’t
speak	for	a	long	while	after	I	appear,	and	I	find	that	this	pleases	me.	Her	kind
talk	so	much.	It	goes	on	for	long	enough,	though,	even	I	get	a	little	impatient.



I	tell	her,	“You	won’t	see	Steel	again.”	In	case	she	was	worried	about	that.



She	jerks	a	little,	as	if	she’s	forgotten	my	presence.	Then	she	sighs.	“Tell
him	I’m	sorry.	I	just…	couldn’t.”



“He	understands.”



She	nods.	Then:	“Schaffa	died	today.”



I	 had	 forgotten	 him.	 I	 should	 not	 have;	 he	was	 part	 of	 you.	 Still.	 I	 say
nothing.	She	seems	to	prefer	that.



She	 takes	a	deep	breath.	 “Will	you…	The	others	 say	you	brought	 them,
and	Mama.	Can	you	take	us	back?	I	know	it’ll	be	dangerous.”



“There’s	 no	 longer	 any	danger.”	When	 she	 frowns,	 I	 explain	 all	 of	 it	 to
her:	the	truce,	the	release	of	hostages,	the	cessation	of	immediate	hostilities	in
the	 form	 of	 no	 more	 Seasons.	 It	 does	 not	 mean	 complete	 stability.	 Plate
tectonics	will	be	plate	tectonics.	Season-like	disasters	will	still	occur,	though
with	greatly	decreased	frequency.	I	conclude:	“You	can	take	the	vehimal	back
to	the	Stillness.”



She	shudders.	I	belatedly	recall	what	she	suffered	there.	She	also	says,	“I
don’t	know	if	I	can	give	it	magic.	I…	I	feel	like…”



She	lifts	the	stone-capped	stump	of	her	left	wrist.	I	understand,	then	–	and
yes,	she’s	right.	She	is	aligned	perfectly,	and	will	be	so	for	the	rest	of	her	life.
Orogeny	is	lost	to	her,	forever.	Unless	she	wants	to	join	you.



I	say,	“I	will	power	the	vehimal.	The	charge	should	last	six	months	or	so.
Leave	within	that	time.”



I	 adjust	my	position	 then,	 to	 the	 foot	of	 the	 stairs.	She	 starts,	 and	 looks
around	to	find	me	holding	you.	I’ve	picked	up	her	old	hand,	too,	because	our
children	 are	 always	 part	 of	 us.	 She	 stands,	 and	 for	 a	 moment	 I	 fear
unpleasantness.	But	the	look	on	her	face	is	not	unhappy.	Just	resigned.



I	wait,	for	a	moment	or	a	year,	to	see	if	she	has	any	final	words	for	your
corpse.	She	says,	instead,	“I	don’t	know	what	will	happen	to	us.”



“‘Us’?”



She	sighs.	“Orogenes.”



Oh.	 “The	 current	 Season	will	 last	 for	 some	 time,	 even	with	 the	Rifting
quelled,”	 I	say.	“Surviving	 it	will	 require	cooperation	among	many	kinds	of
people.	Cooperation	presents	opportunities.”



She	frowns.	“Opportunities…	for	what?	You	said	the	Seasons	would	end
after	this.”



“Yes.”



She	 holds	 up	 her	 hands,	 or	 one	 hand	 and	 one	 stump,	 to	 gesture	 in
frustration.	 “People	 killed	 us	 and	 hated	 us	 when	 they	 needed	 us.	 Now	we
don’t	even	have	that.”



Us.	We.	She	still	thinks	of	herself	as	orogene,	though	she	will	never	again
be	able	to	do	more	than	listen	to	the	earth.	I	decide	not	to	point	this	out.	I	do
say,	however,	“And	you	won’t	need	them,	either.”



She	falls	silent,	perhaps	in	confusion.	To	clarify,	I	add,	“With	the	end	of
the	 Seasons	 and	 the	 death	 of	 all	 the	Guardians,	 it	will	 now	 be	 possible	 for
orogenes	to	conquer	or	eliminate	stills,	if	they	so	choose.	Previously,	neither
group	could	have	survived	without	the	other’s	aid.”



Nassun	gasps.	“That’s	horrible!”



I	don’t	bother	to	explain	that	just	because	something	is	horrible	does	not
make	it	any	less	true.



“There	won’t	be	any	more	Fulcrums,”	she	says.	She	looks	away,	troubled,
perhaps	 remembering	 her	 destruction	 of	 the	 Antarctic	 Fulcrum.	 “I	 think…
They’re	wrong,	but	I	don’t	know	how	else…”	She	shakes	her	head.



I	 watch	 her	 flounder	 in	 silence	 for	 a	 month,	 or	 a	 moment.	 I	 say,	 “The
Fulcrums	are	wrong.”



“What?”



“Imprisonment	 of	 orogenes	 was	 never	 the	 only	 option	 for	 ensuring	 the
safety	of	society.”	I	pause	deliberately,	and	she	blinks,	perhaps	remembering
that	orogene	parents	are	perfectly	capable	of	raising	orogene	children	without
disaster.	“Lynching	was	never	the	only	option.	The	nodes	were	never	the	only
option.	 All	 of	 these	 were	 choices.	 Different	 choices	 have	 always	 been
possible.”



There	is	such	sorrow	in	her,	your	little	girl.	I	hope	Nassun	learns	someday
that	she	is	not	alone	in	the	world.	I	hope	she	learns	how	to	hope	again.



She	lowers	her	gaze.	“They’re	not	going	to	choose	anything	different.”



“They	will	if	you	make	them.”



She’s	wiser	than	you,	and	does	not	balk	at	the	notion	of	forcing	people	to
be	decent	to	each	other.	Only	the	methodology	is	a	problem.	“I	don’t	have	any
orogeny	anymore.”



“Orogeny,”	 I	 say,	 sharply	so	she	will	pay	attention,	“was	never	 the	only
way	to	change	the	world.”



She	 stares.	 I	 feel	 that	 I	 have	 said	 all	 I	 can,	 so	 I	 leave	 her	 there	 to
contemplate	my	words.



I	 visit	 the	 city’s	 station,	 and	 charge	 its	 vehimal	with	 sufficient	magic	 to
return	 to	 the	 Stillness.	 It	 will	 still	 take	 a	 journey	 of	 months	 or	 more	 for
Nassun	 and	 her	 companions	 to	 reach	 Rennanis	 from	 the	 Antarctics.	 The
Season	 will	 likely	 get	 worse	 while	 they	 travel,	 because	 we	 have	 a	 Moon
again.	Still…	they	are	part	of	you.	I	hope	they	survive.



Once	 they’re	 on	 their	 way,	 I	 come	 here,	 to	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 mountain
beneath	Corepoint.	To	attend	to	you.



There	is	no	one	true	way,	when	we	initiate	 this	process.	The	Earth	–	for
the	sake	of	good	relations	I	will	no	longer	call	it	Evil	–	reordered	us	instantly,
and	by	now	many	of	us	are	skilled	enough	to	replicate	that	reordering	without
a	lengthy	gestation.	I	have	found	that	speed	produces	mixed	results,	however.
Alabaster,	 as	 you	 would	 call	 him,	 may	 not	 fully	 remember	 himself	 for
centuries	–	or	ever.	You,	however,	must	be	different.



I	have	brought	you	here,	 reassembled	 the	 raw	arcanic	 substance	of	your
being,	 and	 reactivated	 the	 lattice	 that	 should	 have	 preserved	 the	 critical
essence	 of	who	 you	were.	You’ll	 lose	 some	memory.	 There	 is	 always	 loss,
with	change.	But	I	have	told	you	this	story,	primed	what	remains	of	you,	 to
retain	as	much	as	possible	of	who	you	were.



Not	to	force	you	into	a	particular	shape,	mind	you.	From	here	on,	you	may
become	whomever	 you	wish.	 It’s	 just	 that	 you	need	 to	 know	where	 you’ve
come	from	to	know	where	you’re	going.	Do	you	understand?



And	if	you	should	decide	to	leave	me…	I	will	endure.	I’ve	been	through
worse.



So	I	wait.	Time	passes.	A	year,	a	decade,	a	week.	The	length	of	time	does
not	matter,	 though	Gaewha	eventually	loses	interest	and	leaves	to	attend	her
own	affairs.	I	wait.	I	hope…	no.	I	simply	wait.



And	 then	 one	 day,	 deep	 in	 the	 fissure	where	 I	 have	 put	 you,	 the	 geode
splits	 and	 hisses	 open.	 You	 rise	 from	 its	 spent	 halves,	 the	 matter	 of	 you
slowing	and	cooling	to	its	natural	state.



Beautiful,	I	think.	Locs	of	roped	jasper.	Skin	of	striated	ocher	marble	that
suggests	laugh	lines	at	eyes	and	mouth,	and	stratified	layers	to	your	clothing.
You	watch	me,	and	I	watch	you	back.



You	say,	in	an	echo	of	the	voice	you	once	had,	“What	is	it	that	you	want?”



“Only	to	be	with	you,”	I	say.



“Why?”



I	adjust	myself	 to	a	posture	of	humility,	with	head	bowed	and	one	hand
over	my	chest.	“Because	that	is	how	one	survives	eternity,”	I	say,	“or	even	a
few	years.	Friends.	Family.	Moving	with	them.	Moving	forward.”



Do	you	remember	when	I	first	told	you	this,	back	when	you	despaired	of
ever	 repairing	 the	 harm	 you’d	 done?	 Perhaps.	 Your	 position	 adjusts,	 too.
Arms	folded,	expression	skeptical.	Familiar.	I	try	not	to	hope	and	fail	utterly.



“Friends,	family,”	you	say.	“Which	am	I,	to	you?”



“Both	and	more.	We	are	beyond	such	things.”



“Hmm.”



I	am	not	anxious.	“What	do	you	want?”



You	consider.	I	listen	to	the	slow	ongoing	roar	of	the	volcano,	down	here
in	the	deep.	Then	you	say,	“I	want	the	world	to	be	better.”



I	have	never	regretted	more	my	inability	to	leap	into	the	air	and	whoop	for
joy.



Instead,	I	 transit	 to	you,	with	one	hand	proffered.	“Then	let’s	go	make	it
better.”



You	look	amused.	It’s	you.	It’s	truly	you.	“Just	like	that?”



“It	might	take	some	time.”



“I	don’t	think	I’m	very	patient.”	But	you	take	my	hand.



Don’t	be	patient.	Don’t	ever	be.	This	is	the	way	a	new	world	begins.



“Neither	am	I,”	I	say.	“So	let’s	get	to	it.”



APPENDIX	1
A	catalog	of	Fifth	Seasons	that	have	been	recorded	prior	to	and
since	the	founding	of	the	Sanzed	Equatorial	Affiliation,	from	most

recent	to	oldest

Choking	Season:	 2714–2719	 Imperial.	 Proximate	 cause:	 volcanic	 eruption.
Location:	 the	 Antarctics	 near	 Deveteris.	 The	 eruption	 of	 Mount	 Akok
blanketed	a	 five-hundred-mile	 radius	with	 fine	ash	clouds	 that	 solidified
in	 lungs	 and	mucous	membranes.	 Five	 years	without	 sunlight,	 although
the	northern	hemisphere	was	not	affected	as	much	(only	two	years).

Acid	 Season:	 2322–2329	 Imperial.	 Proximate	 cause:	 plus-ten-level	 shake.
Location:	 unknown;	 far	 ocean.	 A	 sudden	 plate	 shift	 birthed	 a	 chain	 of
volcanoes	 in	 the	 path	 of	 a	 major	 jet	 stream.	 This	 jet	 stream	 became
acidified,	flowing	toward	the	western	coast	and	eventually	around	most	of
the	Stillness.	Most	coastal	comms	perished	in	the	initial	tsunami;	the	rest
failed	 or	 were	 forced	 to	 relocate	 when	 their	 fleets	 and	 port	 facilities
corroded	and	the	fishing	dried	up.	Atmospheric	occlusion	by	clouds	lasted
seven	years;	coastal	pH	levels	remained	untenable	for	many	years	more.

Boiling	 Season:	 1842–1845	 Imperial.	 Proximate	 cause:	 hot	 spot	 eruption
beneath	 a	 great	 lake.	 Location:	 Somidlats,	 Lake	 Tekkaris	 quartent.	 The
eruption	 launched	millions	 of	 gallons	 of	 steam	 and	 particulates	 into	 the
air,	 which	 triggered	 acidic	 rain	 and	 atmospheric	 occlusion	 over	 the
southern	half	of	 the	continent	for	 three	years.	The	northern	half	suffered
no	 negative	 impacts,	 however,	 so	 archeomests	 dispute	 whether	 this
qualifies	as	a	“true”	Season.

Breathless	Season:	1689–1798	Imperial.	Proximate	cause:	mining	accident.
Location:	 Nomidlats,	 Sathd	 quartent.	 An	 entirely	 human-caused	 Season
triggered	 when	 miners	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 northeastern	 Nomidlats
coalfields	 set	 off	 underground	 fires.	 A	 relatively	 mild	 Season	 featuring
occasional	 sunlight	 and	 no	 ashfall	 or	 acidification	 except	 in	 the	 region;
few	 comms	 declared	 Seasonal	 Law.	 Approximately	 fourteen	 million
people	 in	 the	 city	of	Heldine	died	 in	 the	 initial	natural-gas	 eruption	and
rapidly	 spreading	 fire	 sinkhole	 before	 Imperial	 Orogenes	 successfully
quelled	 and	 sealed	 the	 edges	 of	 the	 fires	 to	 prevent	 further	 spread.	 The
remaining	mass	could	only	be	isolated,	where	it	continued	to	burn	for	one



hundred	and	nine	years.	The	smoke	of	 this,	spread	via	prevailing	winds,
caused	 respiratory	 problems	 and	 occasional	 mass	 suffocations	 in	 the
region	for	several	decades.	A	secondary	effect	of	the	loss	of	the	Nomidlats
coalfields	 was	 a	 catastrophic	 rise	 in	 heating	 fuel	 costs	 and	 the	 wider
adaption	 of	 geothermal	 and	 hydroelectric	 heating,	 leading	 to	 the
establishment	of	the	Geneer	Licensure.

The	Season	of	Teeth:	1553–1566	Imperial.	Proximate	cause:	oceanic	shake
triggering	 a	 supervolcanic	 explosion.	 Location:	 Arctic	 Cracks.	 An
aftershock	of	the	oceanic	shake	breached	a	previously	unknown	hot	spot
near	 the	 north	 pole.	This	 triggered	 a	 supervolcanic	 explosion;	witnesses
report	 hearing	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 explosion	 as	 far	 as	 the	 Antarctics.	 Ash
went	upper-atmospheric	and	spread	around	the	globe	rapidly,	although	the
Arctics	 were	 most	 heavily	 affected.	 The	 harm	 of	 this	 Season	 was
exacerbated	 by	 poor	 preparation	 on	 the	 part	 of	 many	 comms,	 because
some	nine	hundred	years	had	passed	since	the	last	Season;	popular	belief
at	 the	 time	 was	 that	 the	 Seasons	 were	 merely	 legend.	 Reports	 of
cannibalism	spread	from	the	north	all	 the	way	 to	 the	Equatorials.	At	 the
end	of	 this	Season,	 the	Fulcrum	was	 founded	 in	Yumenes,	with	 satellite
facilities	in	the	Arctics	and	Antarctics.

Fungus	Season:	602	Imperial.	Proximate	cause:	volcanic	eruption.	Location:
western	 Equatorials.	 A	 series	 of	 eruptions	 during	 monsoon	 season
increased	humidity	and	obscured	sunlight	over	approximately	20	percent
of	 the	 continent	 for	 six	months.	While	 this	 was	 a	mild	 Season	 as	 such
things	 go,	 its	 timing	 created	 perfect	 conditions	 for	 a	 fungal	 bloom	 that
spread	 across	 the	 Equatorials	 into	 the	 northern	 and	 southern	 Midlats,
wiping	 out	 then-staple-crop	 miroq	 (now	 extinct).	 The	 resulting	 famine
lasted	four	years	(two	for	the	fungus	blight	to	run	its	course,	two	more	for
agriculture	and	food	distribution	systems	 to	 recover).	Nearly	all	affected
comms	were	able	to	subsist	on	their	own	stores,	thus	proving	the	efficacy
of	Imperial	reforms	and	Season	planning,	and	the	Empire	was	generous	in
sharing	stored	seed	with	those	regions	that	had	been	miroq-dependent.	In
its	 aftermath,	 many	 comms	 of	 the	 middle	 latitudes	 and	 coastal	 regions
voluntarily	joined	the	Empire,	doubling	its	range	and	beginning	its	Golden
Age.

Madness	Season:	 3	Before	 Imperial–7	 Imperial.	 Proximate	 cause:	 volcanic
eruption.	 Location:	 Kiash	 Traps.	 The	 eruption	 of	 multiple	 vents	 of	 an
ancient	 supervolcano	 (the	 same	 one	 responsible	 for	 the	Twin	 Season	 of
approximately	10,000	years	previous)	launched	large	deposits	of	the	dark-
colored	mineral	augite	into	the	air.	The	resulting	ten	years	of	darkness	was
not	 only	devastating	 in	 the	usual	Seasonal	way,	 but	 resulted	 in	 a	 higher
than	usual	incidence	of	mental	illness.	The	Sanzed	Equatorial	Affiliation
(commonly	called	the	Sanze	Empire)	was	born	in	this	Season	as	Warlord



Verishe	 of	 Yumenes	 conquered	 multiple	 ailing	 comms	 using
psychological	 warfare	 techniques.	 (See	 The	 Art	 of	 Madness,	 various
authors,	 Sixth	University	 Press.)	Verishe	 named	 herself	 Emperor	 on	 the
day	the	first	sunlight	returned.

[Editor’s	note:	Much	of	the	information	about	Seasons	prior	to	the	founding
of	 Sanze	 is	 contradictory	 or	 unconfirmed.	 The	 following	 are	 Seasons
agreed	 upon	 by	 the	 Seventh	 University	 Archaeomestric	 Conference	 of
2532.]

Wandering	Season:	 Approximately	 800	Before	 Imperial.	 Proximate	 cause:
magnetic	 pole	 shift.	 Location:	 unverifiable.	 This	 Season	 resulted	 in	 the
extinction	of	several	 important	 trade	crops	of	 the	time,	and	twenty	years
of	 famine	 resulting	 from	 pollinators	 confused	 by	 the	movement	 of	 true
north.

Season	of	Changed	Wind:	Approximately	1900	Before	Imperial.	Proximate
cause:	 unknown.	 Location:	 unverifiable.	 For	 reasons	 unknown,	 the
direction	of	the	prevailing	winds	shifted	for	many	years	before	returning
to	 normal.	Consensus	 agrees	 that	 this	was	 a	Season,	 despite	 the	 lack	 of
atmospheric	occlusion,	because	only	a	substantial	(and	likely	far-oceanic)
seismic	event	could	have	triggered	it.

Heavy	 Metal	 Season:	 Approximately	 4200	 Before	 Imperial.	 Proximate
cause:	 volcanic	 eruption.	 Location:	 Somidlats	 near	 Eastern	 Coastals.	 A
volcanic	 eruption	 (believed	 to	 be	 Mount	 Yrga)	 caused	 atmospheric
occlusion	 for	 ten	 years,	 exacerbated	 by	 widespread	 mercury
contamination	throughout	the	eastern	half	of	the	Stillness.

Season	 of	 Yellow	 Seas:	 Approximately	 9200	 Before	 Imperial.	 Proximate
cause:	 unknown.	 Location:	 Eastern	 and	 Western	 Coastals,	 and	 coastal
regions	as	far	south	as	the	Antarctics.	This	Season	is	only	known	through
written	 accounts	 found	 in	 Equatorial	 ruins.	 For	 unknown	 reasons,	 a
widespread	bacterial	bloom	toxified	nearly	all	sea	life	and	caused	coastal
famines	for	several	decades.

Twin	 Season:	 Approximately	 9800	 Before	 Imperial.	 Proximate	 cause:
volcanic	eruption.	Location:	Somidlats.	Per	songs	and	oral	histories	dating
from	 the	 time,	 the	 eruption	 of	 one	 volcanic	 vent	 caused	 a	 three-year
occlusion.	As	this	began	to	clear,	it	was	followed	by	a	second	eruption	of
a	different	vent,	which	extended	the	occlusion	by	thirty	more	years.



APPENDIX	2
A	Glossary	of	Terms	Commonly	Used	in	All	Quartents	of	the

Stillness

Antarctics:	The	southernmost	latitudes	of	the	continent.	Also	refers	to	people
from	antarctic-region	comms.

Arctics:	 The	 northernmost	 latitudes	 of	 the	 continent.	 Also	 refers	 to	 people
from	arctic-region	comms.

Ashblow	 Hair:	 A	 distinctive	 Sanzed	 racial	 trait,	 deemed	 in	 the	 current
guidelines	 of	 the	 Breeder	 use-caste	 to	 be	 advantageous	 and	 therefore
given	preference	 in	 selection.	Ashblow	hair	 is	 notably	 coarse	 and	 thick,
generally	 growing	 in	 an	 upward	 flare;	 at	 length,	 it	 falls	 around	 the	 face
and	shoulders.	It	is	acid-resistant	and	retains	little	water	after	immersion,
and	has	been	proven	effective	as	an	ash	filter	in	extreme	circumstances.	In
most	 comms,	 Breeder	 guidelines	 acknowledge	 texture	 alone;	 however,
Equatorial	Breeders	generally	also	require	natural	“ash”	coloration	(slate
gray	to	white,	present	from	birth)	for	the	coveted	designation.

Bastard:	A	person	born	without	a	use-caste,	which	is	only	possible	for	boys
whose	 fathers	 are	 unknown.	 Those	 who	 distinguish	 themselves	may	 be
permitted	to	bear	their	mother’s	use-caste	at	comm-naming.

Blow:	A	volcano.	Also	called	firemountains	in	some	Coastal	languages.
Boil:	A	geyser,	hot	spring,	or	steam	vent.
Breeder:	 One	 of	 the	 seven	 common	 use-castes.	 Breeders	 are	 individuals

selected	 for	 their	 health	 and	 desirable	 conformation.	 During	 a	 Season,
they	 are	 responsible	 for	 the	 maintenance	 of	 healthy	 bloodlines	 and	 the
improvement	of	comm	or	race	by	selective	measures.	Breeders	born	into
the	 caste	 who	 do	 not	 meet	 acceptable	 community	 standards	 may	 be
permitted	to	bear	the	use-caste	of	a	close	relative	at	comm-naming.

Cache:	 Stored	 food	 and	 supplies.	 Comms	 maintain	 guarded,	 locked
storecaches	 at	 all	 times	 against	 the	 possibility	 of	 a	 Fifth	 Season.	 Only
recognized	 comm	members	 are	 entitled	 to	 a	 share	 of	 the	 cache,	 though
adults	 may	 use	 their	 share	 to	 feed	 unrecognized	 children	 and	 others.
Individual	 households	 often	 maintain	 their	 own	 housecaches,	 equally
guarded	against	non–family	members.

Cebaki:	A	member	of	 the	Cebaki	 race.	Cebak	was	once	a	nation	 (unit	of	 a



deprecated	political	 system,	Before	 Imperial)	 in	 the	Somidlats,	 though	 it
was	 reorganized	 into	 the	 quartent	 system	 when	 the	 Old	 Sanze	 Empire
conquered	it	centuries	ago.

Coaster:	A	person	 from	a	 coastal	 comm.	Few	coastal	 comms	can	 afford	 to
hire	Imperial	Orogenes	to	raise	reefs	or	otherwise	protect	against	tsunami,
so	coastal	cities	must	perpetually	rebuild	and	tend	to	be	resource-poor	as	a
result.	 People	 from	 the	 western	 coast	 of	 the	 continent	 tend	 to	 be	 pale,
straight-haired,	 and	 sometimes	 have	 eyes	 with	 epicanthic	 folds.	 People
from	the	eastern	coast	tend	to	be	dark,	kinky-haired,	and	sometimes	have
eyes	with	epicanthic	folds.

Comm:	 Community.	 The	 smallest	 sociopolitical	 unit	 of	 the	 Imperial
governance	system,	generally	corresponding	to	one	city	or	town,	although
very	 large	 cities	 may	 contain	 several	 comms.	 Accepted	 members	 of	 a
comm	 are	 those	 who	 have	 been	 accorded	 rights	 of	 cache-share	 and
protection,	 and	 who	 in	 turn	 support	 the	 comm	 through	 taxes	 or	 other
contributions.

Commless:	 Criminals	 and	 other	 undesirables	 unable	 to	 gain	 acceptance	 in
any	comm.

Comm	Name:	The	third	name	borne	by	most	citizens,	indicating	their	comm
allegiance	 and	 rights.	 This	 name	 is	 generally	 bestowed	 at	 puberty	 as	 a
coming-of-age,	 indicating	 that	 a	 person	 has	 been	 deemed	 a	 valuable
member	of	the	community.	Immigrants	to	a	comm	may	request	adoption
into	that	comm;	upon	acceptance,	they	take	on	the	adoptive	comm’s	name
as	their	own.

Creche:	A	place	where	children	too	young	to	work	are	cared	for	while	adults
carry	out	needed	tasks	for	the	comm.	When	circumstances	permit,	a	place
of	learning.

Equatorials:	 Latitudes	 surrounding	 and	 including	 the	 equator,	 excepting
coastal	 regions.	 Also	 refers	 to	 people	 from	 equatorial-region	 comms.
Thanks	 to	 temperate	 weather	 and	 relative	 stability	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the
continental	plate,	Equatorial	comms	tend	to	be	prosperous	and	politically
powerful.	The	Equatorials	once	formed	the	core	of	the	Old	Sanze	Empire.

Fault:	A	place	where	breaks	 in	 the	 earth	make	 frequent,	 severe	 shakes	 and
blows	more	likely.

Fifth	Season:	An	extended	winter	–	lasting	at	least	six	months,	per	Imperial
designation	 –	 triggered	 by	 seismic	 activity	 or	 other	 large-scale
environmental	alteration.

Fulcrum:	 A	 paramilitary	 order	 created	 by	 Old	 Sanze	 after	 the	 Season	 of
Teeth	 (1560	 Imperial).	 The	 headquarters	 of	 the	 Fulcrum	 is	 in	Yumenes,
although	 two	 satellite	 Fulcrums	 are	 located	 in	 the	 Arctic	 and	 Antarctic
regions,	for	maximum	continental	coverage.	Fulcrum-trained	orogenes	(or
“Imperial	 Orogenes”)	 are	 legally	 permitted	 to	 practice	 the	 otherwise-



illegal	craft	of	orogeny,	under	strict	organizational	rules	and	with	the	close
supervision	of	the	Guardian	order.	The	Fulcrum	is	self-managed	and	self-
sufficient.	 Imperial	 Orogenes	 are	 marked	 by	 their	 black	 uniforms,	 and
colloquially	known	as	“blackjackets.”

Geneer:	 From	 “geoneer.”	 An	 engineer	 of	 earthworks	 –	 geothermal	 energy
mechanisms,	tunnels,	underground	infrastructure,	and	mining.

Geomest:	One	who	studies	stone	and	 its	place	 in	 the	natural	world;	general
term	for	a	scientist.	Specifically	geomests	study	lithology,	chemistry,	and
geology,	which	are	not	considered	separate	disciplines	in	the	Stillness.	A
few	 geomests	 specialize	 in	 orogenesis	 –	 the	 study	 of	 orogeny	 and	 its
effects.

Greenland:	An	area	of	fallow	ground	kept	within	or	just	outside	the	walls	of
most	comms	as	advised	by	stonelore.	Comm	greenlands	may	be	used	for
agriculture	or	animal	husbandry	at	all	 times,	or	may	be	kept	as	parks	or
fallow	 ground	 during	 non-Seasonal	 times.	 Individual	 households	 often
maintain	their	own	personal	housegreen,	or	garden,	as	well.

Grits:	 In	 the	 Fulcrum,	 unringed	 orogene	 children	 who	 are	 still	 in	 basic
training.

Guardian:	 A	 member	 of	 an	 order	 said	 to	 predate	 the	 Fulcrum.	 Guardians
track,	protect,	protect	against,	and	guide	orogenes	in	the	Stillness.

Imperial	 Road:	 One	 of	 the	 great	 innovations	 of	 the	 Old	 Sanze	 Empire,
highroads	 (elevated	 highways	 for	 walking	 or	 horse	 traffic)	 connect	 all
major	comms	and	most	large	quartents	to	one	another.	Highroads	are	built
by	 teams	 of	 geneers	 and	 Imperial	 Orogenes,	 with	 the	 orogenes
determining	 the	 most	 stable	 path	 through	 areas	 of	 seismic	 activity	 (or
quelling	 the	 activity,	 if	 there	 is	 no	 stable	 path),	 and	 the	 geneers	 routing
water	 and	 other	 important	 resources	 near	 the	 roads	 to	 facilitate	 travel
during	Seasons.

Innovator:	One	of	the	seven	common	use-castes.	Innovators	are	individuals
selected	 for	 their	 creativity	 and	 applied	 intelligence,	 responsible	 for
technical	and	logistical	problem	solving	during	a	Season.

Kirkhusa:	A	mid-sized	mammal,	 sometimes	kept	as	a	pet	or	used	 to	guard
homes	or	livestock.	Normally	herbivorous;	during	Seasons,	carnivorous.

Knapper:	 A	 small-tools	 crafter,	 working	 in	 stone,	 glass,	 bone,	 or	 other
materials.	 In	 large	 comms,	 knappers	 may	 use	 mechanical	 or	 mass-
production	 techniques.	 Knappers	 who	 work	 in	 metal,	 or	 incompetent
knappers,	are	colloquially	called	“rusters.”

Lorist:	One	who	studies	stonelore	and	lost	history.
Mela:	A	Midlats	plant,	related	to	the	melons	of	Equatorial	climates.	Mela	are

vining	ground	plants	 that	normally	produce	 fruit	 aboveground.	During	a
Season,	 the	 fruit	 grows	 underground	 as	 tubers.	 Some	 species	 of	 mela
produce	flowers	that	trap	insects.



Metallore:	 Like	 alchemy	 and	 astronomestry,	 a	 discredited	 pseudoscience
disavowed	by	the	Seventh	University.

Midlats:	The	“middle”	latitudes	of	the	continent	–	those	between	the	equator
and	 the	 arctic	 or	 antarctic	 regions.	 Also	 refers	 to	 people	 from	 midlats
regions	 (sometimes	 called	 Midlatters).	 These	 regions	 are	 seen	 as	 the
backwater	 of	 the	 Stillness,	 although	 they	 produce	 much	 of	 the	 world’s
food,	materials,	and	other	critical	resources.	There	are	two	midlat	regions:
the	northern	(Nomidlats)	and	southern	(Somidlats).

Newcomm:	Colloquial	 term	 for	 comms	 that	 have	 arisen	 only	 since	 the	 last
Season.	Comms	that	have	survived	at	least	one	Season	are	generally	seen
as	more	desirable	places	to	live,	having	proven	their	efficacy	and	strength.

Nodes:	The	network	of	Imperially	maintained	stations	placed	throughout	the
Stillness	 in	 order	 to	 reduce	 or	 quell	 seismic	 events.	Due	 to	 the	 relative
rarity	 of	 Fulcrum-trained	 orogenes,	 nodes	 are	 primarily	 clustered	 in	 the
Equatorials.

Orogene:	One	who	 possesses	 orogeny,	whether	 trained	 or	 not.	Derogatory:
rogga.

Orogeny:	 The	 ability	 to	 manipulate	 thermal,	 kinetic,	 and	 related	 forms	 of
energy	to	address	seismic	events.

Quartent:	 The	 middle	 level	 of	 the	 Imperial	 governance	 system.	 Four
geographically	 adjacent	 comms	 make	 a	 quartent.	 Each	 quartent	 has	 a
governor	to	whom	individual	comm	heads	report,	and	who	reports	in	turn
to	a	regional	governor.	The	largest	comm	in	a	quartent	is	its	capital;	larger
quartent	 capitals	 are	 connected	 to	 one	 another	 via	 the	 Imperial	 Road
system.

Region:	 The	 top	 level	 of	 the	 Imperial	 governance	 system.	 Imperially
recognized	regions	are	the	Arctics,	Nomidlats,	Western	Coastals,	Eastern
Coastals,	 Equatorials,	 Somidlats,	 and	 Antarctics.	 Each	 region	 has	 a
governor	 to	 whom	 all	 local	 quartents	 report.	 Regional	 governors	 are
officially	 appointed	 by	 the	 Emperor,	 though	 in	 actual	 practice	 they	 are
generally	selected	by	and/or	come	from	the	Yumenescene	Leadership.

Resistant:	One	 of	 the	 seven	 common	 use-castes.	 Resistants	 are	 individuals
selected	 for	 their	 ability	 to	 survive	 famine	 or	 pestilence.	 They	 are
responsible	for	caring	for	the	infirm	and	dead	bodies	during	Seasons.

Rings:	 Used	 to	 denote	 rank	 among	 Imperial	 Orogenes.	 Unranked	 trainees
must	pass	a	series	of	tests	to	gain	their	first	ring;	ten	rings	is	the	highest
rank	an	orogene	may	achieve.	Each	ring	is	made	of	polished	semiprecious
stone.

Roadhouse:	 Stations	 located	 at	 intervals	 along	 every	 Imperial	 Road	 and
many	 lesser	 roads.	 All	 roadhouses	 contain	 a	 source	 of	 water	 and	 are
located	 near	 arable	 land,	 forests,	 or	 other	 useful	 resources.	 Many	 are
located	in	areas	of	minimal	seismic	activity.



Runny-sack:	A	small,	easily	portable	cache	of	supplies	most	people	keep	in
their	homes	in	case	of	shakes	or	other	emergencies.

Safe:	A	beverage	traditionally	served	at	negotiations,	first	encounters	between
potentially	hostile	parties,	and	other	 formal	meetings.	 It	contains	a	plant
milk	that	reacts	to	the	presence	of	all	foreign	substances.

Sanze:	 Originally	 a	 nation	 (unit	 of	 a	 deprecated	 political	 system,	 Before
Imperial)	in	the	Equatorials;	origin	of	the	Sanzed	race.	At	the	close	of	the
Madness	 Season	 (7	 Imperial),	 the	 nation	 of	 Sanze	 was	 abolished	 and
replaced	 with	 the	 Sanzed	 Equatorial	 Affiliation,	 consisting	 of	 six
predominantly	 Sanzed	 comms	 under	 the	 rule	 of	 Emperor	 Verishe
Leadership	Yumenes.	The	Affiliation	expanded	rapidly	in	the	aftermath	of
the	Season,	 eventually	 encompassing	 all	 regions	 of	 the	Stillness	 by	 800
Imperial.	Around	the	time	of	the	Season	of	Teeth,	the	Affiliation	came	to
be	known	colloquially	as	the	Old	Sanze	Empire,	or	simply	Old	Sanze.	As
of	the	Shilteen	Accords	of	1850	Imperial,	the	Affiliation	officially	ceased
to	 exist,	 as	 local	 control	 (under	 the	 advisement	 of	 the	 Yumenescene
Leadership)	 was	 deemed	 more	 efficient	 in	 the	 event	 of	 a	 Season.	 In
practice,	 most	 comms	 still	 follow	 Imperial	 systems	 of	 governance,
finance,	education,	and	more,	and	most	regional	governors	still	pay	taxes
in	tribute	to	Yumenes.

Sanzed:	 A	 member	 of	 the	 Sanzed	 race.	 Per	 Yumenescene	 Breedership
standards,	 Sanzeds	 are	 ideally	 bronze-skinned	 and	 ashblow-haired,	with
mesomorphic	or	endomorphic	builds	and	an	adult	height	of	minimum	six
feet.

Sanze-mat:	The	language	spoken	by	the	Sanze	race,	and	the	official	language
of	the	Old	Sanze	Empire,	now	the	lingua	franca	of	most	of	the	Stillness.

Seasonal	 Law:	 Martial	 law,	 which	 may	 be	 declared	 by	 any	 comm	 head,
quartent	 governor,	 regional	 governor,	 or	 recognized	 member	 of	 the
Yumenescene	 Leadership.	 During	 Seasonal	 Law,	 quartent	 and	 regional
governance	are	suspended	and	comms	operate	as	sovereign	sociopolitical
units,	though	local	cooperation	with	other	comms	is	strongly	encouraged
per	Imperial	policy.

Seventh	 University:	 A	 famous	 college	 for	 the	 study	 of	 geomestry	 and
stonelore,	currently	Imperially	funded	and	located	in	the	Equatorial	city	of
Dibars.	Prior	versions	of	the	University	have	been	privately	or	collectively
maintained;	notably,	the	Third	University	at	Am-Elat	(approximately	3000
Before	 Imperial)	 was	 recognized	 at	 the	 time	 as	 a	 sovereign	 nation.
Smaller	 regional	 or	 quartent	 colleges	 pay	 tribute	 to	 the	 University	 and
receive	expertise	and	resources	in	exchange.

Sesuna:	Awareness	of	 the	movements	of	 the	earth.	The	 sensory	organs	 that
perform	 this	 function	are	 the	 sessapinae,	 located	 in	 the	brain	 stem.	Verb
form:	to	sess.



Shake:	A	seismic	movement	of	the	earth.
Shatterland:	 Ground	 that	 has	 been	 disturbed	 by	 severe	 and/or	 very	 recent

seismic	activity.
Stillheads:	A	derogatory	term	used	by	orogenes	for	people	lacking	orogeny,

usually	shortened	to	“stills.”
Stone	Eaters:	A	rarely	seen	sentient	humanoid	species	whose	flesh,	hair,	etc.,

resembles	stone.	Little	is	known	about	them.
Strongback:	 One	 of	 the	 seven	 common	 use-castes.	 Strongbacks	 are

individuals	 selected	 for	 their	 physical	 prowess,	 responsible	 for	 heavy
labor	and	security	in	the	event	of	a	Season.

Use	Name:	The	second	name	borne	by	most	citizens,	indicating	the	use-caste
to	 which	 that	 person	 belongs.	 There	 are	 twenty	 recognized	 use-castes,
although	 only	 seven	 in	 common	 use	 throughout	 the	 current	 and	 former
Old	 Sanze	 Empire.	 A	 person	 inherits	 the	 use	 name	 of	 their	 same-sex
parent,	on	the	theory	that	useful	traits	are	more	readily	passed	this	way.



Acknowledgments
	

Whew.	That	took	a	bit,	didn’t	it?



The	Stone	Sky	marks	more	than	just	the	end	of	another	trilogy,	for	me.	For
a	variety	of	reasons,	the	period	in	which	I	wrote	this	book	has	turned	out	to	be
a	time	of	 tremendous	change	in	my	life.	Among	other	 things,	I	quit	my	day
job	and	became	a	full-time	writer	 in	July	of	2016.	Now,	I	 liked	my	day	job,
where	I	got	to	help	people	make	healthy	decisions	–	or	at	 least	survive	long
enough	to	do	so	–	at	one	of	the	most	crucial	transition	points	of	adult	life.	I	do
still	help	people,	I	think,	as	a	writer,	or	at	least	that’s	the	impression	I	get	from
those	of	you	who’ve	sent	letters	or	online	messages	telling	me	how	much	my
writing	 has	 touched	 you.	But	 in	my	 day	 job,	 the	work	was	more	 direct,	 as
were	its	agonies	and	rewards.	I	miss	it	a	lot.



Oh,	don’t	get	me	wrong;	this	was	a	good	and	necessary	life	transition	to
make.	My	writing	 career	 has	 exploded	 in	 all	 the	 best	ways,	 and	after	 all,	 I
love	being	a	writer,	too.	But	it’s	my	nature	to	reflect	in	times	of	change,	and	to
acknowledge	both	what	was	lost	as	well	as	what	was	gained.	



This	change	was	facilitated	by	a	Patreon	(artist	crowdfunding)	campaign
that	 I	 began	 in	 May	 of	 2016.	 And	 on	 a	 more	 somber	 note…	 this	 Patreon
funding	 is	 also	 what	 allowed	me	 to	 focus	 wholly	 on	my	mother	 during	 the
final	 days	 of	 her	 life,	 in	 late	 2016	 and	 early	 2017.	 I	 don’t	 often	 talk	 about
personal	 things	 in	 public,	 but	 you	 can	 perhaps	 see	 how	 the	 Broken	 Earth
trilogy	 is	my	attempt	 to	wrestle	with	motherhood,	among	other	 things.	Mom
had	a	difficult	 last	 few	years.	 I	 think	 (so	many	of	my	novels’	underpinnings
become	 clear	 in	 retrospect)	 that	 on	 some	 level	 I	 suspected	 her	 death	 was
coming;	 maybe	 I	 was	 trying	 to	 prepare	 myself.	 Still	 wasn’t	 ready	 when	 it
happened…	but	then,	no	one	ever	is.	



So	 I’m	 grateful	 to	 everyone	 –	 my	 family,	 my	 friends,	 my	 agent,	 my
Patrons,	the	folks	at	Orbit,	including	my	new	editor,	my	former	coworkers,	the
staff	of	the	hospice,	everyone	–	who	helped	me	through	this.



And	 this	 is	why	 I’ve	worked	 so	 hard	 to	 get	 The	 Stone	 Sky	 out	 on	 time,
despite	travel	and	hospitalizations	and	stress	and	all	the	thousand	bureaucratic
indignities	of	 life	after	a	parent’s	death.	I	definitely	haven’t	been	in	 the	best
place	while	working	 on	 this	 book,	 but	 I	 can	 say	 this	much:	Where	 there	 is
pain	in	this	book,	it	is	real	pain;	where	there	is	anger,	it	is	real	anger;	where
there	 is	 love,	 it	 is	 real	 love.	You’ve	 been	 taking	 this	 journey	with	me,	 and
you’re	always	going	to	get	the	best	of	what	I’ve	got.	That’s	what	my	mother
would	want.



extras

	



	

	

about	the	author	

N.	K.	 Jemisin	 is	 a	 Brooklyn	 author	 who	won	 the	 Hugo	 Award	 for
Best	Novel	 for	The	Fifth	 Season,	which	was	 also	 a	New	York	Times
Notable	Book	of	2015.	She	previously	won	the	Locus	Award	for	her
first	 novel,	The	Hundred	 Thousand	Kingdoms,	 and	 her	 short	 fiction
and	 novels	 have	 been	 nominated	 multiple	 times	 for	 Hugo,	 World
Fantasy,	 Nebula,	 and	 RT	Reviewers’	 Choice	 awards,	 and	 shortlisted
for	 the	Crawford	and	 the	 James	Tiptree,	 Jr.	 awards.	She	 is	 a	 science
fiction	and	fantasy	reviewer	for	the	New	York	Times,	and	you	can	find
her	online	at	nkjemisin.com.
	
Find	 out	 more	 about	 N.	 K.	 Jemisin	 and	 other	 Orbit	 authors	 by
registering	for	the	free	monthly	newsletter	at	www.orbitbooks.net.



	

if	you	enjoyed	
THE	STONE	SKY	

look	out	for	

PROVENANCE	
by	

Ann	Leckie	

Following	her	record-breaking	debut	trilogy,	Ann	Leckie,	winner	of	the
Hugo,	Nebula,	Arthur	C.	Clarke	and	Locus	awards,	returns	with	a	thrilling

new	story	of	power,	theft,	privilege	and	birthright.	
	

A	power-driven	young	woman	has	just	one	chance	to	secure	the	status	she
craves	and	regain	priceless	lost	artefacts	prized	by	her	people.	She	must	free

their	thief	from	a	prison	planet	from	which	no	one	has	ever	returned.
	

Ingray	and	her	charge	will	return	to	their	home	world	to	find	their	planet	in
political	turmoil,	at	the	heart	of	an	escalating	interstellar	conflict.	Together,
they	must	make	a	new	plan	to	salvage	Ingray’s	future,	her	family	and	her

world	before	they	are	lost	to	her	for	good.



	

1	

“There	were	unexpected	difficulties,”	said	the	dark	gray	blur.	That	blur	sat	in
a	pale	blue	cushioned	chair,	no	more	 than	a	meter	away	 from	where	 Ingray
herself	sat,	facing,	in	an	identical	chair.

Or	 apparently	 so,	 anyway.	 Ingray	 knew	 that	 if	 she	 reached	much	more
than	a	meter	past	her	knees,	she	would	touch	smooth,	solid	wall.	The	same	to
her	 left,	 where	 apparently	 the	 Facilitator	 sat,	 bony	 frame	 draped	 in	 brown,
gold,	 and	 purple	 silk,	 hair	 braided	 sleekly	 back,	 dark	 eyes	 expressionless,
watching	the	conversation.	Listening.	Only	the	beige	walls	behind	and	to	the
right	of	Ingray	were	really	as	they	appeared.	The	table	beside	Ingray’s	chair
with	 the	 gilded	 decanter	 of	 serbat	 and	 the	 delicate	 glass	 tray	 of	 tiny	 rose-
petaled	cakes	was	certainly	real	–	the	Facilitator	had	invited	her	to	try	them.
She	had	been	too	nervous	to	even	consider	eating	one.

“Unexpected	 difficulties,”	 continued	 the	 dark	 gray	 blur,	 “that	 led	 to
unanticipated	 expenses.	 We	 will	 require	 a	 larger	 payment	 than	 previously
agreed.”

That	other	anonymous	party	could	not	see	Ingray	where	she	sat	–	saw	her
as	the	same	sort	of	dark	gray	blur	she	herself	faced.	Sat	in	an	identical	small
room,	 somewhere	 else	on	 this	 station.	Could	not	 see	 Ingray’s	 expression,	 if
she	 let	 her	 dismay	 and	 despair	 show	 itself	 on	 her	 face.	 But	 the	 Facilitator
could	 see	 them	both.	E	wouldn’t	 betray	 having	 seen	 even	 Ingray’s	 smallest
reaction,	 she	was	 sure.	 Still.	 “Unexpected	 difficulties	 are	 not	my	 concern,”
she	said,	calmly	and	smoothly	as	 she	could	manage.	“The	price	was	agreed
beforehand.”	The	price	was	 everything	 she	owned,	not	 counting	 the	 clothes
she	wore,	or	passage	home	–	already	paid.

“The	 unexpected	 expenses	 were	 considerable,	 and	 must	 be	 met
somehow,”	said	the	dark	gray	blur.	“The	package	will	not	be	delivered	unless
the	payment	is	increased.”

“Then	do	not	deliver	it,”	replied	Ingray,	trying	to	sound	careless.	Holding
her	hands	very	still	in	her	lap.	She	wanted	to	clutch	the	green	and	blue	silk	of
her	full	skirts,	to	have	some	feeling	that	she	could	hold	on	to	something	solid
and	 safe,	 a	 childish	 habit	 she	 thought	 she’d	 lost	 years	 ago.	 “You	 will	 not



receive	any	payment	at	all,	as	a	result.	Certainly	your	expenses	must	be	met
regardless,	but	that	is	no	concern	of	mine.”

She	waited.	The	Facilitator	said	nothing.	Ingray	reminded	herself	that	the
gray	blur	had	more	to	lose	than	she	did	if	this	deal	didn’t	happen.	She	could
take	 what	 was	 left	 of	 the	 payment	 she’d	 brought,	 after	 the	 Facilitator’s
commission	–	payable	no	matter	what	happened,	at	 this	stage.	She	could	go
home,	 back	 to	Hwae.	 She’d	 have	 a	 good	 deal	 less	 than	 she’d	 started	with,
true,	and	maybe	she	would	have	to	settle	for	that,	invest	what	she	had	left.	If
she	lost	her	job	she	could	probably	use	what	connections	remained	to	her	to
find	 another	 one.	 She	 imagined	 her	 foster-mother’s	 cold	 disappointment;
Netano	 Aughskold	 did	 not	 waste	 time	 or	 energy	 on	 unambitious	 or
unsuccessful	children.

And	Ingray	imagined	her	foster-brother	Danach’s	smug	triumph.	Even	if
all	 Ingray’s	 plans	 succeeded,	 she	 would	 never	 replace	 Danach	 as	 Netano’s
favorite,	 but	 she	 could	 walk	 away	 from	 the	 Aughskolds	 knowing	 she’d
humiliated	her	arrogant	brother,	and	made	all	of	them,	Netano	included,	take
notice.	 And	 plenty	 of	 other	 people	 with	 power	 and	 influence	 would	 take
notice	as	well.	If	this	deal	didn’t	go	through,	she	wouldn’t	have	that,	wouldn’t
have	even	the	smallest	of	victories	over	her	brother.

Silence	still	from	the	gray	blur,	from	the	Facilitator.	The	spicy	smell	of	the
serbat	from	the	decanter	turned	her	stomach.	It	wasn’t	going	to	happen.

And	maybe	 that	would	be	all	 right.	What	was	she	 trying	 to	do	anyway?
This	plan	was	ridiculous.	It	was	impossible.	The	chances	of	her	succeeding,
even	if	this	trade	went	ahead,	were	next	to	nothing.	What	was	she	even	doing
here?	 For	 an	 instant	 she	 felt	 as	 though	 she	 had	 stepped	 off	 the	 edge	 of	 a
precipice,	and	this	was	that	barest	moment	before	she	plunged	downward.

Ingray	 could	 end	 it	 now.	 Announce	 that	 the	 deal	 was	 off,	 give	 the
Facilitator	eir	fee,	and	go	home	with	what	she	had	left.

The	blur	across	from	Ingray	gave	a	dissatisfied	sigh.	“Very	well,	then.	The
deal	 goes	 forward.	 But	 now	 we	 know	 what	 to	 think	 of	 the	 much-vaunted
impartiality	and	equitable	practice	of	the	Tyr.”

“The	terms	were	plain	from	the	start,”	said	the	Facilitator	in	an	even	tone.
“The	payment	was	accurately	described	to	you,	and	if	you	did	not	consider	it
adequate,	you	had	only	to	demand	more	at	the	time	of	the	offer,	or	refuse	the
sale	outright.	This	is	our	inflexible	rule	in	order	to	prevent	misunderstandings
and	acrimony	at	just	this	stage	of	the	proceedings.	I	explained	this	to	you	at
the	time.	Had	you	not	expressed	your	understanding	of	and	agreement	to	that
policy,	I	would	not	have	allowed	the	exchange	to	go	forward.	To	do	otherwise
would	damage	our	reputation	for	impartiality	and	fair	dealing.”	The	gray	blur
did	not	reply.	“I	have	examined	the	payment	and	the	merchandise,”	said	 the
Facilitator,	still	calm	and	even.	“They	are	both	as	promised.”

Now	was	 Ingray’s	 chance.	 She	 should	 escape	 this	while	 she	 still	 could.



She	opened	her	mouth.	“Very	well,”	she	said.
Oh,	almighty	powers,	what	had	she	just	done?

	
The	assigned	pickup	location	was	a	small	room	walled	in	orchids	growing	on
what	looked	like	a	maze	of	tree	roots.	A	woman	in	a	brown-and-purple	jacket
and	 sarong	 stood	 beside	 a	 scuffed	 gray	 shipping	 crate	 two	meters	 long	 and
one	high,	jarringly	out	of	place	in	such	carefully	tended,	soft-colored	luxury.
“There	 is	 some	 misunderstanding,	 excellency,”	 Ingray	 suggested.	 “This	 is
supposed	 to	be	a	person.”	Looking	at	 the	 size	and	 the	 shape	of	 the	crate,	 it
occurred	to	her	that	it	might	hold	a	body.

Utter	failure.	The	dread	Ingray	had	felt	since	the	gray	blur	had	demanded
extra	payment	intensified.

Not	moving	from	her	place	at	the	far	end	of	the	crate,	not	looking	at	it,	not
even	 blinking,	 the	 woman	 said,	 primly,	 “We	 do	 not	 involve	 ourselves	 in
kidnappings	or	in	slave	trading,	excellency.”

Ingray	blinked.	Took	a	breath,	unsure	of	how	to	continue.	“May	I	open	the
crate?”	she	asked,	finally.

“It	is	yours,”	said	the	woman.	“You	may	do	whatever	you	wish	with	it.”
She	did	not	otherwise	move.

It	took	Ingray	a	few	moments	to	find	all	the	latches	on	the	crate	lid.	Each
came	 apart	with	 a	 dull	 snap,	 and	 she	 carefully	 shoved	 over	 one	 end	 of	 the
heavy	lid,	wary	of	sending	it	crashing	over	the	back	of	the	crate.	Light	glinted
off	something	smooth	and	dark	inside.	A	suspension	pod.	She	pushed	the	lid	a
few	centimeters	farther	over.	Reached	in	to	pull	back	the	cover	over	the	pod’s
indicator	 panel.	Blue	 and	green	 lights	 on	 the	 panel	 told	 her	 the	 pod	was	 in
operation,	and	its	occupant	alive.	She	could	not	help	a	very	small	exhalation
of	relief.

And	 maybe	 it	 was	 better	 this	 way.	 She	 could	 delay	 any	 awkward
explanations,	 could	 bring	 this	 person	 to	 the	 ship	 she’d	 booked	 passage	 on
without	 anyone	 knowing	 what	 she	 was	 doing.	 She	 pushed	 and	 tugged	 the
crate	lid	back	into	place,	relatched	it.

“Your	pardon,”	she	said	to	the	woman	in	the	brown-and-purple	sarong.	“I
didn’t	anticipate	that…	my	purchase	would	arrive	packaged	this	way.	I	don’t
think	 I	 can	move	 this	 on	my	 own.	 Is	 there	 a	 cart	 I	 can	 borrow?”	How	 she
would	get	it	onto	a	cart	by	herself,	she	didn’t	know.	And	if	they	charged	for
the	 cart’s	 use,	well,	 she	had	nothing	 left	 to	 pay	 for	 that.	She	might	 have	 to
open	that	pod,	right	here	and	now,	and	hope	its	occupant	was	willing	and	able
to	walk.	“Or	can	it	be	delivered	to	my	ship?”

With	no	change	of	expression,	 the	woman	 touched	 the	side	of	 the	crate,
and	there	was	a	click	and	it	shifted	toward	Ingray,	just	a	bit.	“Once	you	have
claimed	your	purchase,”	the	woman	said,	“it	is	no	longer	in	our	custody	and



we	 will	 not	 take	 any	 responsibility	 for	 it.	 This	 may	 occasionally	 seem
inconvenient,	but	we	find	it	prevents	misunderstandings.	You	should	be	able
to	 move	 this	 on	 your	 own.	When	 you	 are	 clear	 of	 our	 premises	 and	 have
reenabled	your	communications	you’ll	be	shown	 the	most	efficient	passable
route	for	objects	of	this	size.”

There	must	have	been	some	kind	of	assist	on	the	crate,	because	although	it
had	to	be	quite	heavy	it	slid	easily,	though	it	swung	wildly	until	Ingray	got	the
trick	of	moving	it	forward	without	also	sending	it	sideways.	And	she	almost
lost	control	of	 it	entirely	when,	coming	out	of	a	nondescript	doorway	into	a
broad,	 brightly	 lit	 black-and-red-tiled	 corridor,	 she	 blinked	 her
communications	 back	 on	 and	 a	 long	 list	 of	 alerts	 and	 news	 items	 suddenly
appeared	 in	her	vision.	A	surprising	 lot	of	news	 items,	when	Ingray	had	set
her	feed	to	winnow	out	local	news,	all	but	the	most	urgent.	Though	the	largest
and	brightest	of	them	–	large	enough	that	she	couldn’t	help	reading	it	even	as
she	 desperately	 swung	 the	 shipping	 crate	 away	 from	crashing	 into	 a	wall	 –
was	 definitely	 of	 more	 than	 local	 interest.	 GECK 	 DIPLOMATIC 	 MISSION
ARRIVES 	IN 	TYR ,	 it	read,	and	smaller,	beneath	that,	TYR 	SI ILAS 	COUNCIL
APPROVES 	 REQUEST 	 FOR 	 PROVIS IONS ,	 FUEL ,	 AND 	 REPAIRS .	 Well,	 of
course	they	had	approved	it.	The	Geck	were	signatories	to	the	treaty	with	the
dangerous	 and	 enigmatic	 Presger,	 and	whatever	 anyone	 felt	 about	who	 had
made	that	treaty	and	how,	no	one	was	fool	enough	to	want	to	break	it.

Her	 attention	 to	 the	 headline	 brought	 up	 a	 cloud	 of	 more	 detailed
information,	 and	 opinion	 pieces.	 CONCLAVE 	 A 	 BLATANT 	 RADCHAAI
POWER 	GRABshouted	one,	and	CONSCIOUS 	AI 	MAKES 	ITS 	MOVE 	AT 	LAST
–	IS 	THIS 	THE 	BEGINNING 	OF 	THE 	END 	FOR 	HUMANITY?	asked	another.	A
quiet	voice	whispered	 in	her	ear	 that	a	noodle	shop	she’d	eaten	at	six	 times
since	she’d	arrived	here	was	open	and	nearby,	with	a	relatively	short	queue	–
a	personal	alert	Ingray	had	set	days	ago	and	forgotten	to	turn	off.	She	hadn’t
eaten	 breakfast,	 or	 the	 cakes	 the	 Facilitator	 had	 offered	 her.	 But	 suddenly
noodles	sounded	very	good.

There	wasn’t	 time.	 The	 ship	 she’d	 bought	 passage	 on	 departed	 in	 three
hours,	which	meant	she	had	to	be	aboard	in	less	time	than	that.	And	even	if
she’d	had	time	–	and	any	money	at	all	–	she	could	hardly	queue	for	noodles
with	this	body-size	crate	in	tow	that	she	could	barely	steer.	She	thought	away
every	message	except	the	route	to	her	ship,	and	kept	going.	She	could	eat	on
board.

The	 route	 she’d	 been	 given	 kept	 her	mostly	 out	 of	 the	 station’s	 busiest
areas,	 though	on	Tyr	Siilas	“less	busy”	was	 still	quite	crowded.	At	 first	 she
was	 self-conscious,	 afraid	 she’d	 attract	 unwelcome	 curiosity	 pushing	 a
suspension-pod-size	crate	through	the	station’s	thoroughfares,	but	the	crowds
split	 and	 streamed	 around	 her	 without	 contact	 or	 comment.	 And	 she	 was
hardly	the	only	person	pushing	an	awkward	load.	She	had	to	swerve	carefully



around	a	 stack	of	 crates	 full	 of	onions,	 apparently	 trundling	 along	under	 its
own	power,	and	then	found	herself	stuck	for	a	few	frustrating	seconds	behind
what	at	first	she	took	to	be	a	puzzlingly	tall	mech,	but	when	it	finally	moved
she	 realized	 it	 was	 actually	 a	 human	 in	 an	 environmental	 support	 suit,
someone	 from	a	 low-gravity	habitat,	 to	 judge	 from	 their	height	and	need	 to
wear	the	suit.

At	one	point	she	had	to	wait	a	half	hour	for	a	freight	lift,	and	then	spent
the	ride	pinned	against	 the	 lift’s	grimy	back	wall.	She	regretted	wearing	her
stiff,	 formal	 sandals	 and	 the	 silk	 jacket	 and	 long,	 full	 skirts	 that	 she’d	 kept
when	 she’d	 sold	 the	 rest	 of	 her	 clothes,	 with	 the	 intention	 of	 looking	 as
seriously	 businesslike	 as	 possible.	 Very	 probably	 pointless	 –	 the	 Facilitator
likely	didn’t	 care	 so	 long	as	her	money	was	good,	and	whoever	was	on	 the
other	side	of	the	deal	she’d	made	couldn’t	see	her	anyway.

As	soon	as	she	was	off	the	lift	she	girded	up	her	skirts,	and	took	off	her
sandals	 and	 set	 them	 on	 the	 crate	 along	 with	 the	 small	 bag	 that	 held
everything	else	she	owned	now	–	her	identity	tabula	and	a	few	small	toiletries
–	and	then	set	out	on	the	long	stop-and-start	trek	through	the	docks,	swerving
around	 inattentive	 travelers	 when	 she	 could,	 the	 time	 display	 in	 her	 vision
reassuring	 her,	 at	 least,	 that	 she	 still	 had	 plenty	 of	 time	 to	 reach	 her	 ship,
which	was,	predictably,	in	the	section	of	the	docks	farthest	from	where	she’d
entered.

She	arrived	at	 the	bay	 tired,	 frustrated,	 and	anxious.	The	bay	was	much
smaller	 than	 she’d	 expected,	 but	 then	 she	 had	 only	 ever	 taken	 the	 big
passenger	 liners	 between	 systems.	 Had	 taken	 one	 here,	 but	 she	 could	 not
afford	 even	 the	 cheapest	 available	 return	 fare	 home	 on	 such	 a	 ship.	 She’d
known	 this	 ship	 was	 small,	 a	 cargo	 ship	 with	 a	 few	 extra	 berths	 for
passengers,	known	that	her	trip	home	would	be	cramped	and	unluxurious,	but
she	 hadn’t	 stopped	 to	 consider	 what	 that	 would	 mean	 now	 that	 she	 was
bringing	 this	 crate	with	 her.	 If	 this	 had	 been	 a	 passenger	 liner,	 there	would
have	been	 someone	here	 she	could	 turn	 the	crate	over	 to,	who	would	make
sure	 it	 got	 to	 Ingray’s	 berth,	 or	 to	 cargo.	 But	 the	 bay	was	 empty.	And	 she
didn’t	think	she	could	get	both	herself	and	the	crate	into	the	airlock.

While	she	stood	thinking,	a	man	came	out	of	the	air-lock.	Short	and	solid-
bodied,	 and	 there	was	 something	undefinably	odd	about	his	 squarish	 face	–
something	off	about	the	shape	of	his	nose,	or	the	size	of	his	mouth.	His	hair
was	pulled	back	behind	his	head,	to	hang	behind	him	in	dozens	of	tiny	braids.
He	wore	 a	 gray-and-green-striped	 lungi	 and	 a	 dark	gray	 jacket,	 and	he	was
barefoot	 –	 less	 formal	 than	 what	 nearly	 everyone	 here	 wore	 for	 business
dealings	 or	 important	 meetings,	 but	 still	 perfectly	 respectable.	 “You	 are
Ingray	Aughskold?”

“You	must	be	Captain	Uisine.”	Ingray	had	booked	this	berth	through	the
Tyr	Siilas	dock	office,	days	ago,	before	 this	 ship	had	arrived	here.	 “Or	 is	 it



Captain	Tic?”	Somewhere	 like	 this,	where	 you	met	 people	 from	all	 over,	 it
was	difficult	 to	know	what	order	 anyone’s	name	was	 in,	 or	which	one	 they
preferred	to	be	addressed	by.

“Either	 one,”	 said	 Captain	 Uisine.	 “You	 didn’t	 say	 anything	 about
oversize	luggage,	excellency.”

“No,”	Ingray	said.	“I	didn’t.	I	wasn’t	expecting	it	myself.”
Captain	 Uisine	 was	 silent	 a	 moment.	 Waiting,	 Ingray	 supposed.	 Then,

“It’s	too	large	for	the	passenger	compartments,	excellency.	It	will	need	to	be
loaded	into	cargo.	That’s	accessed	on	the	lower	level.	But	it’s	sealed	up	at	the
moment.	And	I’m	not	opening	it	before	I	see	a	duly	registered	Statement	of
Contents.”

She	didn’t	 even	know	 there	was	 such	a	 thing,	or	 that	 she	might	need	 it.
Then	again,	she’d	never	expected	to	have	to	deal	with	cargo	at	all.	“I	can’t…”
She	 really	 ought	 to	 have	 eaten	 something	 that	 morning.	 “I	 can’t	 leave	 it
behind.	Is	there	time	to	open	the	cargo	access?”	She	thought	she	was	standing
quite	still,	but	she	must	have	moved	the	hand	that	rested	on	the	crate,	because
now	it	slid	forward.	She	grabbed	for	it.

Captain	Uisine	 laid	 a	 hand	 on	 it	 to	 stop	 and	 steady	 it.	 “Plenty	 of	 time.
Departure’s	 delayed.	 Have	 you	 not	 checked	 your	 notifications?	We’re	 here
another	two	days.”

“Two	days!”	 It	didn’t	seem	possible.	She	summoned	her	notifications	 to
her	vision,	and	saw	what	she	would	have	seen	immediately	if	she’d	checked
her	personal	messages	–	a	brief,	bare	note	about	the	delay,	from	Captain	Tic
Uisine.	Unavoidable	delay,	the	note	called	it,	due	to	current	events.

Current	events.	Of	course.	Ingray	pulled	up	the	news,	looked	closer	at	the
information	 about	 the	 Geck	 diplomatic	 mission.	 Which	 mentioned,	 quite
clearly	but	further	in	than	she’d	bothered	to	look,	that	arrivals	and	departures
were	being	rearranged	to	fit	the	Geck	in	as	quickly	and	safely	as	possible.

There	 was	 no	 arguing	 with	 that,	 no	 recourse.	 Even	 if	 Ingray	 had	 been
traveling	with	Netano	Aughskold,	who	had	herself	not	infrequently	demanded
(and	 received)	 such	 priority,	 it	 wouldn’t	 have	 done	 any	 good,	 and	 not	 just
because	this	wasn’t	Netano’s	home	system.	The	Geck	were	aliens,	not	human.
They	 almost	 never	 left	 their	 homeworld,	 or	 so	 Ingray	 understood,	 and	 had
done	 so	 now	 only	 to	 attend	 to	 urgent	matters	 regarding	 the	 treaty	with	 the
alien	Presger.	Before	the	treaty,	the	Presger	would	tear	apart	human	ships	and
stations	–	and	their	passengers	and	residents	–	seemingly	at	a	whim.	Nothing
could	 stop	 them,	 nothing	 except	 the	 treaty,	 which	 the	 Radchaai	 ruler
Anaander	 Mianaai	 had	 signed	 in	 the	 name	 of	 all	 humanity;	 the	 Presger
apparently	did	not	understand	or	care	about	whether	there	might	be	different
sorts	 of	 humans,	 with	 different	 authorities.	 But	 no	 matter	 how	 anyone	 felt
about	the	Radchaai	taking	on	that	authority,	no	one	wanted	the	Presger	to	start
killing	people	again.



Eventually	the	Geck	had	also	become	signatories,	and	much	more	recently
the	Rrrrrr.	And	now	 there	was	a	potential	 third	new	nonhuman	signatory	 to
the	treaty,	and	a	conclave,	called	by	the	Presger,	to	decide	the	issue.	Probably
everyone	anywhere	in	the	unthinkably	vast	reaches	of	human-inhabited	space
was	aware	of	 it,	 had	opinions,	wanted	 to	know	more,	wanted	 to	know	how
this	conclave	would	affect	their	futures.

Ingray	couldn’t	bring	herself	to	care	just	now.	“I	can’t	wait	two	days,”	she
said.	Captain	Uisine	said	nothing,	didn’t	make	the	obvious	comment	–	there
was	no	avoiding	the	wait,	and	he	had	no	control	over	it.	Didn’t	take	his	hand
off	the	end	of	the	crate.	Probably	wise	–	Ingray	didn’t	know	how	to	turn	off
the	assist.	“I	just	can’t.”

“Why	 not?”	 he	 asked.	 Serious,	 but	 not,	 it	 seemed,	 terribly	 invested	 in
Ingray’s	particular	problems.

Ingray	closed	her	eyes.	She	would	not	cry.	Opened	her	eyes	again,	took	a
breath,	 and	 said,	 “I	 spent	 everything	 I	 had	 settling	 up	 at	 my	 lodgings	 this
morning.”

“You’re	broke.”	Captain	Uisine’s	eyes	flicked	to	Ingray’s	bag	and	jacket
and	sandals	still	perched	on	top	of	the	crate.

“I	 can’t	 not	 eat	 for	 two	 days.”	 She	 should	 have	 had	 breakfast	 that
morning.	She	should	have	eaten	some	cakes,	when	she	was	dealing	with	the
Facilitator.

“Well,	 you	 can,”	 said	Captain	Uisine.	 “As	 long	 as	 you	 have	water.	 But
what	about	your	friend?”

Ingray	frowned.	“My	friend?”
“The	person	you’re	traveling	with.	Can	they	help	you	out?”
“Um.”
Captain	Uisine	waited,	still	noncommittal.	It	occurred	to	Ingray	that	even

if	Captain	Uisine	charged	 for	carrying	 the	crate	 in	cargo,	 it	would	 likely	be
less	than	a	passenger	fare.	Maybe	she’d	have	enough	to	at	least	buy	a	meal	or
two	between	now	and	when	the	ship	finally	left.	“And	while	you’re	thinking
about	that,”	the	captain	added	before	Ingray	could	speak,	“you	can	show	me
the	Statement	of	Contents	for	the	crate.”

For	a	panicked	moment,	 Ingray	 tried	 to	 think	of	some	way	to	argue	 that
she	 shouldn’t	 have	 to	 show	 one.	 Then	 she	 remembered	 that	 so	 far	 the
Facilitator	seemed	to	have	anticipated	what	she	would	need	to	bring	the	crate
away	with	her.	She	pulled	her	personal	messages	 into	her	vision	again,	 and
there	it	was.	“I’ve	just	sent	it	to	you,”	she	said.

Captain	Uisine	 blinked,	 and	gazed	off	 into	 the	 distance.	 “Miscellaneous
biologicals,”	 he	 said	 after	 a	 few	moments,	 focusing	 again	 on	 Ingray.	 “In	 a
crate	 this	 size	 and	 shape?	 I’m	 sorry,	 excellency,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 hatch	 this
morning.	 I’ll	 be	 exercising	 my	 right	 to	 examine	 the	 contents	 myself,	 as
outlined	in	the	fare	agreement.	Otherwise	that	crate	is	not	coming	aboard.”



Damn.	“So,”	said	Ingray,	“the	person	I’m	traveling	with	is	in	here.”
“In	the	crate?”	He	seemed	entirely	unsurprised.
“In	a	suspension	pod	in	the	crate,	yes,”	Ingray	replied.	“I	didn’t	expect	em

to	come	 this	way,	 I	 thought	 I	would	 just,	you	know,	meet	em	and	bring	em
here,	and…”	She	trailed	off,	at	a	loss	how	to	explain	any	further.

“Do	you	have	authorizations	permitting	you	 to	 remove	 this	person	 from
Tyr	Siilas?	And	before	 you	mention	 it,	 I	 am	aware	 that	 such	 authorizations
aren’t	always	legally	necessary	here.	I,	however,	do	always	require	them.”

“An	 authorization	 to	 take	 someone	 on	 your	 ship?”	 Ingray	 frowned,
bewildered.	“You	didn’t	need	one	 for	me.	You	didn’t	ask	me	 for	one,	 for…
my	friend.”

Still	 not	 changing	 expression,	 Captain	 Uisine	 said,	 “I	 don’t	 transport
anyone	against	their	will.	I	say	that	specifically	in	the	fare	agreement.”	Which
Ingray	 had	 read,	 of	 course;	 she	 was	 no	 fool.	 But	 obviously	 she	 hadn’t
remembered	 that.	Hadn’t	 thought,	at	 that	point,	 that	 it	would	be	an	 issue.	“I
can	ask	you	right	now,	do	you	want	to	leave	Tyr	Siilas	and	go	to	Hwae…”

“I	do!”	Ingray	interjected.
“…	and	you	can	tell	me	that.”	His	voice	was	still	serious	and	even.	“This

person	cannot	tell	me	if	e	wants	to	go	where	you	are	taking	em.	I	don’t	doubt
there’s	 some	 very	 compelling	 reason	 you	 are	 bringing	 em	 aboard	 in	 a
suspension	pod.	I	would	like	to	be	sure	that	compelling	reason	is	eirs,	and	not
just	yours.”

“But…”	But	he’d	already	said	that	this	wasn’t	a	matter	of	Tyr	Siilas	law.
And	if	he	refunded	her	money,	she	might	be	able	to	find	another	ship	for	the
same	 fare,	 but	 if	 she	went	 through	 the	 dock	office	 again	 she’d	 have	 to	 pay
another	fee,	which	she	didn’t	have.	She	might	be	able	to	find	passage	on	her
own,	but	that	would	take	time.	Maybe	a	lot	of	time.	She	sighed.	“I	don’t	know
why	 e’s	 in	 a	 suspension	 pod.”	Well,	 actually,	 she	 had	 some	 idea.	 But	 that
wasn’t	going	 to	help	her	cause	with	Captain	Uisine,	plainly.	“I	went	 to	pick
em	up,	and	this	is	how	I	found	em.”

“Is	 there	 some	 medical	 reason	 this	 person	 is	 traveling	 in	 a	 suspension
pod?”

“Not	that	I	know	of,”	she	said,	quite	honestly.
“E	didn’t	leave	you	any	message,	or	any	instruction?”
“No.”
“Well,	 excellency,”	 said	Captain	Uisine	after	a	 few	moments,	 “I	 suggest

we	open	the	pod	and	ask	em.	We	can	always	put	em	back	in	if	e	prefers	that.”
“What,	right	here?”	The	bay	wasn’t	really	closed	off,	not	at	the	moment,

and	coming	out	of	a	suspension	pod	was	uncomfortable	and	undignified.	Or
so	Ingray	understood.	And	in	the	time	it	had	taken	to	push	the	crate	here,	she
had	 decided	 that	 maybe	 she	 preferred	 things	 this	 way,	 preferred	 to	 delay
introducing	herself	 to	 this	person	and	explaining	 just	why	she’d	brought	em



here.
“I	 don’t	 have	 oversize	 luggage	 regulations	 for	 amusement’s	 sake.	 The

only	way	that	crate	is	coming	on	board	is	through	cargo	access.	And	for	what
I	hope	are	obvious	reasons	I’m	not	going	to	agree	to	that	happening.”

If	Ingray’s	mother	Netano	were	doing	this,	she’d	have	somehow	obtained
whatever	authorizations	she	would	need	to	satisfy	this	ship	captain.	Or	she’d
have	bought	passage	on	some	ship	where	the	captain	or	other	crew	owed	her
favors,	 or	 were	 in	 her	 power	 for	 some	 reason.	 Danach	 –	 Ingray’s	 foster-
brother	Danach	would	probably	find	some	way	to	threaten	Captain	Uisine,	or
charm	or	 bribe	 him	 into	 doing	what	 he	wanted.	Maybe	 she	 could	 bluff	 her
way	 through	 this.	Maybe	 tears	would	do	 it;	 they	would	certainly	be	easy	 to
produce	right	now.	But	judging	from	the	captain’s	reaction	on	hearing	that	she
wouldn’t	 be	 able	 to	 afford	 to	 eat	 for	 two	 days,	 she	 didn’t	 think	 that	would
work.

She	had	to	do	something.	She	had	to	get	herself	–	and	the	person	in	this
suspension	pod	–	onto	that	ship.	She	had	no	other	option,	no	other	available
course,	beyond	staying	on	this	station,	broke	and	starving,	for	the	rest	of	her
life.

She	was	not	going	to	cry.	“Look,”	she	said,	“I	need	to	explain.”	Captain
Uisine	 had	 already	 put	 the	 worst	 possible	 construction	 on	 the	 situation.	 It
wasn’t	 going	 to	 look	 any	 better	 once	 the	 suspension	 pod	was	 opened.	 She
looked	behind	her,	through	the	entrance	to	the	bay,	but	no	one	was	passing	in
the	corridor	beyond.	Looked	back	at	Captain	Uisine.	Sighed	again.	“I	paid	to
have	 this	 person	 brought	 out	 of	 Compassionate	 Removal.”	 No	 glimmer	 of
recognition	 on	 Captain	 Uisine’s	 face.	 She’d	 used	 the	 name	 most	 Bantia
speakers	 would	 have	 used,	 on	 Hwae;	 maybe	 he	 didn’t	 recognize	 that.	 She
tried	to	think	what	the	word	might	be	in	Yiir,	which	she	had	been	using	here,
had	used	in	all	her	brief	dealings	with	Captain	Uisine	so	far.	She	didn’t	think
there	was	one	–	here	on	Tyr	Siilas	nearly	 every	 crime	was	punishable	by	 a
fine.	 All	 the	 language	 lessons	 and	 news	 items	 she’d	 run	 across	 discussed
crime	and	 its	 consequences	 in	 those	 terms.	She	called	up	a	dictionary,	 tried
searching	 through	 it,	 without	 success.	 “You	 know,	when	 someone	 breaks	 a
law,	and	either	they’ve	done	it	over	and	over	again	and	you	know	they’re	just
going	to	keep	doing	it,	or	what	they	did	was	so	terrible	they’re	not	going	to
get	 another	 chance	 to	 do	 it	 again.	 So	 they	 get	 sent	 to	 Compassionate
Removal.”

“You’re	talking	about	a	prison,”	said	Captain	Uisine.
In	the	corner	of	Ingray’s	vision,	her	dictionary	confirmed	and	defined	the

word.	“No,	it’s	not	a	prison!	We	don’t	have	prisons.	It’s	a	place.	Where	they
can	 be	 away	 from	 regular	 people.	 They	 can	 do	 whatever	 they	 want,	 go
wherever	 they	 like,	you	know,	 so	 long	as	 they	stay	 there.	And	 they	have	 to
stay	there.	Once	you	go	in	you	don’t	come	out.	You’re	legally	dead.	It’s	just,



it	would	be	wrong	to	kill	them.”
“So	you	paid	everything	you	had	–	which	to	judge	from	the	clothes	you’re

wearing,	and	your	manner,	was	quite	a	lot	–	to	have	your	friend	broken	out	of
a	high-security	prison	with	a	name	that	sounds	like	a	euphemism	for	killing
vermin.	What	did	e	do?”

“E’s	not	my	friend!	I’ve	never	even	met	em.	Well,	I	was	at	an	event	e	was
at	once.	A	couple	of	times.	But	we	never	met	in	person.”

“What	did	e	do?”	Captain	Uisine	asked	again.
“This	is	Pahlad	Budrakim.”	Winced,	after	she	said	it.	Had	she	really	done

this?	But	there	hadn’t	been	any	other	choice.
After	 an	 endless	 moment,	 Captain	 Uisine	 said,	 “Am	 I	 supposed	 to

recognize	the	name?”
“You	don’t?”	asked	Ingray,	surprised.	“Not	at	all?”
“Not	at	all.”
“Pahlad’s	father,	Ethiat	Budrakim,	is	Prolocutor	of	the	Third	Assembly,	on

Hwae.”	No	reaction	from	Captain	Uisine.	“A	prolocutor	is…”
“Yes,”	 put	 in	 Captain	 Uisine,	 evenly.	 “A	 prolocutor	 presides	 over	 an

Assembly,	 and	 represents	 that	Assembly	 to	 the	Overassembly.	 I’ve	 been	 to
Hwae	Station	quite	a	few	times,	and	I	pay	attention	to	station	news.	I	know
who	Prolocutor	Dicat	is,	e’s	Prolocutor	of	the	First	Assembly.	Eir	name	is	on
all	 sorts	of	 regulations	 I	have	 to	 follow	when	I’m	docked	 there.	But	 I	don’t
know	anything	about	the	Third	Assembly.”

That	made	sense.	Hwae	Station	and	the	several	Hwaean	outstations	–	and
the	intersystem	gates,	for	that	matter	–	were	all	under	the	authority	of	the	First
Assembly.	 It	 made	 sense	 that	 Captain	 Uisine	 would	 pay	 attention	 to	 First
Assembly	 affairs	 and	 not	 to	 the	 Assemblies	 based	 on	 Hwae	 itself.	 Ingray
blinked.	 Took	 a	 breath.	 “Well,	 Prolocutor	 Budrakim	 has	 held	 his	 seat	 for
decades.	There	was	an	election	just	a	few	years	ago.	It	was	very	dramatic.	He
almost	lost.	Which	is	how…	Pahlad	is…	well,	was	one	of	his	foster-children.
Ethiat	Budrakim	is	part	Garseddai.”

“Him	and	a	billion	other	people	who	think	it’s	 tragic	and	romantic	to	be
Garseddai.”	 Captain	 Uisine’s	 voice	 was	 disdainful.	 “It’s	 only	 the	 most
notorious	out	of	a	 long	 list	of	Radchaai	atrocities.	The	only	system	to	resist
invasion	so	effectively	that	the	Radchaai	destroyed	every	last	one	of	them	for
it	and	 left	 the	entire	system	burned	and	lifeless.	People	 like	your	Prolocutor
Budrakim	can	claim	ancestors	who	are	either	especially	valorous	or	especially
deserving	of	sympathy,	whichever	suits	them	better	at	the	moment.	Lucky	for
them	 there’s	 no	 way	 to	 prove	 it	 one	 way	 or	 the	 other.	 Let	 me	 guess;	 he’s
descended	 from	an	Elector	who	managed	 to	 secretly	 flee	 the	 system	before
the	Radchaai	burned	everything.”

“But	he	is!”	insisted	Ingray.	“He	has	proof.	He’s	got	part	of	a	panel	from
inside	the	shuttle	his	ancestor	fled	in,	and	a	shirt	with	blood	on	it.	And	a	lot	of



other	 things,	 jewelry	 and	 a	 half	 dozen	 of	 those	 little	 pentagonal	 tokens
stamped	with	flowers	that	I	think	were	from	some	kind	of	game.	Or,	he	used
to	have	those	things.	They	were	stolen.	You	really	didn’t	hear	about	this?”

“I	really	didn’t.”	Captain	Uisine	sounded	half	sarcastic,	as	though	the	idea
that	he	might	have	heard	about	something	that	had	consumed	the	attention	of
everyone	 Ingray	 had	 known,	 and	 pretty	much	 every	major	 news	 service	 in
Hwae	System,	struck	him	as	ridiculous.

“It	 was	 an	 inside	 job.	 Pahlad	 had	 grown	 up	 in	 Ethiat	 Budrakim’s
household,	 and	 e	 had	 been	 given	 a	 post	 overseeing	 the	 lareum	 where	 the
Garseddai	vestiges	were	kept.”	There	had	been	a	lot	of	comment	about	how,
while	it	was	of	course	generous	of	prominent	citizens	to	raise	foster-children
from	less	advantaged	circumstances,	or	even	 the	public	crèches,	 it	had	been
foolish	of	Ethiat	Budrakim	to	trust	Pahlad	so	implicitly.	No	one	was	as	close
or	loyal	as	your	own	acknowledged	heirs,	everyone	knew	that.	Thinking	of	it
still	 made	 Ingray,	 herself	 a	 foster-child	 out	 of	 a	 public	 crèche,	 cringe
unhappily.	“Nobody	could	have	done	it	except	Pahlad.”

“And	for	 this	e	 is	cast	permanently	 into	an	 inescapable	prison,	what	did
you	call	it,	Compassionate	Removal?	And	declared	dead?”	He	took	his	hand
off	the	crate.	Put	it	back,	when	the	crate	shifted	again,	even	though	Ingray	still
held	her	end.

“E	had	betrayed	eir	parent!	It	was	a	huge	scandal.	And	e	showed	no	signs
of	remorse	at	what	e	had	done.	The	whole	thing	had	been	very	elaborate	and
cold-blooded.	E	managed	 to	make	 copies	of	 the	 things	 and	put	 them	 in	 the
lareum	in	place	of	the	real	ones,	and	there	was	Prolocutor	Budrakim	showing
people	 around,	 you	 know,	 thinking	 they	 were	 the	 real	 ones,	 and	 no	 one
knowing	they	were	fake	the	whole	time.	And	his	foster-child	Pahlad	standing
right	there	nearly	every	time,	just	as	cool	as	anything,	as	though	nothing	was
wrong.”	And	after	all,	it	wasn’t	as	though	e	was	being	executed.	“The	copies
were	nearly	perfect.”

Captain	Uisine	thought	about	that	a	moment.	“And	your	interest	in	this?”
“They	never	found	the	originals,”	Ingray	said.	“Pahlad	wouldn’t	say	what

had	 happened	 to	 them.	 E	 insisted	 e	 had	 stolen	 nothing,	 and	 done	 nothing
wrong.	But	of	course	e	must	have	done	it,	no	one	else	could	have.	So	e	must
know	where	they	are.”

“Ah.”	Captain	Uisine	seemed	to	relax,	and	leaned	back	against	the	airlock
frame,	folded	his	arms.	“You	think	this	Pahlad	Budrakim	can	lead	you	to	the
originals,	which	you	can	then,	what,	sell?	Hold	hostage?	Restore	heroically	to
their	proper	place?”

Any	of	 them	would	serve	 Ingray’s	purpose,	 really.	But	what	she	wanted
more	than	anything	was	to	be	able	to	bring	them	to	Netano.	“My	mother	is	a
district	 representative	 in	 the	 Third	 Assembly.	 She	 wants	 to	 be	 Third
Prolocutor	 –	 she	 tried,	 last	 election,	 but	 in	 the	 end	 the	 votes	 tipped



Budrakim’s	way.”	And	Netano	had	never	been	friendly	with	Ethiat	Budrakim,
an	 enmity	 that	 couldn’t	 be	 explained	 by	 differences	 of	 faction.	 After	 all,
plenty	 of	 other	 Assembly	 representatives	 managed	 to	 get	 along	 quite
amicably	whatever	their	differing	positions	on	tariffs	or	fishing	limits.	“Right
now	I’m	one	of	three…”	Not	three.	Vaor	had	gone	last	year.	Gone	because	e’d
wanted	to,	e’d	insisted,	not	because	Netano	had	sent	em	away,	but	e	had	wept
the	whole	time	e’d	packed,	wept	walking	out	the	door,	and	e	hadn’t	answered
any	 of	 Ingray’s	 messages	 since.	 “Two	 foster-children	 in	 my	 mother’s
household.	One	of	us	will	get	to	be	Netano	eventually.”

“And	 this	 is	 how	 you	 intend	 to	 distinguish	 yourself	 in	 your	 mother’s
eyes,”	Captain	Uisine	guessed.

“I	didn’t	expect	Pahlad	to	come	all	packaged	up	like	this!”	She	couldn’t
resist	the	impulse	anymore	–	she	grabbed	a	handful	of	soft	silk	skirt.	“I	went
to,	 you	know,	 the	usual	 sort	 of	 broker	 here,	 and	made	 an	offer,	 to	whoever
could	 discreetly	 bring	 Pahlad	 Budrakim	 out	 of	 Compassionate	 Removal.”
Honestly,	she	hadn’t	really	expected	that	anyone	would	take	that	offer	up.	The
plan	had	been	desperate	from	the	start.

“Slavery	and	human	trafficking	are	among	the	very	few	things	that	aren’t
legal	 here,”	Captain	Uisine	observed.	 “Technically,	 anyway.	Of	course	 they
would	deliver	 this	 person	 to	you	all	 packaged	up.	 It	 gives	 them	deniability.
And	I	must	say,	excellency,	the	fact	that	that	didn’t	occur	to	you,	or	that	you
weren’t	 at	 least	 prepared	 for	 the	 possibility,	 suggests	 to	me	 that	 you’re	 not
best	 suited	 to	 follow	 in	 the	 footsteps	 of	 your	 apparently	 political	 mother.”
Ingray	frowned.	She	was	not	going	to	cry.	Captain	Uisine	continued	speaking.
“I	mean	no	offense.	We	all	have	our	particular	 talents.	What	happens	if	you
aren’t	selected	to	be	your	mother’s	heir?”

Possibly	 not	 much.	 Possibly	 she	 would	 just	 continue	 in	 her	 job,	 in	 the
family,	as	she	had.	But	Netano	had	always	said	that	in	anything	worth	doing,
the	stakes	were	all	or	nothing.	Most	families	on	Hwae	had	sent	one	or	more
children	out	for	fosterage,	or	were	fostering	children	from	other	households,
some	in	temporary	arrangements,	some	in	permanent	adoptions.	Danach,	for
instance,	was	a	foster	from	one	of	Netano’s	supporters.	But	there	were	always
some	children	in	every	district	whose	parents	were	unwilling	or	unable	to	care
for	 them,	 and	 had	 no	 one	willing	 or	 able	 to	 foster	 them,	who	 ended	 up	 as
wards	of	 the	state	 in	one	of	 the	district’s	public	crèches.	 Ingray,	 like	Pahlad
Budrakim,	had	been	one	of	these.	“I	don’t	really	have	a	chance	to	be	Mama’s
heir.	I	never	really	did.”	But	if	she	left	the	Aughskold	household,	or	was	sent
away,	she	had	no	other	family	to	turn	to.	She	would	be	entirely	on	her	own.
“Mama	likes	it	when	we	take	initiative,	and	she	likes	schemes,	but	she	doesn’t
like	 it	 when	we	 fail.	 If	 I	 fail	 badly	 enough	 I’ll	 probably	 have	 to	 leave	 the
household.	Worse,	I’ll	be	in	debt.	I	borrowed	against	my	future	allowance,	to
get	enough	for	the	payment.	So	even	if	I	don’t	lose	my	job	–	which	I	probably



will	 –	 I’ll	 be	 broke.	 For	 years.”	 For	 decades.	 “I	 know	 it	 wasn’t	 exactly	 a
prudent	use	of	my	resources,”	she	admitted.	Willed	herself	to	open	her	hand,
raised	 it	 to	 lay	 on	 the	 crate	 but	 instead	 clasped	 it	 with	 her	 other	 hand,	 a
perfectly	acceptable	pose	with	no	danger	of	anxiously	clutching	at	things.	“If
I	was	going	 to	borrow	 like	 that,	 I	ought	 to	have	 just	 invested	 it	 somewhere
safe.	 Then	 if	 Netano	 sent	 me	 away,	 I’d	 have	 at	 least	 had	 enough	 to	 keep
myself	with.	I	just…”	She	just	couldn’t	stand	the	thought	of	Danach	sneering
openly	at	her.	Of	losing	any	chance	at	all	of	Netano	Aughskold’s	regard.

Captain	Uisine	stared	at	her	over	 the	crate.	“I	am	on	 the	very	edge,”	he
said,	finally,	“of	refunding	your	passage	–	both	of	the	berths	you’ve	paid	for	–
and	asking	you	to	leave	this	bay.	I	haven’t	made	up	my	mind	yet.	But	I’ll	tell
you	one	thing,	there’s	no	way	you’re	bringing	that	person	–	Pahlad	Budrakim,
you	said?	–	aboard	my	ship	still	in	that	suspension	pod.	And	considering	you
expected	 to	meet	 em	awake	and	unfrozen,	you	won’t	have	any	objection	 to
thawing	em	out	now,	I	presume?”

“Will	you	take	us	aboard	then?”
“I’ll	consider	taking	you	aboard	then.	Pahlad	Budrakim	can	do	as	e	likes.”

A	moment’s	 thought.	 “If	 e	doesn’t	want	 to	come	aboard,	 I’ll	 refund	you	eir
fare.”

It	 could	have	been	worse,	 Ingray	 supposed.	 It	was	 some	 sort	of	 chance,
anyway.	 Captain	 Uisine	 put	 his	 other	 hand	 on	 the	 crate.	 “Step	 back,
excellency,	you	don’t	want	your	foot	caught	under	this.”	Ingray	stepped	back
and	the	crate	settled	to	the	floor	with	a	thunk.	“Do	you	know	if	this	person	has
ever	been	in	suspension	before?”

Ingray	 picked	 up	 her	 jacket	 and	 bag	 and	 sandals	 off	 the	 crate	 lid.	 “No,
why?”

Captain	Uisine	touched	the	crate’s	latches	and	carefully	slid	the	lid	aside.
“E	might	panic	if	e	doesn’t	know	what	to	expect.	A	little	help	would	be	nice.”

Ingray	dropped	her	sandals	and	bag,	pulled	her	jacket	on,	and	then	helped
brace	the	lid	as	Captain	Uisine	tilted	it	and	let	it	slide	down	to	rest	against	the
crate.

Captain	Uisine	 looked	 for	a	moment	at	 the	smooth,	black	surface	of	 the
pod,	then	slid	open	the	pod’s	control	panel.	“Everything	looks	good,”	he	said,
as	 a	 giant	 black	 spider	 scuttled	 out	 of	 the	 airlock,	 nearly	 a	 meter	 high,	 a
rolled-up	 blanket	 clutched	 in	 one	 hairy	 appendage.	 Weirdly,	 disturbingly
graceful,	 it	 skittered	up	 to	Captain	Uisine	and	stopped,	 turned	one	of	 its	 far
too	 many	 stalked	 eyes	 toward	 Ingray.	 No,	 it	 wasn’t	 a	 spider.	 It	 was…
something	else.

“Um,”	said	Ingray.	“That’s…	is	that	a	spider?”	She	didn’t	know	why	the
back	of	her	neck	was	prickling.	She	didn’t	mind	spiders.	But	this…	thing	was
so	 unsettling.	 Its	 legs	 were	 jointed	 wrong,	 she	 realized,	 and	 its	 eyestalks
sprouted	 right	 out	 of	 its	 blob	of	 a	 body.	There	was	no	waist,	 no	head.	And



something	else	was	wrong,	though	she	couldn’t	quite	say	what.
“Of	course	it’s	not	a	spider,”	replied	Captain	Uisine,	still	frowning	at	the

suspension	pod.	“You	don’t	get	spiders	with	half-meter	bodies,	or	two-meter
leg	spans.	Or,	you	know,	not	unaugmented	ones.	But	this	 isn’t	a	spider.”	He
looked	up.	“But	it’s	kind	of	 like	a	spider,	 I’ll	grant	you	that.	Do	you	have	a
problem	 with	 spiders,	 excellency?”	 The	 not-spider’s	 body	 trembled
gelatinously,	 stretched	 to	 become	 oblong	 rather	 than	 round,	 and	 four	 extra
legs	slid	out	to	touch	the	bay	floor.	“Does	that	help?”

Seeing	 the	 thing	 change	 shape	was	 somehow	even	more	 disturbing,	 but
she	refused	to	step	back,	even	though	she	wanted	to.	“Not	really.	And	I	don’t
mind	spiders	at	all.	It’s	just,	this	looks	so…	so	organic.”	Except	in	a	wrong,
squishy,	itchy	sort	of	way.

“Well,	yes,”	said	Captain	Uisine,	standing	square	and	stolid	by	 the	open
crate.	 Entirely	 unbothered	 by	 the	 spidery	 thing	 beside	 him.	 “A	 lot	 of	 it	 is.
Some	people	find	it	unsettling,	and	apparently	you’re	one	of	them,	but	it’s	just
a	bio	mech.	You’ll	get	used	to	it	after	a	few	days,	or	if	you	don’t	I’ll	keep	it
out	of	your	way.”	He	touched	the	control	panel	and	the	smooth	surface	of	the
pod	broke	open	with	a	click	and	slid	aside.	For	 just	an	 instant	 Ingray	saw	a
person	 lying	 naked	 and	 motionless,	 submerged	 in	 a	 pool	 of	 blue	 fluid,
unevenly	cut	hair	a	 tangled	mass	over	half	of	eir	sharp-featured	face,	 thin	–
thinner	than	she	remembered	pictures	of	Pahlad	Budrakim	–	the	long	welt	of	a
scar	along	eir	right	flank.

Then	 the	 smooth,	 glassy	 surface	 of	 the	 preserving	medium	 rippled	 and
billowed	as	the	person	opened	eir	eyes	and	sat	convulsively	up,	choking,	one
outthrust	 arm	 smacking	 hard	 into	 Ingray.	 Captain	 Uisine	 grabbed	 eir	 other
arm.	 “It’s	 all	 right,”	 he	 said,	 voice	 still	 calm	 and	 serious.	 The	 person
continued	 to	choke	as	blue	 fluid	poured	out	of	 eir	mouth	and	nose,	 sheeted
away	from	eir	body	back	into	the	pod.	“It’s	all	right.	Everything’s	fine.	You’re
all	right.”

The	last	of	the	fluid	drained	away	from	the	person’s	mouth	and	nose,	and
e	gave	a	breathy,	shaking	moan.

“First	 time?”	 asked	 Captain	 Uisine,	 reaching	 down	 for	 the	 blanket	 the
spider	mech	still	proffered.

The	naked	person	in	the	pod	closed	eir	eyes.	Gasped	a	few	times,	and	then
eir	breathing	settled.

“Are	you	all	right?”	asked	Ingray.	In	Bantia	this	time,	the	most	commonly
spoken	 language	 in	 Hwae	 System,	 though	 she	 was	 fairly	 sure	 Pahlad
Budrakim	would	have	understood	Yiir,	which	Captain	Uisine	had	used.

Captain	Uisine	shook	the	blanket	out	and	laid	it	around	the	naked	person’s
shoulders.

“Where	 am	 I?”	 e	 asked,	 in	 Bantia,	 voice	 rough	 with	 cold	 or	 fear	 or
something	else.



“We’re	 on	 Tyr	 Siilas	 Station,	 in	 Tyr	 System,”	 said	 Ingray,	 and	 then,	 to
Captain	Uisine,	“E	asked	where	e	is,	and	I	told	em	we	are	on	Tyr	Siilas.”

“How	did	I	get	here?”	asked	the	person	sitting	in	the	suspension	pod,	 in
Bantia.	By	now	the	blue	fluid	had	all	drained	away	to	some	reservoir	 in	the
pod	itself.

“I	paid	someone	to	bring	you	out,”	said	Ingray.	“I’m	Ingray	Aughskold.”
The	person	opened	eir	eyes	then.	“Who?”
Well,	Ingray	had	never	really	met	Pahlad	Budrakim	in	person.	And	e	was

ten	or	more	years	older	 than	she	was,	and	not	 likely	 to	have	noticed	a	very
young	Aughskold	 foster-daughter,	not	 likely	 to	have	known	her	name	when
she	had	still	been	a	child,	 let	 alone	her	adult	name,	which	she’d	 taken	only
months	 before	 e’d	 gone	 into	 Compassionate	 Removal.	 “I’m	 one	 of	Netano
Aughskold’s	children,”	said	Ingray.

“Why,”	e	asked,	eir	voice	gaining	strength,	“would	one	of	Representative
Aughskold’s	children	bring	me	anywhere?”

Ingray	 tried	 to	 think	of	a	simple	way	to	explain,	and	settled,	 finally,	 for,
“You’re	Pahlad	Budrakim.”

E	gave	a	little	shake	of	eir	head,	a	frown.	“Who?”
Ingray	suppressed	a	start	as	another	spider	mech	came	skittering	out	of	the

airlock.	 This	 one	 held	 a	 large	 cup	 of	 steaming	 liquid,	 which	 it	 passed	 to
Captain	Uisine	before	it	spun	and	returned	to	the	ship.	“Here,	excellency,”	he
said,	 in	Yiir,	offering	 it	 to	 the	person	 still	 sitting	 in	 the	pod.	 “Can	you	hold
this?”

“Here,”	said	the	first	spider	mech,	in	a	thin,	thready	voice,	in	Bantia.	“Can
you	hold	this?”

“Aren’t	 you	 Pahlad	 Budrakim?”	 asked	 Ingray,	 feeling	 strangely	 numb,
except	maybe	for	an	unpleasant	sensation	 in	her	gut,	as	 though	she	was	not
capable	of	feeling	any	more	despair	or	fear	 than	she	already	had	 today.	The
Facilitator	had	said	this	was	Pahlad.	No,	e’d	said	e’d	examined	the	payment
and	 the	merchandise	and	both	were	what	 they	should	have	been.	But	surely
that	was	the	same	thing.

“No,”	 said	 the	person	 sitting	 in	 the	 suspension	pod.	“I	don’t	 even	know
who	that	is.”	E	noticed	the	cup	Captain	Uisine	was	proffering.	“Thank	you,”	e
said,	and	took	it,	cupped	it	in	eir	hands	as	Captain	Uisine	stopped	the	blanket
from	sliding	off	eir	shoulders.

“Drink	some,”	said	Captain	Uisine,	still	in	Yiir.	“It’s	serbat	–	it’ll	do	you
good.”

“Drink	 it,”	 said	 the	 spider	mech,	 in	 Bantia.	 “It’s	 serbat	 –	 it’s	 good	 and
nutritious.”

What	 if	 there	 had	 been	 a	 mistake?	 This	 person	 looked	 like	 Pahlad
Budrakim.	But	also,	 in	a	way,	e	didn’t.	E	was	 thinner,	 certainly,	 and	 Ingray
had	only	seen	em	in	person	once	or	twice,	and	that	was	years	ago.	“You’re	not



Pahlad	Budrakim?”
“No,”	 said	 the	 person	 who	 was	 not	 Pahlad	 Budrakim.	 “I	 already	 said

that.”	E	took	a	drink	of	the	serbat.	“Oh,	that’s	good.”
Really,	it	didn’t	matter.	Even	if	this	person	was	Pahlad,	if	e	was	lying	to

her,	 it	made	 no	 difference.	 She	 couldn’t	 compel	 em	 to	 go	with	 her	 back	 to
Hwae,	and	not	just	because	Captain	Uisine	would	refuse	to	take	em	unless	e
wanted	 to	go.	Her	plan	had	always	depended	on	Pahlad	being	willing	 to	go
along.	“You	look	a	lot	like	Pahlad	Budrakim,”	Ingray	said.	Still	hoping.

“Do	I?”	e	asked,	and	took	another	drink	of	serbat.	“I	guess	someone	made
a	mistake.”	E	looked	straight	at	Ingray	then,	and	said,	“So,	when	a	Budrakim
goes	to	Compassionate	Removal	it’s	only	for	show,	is	it?	They	send	someone
to	 fish	 them	 out,	 behind	 the	 scenes?”	 Eir	 expression	 didn’t	 change,	 but	 eir
voice	was	bitter.

Ingray	drew	breath	to	say,	indignantly,	No	of	course	not,	but	found	herself
struck	 speechless	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 she	 had	herself	 gotten	 a	Budrakim	out	 of
Compassionate	Removal.	“No,”	she	managed,	finally.	“No,	I…	you’re	really
not	Pahlad	Budrakim?”

“I’m	really	not,”	e	said.
“Then	 who	 are	 you?”	 asked	 the	 spider	 mech,	 though	 Captain	 Uisine

hadn’t	said	anything	aloud.
The	person	sitting	in	the	suspension	pod	took	another	drink	of	serbat,	then

said,	“You	said	we’re	on	Tyr	Siilas?”
“Yes,”	said	the	spider	mech.	Ingray	found	she	couldn’t	speak	at	all.
“I	 think	 I’d	 rather	 not	 tell	 you	 who	 I	 am.”	 E	 looked	 around,	 at	 the

suspension	pod	e	sat	in,	the	crate	still	surrounding	it,	at	Captain	Uisine,	at	the
spider	mech	beside	the	captain,	around	at	the	bay.	“I	think	I’d	like	to	visit	the
Incomers	Office.”

“Why?”	asked	Ingray,	almost	a	cry,	unable	to	keep	her	confusion	and	her
despair	out	of	her	voice.

“Unless	you	have	 financial	 resources	we’re	unaware	of,”	said	 the	spider
mech,	“you	won’t	be	able	to	do	more	than	apply	for	an	indenture.	You	may	or
may	not	get	one,	and	unless	you	have	contacts	here	you	very	probably	won’t
like	what	you	get	if	you	do.”

“I’ll	like	it	better	than	Compassionate	Removal.”	E	drained	the	last	of	eir
beverage.

“Look	on	the	bright	side,”	Captain	Uisine	said	himself,	to	Ingray,	in	Yiir,
as	he	took	the	cup	from	not-Pahlad.	“I’ll	refund	you	eir	passage,	and	you’ll	be
able	to	eat	actual	food	for	the	next	couple	of	days.”