OceanofPDF.com



The Last Graduate is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents
either are products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any
resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely

coincidental.

Copyright © 2021 by Temeraire LLC
Illustrations copyright © 2020, 2021 by Penguin Random House LLC

All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by Del Rey, an imprint of Random House, a division
of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.

Del Rey is a registered trademark and the Circle colophon is a trademark of
Penguin Random House LLC.

The illustration on this page was originally published in A Deadly Education by
Naomi Novik, published by Del Rey, an imprint of Random House, a division of
Penguin Random House LLC, in 2020. Copyright © 2020 by Penguin Random

House LLC.

library of congress cataloging-in-publication data
Names: Novik, Naomi, author.

Title: The last graduate: a novel / Naomi Novik.
Description: New York: Del Rey, [2021] | Series: Lesson Two of The Scholomance

Identifiers: LCCN 2020055382 (print) | LCCN 2020055383 (ebook) | ISBN
9780593128862 (hardcover) | ISBN 9780593357286 (International) | ISBN

9780593128879 (ebook)
Subjects: GSAFD: Fantasy fiction.

Classification: LCC PS3614.O93 L37 2021 (print) | LCC PS3614.O93 (ebook) |
DDC 813/.6—dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/​2020055382
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/​2020055383

Ebook ISBN 9780593128879

Illustration: Elwira Pawlikowska
Illustration design: David G. Stevenson

Illustration calligraphy: Van Hong and David G. Stevenson

randomhousebooks.com

Book design by Simon M. Sullivan, adapted for ebook

Cover design and illustration: Faceout Studio/Jeff Miller, based on imagery ©
Shutterstock

Art direction: David G. Stevenson



ep_prh_5.7.1_c0_r0

OceanofPDF.com



Contents
Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Chapter 1: Vipersac

Chapter 2: Cushions

Chapter 3: Leskits

Chapter 4: Midterms

Chapter 5: Quattria

Chapter 6: Spelled Dye & Mortal Flame

Chapter 7: Alliance

Chapter 8: Slitherjaw

Chapter 9: Drencher

Chapter 10: The Himalayas

Chapter 11: Enclavers

Chapter 12: Intermission

Chapter 13: Martyrdom

Chapter 14: Patience

Illustrations

By Naomi Novik

About the Author

OceanofPDF.com



K eep far away from Orion Lake.
Most of the religious or spiritual people I know—and to be fair,

they’re mostly the sort of people who land in a vaguely pagan commune in
Wales, or else they’re terrified wizard kids crammed into a school that’s trying
to kill them—regularly beseech a benevolent and loving all-wise deity to
provide them with useful advice through the medium of miraculous signs and
portents. Speaking as my mother’s daughter, I can say with authority that they
wouldn’t like it if they got it. You don’t want mysterious unexplained advice
from someone you know has your best interests at heart and whose judgment
is unerringly right and just and true. Either they’ll tell you to do what you
want to do anyway, in which case you didn’t need their advice, or they’ll tell



you to do the opposite, in which case you’ll have to choose between sullenly
following their advice, like a little kid who has been forced to brush her teeth
and go to bed at a reasonable hour, or ignoring it and grimly carrying on, all
the while knowing that your course of action is guaranteed to lead you
straight to pain and dismay.

If you’re wondering which of those two options I picked, then you must
not know me, as pain and dismay were obviously my destination. I didn’t even
need to think about it. Mum’s note was infinitely well-meant, but it wasn’t
long: My darling girl, I love you, have courage, and keep far away from Orion
Lake. I read the whole thing in a single glance and tore it up into pieces
instantly, standing right there among the little freshmen milling about. I ate
the scrap with Orion’s name on it myself and handed the rest out at once.

“What’s this?” Aadhya said. She was still giving me narrow-eyed
indignation.

“It lifts the spirits,” I said. “My mum put it in the paper.”
“Yes, your mum, Gwen Higgins,” Aadhya said, even more coolly. “Who

you’ve mentioned so often to us all.”
“Oh, just eat it,” I said, as irritably as I could manage after having just

downed my own piece. The irritation wasn’t as hard to muster up as it
might’ve been. I can’t think of anything I’ve missed in here, including the sun,
the wind, or a night’s sleep in safety, nearly as much as I’ve missed Mum, so
that’s what the spell gave me: the feeling of being curled up on her bed with
my head in her lap and her hand stroking gently over my hair, the smell of the
herbs she works with, the faint croaking of frogs outside the open door, and
the wet earth of a Welsh spring. It would’ve lifted my spirits enormously if
only I hadn’t been worrying deeply at the same time what she was trying to
tell me about Orion.

The fun possibilities were endless. The best one was that he was doomed
to die young and horribly, which given his penchant for heroics was
reasonably predictable anyway. Unfortunately, falling in something or other
with a doomed hero isn’t the sort of thing Mum would warn me off. She’s
very much of the gather ye rosebuds while ye may school of thought.



Mum would only warn me off something bad, not something painful. So
obviously Orion was the most brilliant maleficer ever, concealing his vile
plans by saving the lives of everyone over and over just so he could, I don’t
know, kill them himself later on? Or maybe Mum was worried that he was so
annoying that he’d drive me to become the most brilliant maleficer ever,
which was probably more plausible, since that’s supposedly my own doom
anyway.

Of course, the most likely option was that Mum didn’t know herself.
She’d just had a bad feeling about Orion, for no reason she could’ve told me
even if she’d written me a ten-page letter on both sides. A feeling so bad that
she’d hitchhiked all the way to Cardiff to find the nearest incoming freshman,
and she’d asked his parents to send me her one-gram note. I reached out and
poked Aaron in his tiny skinny shoulder. “Hey, what did Mum give your
parents for bringing the message?”

He turned round and said uncertainly, “I don’t think she did? She said she
didn’t have anything to pay with, but she asked to talk to them in private, and
then she gave it to me and my mam squeezed a bit of my toothpaste out to
make room.”

That might sound like nothing, but nobody wastes any of their inadequate
four-year weight allowance on ordinary toothpaste; I brush with baking soda
out of the alchemy lab supply cabinets myself. If Aaron had brought any at
all, it was enchanted in some way: useful when you aren’t going to see a
dentist for the next four years. He could have traded that one squeeze of it to
someone with a bad toothache for a week of extra dinners, easily. And his
parents had taken that away from their own kid—Mum had asked his parents
to take that away from their own kid—just to get me the warning. “Great,” I
said bitterly. “Here, have a bite.” I gave him one of the pieces of the note,
too. He probably needed it as much as ever in his life, after just being sucked
into the Scholomance. It’s better than the almost inevitable death waiting for
wizard kids outside, but not by much.

The food line opened up just then, and the ensuing stampede interfered
with my brooding, but Liu asked me quietly, “Everything okay?” as we lined
up.



I just stared at her blankly. It wasn’t mindreading or anything—she had an
eye for small details, putting things together, and she indicated my pocket,
where I’d put the last scrap of the note—the note whose actual contents I
hadn’t shared, even while I’d passed out pieces with an enchantment that
should have precluded all brooding. My confusion was because—she’d asked.
I wasn’t used to anyone inquiring after me, or for that matter even noticing
when I’m upset. Unless I’m sufficiently upset that I start conveying the
impression that I’m about to set everyone around me on fire, which does in
fact happen on a not infrequent basis.

I had to think about it to decide that I didn’t, actually, want to talk about
the note. I’d never had the option. And having it meant—that I was telling Liu
the truth when I nodded to say yes, everything’s okay, and smiled at her, the
expression feeling a bit odd and stretchy round my mouth, unfamiliar. Liu
smiled back, and then we were in the line, and we all focused on the job of
filling our trays.

We’d lost our freshmen in the shuffle: they go last, obviously, and we now
had the dubious privilege of going first. But nothing stops you taking extra for
their benefit, if you can afford it, and at least for today we could. The walls of
the school were still a bit warm from the end-of-term cleansing cycle. Any of
the maleficaria that hadn’t been crisped to fine ash were all just starting to
creep out of the various dark corners they’d hidden in, and the food was as
unlikely to be contaminated as it ever was. So Liu took extra milk cartons for
her cousins, and I took seconds of pasta for Aaron, a bit grudgingly.
Technically he wasn’t owed anything for bringing the note, not by me; by
Scholomance etiquette, that’s all settled outside. But he hadn’t got anything
for it outside, after all.

It was odd being almost first out of the queue into the nearly empty
cafeteria, with the enormously long tail of kids still snaking along the walls,
tripled up, the sophomores poking the freshmen and pointing them at the
ceiling tiles and the floor drains and the air vents on the walls, which they’d
want to keep an eye on in the future. The last of the folded-up tables were
scuttling back into the open space that had been left for the freshman rush,
and unfolding back into place with squeals and thumps. My friend Nkoyo—



could I think of her as a friend, too? I thought perhaps I could, but I hadn’t
been handed a formal engraved notice yet, so I’d be doubtful a while longer—
had got out in front with her best mates; she was at a prime table, positioned
in the ring that’s exactly between the walls and the line, under only two ceiling
tiles, with the nearest floor drain four tables away. She was standing up tall
and waving us over, easy to spot: she was wearing a brand-new top and baggy
trousers, each in a beautiful print of mixed wavy lines that I was fairly sure
had enchantments woven in. This is the day of the year when everyone breaks
out the one new outfit per year most of us brought in—my own extended
wardrobe sadly got incinerated freshman year—and she had clearly been
saving this one for senior year. Jowani was bringing over two big jugs of
water while Cora did the perimeter wards.

It was odd, walking through the cafeteria over to join them. Even if we
hadn’t been offered an actual invitation, there were loads of good tables still
open, and all the bad ones. I’ve occasionally ended up with my pick of tables
before, but that’s always been a bad and risky move born of getting to the
cafeteria too early, usually as an act of desperation when I’d had too many
days of bad luck with my meals. Now it was just the ordinary course of
things. Everyone else going to the tables around me was a junior, too, or
rather a senior; I knew most of them by face if not by name. Our numbers
had been whittled down to roughly a thousand at this point, from a start of
sixteen hundred. Which sounds horrifying, except there’re normally fewer
than eight hundred kids left by the start of senior year. And normally, less
than half of those make it out of graduation.

But our year had thrown a substantial wrench into the works, and he was
sitting down at the table next to me. Nkoyo barely waited for me and Orion to
take our seats before she burst out, “Did it work? Did you get the machinery
fixed?”

“How many mals were down there?” Cora blurted over her at the same
time, sliding into her own seat out of breath, still capping the small clay jug
she’d used to drip a perimeter spell round the table.

They weren’t being rude, by Scholomance standards of etiquette: they
were entitled to ask us, since they’d got the table; that’s more than a fair trade



for first-hand information. Other seniors were busily occupying all the
neighboring tables—giving us a solid perimeter of security—the better to
listen in; the further ones were shamelessly leaning over and cupping their
ears while friends watched their backs for them.

Everyone in the school already knew one very significant bit of
information, namely that Orion and I had improbably made it back alive from
our delightful excursion to the graduation hall this morning. But I’d spent the
rest of the day holed up in my room, and Orion mostly avoided human beings
unless they were being eaten by mals at the time, so anything else they’d
heard had come to them filtered through the school gossip chain, and that’s
not a confidence-inspiring source of information when you’re relying on it to
stay alive.

I wasn’t enthusiastic about reliving the recent experience, but I knew they
had a right to what I could give them. And it was indisputably me who had it
to give, because before the food line had opened, I’d already overheard one of
the other New York seniors asking Orion a similar question, and he’d said, “I
think it went okay? I didn’t really see much. I just kept the mals off until they
were done, and then we yanked back up.” It wasn’t even bravado; that was
literally what he thought of the enterprise. Slaughtering a thousand mals in
the middle of the graduation hall, just another day’s work. I could almost
have felt sorry for Jermaine, who’d worn the expression of a person trying to
have an important conversation with a brick wall.

“A lot,” I said to Cora, dryly. “The place was crammed, and they were all
ravenous.” She swallowed, biting her lip, but nodded. Then I told Nkoyo,
“The senior artificers thought they’d got it, anyway. And it took them an hour
and change, so I hope they weren’t just faffing around.”

She nodded, her whole face intent. It wasn’t at all an academic question. If
we really had fixed the equipment down in the graduation hall, then the same
engines that run the cleansing up here twice a year, to burn out the mals
infesting the corridors and classrooms, ran down there, too, and presumably
wiped out a substantial number of the much larger and worse mals hanging
round in the hall waiting for the graduation feast of seniors. Which meant that
probably loads of the graduating class had made it. And much more to the



point, that loads of our graduating class would have a better chance to make
it.

“Do you think they really made it out okay? Clarita and the others?”
Orion said, frowning into the churned mess of potatoes and peas and beef he
was making out of what the cafeteria had called shepherd’s pie but was
thankfully just cottage pie. On a bad day it would turn out to be made of
shepherd. Regardless of name, it was actually still hot enough to steam, not
that Orion was appreciating its miraculous state.

“We’ll find out at the end of term, when it’s our turn through the mill,” I
said. If we hadn’t got it working, of course, then instead the seniors in front
of us had been dumped into a starving and worked-up horde of already-
vicious maleficaria, and had probably been ripped apart en masse before ever
getting to the doors. And our class would have just as good a time of it, in
three hundred sixty-five days and counting. Which was a delightful thought,
and I was telling myself as much as Orion when I added, “And since we can’t
find out sooner, there’s absolutely no point brooding about it, so will you stop
mangling your innocent dinner? It’s putting me off mine.”

He rolled his eyes at me and shoved a giant heaped spoonful into his
mouth dramatically by way of response, but that gave his brain a chance to
notice that he was an underfed teenage boy, and he began hoovering his plate
clean with real attention.

“If it did work, how long do you think it will last?” one of Nkoyo’s other
friends asked, a girl from Lagos enclave who’d taken a seat one from the end
of the table just to have access. Another good question I hadn’t any answer to,
since I wasn’t an artificer myself. The only thing I’d known about the work
going on behind my back—in Chinese, which I didn’t speak—was the rate of
words coming out of the artificers that had sounded like profanity. Orion
hadn’t known that much: he’d been out in front of us all, killing mals by the
dozen.

Aadhya answered for me. “The times Manchester enclave repaired the
graduation hall machinery, the repairs held up for at least two years,
sometimes three. I’d bet on it working this year at least, and maybe the one
after.”



“But not…more than that,” Liu said softly, looking across the room at her
cousins, who were at their own table now, along with Aaron and Pamyla, the
girl who’d brought in Aadhya’s letter, and a good, solid crowd of other
freshmen kids clustered around them: the kind of group that mostly only
enclave kids got. Which surprised me, until I realized they’d picked up some
glow-by-association from getting that close to Orion, hero of the hour. And
then it occurred to me, possibly even a bit of glow might have come from me,
since to all of the freshmen I was now a lofty senior who’d also been on the
run down to the hall, and not the creepy outcast of my year.

And—I wasn’t the creepy outcast by anyone’s standards anymore. I had a
graduation alliance with Aadhya and Liu, one of the first formed in our year.
I’d been invited to sit at one of the safest tables in the cafeteria, by someone
who had other choices. I had friends. Which felt even more unreal than
surviving long enough to become a senior, and I owed that, I owed every last
bit of it, to Orion Lake, and I didn’t care, actually, what the price tag was
going to be. There’d be one, no question. Mum hadn’t warned me for no
reason. But I didn’t care. I’d pay it back, whatever it was.

As soon as I put it in those terms inside my head, I stopped worrying over
my note. I didn’t even have to wish anymore that Mum hadn’t sent it. Mum
had to send it, because she loved me and she didn’t know Orion from a cold
welshcake; she couldn’t help but warn me off if she knew I was on a bad road
for his sake. And I could hold her love close to me and feel it, and still decide
I was ready to pay. I put my fingers into my pocket to touch the last scrap I’d
saved, the piece that said courage, and I ate it that night before I went to
sleep, lying in my narrow bed on the lowest floor of the Scholomance, and I
dreamed of being small again, running in a wide-open field of overgrown
grass and tall purple-belled flowers around me, knowing Mum was nearby
and watching me and glad that I was happy.



The lovely warm feeling lasted five seconds into the next morning, which is
how long it took me to finish waking up. In most schools, you get holidays
after term-end. Here, it’s graduation in the morning, induction in the evening,
you congratulate yourself and your surviving friends that you’ve all lived that
long, and the next day it’s the start of the new term. The Scholomance isn’t
really conducive to holiday-making, to be fair.

On the first day of term, we have to go to our new homeroom and get our
schedules lined up before breakfast. I was still feeling like moldy bread: it
tends to slightly aggravate a half-healed gut wound when you get yourself
bungeed around by yanker spells et cetera. I’d deliberately set an alarm to
wake me five minutes before the end of morning curfew, because I was
absolutely sure that wherever I was assigned for homeroom, it was going to
take forever getting there. And sure enough, when the slip of paper with my
assignment slid under my door at 5:59 a.m., it was for room 5013. I glared at
it. Seniors hardly ever get any classroom assignments above the third floor, so
you might think I should have been pleased, except it was only homeroom,
and I was sure I’d never get a real class assigned that high. As far as I knew,
there weren’t any classrooms on that floor—fifth floor is the library. Probably
I was being sent to some filing closet deep in the stacks with a handful of
other luckless strangers.

I didn’t even clean my teeth. I just swished my mouth out with water from
my jug and started off on the slog while the first other seniors up were still
shambling off to the loo. I didn’t bother asking round to see if anyone else
was going the same way: I was sure nobody I knew well enough to speak to
would be. I just waved to Aadhya in passing as she came out of her room
with her bathroom bag, and she nodded back in immediate understanding and
gave me a thumbs-up for encouragement as she continued on to collect up
Liu: we’re all sadly familiar with the hazard of a long slog to a classroom, and
our year now had the longest slogs of all.

There was no more down for us: yesterday, just as the seniors’ res hall
went rotating down to the graduation hall, ours had followed to take their
place, at the lowest level of the school. I had to trot round to the stairway
landing, then make my extremely cautious way through the workshop level—



yes, it was the day after the cleansing, but it’s never a good thing to be first
onto a classroom floor in the morning—and then begin on the five steep
double flights of stairs straight up.

They all felt at least twice as long as usual. Distances in the Scholomance
are extremely flexible. They can be long, agonizingly long, or approaching the
infinite, depending largely on how much you’d like them to be otherwise. It
also didn’t help that I was so early. I didn’t even see another kid until I was
panting my way up past the sophomore res hall, where the early risers had
started trickling onto the stairs in small groups, mostly alchemy and artifice
students hoping to nab better seats in the workshop and the labs. By the time
I reached the freshman floor, the regular morning exodus was in full swing,
but since they were all freshmen on their first day with no real idea where
they were going, that didn’t speed the stairs up at all.

The only saving grace of the whole painful trip was that I kept my storing
crystal tightly clenched in my fist the whole time, concentrating on pushing
mana into it. By the end of the final flight, where my gut was throbbing and
my thighs were burning in counterpoint, every single deliberate step made a
noticeable increase in the glow coming from between my fingers, and I had
filled a good quarter of it by the time I came up into the completely empty
reading room.

I badly needed to catch my breath, but as soon as I stopped moving, the
five-minute warning bell rang from below. Stumbling around through the
stacks looking for a classroom I had never even glimpsed before was a recipe
for arriving late, not a good idea, so I grudgingly spent a bit of my hard-won
mana on a finding spell. It cheerfully pointed me straight into a completely
dark section of the stacks. I looked back without much hope at the stairs, but
no one else was showing up to join me.

The reason for that became clear when I finally got to the classroom,
which was behind a single dark wooden door almost invisible between two
big cabinets full of ancient yellowing maps. I opened the door expecting to
find something really horrible inside, and I did: eight freshmen, all of whom
turned and stared at me like a herd of small and especially pitiful deer about
to be mown down by a massive lorry. There wasn’t so much as a sophomore



among the lot. “You’ve got to be joking,” I said with revulsion, and then I
stalked to the front row and sat down in the best seat in the place, fourth from
the near end. Which I could get without even a nudge, because they’d left the
front row nearly wide open like they were still in primary school and worried
about looking like teacher’s pets. The only teachers in here are the
maleficaria, and they don’t have pets, they have lunch.

The desks were charming Edwardian originals, by which I mean ancient,
too small for five-foot-ten me, and incredibly uncomfortable. They were made
of wrought iron and would be hard to move in an emergency; the attached
desk on mine, slightly too small to hold a sheet of normal-sized writing paper,
had been very nicely polished and smooth roughly 120 years ago. It had since
been scarified so thoroughly that kids had started writing on top of other kids’
graffiti just to have room for their messages of despair. One had written let
me out over and over in a neat red ink border all around the entire L-shaped
surface, and another had done a highlighter pass over it in yellow.

There was only one other kid in the front row, and she’d taken what would
have been the best seat, sixth from the far end—smarter to get a bit more
distance from the door—except for the air vent in the floor just two seats
behind it. Which was currently covered by a stupider kid’s bookbag, so you
couldn’t know it was there unless you spotted that the other three air vents in
the floor were laid out in a square pattern that needed a fourth one there. She
watched me coming in as if she expected me to kick her out of her seat: age
hath its prerogatives, and seniors are rarely shy about taking them. When I
took the real best seat, she looked behind herself, realized her mistake, then
hurriedly collected up her bag and moved down the row and said, “Is this seat
taken?” gesturing to the one next to me, with a sort of anxious air.

“No,” I said back to her irritably. I was annoyed because it made sense for
me to let her sit next to me, since that only improved my odds by upping the
nearby targets, and yet I didn’t particularly want to. She was an enclave kid,
no question. That was a shield holder of some kind on her wrist, the
deceptively dull-looking ring on her finger was almost certainly a power-
sharer, and she’d come in actively drilled on Scholomance strategy, such as
how to identify the best seats in a room, even on the first day of class when



you’re too dazed to remember all the advice your parents gave you and
instead just huddle with the other little kids like a zebra trying to hide in the
herd. Also, the maths textbook in her bag was in Chinese, but she had good
old Introductory Alchemy in English, and her notebooks were labeled in Thai
script, meaning she was fluent enough to take magic coursework in not one
but two foreign languages. Given the consequences of making even minor
mistakes, that’s a tall order for a fourteen year old. Likely she’d been in the
most expensive language classes enclave wealth could buy from the age of
two. She’d probably been planning to turn round in a moment and tell the
other kids they were sitting in bad and dangerous seats, so they’d understand
where they all stood in the pecking order: beneath her. I was only surprised
she hadn’t already made it clear.

Then one of the other kids behind us said tentatively, “Hello, El?” and I
realized he was one of Liu’s cousins. “It’s Guo Yi Zheng,” he added, which
was helpful, as I’d gone out of induction day in perfect confidence that I
wouldn’t be seeing any of the freshmen I’d met ever again except by pure
accident, and I hadn’t tried to remember their names. There’s not a lot of
cross-year mingling in here. Our schedules make sure of that. Seniors spend
almost all of our time on the lower levels, and freshmen get the safer
classrooms higher up. If you’re a freshman who regularly spends time hanging
round the places where seniors are, you’re asking to get eaten, and some
maleficaria will grant your request.

But on the other hand, if you are somewhere with an upperclassman in
range, you’d rather be closer to them than not. Zheng was already collecting
up his bag and hustling over, which was just as well, because he’d been
nearest the door until then. “May I sit with you?”

“Yeah, fine,” I said. I didn’t mind him. Liu being my ally didn’t give her
freshman cousin a claim on me, but he didn’t need it to. She was my friend.
“Watch out for air vents, even on the library level,” I added. “And you were
too close to the door.”

“Oh. Yes, of course, I was just—” he said, looking over at the other kids,
but I cut him off.



“I’m not your mum,” I said, deliberately rude: you do freshmen no favors
by letting them imagine there are heroes in here, Orion Lake notwithstanding.
I couldn’t be his savior; I had enough to do saving myself. “I don’t need an
excuse. I’ve just told you. Listen or don’t.” He shut it and sat down, a bit
abashed.

Of course, he was right to stick close to the other kids: there’s a reason
zebras hang out in herds. But it isn’t worth letting the other zebras put you in
a really bad position. If you were unlucky, you learned that lesson when the
lion ate you instead of them. If you were me, you learned it when you saw the
lion eat someone else, one of the loser kids who wasn’t quite as much a loser
as you were, and who therefore had been allowed to sit on the end of the row,
between the door and the kids who mattered.

And he had no business letting them put him on the end of the row,
because he was one of the kids who mattered, or closer to it than anyone else
here but the enclave girl. It’s widely known that Liu’s family are really close
to founding an enclave of their own. They’re already a big enough group that
Liu got a box of hand-me-downs from an extended family member when she
came in, and she’d given Zheng and his twin brother Min each a bag of stuff
out of it, with the rest to come at the end of this year. They weren’t enclavers,
but they weren’t losers either. But for the moment, he was still behaving as
though he were an ordinary human being, instead of a student in the
Scholomance.

A buzz of noise went up from the other kids. While we’d been talking, the
draft schedules had just appeared on our desks, in the usual way: you look
away for a second, and then they’re there when you look back, as if they’d
always been there. If you try to be cheeky and stare at your desk unblinkingly
so the school can’t slip it in, something bad is likely to happen to create an
opportunity, like the lights going out, so other kids will shove you or put a
hand over your eyes if they catch you at it. It’s a lot more expensive, mana-
wise, to let people see magic happening in a way they instinctively disbelieve,
because that means you have to force it onto them as well as the universe. It’s
one of the reasons that people don’t often do real magic round mundanes. It’s
loads harder, unless you dress it up as some sort of performance, or do it



round people who aggressively work to believe in whatever magic you’re
doing, like Mum and her natural healing stuff with all her crunchy friends out
in the woods.

And even though we’re wizards, we still don’t really expect things to
appear out of thin air. We know it can be done, so it’s not as hard to persuade
us, but on the other hand, we’ve got more mana of our own to fight that
persuasion with. It costs the school much less to just slip something onto the
desk while we’re looking away, as if someone had just put it there, than it
does to let us watch it coming into existence.

Zheng was already trying to crane out around me to peek at the enclave
girl’s sheet; I sighed and said to him, “Go and sit next to her,” grudgingly. I
didn’t like it, but my not liking it didn’t change the reality that it was an
obviously good idea for him to make up to her. He twitched a bit, probably
more guilt: I expect his mum had lectured him on that subject as well. Then
he did get up and went over to the Thai girl and introduced himself.

To be fair, she made him a polite wai, and invited him to sit down next to
her with a gesture; usually you have to suck up a little more energetically to
get in with an enclave kid. But I suppose he didn’t have competition yet. After
he sat down, a few other kids got up and moved into the seats behind them
and they all started comparing schedules. The enclaver girl was already
working on her own, with the speed that meant she knew exactly what she
was going for, and she started showing the others hers and pointing out issues
on theirs. I made a note to have a look at Zheng’s after he was done, just in
case she was a bit too helpful to her own benefit.

But first I had to take care of my own schedule, and one look told me I
was in for it. I’d known going in that I’d have to take two seminars in my
senior year: that’s the price you pay for going incantations track and getting to
minimize your time on the lower floors your first three years. But I’d been put
into four of them—or five if you counted twice for the monstrous double
course, meeting first thing every single day, that was simply titled Advanced
Readings in Sanskrit, instruction in English. The note indicated that it would
count as coursework for Sanskrit and Arabic, which made suspiciously little
sense except for instance if we’d be studying medieval Islamic reproductions



of Sanskrit manuscripts—such as the one I’d acquired in the library just two
weeks before. That made for a really narrow field. I’d be lucky if there were
three other kids in the bloody room with me. I glared at it sitting there like a
lead bar across the top of my schedule sheet. I’d been counting on getting the
standard Sanskrit seminar led in English, which should have meant being
lumped into one of the larger seminar classrooms on the alchemy lab floor
with the dozen or so artifice- and alchemy-track kids from India who were
doing Sanskrit for their language requirement.

And I couldn’t easily manufacture a conflict for it, since I didn’t have so
much as a single other senior in the room to compare schedules with. Usually
at least one or two of the other outcast kids would grudgingly let me have a
look, in exchange for getting to see mine, and that would give me at least one
or two classes I could put in to try and force the school to shift the worst of
my assignments around. You’re allowed to specify up to three classes, and as
long as you’ve met all your requirements, the Scholomance has to rework the
rest of your schedule around them, but if you don’t know what other classes
there actually are or when they’re scheduled, it’s just a gambling game that
you’re sure to lose.

The Advanced Readings seminar would have been more than enough to
make my schedule unusually lousy, but on top of that, I also had a really
magnificent seminar on Development of Algebra and Applications to
Invocation, which was going to count for languages, unspecified—a bad sign
that I’d be getting loads of different primary sources to translate—as well as
honors history and maths. I hadn’t been assigned any other maths courses, so
my odds of getting out of that one were very slim. Then there was the rotten
seminar I’d actually been expecting to get, on Shared Proto-Indo-European
Roots in Modern Spellcasting, which shouldn’t have been my easiest class,
and last but very much not least, The Myrddin Tradition, which was supposed
to count for honors literature, Latin, modern French, modern Welsh, and Old
and Middle English. And I knew right now that by the third week of class, I’d
be getting nothing but straight-up Old French and Middle Welsh spells.

The rest of the slots were filled with shop—which I should have had a
claim to be let out of entirely, since last term I’d done a magic mirror which



still muttered gloomily at me every so often even though I had it hung up
facing the wall—and I’d been put in honors alchemy, both meeting on mixed-
up schedules: Mondays and Thursdays for the one, and Tuesdays and Fridays
for the other. I’d be with different kids each day of the week, so I’d have it
twice as hard as I already do finding anyone to do things like hold something I
need to weld or watch my bag while I go and get supplies.

Up to that point, it was possibly the single worst senior schedule I’d ever
heard of. Not even the kids aiming for class valedictorian were going to take
four seminars. Except, as if the school was pretending to make up for all that,
the entire afternoon on Wednesdays was literally unassigned to anything. It
just said “Work,” exactly like the work period we all get right after lunch,
only it had an assigned room. Namely this one.

I stared at the box on my schedule sheet with deep and unrelenting
suspicion, trying to make sense of it. An entire afternoon of free time, all the
way up in the library itself, officially reserved so I wouldn’t even have to
protect my turf, with no reading, no quizzes, no assignments. That alone
made this possibly the single best senior schedule I’d ever heard of. It was
worth the trade-off. I’d been worrying about how I could possibly make up
for all the mana I’d blown last term; with a triple-length work period once a
week, I might be back on track before Field Day.

So there had to be a monstrous catch somewhere, only I couldn’t begin to
guess what it was. I got up and poked Zheng. “Keep an eye on my things,” I
told him. “I’m going to do a full check on the room. If any of you want to
know how, watch,” I added, and all their heads popped up to watch me go
over the place. I started at the air vents and made sure all of them were
screwed down tight, and made a sketch on a piece of scrap paper to show
where they were in the room, in case something unusually clever decided to
creep in and replace one of them at some point. I counted all the chairs and
desks and looked under each one; I took out every single drawer in the
cupboard along the back wall and opened all the cabinet doors and put a light
inside the guts of it; I pulled it away from the wall and checked to make sure
it and the wall were both solid. I shone a light along the entire perimeter of
the floor to look for holes, I tapped over every wall as high as I could reach, I



checked the doorframe to make sure the top and bottom were snug, and by
the time I had finished, I was as sure as I could get that this was a perfectly
ordinary classroom.

By which I mean, mals could get into it any number of ways: through the
air vents, or under the door, or by gnawing through the walls. At least in this
one, they couldn’t get in by dropping down from the ceiling, because there
was no ceiling. The Scholomance doesn’t have a roof; you don’t need one
when you build your magic school jutting off from the world into a mystical
void of non-literal space. The library walls just sort of keep going straight up
until they’re lost in the dark. In theory, they do eventually stop somewhere far
up there. I’m not climbing up to prove it to myself. But anyway, the room
wasn’t infested to start with, and there weren’t any obvious gaping
vulnerabilities. So what could the school possibly mean, giving me the
massive gift of an entire afternoon off in here?

I went back to my seat and stared at the schedule. Of course I understood
that the afternoon off was the bait in the trap, but it was really good bait, and
also a really good trap. I couldn’t actually ensure a single good change in my
schedule, since I didn’t know when any other senior classes were being held.
If I put down, say, that senior course in Sanskrit that I’d been expecting, to
try and knock out that horrible Advanced Readings seminar, then even if the
Scholomance actually did drop the seminar, it would have an excuse to shove
me into an Arabic course on Wednesday afternoons. If I even tried to get
something as minor as the matching shop class on Thursday afternoons, I’d
undoubtedly be given alchemy lab on Wednesdays, and something else on
Fridays. Anything I did would lose me the one really great thing about this
schedule, with no guaranteed improvements.

“Let me see all of yours,” I said to Zheng, without any real hope. One
thing about being jammed in with freshmen, they all handed their sheets over
meekly without even asking for a favor back, and I combed through the entire
sheaf looking for any courses that I could take. But it was useless. I’ve never
heard of freshmen being assigned to any class that a senior could possibly
request, and they hadn’t been. All of them had the standard Intro to Shop,
Intro to Lab—enclave girl had wisely encouraged all of them to move those



right before lunch Tuesday and Wednesday respectively, which are the best
slots freshmen can get, since upperclassmen bagsie the afternoons—along
with freshman-year Maleficaria Studies, wouldn’t they have fun in there, and
all the rest of their classes were literature and maths and history on the third
and fourth floor. Except for one: outrageously, all of them also had the same
Wednesday work session right up here with me, the lucky little snotnoses.
None of them even appreciated how amazing it was.

I gave up and fatalistically signed my name at the bottom of my schedule
without even trying to make any changes, then I went up to the big ancient
secretary desk at the front of the room, cautiously lifted the roll-top—nothing
there today, but just wait—and put my schedule inside. Most classrooms have
a more formal place for submitting work, a slot that pretends to be shooting
our papers through a network of pneumatic tubes to some central repository,
but those broke early in the last century and were just patched up with
transport spells, so really all you need to do is put your work out of sight in
some common spot and it’ll be taken up. I stared down at my sheet one last
time, then took a deep breath and shut the roll-top again.

I was sure I’d find out just how big a mistake I’d made right after
breakfast, when I headed down to my first seminar, but I was wrong about
that. I found out not a quarter of an hour later, without ever leaving the room.
I was bent with gritted teeth over a snarled mess of crochet, getting as much
mana into my crystal as I could before breakfast, and already mentally
strategizing what hideously boring calisthenics I could do in this room once
I’d healed up a bit more—I hate exercise violently, so forcing myself to do it
is wonderful for building mana. There wasn’t much space, and never mind
moving the desks. I’d probably have to do crunches lying across the top of
two desks. But who cared: I’d be able to fill a crystal every two weeks, I
thought.

Meanwhile the freshmen were all hanging about in the front of the
classroom as if they didn’t have a care in the world, chattering to one another.
Just to improve things, all of them were speaking in Chinese, including the
Indian boy, and the Russian boy and girl—I was fairly certain that was
Russian they’d spoken to each other, but they’d dived into the general



conversation without a hitch. They were undoubtedly all doing Chinese-track
general classes—in here, your choices for things like maths and history are
that or English.

I was doing my best to let the conversation just be background noise, but
it wasn’t working very well. One of the hazards of studying a ridiculous
number of languages is that my brain has got the idea that if I don’t
understand something I’m hearing, it’s because I’m not paying enough
attention, and if I just listen hard enough I’ll somehow be able to divine the
meaning. I should have been safe from being hit with another new language
for at least a quarter, since the Scholomance had started me on Arabic not
three weeks ago, but sitting in a classroom for two hours every Wednesday
with a pack of freshmen all speaking Chinese would undoubtedly mean I’d
start getting spells in Chinese, too.

Unless they all helpfully got themselves killed before the month was out,
which wasn’t beyond the realm of possibility. Usually the first week of term is
all right, and then just as the freshmen have been lulled into a state of false
calm, the first mals creep out of their hidey-holes, not to mention the first
wave of newly hatched ones from the ground floor start to find ways to squirm
up here.

Of course, there’s always the occasional overachiever. Like the baby
vipersac that quietly worked its way up through the air vent just then.
Probably it had stretched itself out skinny and long to get through the wards
on the ventilation system, making itself look like a harmless little liquid
dribble, and it snaked through the physical grating and coiled itself up on the
floor behind one of the bookbags to form back into shape. It would have
made some squelching noises in the process, but the freshmen were talking
loudly enough to cover for it, and I wasn’t paying very close attention myself,
because for once in my life, I was the single worst target in the room by a
thousand miles; no mal would pick me out of this crowd. I was already
starting to think of the place as some kind of refuge.

Then one of the freshmen saw it and squealed in alarm. I didn’t even
bother to look what they were squealing at; I was out of the chair with my
bookbag over my shoulder and halfway to the door—the boy had been



looking towards the back of the room—before I even spotted the vipersac,
hovering already fully inflated over the fourth row of seats like a magenta
balloon that someone had Jackson Pollocked with spatters of blue. The
blowdart tubes were starting to puff out. The other kids were all screaming
and clutching at one another or ducking behind the big desk, a classic
mistake: how long were they planning to stay back there? The vipersac
wouldn’t be going anywhere with a spread like this, and the instant they stuck
their heads out for a peek, it would get them.

That was their problem, of course, and if they didn’t find a solution for it
on their own, they weren’t going to make it out of homeroom on their first day
of class, which probably meant they weren’t going to last long anyway. It
wasn’t even the slightest bit my problem. My problem was that I’d been
assigned four highly dangerous seminar classes, and I was already far behind
on saving mana for graduation. I was going to need every last minute of my
time in this room to build enough mana to make up for all that. I didn’t have
so much as a single crochet stitch’s worth of energy to spare on a flock of
random freshmen I didn’t care about in the slightest.

Except for one. After I kicked the classroom door open, I did turn back to
yell, “Zheng! Out, now,” and he did a U-turn around from the big desk and
ran towards me. The other kids might not all have understood me, but they
were smart enough to follow him, and most of them were smart enough to
abandon their bookbags while they were at it. Except for the enclave girl, of
all people. She undoubtedly could have replaced every last thing she was
carrying just by hitting up the older kids from her enclave, but she grabbed
her bag before coming, so she was bringing up the very end of the pack when
the vipersac got inflated enough that its three little eyestalks popped out and it
started turning to track the last of the moving targets. As soon as it took her
out, everyone else would get away. It was only a little bigger than a football;
that newly hatched, it would probably stop to feed straightaway.

I was right at the doorway and about to go through and save my own neck,
exactly as I should have done; exactly as I had done, any number of times
before. It’s rule one: the only thing you worry about, in the moments when
something goes pear-shaped in here, is how to get yourself out of the way



with skin intact. It’s not even selfish. If you start trying to help other people,
you get yourself killed and most likely foul whatever they’re doing to save
themselves while you’re at it. If you’ve got allies or friends, you can help them
beforehand. Share some mana, give them a spell, make them some bit of
artifice, a potion they can use in a tight spot. But anyone who can’t survive an
attack on their own isn’t going to survive. Everyone knows that, and the only
person I’ve ever known to make an exception to the rule is Orion, who’s a
complete numpty, which I’m not.

Except I didn’t go through the door. I stayed there next to it and let the
entire pack of freshmen go galumphing through ahead of me instead. The
vipersac went paler pink as it got ready to shoot Miss Enclave, and then it
reoriented itself with a quick jerk towards the door as Orion, speaking of
numpties, came bursting through it going the extremely wrong way. Two
seconds later, he’d have been full of venom and most likely dead.

Except I was already casting.
The spell I used was a fairly obscure Old English curse. I’m possibly the

only one in the world who has it. Early in my sophomore year, right after
starting Old English, I stumbled over three seniors cornering a junior girl in
the library stacks. Another loser girl, like me, except that boys never tried
that sort of thing with me. Something about the aura of future monstrously
dark sorceress must put them off. I put the three of them off the other girl
just by turning up, even as a scrawny soph. They slunk away, the girl hurried
off in the other direction, and I grabbed the first book off the shelf still
seething with anger. So I didn’t get the book I’d been reaching for; instead I
came away with a small crumbling sheaf of homemade paper full of
handwritten curses some charming beldame had come up with a thousand
years ago or so. It opened up in my hands to this particular curse and I looked
down and saw it before I slammed it shut and put it back on the shelf.

Most people have to study a spell at length to get it into their head. I do,
too, if it’s a useful spell. But if it’s a spell to destroy cities or slaughter armies
or torture people horribly—or, for instance, to shrivel up significant parts of a
boy’s anatomy into a single agonizingly painful lump—one glance and it’s in
there for good.



I’d never used it before, but it worked really effectively in this scenario.
The vipersac instantly compressed down to the size of a good healthy acorn.
It dropped straight out of the air, rattled on the grating for a moment, and
then went down through it like a prize marble vanishing down a sewer drain.
And there went my entire morning’s mana with it.

Orion stopped in the doorway and watched it go, deflating himself. He’d
been ready to launch some kind of fire blast, which would have taken out the
vipersac—and also the three of us, along with any combustible contents of
the classroom, since its internal gases were highly flammable. The enclave girl
threw me and him a scared-rabbit look and darted out the door past him,
even though there wasn’t any reason to run anymore. He looked after her for a
moment, then back at me. I took a single depressing look at my dimmed
mana crystal—yes, completely dull again—and let it drop. “What are you
even doing here?” I said irritably, shoving past him out into the stacks and
heading towards the stairs.

“You didn’t come to breakfast,” he said, falling in with me.
That’s how I learned that the bells weren’t audible in the library classroom.

Which at the moment meant I could either skip breakfast or turn up late to
the first session of my lousiest seminar class, where I would very likely not
have the least chance of getting anyone to fill me in on my first assignments.

I ground my jaw and started stomping down the stairs. “Are you okay?”
Orion asked after a moment, even though I’d just saved him. He hadn’t quite
internalized the idea yet, I suppose.

“No,” I said bitterly. “I’m a numpty.”

OceanofPDF.com



T hat only got more clear to me over the next few weeks. I’m not an
enclave girl. Unlike Orion, I don’t have a virtually limitless supply of

mana to pull on for noble heroics. The exact opposite, because I’d just blown
nearly half the mana stash I’d accumulated over the course of three years. For
more than sufficient cause, since I used it to take out a maw-mouth, and if I
never have to think about that experience again it’ll be soon enough, but it
doesn’t matter how good my reasons were. What matters is I’d had a carefully
planned timetable for building mana over my Scholomance career, and it was
thoroughly wrecked.

My hopes of graduating would have been in equal shambles, except for
that spellbook I’d found. The Golden Stone phase-changing spell is so



valuable outside that Aadhya had been able to run an auction among last
year’s seniors that had netted me a heap of mana, and even a pair of lightly
used trainers on top of it. She was planning to do another one among the kids
in our year soon. With luck I would end up short seven crystals instead of
nineteen. That was still a painful deficit to be making up, and I needed
another thirty at graduation on top of it, at least.

That’s what I’d planned to use my glorious free Wednesday afternoons for.
Ha very ha. The baby vipersac turned out to be only the first of a series of
maleficaria that all seemed irresistibly drawn to this specific library
classroom. There were mals waiting to leap when we walked in the door.
There were mals hiding in shadows that pounced while we were distracted.
There were mals that came in through the vents halfway through class. There
were mals inside the roll-top desk. There were mals waiting when we walked
out the door. I could have avoided learning Chinese with absolutely no
problem, just by not doing a thing. The entire pack of freshmen would have
been gone before the second week of the term.

The writing was on the wall by the end of our first Wednesday session, in
letters of dripping blood, literally: I’d just smeared a willanirga across the
entire perimeter of the room, stomach sac and intestines and all. As we all
headed to dinner in more-or-less bespattered condition, I swallowed my own
irritation and told Sudarat—the enclave girl—that if she wanted more
rescuing, she’d need to share some of her mana supply.

Her face went all red and blotchy, and she said, haltingly, “I don’t—I’m
not,” and then she burst into tears and ran on ahead, and Zheng said, “You
haven’t heard about Bangkok.”

“What haven’t I heard about Bangkok?”
“It’s gone,” he said. “Something took out the enclave, just a few weeks

before induction day.”
I stared at him. The point of enclaves is they don’t get taken out. “How?

By what?”
He made a big arms-spread shrug.
“Have you all heard about Bangkok?” I demanded at dinner, wondering

how I’d missed a piece of news that big, but actually I was ahead of the curve:



Liu was the only one at the table who nodded, and she said, “I just heard in
history.”

“Heard what?” Aadhya wanted to know.
“Bangkok’s gone,” I said. “The enclave’s been destroyed.”
“What?” Chloe said, jerking so hard she slopped her orange juice all over

her tray. She’d asked to eat with us—and nicely, not like she was doing us a
favor gracing us with her presence—so I’d gritted my teeth and said yes.
“That’s got to be fake.”

Liu shook her head. “A girl from Shanghai in our class confirmed it. Her
parents told her little sister to tell her about it.”

Chloe stared at us, still frozen with her glass midair. You couldn’t blame
her for being more than a bit freaked out. Enclaves don’t just go popping off
for no reason, so if an enclave had just been hit hard enough that it was taken
out, it was a sign that some kind of enclave war was on the way, and New
York was the prime candidate for being in the middle of it somehow, but
after the third time in five minutes she asked for more of the details that
neither Liu or I had, I finally said, “Rasmussen, we don’t know. You’re the one
who can find out; your enclave’s freshmen must know more about it by now.”

She did actually say, “Watch my tray?” and then got up and went across
the room to the table where the freshmen from the New York enclave were
sitting. She didn’t come back with much: not even that many of the freshmen
had heard about it yet. The Bangkok kids weren’t making any effort to spread
the news, and Sudarat was literally the only freshman from the place who’d
survived to be inducted. Everyone else in her year had gone down with the
ship. Which alarmed all the enclavers even more. Even when enclaves are
damaged badly enough to make them collapse, there’s usually enough warning
and time for the non-combatants to escape.

By the end of dinner, it became clear that nobody knew what had
happened. We barely know anything in here to start with, since all our news
about the real world comes in once a year via terrified fourteen-year-olds. But
an enclave going down is big news, and not even the Shanghai kids had any
details. Shanghai helped start Bangkok—they’ve been sponsoring new Asian
enclaves these last thirty years, not incidentally while making increasingly



pointed noises about the disproportionate number of Scholomance seats
allocated to the US and Europe. If someone had taken out Bangkok as a first
shot in coming at Shanghai, their freshmen would’ve come in with clear
instructions to close ranks round the Bangkok kids.

On the other hand, if Bangkok had carelessly blown themselves to bits,
which happens occasionally when an enclave gets a bit too ambitious in
developing new magical weaponry without telling anyone, the Shanghai kids
would’ve been given instructions to ditch the Bangkok kids entirely. Instead,
they’d just gone—cautious. Meaning even their parents didn’t have any better
idea than the rest of us did, and if the Shanghai enclavers didn’t know,
nobody knew.

Well, except for whoever had done it. Which was its own source of
complication, because if anyone were going to be orchestrating an indirect
attack on Shanghai, the top candidate was New York. It was hard to imagine
any other enclave in the world doing it without at least their tacit support. But
if New York had secretly arranged anything as massive as taking out an entire
enclave, they certainly wouldn’t have told their freshmen a thing about it,
which meant that not even the New York kids knew whether or not their
enclave had been involved, but they—and the Shanghai kids—all knew that if
it had been anything other than an accident, their parents were very likely at
war outside right now. And we’d have absolutely no way of knowing one way
or another for a year.

It wasn’t a situation you’d call conducive to fellow-feeling among the
enclavers. Personally, I didn’t mind not knowing. I wasn’t going to be joining
an enclave myself. I’d made that decision last year—resentfully—and I wasn’t
going to be getting involved, if there was a war. Even if it was just some
hideous maleficer going around taking out enclaves, it wasn’t anything to me,
except possibly my future competition, according to the unpleasant prophecy
that would have made my life loads easier if it would just hurry up and come
true.

What I did mind was that Sudarat couldn’t help out with what was clearly
about to be my fifth seminar, in freshman rescue. Their enclave’s mana store
had been fairly new and small to begin with, and now the Bangkok seniors



had taken full control and were desperately trading on it to other enclavers to
try and get themselves graduation alliances. They weren’t even sharing with
the juniors and sophomores. All of them had just become ordinary losers like
the rest of us, scrabbling for allies and resources and survival. Their one big
bargaining chip for alliance-building had been the chance of a spot in their
fast-growing enclave, which they didn’t have anymore, and they were
operating under an aura of creepy uncertainty because no one knew what had
happened. The other freshmen hadn’t been avoiding Sudarat because they
hadn’t known she was from Bangkok; they’d been avoiding her because they
had. She hadn’t even been given a share of the gear that last year’s seniors had
left behind. That bag she’d brought in was all the resources she had.

I suppose I should’ve felt sorry for her, but I’d rather be sorry for someone
who never had luck at all than for someone whose extreme luck ran out
unexpectedly. Mum would tell me I could be sorry for both of them, to which
I’d say she could be sorry for both of them, but I had a more limited supply of
sympathy and had to ration it. Anyway, I’d already saved Sudarat’s life twice
before the second week of classes, despite my lack of sympathy, so she hadn’t
any right to complain.

And neither did I, since I was apparently determined to keep doing it.
Aadhya and Liu and I had made plans to take showers together that night.

As we headed downstairs, I said to Liu bitterly, “Have you got any time after?
I need to get down some basic phrases in Chinese.” You might expect that to
mean things like where’s the loo and good morning, but in here, the first things
you learn in any language are get down and behind you and run. Which I was
going to need to stop the freshmen getting in the way of my saving them.
Entirely at my own expense.

Liu bent her head and said softly, “I was going to ask you to help me.” She
reached into her school satchel and pulled up her clear plastic pencil bag to
show me a pair of scissors inside: a left-handed pair with the remnants of
ragged patches of green vinyl still clinging on stickily around the finger holes,
one blade notched and the other a bit rusty. Promising signs: they were bad
enough that they almost certainly weren’t cursed or animated. She’d been
asking round for someone who had a pair to loan for the last couple of weeks.



Her hair was down to below her waist, a glossy midnight black except at
the very roots where it was coming in a color that anyone would also have
called black, except by contrast to the slightly eerie darker shade of the long
mass. Years and years of growing it out, and three of those years had been in
here, having to negotiate terms and conditions for every shower we got. But I
didn’t ask are you sure. I knew she was, even if only on a purely practical
note. Aadhya was going to use it to string the sirenspider lute that she was
making for our graduation run, and anyway, she’d only been able to get away
with growing her hair that long because she’d been using malia.

But then she’d had an unexpected and very thorough spirit cleanse, and
she’d decided she wasn’t going back down the obsidian brick road. So now
she had to pay back three years of unreasonably good hair days all at once.
We’d been taking it in turn each evening to help her comb out the truly
horrific snarls that developed every day no matter how carefully she braided
it.

After we were done in the showers, the three of us went back to Aadhya’s
room. She sharpened the scissors with her tools, then got the box she’d
prepared for the hair. I started the cutting carefully, just taking off a bare
centimeter from one very skinny lock of hair held as far from Liu’s head as I
could—you always want to start slow when it comes to an unfamiliar pair of
scissors. Nothing terrible happened, and slowly I worked halfway up the
strand, and then I took a deep breath and went in fast and cut, right at the
visible demarcation line between the old hair and the new, and handed the
one long section to Aadhya.

“You okay?” I said to Liu. I was making sure the scissors were all right,
but I also wanted to give her an excuse to take a minute: I did expect it to be a
wrench for her, even if she wouldn’t start blubbing or anything.

“Yes, I’m fine,” she said, but she was blinking, and by the time I’d taken
off half the hair, she was blubbing, in a really quiet way, tears slipping away,
and a fat one rolled off her cheek and splatted on her knee.

Aadhya threw me a worried look, then said, “I can definitely manage with
this much, if you wanted to stop.” Liu wouldn’t even have looked bad: her
hair was so thick I’d had to cut it in layers anyway, with the crap scissors, so



I’d started from underneath. You never know when a pair of scissors might
suddenly go unusable, and if she was walking round with the top of her head
trimmed close and a long weird mullet of hair dangling behind, anyone she
asked for a pair of scissors would charge her the earth in trade.

“No,” Liu said, her voice quavery but also absolutely insistent. She was the
quiet one of the three of us, usually—Aad could get plenty of heat going
when she was annoyed, and if there’s ever an Olympics of rage, I’ll be odds-
on favorite to take gold. But Liu was always so contained, so measured and
thoughtful, and it was a surprise to hear her even that close to snapping.

Even to her; she paused and swallowed, but whatever she was feeling, it
wasn’t going back in the box. “I want it off,” she said, with a sharp edge.

“Right,” I said, and went at it faster, shingling every strand as close to her
head as I dared. The glossy strands were trying to tangle round my fingers
even as I chopped them off and handed them off to Aadhya.

And then it was done, and Liu put her hands up to touch her head,
trembling a little. There was barely anything left, only an uneven fuzz. She
closed her eyes and rubbed her hands over it back and forth like she was
making sure it was all gone. She took a few deep watery breaths and then
said, “I haven’t cut it since I came in. Ma told me not to.”

“Why?” Aadhya asked.
“It was…” Liu’s throat worked. “She said, in here, it would tell people I

was someone to watch out for.” And it had worked, because you can’t afford
to have long hair unless you’re a really rich and also careless enclaver—or
unless you’re on the maleficer track.

Aadhya silently went and dug a leftover half of a granola bar out of a
small warded stash box on her desk. Liu tried to refuse it, but Aad said, “Oh
my God, eat the freaking granola bar,” and then Liu’s face crumpled and she
got up and put her arms out towards us. It took me a few moments longer
than Aadhya—three years of near-total social ostracization leaves you badly
equipped for this sort of thing—but they both kept a space open until I
lurched in to join the hug, our arms around each other, and it was the miracle
all over again, the miracle I still couldn’t quite believe in: I wasn’t alone
anymore. They were saving me, and I was going to save them. It felt more



like magic than magic. As though it could make everything all right. As if the
whole world had become a different place.

But it hadn’t. I was still in the Scholomance, and all the miracles in here
come with price tags.

I’d only accepted my horrific schedule for the chance of building mana on
those glorious Wednesday afternoons off. Since I’d been wrong about how
wonderful my Wednesday work sessions would be, you might think I’d also
been wrong about how terrible my four seminars were. And then you’d be
wrong.

Not one of the Myrddin seminar, the Proto-Indo-European seminar, or
the Algebra seminar had more than five students in it. All of them took place
deep in the warren of seminar rooms that we call the labyrinth, because it’s
roughly as hard to get through as the classical version. The corridors like to
squirm around and stretch a bit now and then. But even those paled in awful
next to Advanced Readings in Sanskrit, which turned out to be an
independent study.

I really could have used a dedicated hour a day of quiet time to work on
Sanskrit. The spellbook I’d managed to get my hands on last term was a
priceless copy of the long-lost Golden Stone sutras; the library had let it come
in range in an effort to keep me from taking out that maw-mouth. I still slept
with it under my pillow. I’d just barely managed to fight my way through
twelve pages to the first of the major invocations, and it was already the single
most useful spellbook I’d ever so much as glimpsed in my life.

But what I got instead was a dedicated hour a day, alone in a tiny room on
the outer perimeter of the very first floor, squeezed in around the edge of the
big workshop. To even get there, I had to go almost as far as you could
possibly go into the labyrinth, open an unmarked windowless door, then walk
down a long, narrow, completely unlit corridor that felt like it was anywhere
from one to twelve meters depending on its mood that day.



Inside the room, the one large air vent at the top of the wall shared an air
shaft with the workshop furnaces. It alternated between whooshing blasts of
superheated exhaust air and a steady, whistling stream of ice-cold cooling air.
The only desk in the room was another ancient chair-desk, the whole iron
contraption bolted to the floor. Its back was to the grating. I would have sat
on the floor, but there were two large drainage channels running across the
whole room, coming from the workshop and going to a big trough along the
full length of the back wall, and ominous stains around them suggested that
they overflowed routinely. A row of taps were stuck in the wall overhanging
the trough as well. They dripped constantly in a faint pinging symphony, no
matter how much I tried to tighten them. Every once in a while, horrible
gurgling noises came out of the pipes, and weird grinding sounds happened
under the floor. The door to the room itself didn’t lock, but did slide open or
shut at unpredictable moments with an incredibly loud bang.

If that sounds to you like an absolutely magnificent setup for an ambush,
well, a significant number of mals agreed. I got jumped twice in the first week
of classes.

By the end of the third week of term, I actually had to dip into my mana
stash instead of adding to it. That night I sat on my bed staring at the chest of
crystals Mum sent in with me. Aadhya had done another auction, and now I
had a grand total of seventeen of them glowing and full of mana. But all the
rest sat there empty, and the ones I’d emptied taking out the maw-mouth
were starting to go completely dull. If I didn’t start reviving them soon, they’d
become as useless for storing mana as the kind you buy in bulk online. But I
couldn’t find the time. I was building mana as hard as I possibly could and
cutting every corner possible on my schoolwork, but I was still stuck on the
very same crystal I’d been trying to fill back up since last term. That morning
I’d been attacked in my seminar yet again, and I’d had to empty it completely.

I had gone back to doing sit-ups sooner than any doctor would’ve told me
to, just because the struggle to do them with my aching gut actually made it
easier to build mana. But I was pretty much healed up now, and I couldn’t
even rely on crochet anymore for real mana-building. I just didn’t hate it as



much when I was doing it at night hanging out with Aadhya and Liu. My
friends; my allies. Who were relying on me to help me get them out the doors.

I closed up the box and put it away, and then I went out. It was still an
hour to curfew, but already quiet: no one hangs out in the corridors senior
year. Either they were up in the prime spots in the library, or taking the
chance to go to bed early in the last week or so before the mals were expected
to come back full-force. I went down to Aadhya’s room and tapped on the
door, and when she opened it I said, “Hey, can we go to Liu’s?”

“Sure,” she said, eyeing me, but she didn’t push for details: Aadhya isn’t a
time-waster. She collected her bathroom stuff, so we could go brush teeth
right after, and then together we went to Liu’s room. She was down on our
level, now.

Everyone gets a private room in here, so to squash in each year’s delivery
of freshmen, the rooms are arranged cellblock-style, stacked on top of one
another with a narrow iron walkway outside the upper rooms. But at the end
of term, as the res halls rotate down to their new levels, any empty rooms
disappear and the space gets parceled out to the survivors. Often not in useful
ways. I’ve had a delightfully creepy and useless double-height room since the
start of sophomore year. Liu’s had extended down in this last round, so we
didn’t have to climb up one of the squeaking spiral staircases to see her
anymore.

She let us in and gave each of us our familiars-in-training to hold while we
sat on her bed. I stroked the tiny mouse’s white fur while she sat up in the
palm of my hand nibbling a treat and looking around with bright and
increasingly green eyes. I was still trying hard to name her Chandra, but the
day I’d been thinking of names, Aadhya had said, “You should call her
Precious,” then laughed her head off while I whacked her with a pillow, and
Precious was unfortunately sticking. Mum’s never actually come out and
apologized for saddling me with Galadriel, but I’m reasonably sure she knows
she should be ashamed of herself. Anyway they kept forgetting Chandra and
calling her Precious—all right, to be fair, I kept forgetting it myself—and
pretty soon I was going to have to give up and accept it.



Assuming I was going to have her at all. I stared down at her in my hand
because it was better than looking at their faces, and I said, “I’m falling really
behind on mana.”

I had to tell them. They were counting on me to be able to pull my weight
when it came time for graduation. If I wasn’t going to be able to, they had the
right to back out. They didn’t owe anything to a bunch of freshmen they
hadn’t even met. Liu might have felt she owed me something for Zheng, but I
could be saving just Zheng without laying out a week’s worth of mana I didn’t
actually have saved up, and meanwhile she was breaking her back building
mana for our team herself.

At this rate, I was going to be lucky if I had enough mana for maybe three
medium-power spells, and I didn’t even have any good medium-power spells.
The only really useful spell I’ve got that doesn’t need absolute heaps of mana
is the phase-control spell I got out of Purochana’s book, and it’s not a great
crisis option, since it’s a good five minutes to prep the casting. I’ve used it in a
crisis, but only when I had Orion thoroughly distracting the underlying cause
for those five minutes, and he’s going to be a bit busy come graduation killing
monsters for everyone.

“Zheng told me about Wednesdays,” Liu said quietly, and I looked up. She
didn’t look surprised; actually she looked kind of worried.

“This is your weirdo library session? What’s going on?” Aadhya said, and
Liu said, “It’s her and eight freshmen, and they keep getting hit with major
mals.”

“In the library?” Aadhya said, and then she said, “Wait, this is on top of
that horrible independent study and the three other seminars? Does the school
have it in for you or something?”

We all fell silent. The question answered itself in the asking, really. My
throat felt knotted up right around the tonsils, awful and choking. I hadn’t
even thought about it that way before, but it was obviously true. And that was
worse, so much worse, than just being unlucky.

The Scholomance has been hurting for power almost as much as I have.
It’s not cheap to keep this place working. It’s easy to forget from our
perspective when we’re suffering through this place and getting hit with mals



on a regular basis, but they’d be coming at every last one of us in a continuous
stream, and lots more of them, if it weren’t for all those incredibly powerful
wards on every single air vent and plumbing pipe, and all the highly
improbable artifice that makes sure there are almost none of those openings
in the first place, and despite that we’re all breathing and drinking and bathing
and eating, and all of that takes mana, mana, mana.

Sure, the story is, the enclaves put in some mana, and our parents all put
in some mana if they can afford it, and we put in mana with our work, but we
all know that’s a story. The single biggest source of the school’s mana is us.
We’re all trying to save mana for graduation; everyone’s working on it all the
time. The mana we grudgingly put into our schoolwork and our maintenance
shifts is nothing compared with the amounts we put away for that rainiest of
rainy days. And when the mals tear us apart, of course we grab for all that
nice juicy power we’ve desperately been saving up, and they suck it out of us,
only built up more by all our terror and final agony and struggles to live. The
Scholomance gets the spillover, and then thanks to all those wards, it kills off
a good healthy number of the mals, too, and it all ends up in the school’s
mana stores—where it goes to keep the rest of us luckier ones alive.

So when an enthusiastic hero—read, Orion—shows up and starts saving
lives, and the mals start to starve, the school starts to starve, too. And at the
same time, has more of us alive in here, breathing and drinking et cetera. It’s
all a pyramid scheme, and if there aren’t enough of us on the bottom being
eaten, there’s not enough for the ones at the top.

That’s why we had to go down and fix the cleansing mechanisms in the
graduation hall: all those starving mals down there, waiting in the one place
Orion wasn’t, getting ready to tear the entire graduating class apart because
they hadn’t had enough to eat for the last three years. They were on the verge
of breaking into the rest of the school because they were all so desperate that
they started collectively pounding on the wards at the bottom of the
stairwells.

And Orion—well, Orion’s from the New York enclave, with a power-
sharer on his wrist, and his affinity for combat somehow lets him suck power
out of the mals he kills anyway. They don’t even come after him, because he



has a bottomless supply of mana and an almost equally infinite supply of
fantastic combat spells.

But I don’t. I’m the girl destined to make up for him, but who’s obstinately
kept refusing to become a maleficer and start killing kids by the double
handful, and now I’ve gone the other way entirely. I stopped a maw-mouth
heading for the freshman hall. I helped Orion keep the mals from breaking
into the school. I was down there in the graduation hall with him, helping to
hold up a shield so the senior artificers could fix the cleansing equipment.
And now I’m even copycatting his stupid noble-hero routine one day a week.

Of course the school was going to come after me.
And if the Wednesday mals didn’t work—it would try something else.

And something else after that. The Scholomance isn’t exactly a living thing,
but it isn’t exactly not, either. You can’t put this much mana and this much
thinking into a place without it starting to develop a mind of its own. And
theoretically it’s been built to protect us, so it won’t just start snacking on kids
on its own—not to mention enrollment would drop substantially when that
began happening—but of course it still wants enough mana to keep going; it’s
meant to keep going. And I’ve put myself in the way, so the school is coming
after me, and that means anyone round me is going to be in for it.

“The kids have got to start making mana for you,” Aadhya said.
“They’re just freshmen,” I said, dully. “All eight of them together make

less mana in an hour than I can build in ten minutes.”
“They could reset your dead crystals, though,” Liu said. “You said you

don’t need a lot of mana to wake those up, just a steady stream. They could
each carry one around.”

Liu wasn’t wrong, but that wasn’t actually going to solve the real problem.
“I won’t need the dead crystals. I’m not going to have enough mana to fill my
other empties, at this rate.”

“Then we can trade them,” Aadhya said. “They’re loads better than most
storage. Or you know, I could try building them into the lute—”

“Do you want out?” I said, breaking in, harshly, because I really couldn’t
handle sitting there while they worked through all the options I’d spent the



last three weeks clawing through, trying to find a way out myself, until I’d
realized there wasn’t going to be one for me. There was only the one for them.

Aadhya stopped talking. But Liu didn’t even pause; she just said, “No.”
I swallowed hard. “I don’t think you’ve thought—”

“No,” Liu said, strangely hard, and after a pause, she went on more
quietly, “I used to take Zheng and Min around all day on a leading string
when they were little. At school, if one of the other boys was hurting
something like a frog or a stray kitten, they would stop it and bring the animal
to me, even though they got teased for ‘being girls’ because of it.” She looked
down at Xiao Xing in her hands, stroking her thumb over his head. “No,” she
repeated, softly. “I don’t want out.”

I looked at Aadhya, my feelings in a confused knotted mess: I didn’t know
what I wanted her to say. My practical friend, whose mum had told her it was
a good idea to be decent to losers, and so had been decent to me, all the years
while everyone else treated me like a piece of used kitchen roll no one
wanted to pick up even long enough to put in the bin. I’d liked her because
she was practical, and hard-nosed: she’d always driven a solid hard bargain,
the kind you could believe in, without ever cheating me, even though she’d
more often than not been the only person who would have traded with me.
She hadn’t any reason to care about the freshmen in the library, and she had
choices: she was one of the best practical artificers in our year, with a magical
lute in the finishing stages that was going to be worth something outside, and
not just among students. Any enclaver would’ve gladly snatched her up for a
graduation alliance. That was the smart thing, the practical thing to do, and I
almost wanted her to do it. She’d already taken half a dozen chances on me
that anyone else would have called a bad bet. I didn’t want her to drop me, but
—I couldn’t be the reason she didn’t make it out.

But she only said, “Yeah, no,” almost dismissively. “I’m not a ditcher. We
just need to figure out a way to get you some more mana. Or better yet, get
the school off your back. I don’t get why the Scholomance is pulling this
whole complicated stunt on you. You’re not an enclaver, it’s not like you were
going to have tons of mana anyway, so why is it so into making you spend the
little you’ve got?”



“Unless,” Liu said, and then stopped. We looked over at her; her lips were
pressed together, and she was staring at her hands in her lap, twisted up.
“Unless it’s about—pushing you. The school—”

“Likes maleficers,” Aadhya finished for her.
Liu nodded a little without looking up. And she was absolutely right. That

was surely why the Scholomance had given me that Wednesday session. It
was trying to give me—an easier choice to make. The school wanted me to
have to make the first selfish choice, to save my own mana, instead of saving a
random freshman I didn’t care about. Because then it would be easier for me
to make the second selfish choice after that, and the one after that.

“Yeah,” Aadhya agreed. “The school wants you to go maleficer. What
could you do if you decided to start using malia?”

If you had me make a list of the top ten questions I go to great lengths to
avoid asking myself, that one would have comprehensively covered items one
through nine, and the only reason it wasn’t doing for item ten as well was that
So how do you feel about Orion Lake had quietly crept onto the bottom of it.
But it’s a long way down from the rest. “You don’t want to know,” I said, by
which I meant I don’t want to know.

Aadhya didn’t even slow down. “Well, you’d have to get the malia
somehow—” she was saying thoughtfully.

“That wouldn’t be a problem,” I said through my teeth. She wasn’t wrong
to raise the question, since that’s the top roadblock facing most would-be
maleficers, and the solutions generally involve spending a lot of time on
intimate encounters with entrails and screaming. But my own main concern is
how to avoid accidentally sucking the life force out of everyone around me if
I ever get taken by surprise and instinctively fire off something really
gargantuan. For instance, I’ve got this great spell for razing an entire city to
the ground, which will certainly come in handy if I ever turn into one of those
people who write furious letters to the editor about the architecture of
Cardiff, and I suppose it would do to wipe out any mals on the same floor as
me. Along with all the other people on the same floor as me, but they’d
probably be dead by then, since I’d have drained their mana to cast the spell.



That did finally stop her; she and Liu both eyed me a little dubiously.
“Well, that wasn’t creepy and ominous at all,” Aadhya said after a moment.
“Okay, I vote for you not turning maleficer.”

Liu put up an emphatic hand to agree. I let a choked snort of laughter
come out and put up my hand. “I vote no, too!”

“I’m even going to go out on a limb here and say that pretty much
everyone else in the school will be right there with us,” Aadhya said. “We
could ask people to chip in for you.”

I stared at her. “Hey, everybody, it turns out El is some kind of mana-
sucking vampire queen, we should all give her some mana so she doesn’t drain
us dry.”

Aadhya scrunched up her mouth. “Hmm.”
“We don’t need to ask everyone to chip in for you,” Liu said slowly. “We

could just ask one person—if it’s Chloe.”
I hunched my shoulders forward and didn’t say anything. That wasn’t a

terrible idea. It might even work. That was why I didn’t like it. It had been
almost a month since we’d gone down to the graduation hall, and I still
remembered what it had been like with a New York power-sharer on my
wrist, all that mana right in front of me like getting to plunge my head into a
bottomless well and drink cold water in careless gulps. I didn’t trust how
much I’d liked it. How easy it had been to get used to it.

“You think she’ll say no?” Liu said, and I looked up: she was studying me.
“That’s not…” I trailed off and then blew out a sigh. “She offered me a

spot.”
“In an alliance?” Aadhya said.
“In New York,” I said, which only means one thing in here: an enclave

spot, a guaranteed enclave spot. For most people, if you’re lucky enough to
get picked by an enclaver to join their alliance, it means their enclave will
look at you, maybe give you a job. Usually four hundred kids graduate each
year. Maybe forty enclave spots open up worldwide, and more than half of
them will go to top adult wizards who’ve earned them with decades of work.
A guarantee of one of those spots, fresh out of school, is a prize even if you



weren’t talking about the single most powerful enclave in the world. Aadhya
and Liu were both gawking at me. “They’re freaked out over Orion.”

“After you’ve only been dating two months?” Liu said.
“We’re not dating!”
Aadhya made a dramatic show of rolling her eyes heavenwards. “After

you’ve been doing whatever you’re doing that is not dating but totally looks
like dating to everyone else, for only two months.”

“Thanks ever so,” I said, dryly. “As far as I can tell, they’re shocked that
he’s talking to another human being at all.”

“To be fair, you’re the only person I’ve ever met who’d come up with the
idea of being wildly rude and hostile to the guy who saved your life twenty
times,” Aadhya said.

I glared at her. “Thirteen times! And I’ve saved his life at least twice.”
“Catch up already, girl,” she said, unrepentantly.

It’s not that I’d rather have had Aadhya and Liu ditch me to face the rest of
my school career alone and desperate instead of asking Chloe Rasmussen for
help, but I had definitely managed not to see asking her as an option. I wasn’t
actually sure what she’d say. I’d turned down her offer of a guaranteed place
in New York, after all. I was still sullen about having to do it. I’d spent the
better part of my life carefully planning out my campaign for an enclave spot.
It had been a really comforting plan that ended in the fantasy of me having a
nice happy long life in a safe and luxurious enclave with endless mana at my
fingertips like all the other enclave kids, and by making sure the campaign
was long and involved and never quite completed successfully, I’d neatly
avoided having to think about how I didn’t really want to be an enclaver at all.

Even Chloe—she’s a decent sort, and better than that if I’m being fair.
When the enclave kids started courting me last term—because of Orion—
they all behaved as though they were doing me a generous favor by so much
as talking to me. All it got them was my violent and unstrategic rudeness in



their faces, so they stopped talking to me at all. But Chloe stuck it out. She’s
already asked to sit with us ten times this year, and she hasn’t brought any
tagalongs with her. I don’t know that I’d have bent my neck the way she did,
apologizing to me and even asking to be friends after I bit her head off. I’m
not sorry for doing the biting, I had more than enough cause, but I still don’t
know that I’d have had the grace.

Oh, who am I lying to? My supply of grace wouldn’t overflow an acorn
cap.

But Chloe’s still an enclaver. And not like Orion. All the New York kids
have a power-sharer on their wrists that lets them exchange mana and pull
from their shared storage, but Orion’s is one-way, going in. Because
otherwise, he’ll just pull as much mana as he needs to kill the nearest mal and
save other kids. It’s so much of an instinct for him that he can’t actually stop
himself. So the son of the future Domina of New York doesn’t get access to
the shared mana pool, although he sure gets to contribute, not to mention
come running if any of them get into danger.

Chloe’s one of the kids who gets the benefit of all that power he puts in.
She doesn’t need to budget her spells. She throws up a shield anytime she
feels anxious. If a mal jumps her, maybe she has to keep her head and figure
out what spell to use on it, but she doesn’t have to worry that she can’t afford
to cast it. When she came in as a freshman, on top of bringing in a bag of the
most useful magical items that wizardry can devise, she inherited a massive
chest crammed full by more than a century’s worth of other kids from New
York, each of them bringing in a new set of useful items and making others
in here—items they can afford to leave behind, because when they get out,
they’re going home to one of the richest enclaves in the world. And they do
get out, because they’re the worst targets in the room when we get dumped
into the graduation hall, and there’s lots of tasty losers available to be the
cannon fodder.

I can’t forget that whenever I’m with her. Or more honestly, I do forget it
after a bit, and I don’t want to. I find myself wishing she’d just gone on being
awful, so I could go on being awful back. It feels unfair for her to get to have
real friends, the kind of friends who don’t care about how rich you are and



how much mana you have, and also have all the mana and the money and the
eager hovering sycophants on top of it. But whenever I really get into that
mean sour squirrely thought, I immediately get the sensation of Mum looking
at me with all this love and sympathy, and I feel like an earthworm. So
hanging about with Chloe is a constant roller coaster from guarded to relaxed
to resentful to earthworm and back again.

And now I had to ask her to let me in on the mana pool, because if I
didn’t, I’d be laying out Aadhya and Liu and all the freshmen in the library,
and possibly everyone else in the school if I ever do screw up one fine
morning when a rhysolite tries to dissolve my bones or a magma slug squirms
up the furnace vent and launches itself at my head. I’d have even less excuse
for being resentful of her than I’ve already got. I half wanted her to say no.

“Wait—do you mean you’ll take the spot?” she said instead, sounding
hopeful about it, as if I was meant to think that it was on perpetual offer, and
I could claim myself a place in New York anytime I liked.

“No,” I said, warily. I’d come to her room—I didn’t want eavesdroppers
for this conversation—and the whole place made me feel twitchy. She had
one of the rooms above the bathrooms, where the opening to the void is
overhead instead of out one wall. On the bright side, you never need to worry
about falling out. On the downside, you’ve got an endless void over your head.
She’d dealt with that by putting up a canopy of opaque cloth with just one
spot open over the desk. Anything at all could have been hiding above it or in
the folds.

She’d also kept all the standard-issue wooden furniture that I’d almost
immediately replaced with thin wall-mounted shelves that didn’t provide loads
of dark corners. She even had two half-empty bookcases: her room had just
gone double-width in the last reshuffle, which I could tell because she had a
bright cheerful mural painted over the wall alongside the bed and was still
working on continuing it onto the new space. It wasn’t an ordinary painting,
either; I could feel mana coming off it. She’d probably imbued the paint with
protective spells in alchemy lab. Even so, I kept my back to the door and
didn’t come far into the room. She was snuggled in doing some reading on
one of three luxuriously plush beanbag chairs amid a pile of other cushions,



and I didn’t trust a single one of them. My hands were itching to pull her up
out of the heap before it suddenly swallowed her whole or something. “I’m
just asking to borrow mana. I’m running out.”

“Really?” she said dubiously, like that was an extraordinary thing to
imagine. “Are you feeling okay?”

“It’s not mana drain or a pipesucker,” I said shortly. “I’m using it. I’ve got
three seminars, a double independent study, and once a week I’m stuck with
eight freshmen in a room and things try to eat them.”

Chloe’s eyes were all but popping before I’d finished. “Oh my God, are
you nuts? A double independent study? Are you making a last-ditch run for
valedictorian? Why would you even do that to yourself?”

“The school’s doing it to me,” I said, which she didn’t want to believe was
possible, so I spent the next ten minutes standing there with metaphorical cap
in hand while she earnestly informed me that the fundamental intent of the
Scholomance was the shelter and protection of wizard children, and the
school couldn’t act contrary to that intent, as if it didn’t toss half of us to the
wolves on a regular basis, and also that the school couldn’t violate its standard
procedures, which it also did on a regular basis, and after she had laid out
those lines of argument, she finally wound up triumphantly at, “And why on
earth would it be out to get you?”

I really didn’t want to answer that question, and I was already sick of
hearing her trot out the enclave party line. “Just forget I asked,” I said, and
turned to go; she was going to turn me down anyway.

“What? No, El, wait, that’s not—” she said, and even scrambled up out of
the heap to come after me. “Seriously, wait, I’m not saying no! I’m just—”

and I gritted my teeth and turned round to tell her that if she wasn’t saying no,
she could get on with saying yes, or else stop wasting my time, except instead
what I did was grab her arm and yank her sideways onto the bed with me as
the cushions did have a go at swallowing her whole, and me along with her.
Her own beanbag chair had split open along one seam to let out a gigantic
slick greyish tongue that swiped across the floor towards us. It moved horribly
fast, like a slug on a mission, and after we got out of the way, it kept going
and swiped over the doorway, leaving every inch of the metal coated and



glistening with some kind of thick gelatinous slime that I was confident we
didn’t want to touch.

I always keep my one decent knife on me; I already had it out and was
slicing fast through all the canopy ties along the wall over the bed, so I could
yank it down to envelop the slug-tongue. That bought us a moment, but not a
very long one, since the fabric almost immediately started to hiss and smoke:
yes, the slime was bad. I didn’t recognize this particular variety of mal, but it
was the kind that’s smart enough to play a very long game, waiting until it can
take a victim without sparking suspicion. The dangerous kind. A glistening
tip was already wriggling out through the first dissolving hole in the canopy,
but Chloe had got past her own instinctive shriek and was grabbing a pot of
paint from the rack at the foot of the bed; she threw the paint over it. A
gargling noise of angry protest came from under the disintegrating canopy,
and it rose to a higher pitch when she threw on another pot: red and yellow
streaming together over the silky fabric, staining through and running off in
rivulets, coating the thrashing tongue.

The mal pulled the tongue back in through the hole and back under the
canopy, making a lot of ugly squishing and gurgling noises underneath that
unfortunately sounded less like death throes than a mild attack of indigestion.
“Come on, quick,” Chloe said, grabbing another pot of paint and jerking her
head towards the door, but halfway there, we ran out of time; there was a
large gulping noise and the whole canopy, paint and all, was sucked into the
slit of the beanbag chair with a slurp of tongue, and then the whole pile of
beanbags and cushions heaved itself up together and came at us in a humping
rush.

There was no chance Chloe had been stupid enough to inherit that entire
pile and never even move the pillows apart over the course of the past three-
odd years, so that meant it was the kind of maleficaria that can animate
wizard possessions, and it was also the kind of maleficaria that had a
corporeal flesh-digesting body of its own—each of which is a significant
branching on everyone’s favorite cladogram from Maleficaria Studies,
meaning it was actually two separate mals that had formed some kind of
wonderful symbiotic relationship. Trying to take out two mals at once when



you don’t know what either of them are isn’t what you’d call easy. The only
way to do it, at speed, was something grandiose—the kind of thing that would
eat a heap of the mana I had left, and if I blew it all on Chloe and she didn’t
pay me back, I’d be saving her, choosing her, over everyone else who needed
me.

Or I could just have—waited. Chloe had thrown the paint over the slime
to neutralize it, and she was already sliding the door open. The cushion-
monster was lumping straight towards her back: it would get her before she
got ten steps onto the walkway. If I held back until it caught her, I’d be able
to make it out the other way and get clear. She wasn’t even looking to see if I
was behind her. She hadn’t looked back when we’d been in the stairwell,
either, fighting together to try and keep the argonet from getting into the
school. She’d taken off to save her own skin. Aadhya and Liu had stayed with
me, but she’d abandoned us. And she’d just spent ten minutes telling me at
length that I was making up reasons why I needed mana, which is to say
reasons why she shouldn’t feel bad about saying no to me.

“Get out of the way!” I said through my teeth, and pointed at the cushion
beast. Chloe darted a look back that went wide when she saw the thing
coming at her. She gave a terrific heave and shoved the door and flung herself
out into the hall even as it slid open, where she collided bodily with Orion,
who was already off-balance because he’d been holding on to the door handle
from the other side. She took him down to the floor beneath her in a heap.

The spell I used was a really terrific higher-level working I’d just learned
in my Myrddin class. It had taken me a solid week to plow through the
antique Welsh manuscript—time enlivened by the many lavish illustrations of
the way it had been used by a tidy-minded alchemist maleficer to flay the skin
off hapless victims, neatly drain their blood, pop the organs into separate
containers, and then the flesh into a desiccated heap, leaving behind the
cleaned bones.

The incantation did a remarkable job of whipping off the outer layer of
cushion covers and beanbag chair casings, sending them into a beautifully
folded pile that might have come straight from a laundry. That step briefly
exposed a glowing translucent sac full of tongue and undigested canopy and,



gruesomely, a half-digested person. Thankfully the face was already
unrecognizable, even before the sac shredded into a stack of inch-wide strips
of some vellum-like material, and dumped the whole tongue out flopping
onto the floor. The tongue proceeded to roll up into a very thin spongy mat, a
huge puddle of viscous fluid squeezing out of it, which after a moment of
alarming uncertainty and struggle finally separated into three different liquids:
one ectoplasmic, one clear, and one sort of jelly-pinkish, which all leapt like
graceful fountains into the emptied paint cans on the floor. The excess more
or less reluctantly went down the drain in the middle of the room.

Orion was trying to fight his way back up, hampered because Chloe was
frozen not halfway off him, staring open-mouthed at the elaborate
dismemberment. To be fair to her, it was more of a show than I’m letting on.
When I cast spells, there are usually copious side manifestations, generally
designed to convey to anyone watching that they should probably be fleeing in
terror or alternatively dropping to their knees and doing homage. The whole
dismemberment happened in roughly the span of half a minute, and there was
a lot of futile but violent thrashing involved, along with wailing disembodied
shrieks and gusting flares of phosphorescence as the apparition bit went.
After it was all over, everything was left neatly lined up in a row, exactly like
the supply shop of an alchemist maleficer’s dreams. The remnants of the last
victim had also separated themselves tidily into cleaned bones, flesh, and
scraps of skin, in line with the bits of mal. The skull was sitting atop the pile
of bones with thin trails of smoke coming out of the sockets. And as the
finishing touch, the spongy roll that had been the tongue wrapped itself into a
square of the fallen canopy, and another strip of canopy tore away and tied a
little bow around it before it rolled into the line.

I’d jumped on a chair to get clear of the various gushing fluids, and the
last wafting clouds of phosphorescent smoke were winding around me. My
mana crystal was glowing with the power I’d had to pull, but I wasn’t casting a
shadow, which meant I was probably glowing myself. “Oh my God?” Chloe
said, a little faintly, sort of like a question, frozen in place.

“Hey, can you get off?” Orion said, sounding a bit squashed.



OceanofPDF.com



“J ust so you know, I was going to say yes anyway,” Chloe said miserably,
like she didn’t think I’d ever believe her, as she handed me the power-

sharer. “Really, El.”
“I know you were,” I said grimly, taking it, but her expression didn’t

change; probably my tone didn’t sound very encouraging. So I added, “If you
were going to say no, it wouldn’t have jumped us,” a little pointedly, because
she should have figured that much out by then. A mal smart enough to have
been quietly lurking in her floor pillows—floor pillows she’d probably
inherited from a previous New York enclaver—for years and years,
conserving its energy and slurping up anyone other than her who was unlucky
enough to be left alone in her room—which is the kind of thing enclavers do,



invite friends over for a study group after dinner with the understanding that
one of them is going to arrive first and make sure the room is all right—hadn’t
just leapt at us because it suddenly lost all self-control. It had done it because
Chloe was about to get on board with me, meaning that especially delicious
me was about to become a much harder target.

Chloe frowned, but she’s not dim, and she’d just had her face shoved in it
very firmly, so once she got over the hump of her basic programming, she
worked through the implications fast enough that the associated emotions
traveled over her face in quick succession. It meant I hadn’t been making
everything up. The school really was out to get me, and the mals were, too; I
really was as powerful as that implied—her eyes darted over to the still-
standing array of grotesque ingredients as that hit—and anyone hanging
round me was almost certainly asking to be in the line of fire.

When she got there, I said, “I have a bunch of storage crystals. I’ll just fill
them up and then give this back to you.”

She didn’t say anything for a moment; she was still looking at the
ingredients on the floor, and then she said, slowly, “You’re strict mana. Is that
—because—” She didn’t go on, but that was because she didn’t have to. Like I
said, she’s not dim. Then she looked at me and raised her chin a bit and said
in a high voice, like she was declaring it to the world and not just me, “Keep
it. You might need more.” I was already fighting down the violent urge to
scowl at her like a monster of ingratitude when she added tentatively, “Would
you—do Aadhya and Liu need them?”

Which made it a request to join our alliance.
I couldn’t even just blurt out a flat unthinking no, because I couldn’t give

her an answer to that question without talking to Aadhya and Liu. That meant
that I’d have too much time to recognize that the obvious and sensible and
even fair answer was yes.

I didn’t want to be allied with Chloe Rasmussen. I didn’t want to be one of
the lucky ones whose alliance gets scooped up with enormous condescension
by some enclaver with mana and friends and a chestful of useful things to
spare, which is of course the goal that most people are actively aiming for
when they put together a team without an enclaver already in it. Even if that



wasn’t what Chloe meant or what we meant, that’s what everyone would think
it was. And after all, they’d be right; we’d get Chloe out, and Chloe’s mana
would get us out, and we’d be leaving other people behind who didn’t stand a
chance.

But she had a right to ask, when I was here asking for her help to start
with, and she’d had the guts to ask, when instead she could just have got clear
after paying me back for saving her from the attack that only happened
because she’d been willing to help me in return for nothing at all. She was
offering more than fair value, even if it wasn’t fair that she had it to offer, and
if I still wanted to say no to her despite all of that, Aadhya and Liu had the
right to tell me I was being a colossal twat.

“I’ll talk to them,” I muttered ungraciously, and as you would expect, the
end result was that three days later I had to add Chloe’s name on the wall near
the girls’ bathroom, where we had written up our alliances. Liu also put her
name on the Chinese translation next to me, the power-sharer on her wrist
gleaming and shiny, and then we all went to breakfast together and I had to
hear at least twenty bazillion people congratulating us, where by “us” I mean
me, Aadhya, and Liu, for having scored Chloe. We hadn’t got nearly as many
congratulations when we’d written ourselves up near the end of last term,
even though we’d been one of the first alliances to go on the wall.

To cap it off, Orion didn’t congratulate me exactly, but he said, “I’m glad
you and Chloe have become friends,” in an alarmingly hopeful way that was
very clearly only one unfortunate literature assignment away from turning into
come live with me and be my love, optionally etched onto metal with little
hearts around it.

“I’ve got to get to class,” I said, and escaped to the comparative safety of
my independent study down in the bowels of the school, where the worst
thing that was going to leap at me with devouring attention was a flesh-eating
monster.

In a month of school, I’d so far translated a grand total of four additional
pages out of the Golden Stone sutras. They contained a single three-line spell
in Vedic Sanskrit whose purpose I couldn’t even guess at from the start. It had
seven words I’d never seen before which all had multiple translation options.



The rest of the four pages was a commentary in medieval Arabic explaining
at length why it was just fine to use the Sanskrit spell even though it might
seem haram because of the wine used in the casting process. The
commentary mostly avoided anything useful like explaining what the spell did
that was so great and how the alcohol was meant to be used. Except it didn’t
completely avoid anything useful, so I had to dig through the whole frothing
thing for the handful of nuggets.

That morning I finally figured out which of the ninety-seven possible
meanings went together, and reached the conclusion that the spell was for
tapping into a distant source of water and purifying it—something of
extremely great interest to people living in a desert and much less so to
someone living in an enchanted school equipped with functional if antiquated
plumbing. I was just glaring at my finished and useless three-line translation
when the furnace vent rattled at my back and a whirling mass of fur and
claws and teeth leapt out onto me, exactly as anticipated.

And then it promptly bounced off the shield that I didn’t even have to cast,
because Aadhya’s shield holder on my chest had automatically pulled mana
from the power-sharer to block the physical contact. Even as I whirled round,
the leskit went skidding over the floor into the corner and twisted itself up on
its twelve feet. It was odds-on which of us was more surprised, but it
recovered quicker; it came at me again and stopped just short to give the
shield an experimental swipe, striking a cloud of bright orangey sparks off it.

My normal strategy in a situation like this would have been to distract and
run. But by then I could hear screams and more hissing coming from the
ventilation: there was a pack of them in the workshop. Leskits don’t usually
hunt individually. Mine opened its toothy maw and emitted a loud krrk krrk
krrk noise like an angry ostrich—I’ve never heard an angry ostrich but it’s the
noise I’d imagine coming from one—and there was some scrabbling in the
vent and another one’s head came poking out. It dropped down and the two
of them discussed in skrrks for a moment and then charged me together,
clawing, scraping more deep flaring gouges in the shield.

I stared at them from behind it, and then I slowly said, “Exstirpem has
pestes ex oculis, ex auribus, e facie mea funditus,” which was a slight variation



on an imperial Roman spell meant to eradicate a host of annoyances that are
trying to get at you but are temporarily held back—such as, for instance, a
mob of angry locals besieging your evil tower of wizardry and torture. I
waved my arm in a broad sweeping-away-vermin gesture at the leskits, who
promptly disintegrated, along I presume with all their pals inside the
workshop, since the screaming I could hear filtering in through the vent died
off into a vaguely confused silence.

For another moment I went on staring at what were now two little piles of
ash on the floor, then for lack of anything else to do I slowly sat back down at
my desk and went back to work. There wasn’t any reason for me to go
running out into the corridor, and still twenty minutes left before the bell.
After a few minutes, the door—which had done its slamming routine again
just a few minutes before the leskits made their appearance—slid back open
in what I possibly imagined was a disappointed way. It didn’t even bang all
that loudly.

I spent the rest of the period making a clean copy of the original Sanskrit
spell, along with a formal spell commentary of my own, including word-for-
word translations of the spell into modern Sanskrit and English to help convey
meaning, with several possible variations in connotation, an analysis of the
Arabic commentary, and notes on the potential usage. It was the kind of
stupid flashy work that you only do if you are trying for valedictorian, or
eventual journal publication, which is a less violently competitive approach to
getting post-graduation enclave interest.

I didn’t need to do any of that. There wasn’t an assignment I had to hand
in, and I certainly didn’t need to do the work to cast the spell. In fact, I
could’ve done that as soon as I’d worked out the pronunciation. Except, of
course, that if I ever took the risk of casting a spell without knowing for sure
what it was meant to do, it would definitely turn out to be meant to do a lot of
murder.

I did all of that silly make-work because I didn’t want to start on a new
section. More accurately, I didn’t want to have the time to start on a new
section. Obviously I didn’t have any regrets about spending New York’s mana
on wiping out a pack of leskits, saving my own skin in the process, but I



wasn’t going to let myself feel happy about it. I wasn’t going to be grateful,
and I very much wasn’t going to get used to it, only that was hopeless
nonsense; I was already getting used to it. My shoulders wouldn’t stay tense,
and I kept forgetting to check the vent behind me, as if it wasn’t the most
important thing in the room.

And then at the bell, I went out into the corridor and the crowd of
sophomore artificers came spilling out of the workshop, talking excitedly
about what had happened to the leskits, and I overheard one of them saying,
shrugging, “Comment il les a eus comme ça? J’en ai aucune idée. Putain, j’étais
sûr qu’il allait crever,” and I went to my Myrddin seminar in a cloud of
outrage as I realized Orion had been in there, and my leskit-clearing stunt had
somehow saved his neck, so I did have to be happy I’d been able to do it, and
also what had he even been doing down in the workshop with a bunch of
sophomores?

“Were you lurking outside my classroom door or something?” I demanded
at lunch, as we got in line.

“No!” he said, but he also didn’t offer a remotely convincing explanation.
“I just…I had a feeling” was what he served up, and hunched away from me
looking so sour and grouchy that I almost wanted to let him off the hook,
except my wanting that was so horribly wrong that I didn’t let myself.

“A feeling like you needed to get your arse saved from a pack of leskits?”
I said sweetly instead. “My count is up to four now, isn’t it?”

“I didn’t need to be saved! There were only eight of them, I could’ve taken
them,” he snapped at me, and he had the nerve to sound actually annoyed,
which annoyed me.

“That’s not what I heard about it,” I said, “and if you don’t like getting
rescued in turn, you haven’t got a leg to stand on, have you?”

I took my tray and stalked away across the cafeteria to the table Liu was
holding. Orion slunk after me and sat down next to me with both of us still
mad—you don’t break up a table in here over anything as minor as a violent
quarrel—and we both steamed away in silence for the entire meal. We
cleared our trays and walked out of the cafeteria at what I thought was meant
to be pointedly different times, since he seemed to be in a rush to get out



ahead of me, so I slowed down, and when I came out, I spotted him talking to
Magnus just outside the doors, and a moment later Magnus held out his hand
and I realized Orion was asking him for mana.

“You bag of jumbled screws, you could’ve said you were running low,” I
said, after giving him a swat across the back of the head when I caught him
down the corridor, just before the stairs. “Also, going after mals when you’re
low to try and make up for it is even more stupid than your usual line, which
is saying something.”

“What? No! I wasn’t—” Orion started, and then he turned round and
caught my hard glare and paused, and then looked awkward and said, “Oh,”
like he’d just noticed that was in fact exactly what he’d been doing.

“Yes, oh,” I said. “You’re entitled to a fair share of the New York mana!
You’ve probably put in loads more than your fair share just this past week.”

“I haven’t,” Orion said shortly. “I haven’t been putting anything in at all.”
“What?” I stared at him.
“I haven’t taken out any mals this whole month,” Orion said. “The only

ones I’ve even seen are the ones I’ve seen you taking out.”
If you can believe it, there was even still a faint accusatory tone in there,

but I ignored it in favor of gawping at him. “Are you telling me you haven’t
saved anyone all term? Why haven’t I been hearing howls of death and
dismay all round the place?”

“There aren’t any!” he said. “They’re all lying low. I think we wiped out
too many of them down in the graduation hall,” as if the words too many had
any business taking up room in that sentence, “and the ones left are still
mostly in hiding. I’ve been asking people, but almost nobody’s been seeing
mals at all.”

I can’t actually coherently describe the level of indignation I experienced.
It was one thing for the school to be out to get me, which I think all of us
secretly feel is the case from the moment we arrive, and another for the
school to be out to get only me, to the exclusion of literally everyone else,
including even Orion, even though the school’s hunger was really his fault in
the first place. Although I suppose it was getting him by keeping mals away



from him. “What do you have Wednesdays after work period?” I demanded,
when I could get words out past the incoherent rage.

“My senior alchemy seminar,” he said: four levels down from the library.
So he couldn’t come up and give me a hand even if he wanted to, as he
apparently very much did.

“What are your first periods?”
“Chinese and maths.” As far away from the workshop level as a senior

class could get.
“I hate everything,” I said passionately.

“The rest of New York is going to say something if this keeps going,” Chloe
said unhappily, perched on Liu’s bed cross-legged with her own mouse
cupped in her hands. She’d named him Mistoffeles because he had a single
black spot at his throat like a bow tie, which had started looking much more
like a bow tie just in the week she’d been holding him. He was also already
doing things for her: just yesterday he’d hopped out of her hands and run
scampering off into the drain and then come back a few minutes later and
offered her a little scrap of only slightly gnawed-on ambergris he’d somehow
found down there.

It irritated me: I’d been working on Precious for more than a month and a
half now, giving her mana treats and trying to give her instructions, and she
still wasn’t doing much but accepting the treats as her due and sitting there on
my hand graciously permitting me to pet her. “Shouldn’t you at least be able
to turn invisible or something by now?” I’d told her in a grumble under my
breath before tipping her back into Liu’s cage. She just ignored me. Even
Aadhya had been able to take her mouse Pinky permanently back to her
room by now, where she’d built him a massive and elaborate enclosure full of
wheels and tunnels that kept getting expanded up the wall. “It just takes time
sometimes,” Liu told me, very tactfully, but even she was getting a faintly
doubtful expression as the weeks crept on.



Of course, I still wouldn’t have given up a single minute of getting to
cuddle Precious even if I could have had them all back a hundredfold in study
time. She was so alive and real, her soft fur and her moving lungs and the tiny
beat of her heart; she didn’t belong to the Scholomance. She was a part of the
world outside, the world I sometimes found myself thinking maybe only
existed in the dreams I had of it once in a while. We’d been in the
Scholomance for three years, one month, two weeks, and five days.

And in that last one month, two weeks, and five days, nobody but me or
the me-adjacent had been attacked by a single mal, as far as we could double-
check without making people suspicious. People hadn’t realized yet only
because some of the attacks had spilled over into the workshop, which was on
the other side of my independent study room, and also it was still early
enough in the year that everyone separately thought they were just getting
lucky.

“But the other New York kids are going to notice the mana pool getting
low,” Chloe said. “Magnus was already asking me the other day if I’d been
doing any major workings. I’ve got a right to share power with my allies, but
not to let them take it all.”

“We’re all putting as much as we can back,” Aadhya said. “And there’re
seven seniors from New York. You have to be putting in loads yourselves.
How low is the pool going to get?”

“Well,” Chloe said, in an odd, awkward way, darting a look at me, and
then she said haltingly, “We don’t really—I mean—”

“You don’t build mana at all,” I said flatly, from the corner, as I instantly
realized what she wasn’t saying. “None of you ever put any mana in the
enclave pool, because Orion was putting in enough for all of you.”

Chloe bit her lip and avoided our eyes; Aadhya and Liu were both staring
at her, shocked. Everyone’s got to build mana in here. Even enclave kids.
Their big advantage is more time, better conditions, people watching their
backs and doing homework for them and giving them little presents of mana
and all the other things that the rest of us have to spend mana to get. They all
have their own efficient mana stores and power-sharers. So by the time they
get to senior year, they’re all way ahead. But never having to build mana at all



—never having to do sit-ups or struggle through making some horrible doily,
because all of them were just coasting on Orion’s back—

And he had to beg mana from them when he started to run out.
Chloe didn’t raise her head, and there was color in her cheeks. Mistoffeles

made a little anxious chirping noise in her hands. She probably hadn’t even
thought about it since freshman year. The way I already wasn’t thinking about
it, day-to-day. And I’d sniped at Orion for needing help, after killing monsters
with the mana he’d built up over three years of risking his life.

“So what?” Orion said, and sounded like he meant it.
I hadn’t been near his room since last term; I was doing my best to avoid

being alone with him at all these days. But I’d put Precious down and walked
out of Liu’s room and straight down the corridor to his, without saying
another word to Chloe. Orion was there, busy failing to do his alchemy
homework, judging by the total blankness of the lab worksheet on his desk.
He let me in so nervously that I almost stopped being angry long enough to
reconsider being there, but despite him and his mostly futile attempts at
straightening up his piles of dirty laundry and books, anger won. It usually
does, for me.

I might as well not have bothered, for all he cared when I did tell him. I
stared at him, and he stared back. It wasn’t even just him being happy to help
the useless wankers out; he sounded like he didn’t understand why I was
bothering to mention this odd piece of irrelevant information.

“It’s your mana,” I said through my teeth. “It’s all your mana. Do you get
it, Lake? The whole parasitic lot of them have been clinging on your back for
three years and change, never putting in a minute’s worth of effort themselves
—”

“I don’t care!” he said. “There’s always more. There’s always been more,”
he added, and that did come with an emotion, only it was flat-out whinging.



“I’m sorry, are you bored?” I snarled at him. “Are you missing the good
fun of saving people’s lives six times a day, the regular dose of adoration?”

“I miss the mana!” he yelled at me.
“So take it back!” I said, and yanked the power-sharer off my wrist and

shoved it at him. “Take all of it back! You want more mana, it’s yours, it’s all
yours, they haven’t a right to a single drop.”

He stared down at the power-sharer, a half-hungry expression flitting over
his face, then he shook his head hard with a jerk. “No!” he said, and shoved
his hands in his hair, which hadn’t grown back long enough yet to support the
drama of the gesture, and muttered, “I don’t know what to do with myself,”
plaintively.

“I know what to do with you,” I said, by which I meant kicking him into
next week where maybe he’d have got over himself, only he actually had the
nerve to say, “Yeah?” in a challenging, pretending-to-be-suave double-
entendre sort of way that lasted only long enough for him to hear it coming
out of his own mouth, at which point he went red and embarrassed and then
darted a look around the room with nobody but us in it and turned even more
red, and I went out of the place like a shot and ran straight back to Liu’s just
to escape.

Where I came back in with all of them still sitting there and the power-
sharer still in my hand. Chloe jerked her head up and looked at me anxiously.
But as far as I was concerned, she could discuss it with Orion herself if she
wanted to know what he thought about it. “So what now?” I said, holding it
out to her instead. “You want out?”

“No!” Chloe said, and then Aadhya actually hauled a book out of her
school bag, the thick kind we call larva-killers, and threw it at me with
enough intent behind it that I had to jump aside or it would’ve nailed me in
the bum.

“Stop it!” she said. “I think that’s like the third time you’ve asked to be
ditched. You’re like one of those puffer fish, the second anyone touches you a
little wrong you go all bwoomp,” she illustrated with her hands, “trying to
make them let go. We’ll let you know, how’s that?”



I put the power-sharer back on more or less sullenly—let’s be honest,
more—and sat back down on the floor with my arms wrapped round my
knees. Liu said after a moment, “So the real problem isn’t that you’re using
mana. The problem is that Orion’s not putting any in.”

“Yes, all we need to do is find a surefire way to lure him some mals,” I
muttered. “If only we had a bunch of tasty adolescent wizards all in the same
place. Oh, wait.”

“I’ve got more things to throw over here,” Aadhya said, waving another
deadly book—this one had some actual suspicious splotches on its cover—
threateningly.

“Maybe we could build a honeypot, like they do for construction sites?”
Chloe said.

“Like who does for what?” Aadhya said, and Chloe looked around like she
expected me or Liu to be any less confused.

“A honeypot?” she said, more tentatively. “Is there another word for it?
You know, when there’s a major project for a circle of wizards, and they’re
going to be working for a long time, days, and you don’t want mals to be
coming for them? So you have to lure all the nearby mals out and clean them
up, like the week before? New York used one for the Tri-State Gateway
expansion a couple of years back.”

It certainly sounded brilliant, but only in the sense that it was clearly too
good to be true. “If you can lure them places, why wouldn’t you do it all the
time?” I said. “Just stick one of these honeypots in the middle of a trap, and
no more mals around ever.”

“You’ve still got to do something with them!” Chloe said. “What kind of
trap is going to hold a thousand giant mals? We had to hire a team of three
hundred guards just for the one week.” That was starting to sound a bit more
plausible, and worth considering, and then she added, “Anyway, you can’t just
keep a honeypot going all the time, it’s too expensive to run.”

We all stared at her. She stared back. “It’s too expensive,” I said pointedly.
“For New York.” I’d seen Orion toss fistfuls of mana-infused diamond dust
into his homework assignment potions like it was all-purpose flour. He didn’t
even bother to sweep up the leavings from his lab bench afterwards.



Chloe bit her lip, but then Liu said, “But it can’t be that hard to lure mals.
They want to come for us anyway, you’re just reinforcing their existing
desire.”

“Oh, hey,” Aadhya said abruptly. “How far away did you lure mals
from?”

“We covered all of Gramercy Park and one block out in each direction,”
Chloe said, which meant nothing to me, but Aadhya was nodding.

“Yeah, okay,” she said. “Any artifice is going to be crazy expensive to run
when you try to push the effect out over six city blocks. But we don’t want to
lure all the mals in the school.” We very much didn’t; in fact we all cringed
instinctively just because she’d said it out loud. “We just want a few of them
for Orion.” She rummaged round in her bag and dug out a copy of the
blueprints that she must have made at some point in her career: artificers
often get assigned to do detailed studies of the school, since it helps reinforce
the workings. “Here.” She pointed to a spot on the first floor. “There’s a major
pipe junction here running through the workshop wall. If we build a honeypot
and set it next to the nearest drain and run it from there, I bet we’ll catch him
plenty of mals even if we only cover a two-foot radius.”

“Brilliant,” I said. “So how does one of these honeypots work?”
We all looked at Chloe. “Um, there’s a container—you need to put in

some kind of bait, and then the artifice blows the scent out…” She trailed off
unspecifically and shrugged. “I’m sorry, I only know about it because my
mom had to do the presentation for the requisition process.”

“The requisition process,” I said even more pointedly, because anything
that New York bothered to make you requisition had to be insanely
complicated on top of expensive.

But Aadhya was waving it away. “That’s enough to go on. Liu’s right, it
can’t be that hard. You just brew up some bait that smells like teenage wizard,
and I’ll see what I can come up with to disperse it.”

Chloe was nodding. “How fast do you think you can do it?” she asked
anxiously.

“No clue,” Aadhya said, with a shrug.



“And in the meantime, all of New York has to start building mana,” Liu
said. “If Orion can’t put in mana anymore, and none of you are, you’re going
to run out sooner or later anyway. You don’t want to find out that the
honeypot doesn’t work in three months, just when it’s time to start doing
obstacle-course runs.”

“But if I tell everyone that we have to start putting in mana because Orion
can’t anymore, the first thing Magnus will want to do is run an audit on our
power-sharers to see how much everyone is using,” Chloe said. “Then they’ll
know why it’s going to be sooner.”

“I don’t think he’ll insist on an audit,” Liu said, with a glance towards me.
“Not if you tell them the right way.”

“What’s the right way?” I said warily.

The right way was, Chloe whispered around to everyone in New York, that
Orion’s girlfriend was keeping him from hunting mals because I didn’t want
him getting hurt, and now I was getting suspicious about why the mana was
suddenly running low.

The New York enclavers were all as eager for me to learn the truth about
the source of their mana as Chloe had been, so they did start quietly
contributing after all—which it turned out they could do by the bucketload
without even getting anywhere close to their mana-building capacity. That of
course didn’t keep them from being grumpy about the work they were doing.
I confess I enjoyed catching a glimpse of Magnus stalking into the boy’s
bathroom at the head of his entourage, soaked in sweat and red-faced from
what I assume was a hearty session of building mana with annoying physical
exercise.

But after a month of what I suppose they found unbearable suffering, they
all began to interrogate each other in accusatory ways about mana use, and
meanwhile the honeypot project ran into a serious snag. Aadhya had made up
a special incense burner, a set of nested cylinders of different kinds of metal,



with holes punched carefully in each one to control the path that smoke took
through them. Chloe had mixed a dozen small batches of mana-infused
incense and left them out around a drain in one of the alchemy labs during
dinner. We came down afterwards—warily—and picked the one that showed
the most signs of having been poked at with various appendages, including a
snuffler’s face, which had left a distressing imprint roughly like a lotus
seedpod.

“Great, let’s go,” Orion said promptly; he would have grabbed the cylinder
off the table and headed straight for the door, but Aadhya put out a hand
against his chest and stopped him.

“How about we don’t try it out for the first time next to a big junction
going straight down to the graduation hall,” she said. The rest of us all agreed
heartily. The diameter of the school’s plumbing is open to a determined
interpretation, and if we were deliberately luring mals, our intent would
actually be helping them squeeze themselves through.

Orion sat on a stool in visible impatience, tossing the burner from one
hand to the other, while the rest of us discussed the best place for a trial run.
We finally settled on the lab itself, on the grounds that the incense had been
out here for a bit already, and we didn’t want to carry it through the corridors
to somewhere else, possibly accumulating a trailing horde in the process.

Aadhya put the incense into the burner, fussed with the positioning of the
cylinders a bit longer, and finally said, “All right, let’s give it a shot,” handing
it to Orion.

We all backed well off towards the door while he did the honors. He lit the
small blob of incense—“Ow,” he said, burning his fingers with the match,
which he was more worried about than the possibly impending mals—and
dropped it into the middle of the cylinders. Then he put the burner on the lab
stool and set it right near the drain.

The first threads of smoke came out and visibly wafted over the drain
before dispersing. Orion hovered over it eagerly, but nothing came out. We
waited another few minutes. The smoke began to pick up, making a thin
stream that circled the drain and went down into it. Still nothing.



There had been a couple of small agglos in the lab, stealing the floor
leavings—we’d ignored them as they’re quite handy when fully grown, and
completely harmless otherwise—which had started slowly humping their way
towards the drain to escape when we’d come into the room. While we were
still waiting, they reached the drain and kept going, straight through the
thickest smoke, showing no interest in it whatsoever.

Orion looked over at us. “Shouldn’t it work on them? They’re still mals.”
“Yeah, I guess,” Chloe said, a bit nasally. The burner was certainly doing

something; even all the way back at the door, the air was taking on the same
distinct aroma that regularly wafted out of the boys’ loo.

Aadhya frowned and took a few cautious steps towards the burner.
“Maybe we should,” she started, and that was when Pinky stuck his head out
of his carrying cup and gave a loud excited squeak. Aadhya had made each of
us a bandolier-style strap with a cup attached, for the mice to ride around in
during the day, since Liu wanted us to keep them with us more often. Before
she could stop him, Pinky leapt directly out of the cup on her chest all the
way down to the floor, raced over to the stool, scampered up the leg like a
tiny streak of white lightning, and did a full-body flying lunge for the cylinder
and knocked it onto the floor. While we were still yelping, Mistoffeles and
Xiao Xing emerged from their cups and made their own mad dashes to join
him.

They were certainly interested in the incense. Together they spent the next
half hour rolling the cylinder around the lab in mad glee, sending it under
cabinets and tables and squirming out of our grip every time we tried to grab
it or them. It turns out that magical mice high on incense are really good at
not being caught. There was a lot of swearing and yelling and banged elbows
and barked shins before we finally managed to get the cylinder away from
them and put the smoke out, at which point they collapsed in exhausted furry
lumps with their paws curled and glazed expressions that somehow conveyed
dreamy pleasure on their faces.

Chloe drew several thick lines through the incense recipe in her notebook,
and Aadhya disgustedly dumped the set of cylinders into the scrap bin. When
a first experiment goes that far awry from your expectations, it’s usually not



worth the risk to keep going. It means you’re missing something quite
important, and in this case, we had no idea what the something we were
missing was. So if we tried again with just minor tweaks, we’d expect it to go
wrong, and at that point, not only would it go wrong, it would almost certainly
go wrong in a much more dramatic and possibly painful fashion.

The only positive outcome was my getting the first sign that Precious was
actually becoming a familiar. She hadn’t joined the frenzy; instead, as soon as
Pinky went for the burner, she’d run up my shoulder and jumped onto a high
shelf of the lab, where she tipped a large beaker over herself and sat there
disapprovingly watching the other mice having fun with her tiny forepaws
held over her nose. After we put out the incense, she climbed back into my
bandolier cup and pulled the lid firmly on top of herself and made clear that
she was coming home with me instead of going back to the group cage in
Liu’s room with the other stupefied mice.

So that was tidy, but the honeypot project was back to square one.
Meanwhile the New York enclavers weren’t my only problem anymore.

Everyone else was starting to look into the pattern of mal attacks, or lack
thereof. We all spend a great deal of time thinking about mals and what
they’re going to do. Almost half our freshman and sophomore courses are
devoted to the study of maleficaria, their classification, their behavior, and
most important, how to kill them. When mals start behaving unexpectedly,
that’s bad. Even if the unexpected behavior is that they’re not leaping out to
kill you anymore. That usually just means they’re waiting to leap out and kill
you at a much more opportune moment.

The next Wednesday, at the end of our cheery library death seminar,
Sudarat waited until the kid on my other side got up and then said softly to
me as we packed up to leave, “A girl from Shanghai asked me if our class had
been attacked again.”

We were getting into striking range of midterms by then, and a grand total
of twenty-three people had been killed so far the whole year. More than half
of them had been freshmen blowing themselves up in shop or poisoning
themselves in alchemy lab, which was barely like dying at all by our normal
standards. The others—bar one—had all been cafeteria mistakes. Even that



was radically below the usual rates, since almost everyone could afford to cast
sniffer spells and brew antidotes, since they weren’t getting jumped by
maleficaria.

Death number twenty-three was the only upperclassman, a junior-year
charmer named Prasong who’d been another former Bangkok enclaver. He
had been very unhappy to discover he wasn’t an enclaver anymore, and he’d
made himself obnoxious enough in the years he’d been one that he found
sympathy and friends in very short supply. As he couldn’t see any other way
to continue in the lifestyle to which he’d become accustomed—or to reliably
continue living, for that matter—he made the decision to go maleficer. And
obviously the best and safest way for him to get a big helping of malia stored
up, enough to see him through graduation, would be draining it out of a group
of unsuspecting wide-eyed freshmen.

If that sounds unimaginably evil to you, I should mention that it wasn’t to
us. Most years there are somewhere between four and eight kids who go for
the maleficer track, and since most of them haven’t planned it out carefully in
advance and brought in a supply of small mammals, targeting younger
students is their standard order of business. We’re all warned about it quite
prosaically in the freshman handbook, and told to be wary of older or more
successful kids showing too much interest in our activities. I owed my own
charming gut scar to one of them, the late unlamented Jack Westing, who’d
also done for Orion’s neighbor Luisa back in our sophomore year.

Sudarat was the only freshman that Prasong could talk to without arousing
suspicions. He didn’t even have to go out of his way—she was going as far out
of hers as she could to maintain her connections to the older Bangkok ex-
enclavers. Even if all that got her was a chance to sit with them in the
cafeteria once in a while, or the last hand-me-downs they couldn’t sell as
seniors, that would still be better than nothing. So all Prasong needed to do
was agree to let her fill an empty seat at his table for a single meal. She must
have told him enough about her weird library seminar to convince him it was
the perfect meal: eight freshmen in an isolated room with no witnesses
around. I assume she didn’t mention me.



A few days later, he snuck upstairs just before the end of lunch period and
laid down a flaying hex circle on the floor under the desks.

It wasn’t very good. You can’t exactly look up malia-sucking hexes in the
library; officially there aren’t any malicious texts available in here. That’s
nonsense of course, I’ve stumbled across at least a hundred of them. But
anyone who went looking for them would probably have harder luck getting
one. Anyway, Prasong wasn’t as ambitious as dear Jack. His hex was good
enough to rip off a substantial patch of skin on his victims, opening us up so
he could pull a tidy bit of malia out of us through our pain and horror, and I
imagine that was all he wanted. Actually killing eight wizards at once, even
freshmen, is no joke for a budding maleficer; the psychic damage would’ve
left him visibly marked in the ominous sorts of ways that make your fellow
students—particularly your nearest neighbors—gather up a sufficient group to
put you down before you get any more bright ideas that might involve
extracting mana from them.

Unfortunately for him, I noticed the hex before I even crossed the
threshold. I assumed a construct mal had done it; some of the more advanced
kinds can draw spell inscriptions, although usually not very well. That didn’t
rule out this example. I could’ve done better without half trying, and that’s
exactly what I did: I grabbed a piece of chalk off the nearest board, rewrote
half the sigils to turn the spell back on the original inscriber—correcting the
various mistakes and adding a few improvements while I was at it—and
invoked it with contemptuous ease and barely an ounce of mana. I was even a
little smug that the first attack of the afternoon had been so easy to deal with.

I only found out who had cast it at dinnertime, when people were
gossiping energetically about how Prasong’s skin just completely flew off him
in the middle of the language lab and how he ran around in circles screaming
wildly until he died of massive blood loss and shock.

I won’t say I was sorry. I won’t. I vomited after dinner, but it was probably
something I’d eaten. Sudarat left the cafeteria looking moderately ghastly
herself. She and all the kids in the library had known at once what had
happened: I’d made a point—smug, smug, smug—of showing them the hex
circle, what it was trying to do to us, and how I was cleverly turning it back



on the creator. She’d been extra quiet in the couple of weeks since, which was
saying something. This was the first peep she’d let out in my direction since.

“From Shanghai?” I said slowly.
Sudarat nodded, a small jerk of her head. “Some people from Bangkok

heard,” she said. “About the attacks we’ve had. Some other people. When I
told…” She trailed off, but I’d got the picture. When she’d told Prasong about
the library attacks, other older Bangkok kids had been at the table, too. And
now her former enclave mates were using her as the source of useful gossip to
pass along, just to score a few points. Just like all of us loser kids do, because
you can’t know which of those points is going to be the one that gets you
through the graduation hall gates.

“What did you tell them?” I said.
Her head was bent down towards her desk, the short blunt edge of her hair

hiding her eyes, but I could see her lips and throat work when she swallowed.
“I said, I didn’t remember. Then I said no.”

She was learning, the way every loser freshman learns. She’d understood
that they weren’t asking out of consideration for her: they were hunting for
information that was valuable to them. She understood that they were sniffing
around after me. But she hadn’t learned the full lesson yet, because she’d done
the wrong thing. What she should have done, obviously, was find out how
much the information was worth, and sell it to them. Instead, she’d lied to
protect me, to someone who had hope to offer her: hope of help, hope of a
new home.

Thoughtful of her, although I’d have been happier if someone from
Shanghai hadn’t been suspicious enough to be asking her questions in the first
place. That meant a raft of bad things. For one, the seniors in Shanghai
enclave were actively trying to figure out what was going on with the mals—
and they had nine students in our year alone, not to mention all their allies.
For another, they already knew that our library session had been attacked by
a mal at least once, which made us unusual this year. They were surely trying
to put that information together with any other known mal attacks, which
would be the handful that had spilled over into the workshop from my
seminar room. As soon as someone found out that there was a single-person



language seminar held next to the workshop that was getting attacked, and the
single person happened to also be the only senior in the library room that was
getting attacked, that wouldn’t be a difficult blank to fill in.

I had no idea what would happen when the information all came out. The
other New York kids might decide to cut Chloe and us off from the pipe. If
Orion wasn’t supplying them with fresh mana anyway, they didn’t have a lot
to lose from ditching his “girlfriend.” And that could—would—be the least of
it. If people worked out that the school was gunning for me in particular,
they’d want to know why, and if they couldn’t turn up a reason, someone
would probably decide to poke me with a sharp stick to find out. If they didn’t
just decide that it was a good idea to give the school what it wanted.

So, my midterm study sessions were exceptionally cheery.
Except actually they were. The shine of studying with other people still

hadn’t dulled for me. We’d cleaned up Chloe’s double-width room, and found
new stuffing for the cushions—if you think we’d turn up our noses at reusing
some perfectly good and comfortable cushions just because they’d previously
been home to a pair of monsters and a half-digested fellow student, you
haven’t been paying attention—and we gathered there almost every evening,
with a little basket in the middle where our mice could snooze between
getting petted and even occasionally fed a treat by anyone invited to join us.

It was almost never just the four of us. Whatever subject we wanted to
cover, it was a sure bet we could get in more people for the asking. I had
plenty of help for Arabic: Ibrahim and a couple of his friends were happy to
come by and give me advice as the price of admission. Nkoyo came almost
every night, too, and she was doing that general Sanskrit seminar I’d expected
to get. Thanks to their help, I was making some real headway on the Golden
Stone sutras: just that week I’d actually got to the first of the major workings.

Except, ugh, that was a lie. It wasn’t their help, not really. It was the time I
had because I didn’t have to desperately watch my own back every second of
the day. It was the energy I had because I wasn’t constantly scrabbling to
build mana. And it was their help, too, only their help and the time and the
energy all came from the same thing, and that was Chloe’s help, Chloe’s



bountiful generosity, and I didn’t like it. Except of course I did like it loads, I
was just bitter and sullen about it, too.

But I couldn’t manage being bitter and sullen on the day I turned the page
and found myself looking at a gorgeously calligraphed heading that I didn’t
need to translate into Being the First Stone upon the Golden Road to
understand what it was saying: This one’s really special, with the Sanskrit
incantation set in a finely bordered window on the page, every character
flavored with gold leaf and paint in the main curves. Even at a first glance I
could pick out bits of all the other spells I’d gone through so far: the phase-
control spell, the water-summoning spell, another one I’d just finished
working through that was for dividing earth from stone; they were woven
together and invoked as part of the overall working.

I didn’t just stop being sullen. I stopped worrying about mana, about what
was going to happen when and if my cover was blown; I stopped working on
my midterm assignments and ignored the rest of my classes entirely. For that
whole week, in every waking minute that I wasn’t actually stuck in session or
killing mals, I was working on the sutra. Even during meals I had my head in
a dictionary.

I knew it was stupid. My midterm assignment for the Myrddin seminar
was a long involved piece of Old French poetry that was sure to contain at
least three or four useful combat spells I could probably use during
graduation. Meanwhile Purochana’s great working was on the scale of
architecture and probably needed an entire circle of wizards to cast anyway.
The Golden Stone sutras were meant for building enclaves, not killing off
mals: it would only do me any good if I lived long enough to get out of here.

But if I did—then I could offer it to groups like Liu’s family, like the
kibbutz that Ibrahim’s friend Yaakov was from: established communities of
wizards who wanted to set up their own safe, sheltered places. The Golden
Stone sutras probably weren’t the best way to build enclaves anymore,
otherwise more of the spells would have survived into the modern day, the
way the phase-control spell had, but it would be a sight better than having to
mortgage your entire family to another enclave for three generations just to
get access to the spells, much less for the resources you’d need to use. And



Purochana’s enclave spells probably weren’t going to be as expensive as the
modern spells, either. No one was building skyscraper enclaves back in
ancient India: even if you’d imagined one, you couldn’t exactly call your local
builders and order some steel girders and concrete.

So my golden enclaves wouldn’t be as grand as a top modern-day enclave,
but who cared? It would still keep the mals from getting to your kids, and if
you had that, if you had safe, at least you’d have a choice. A choice that
someone could make without being Mum. You wouldn’t have to suck up to
enclave kids and bribe them. They’d still have advantages, they’d still have
more hand-me-downs and more mana, some people would still court them,
but it wouldn’t be everyone, desperate to survive. They wouldn’t get piles of
free help just for dangling the slim hope of getting into their alliances and the
even slimmer hope of getting into their enclaves.

I liked the idea; I loved the idea, actually. If this was how I’d bring
destruction to the enclaves of the world, I was on board with my great-
grandmother’s prophecy after all. I’d take Purochana’s spells and spread them
all over the world, and I’d teach people how to cast them, and maybe they
wouldn’t like me, but they’d listen to me anyway, for this. They’d let me stay
in the enclaves I helped them build, and I’d make it part of the price that they
had to help others build them, too. Either they’d donate resources, or they’d
make copies of the spells, or train teachers—

While I was busy putting the world to rights in my spare time, what I
wasn’t doing was any of my other schoolwork. I completely forgot the
midterm assignment for my Proto-Indo-European seminar, and I would have
been well on the way to outright failing if it hadn’t been for Ibrahim; when I
remembered it on the Monday night before the due date, with less than one
hour to curfew, he brokered me an emergency trade with an enclaver from
Dubai that he’d got friendly with. He and I had sat near the Dubai kids in the
library for one evening last term. They all still gave me dirty looks if we
passed in the corridors, and he’d made one good friend and four nodding
acquaintances. Story of my life. But now I got to benefit, because when I
yawped in alarm, that night in Chloe’s room, Ibrahim said, “Hey, Jamaal’s
probably got a paper for that.” It turned out that Jamaal was the youngest of



five, and had inherited a priceless collection of hand-me-down papers and
schoolwork for nearly every class he might possibly have taken, and more
besides. I handed over a copy of the paper I’d written about the water-
summoning spell and got back a nice, solid essay handed in for the PIE
seminar of ten years ago.

I still had to rewrite the essay in my own handwriting, and while I was
doing that, I got annoyed at some of the dumb things it said and ended up
changing about half of it, staying up until all hours. I fell asleep on my desk
and had to work on it the next day during my independent study. Afterwards I
shuffled into the PIE seminar, full of unjustifiable resentment, and as I stuffed
it into the submission slot still yawning, an eldritch vapor wisped out and went
straight into my wide-open mouth.

Forget any preconceived notions you might have of gigantic Cthulhian
monstrosities. Eldritch-category mals are actually relatively fragile. They hunt
by driving people insane with enchanted gases that fill your senses with the
impression of untold horrors, and while you thrash around screaming and
begging everything to stop, the mal creeps out of its hiding place and tries to
hook your brains out through your nose with its partially embodied limbs.

The problem with using this clever tactic on me was that there really isn’t
an untold horror that the human brain is capable of experiencing that’s worse
than being enveloped by a maw-mouth. So the vapor made me flash back to
that particular experience, and I reacted just as I had at the time, which can
be summed up as me yelling die immediately you horrible monstrosity with
enormous and violent conviction. Only this wasn’t a maw-mouth, it was just a
drippy ectoplasmic cloud, and I slammed it with the full force of a major
arcana murder spell like someone trying to light a match with a flamethrower.

My handiest killing spell doesn’t kill things by destroying their bodies, it
just goes straight to extinguishing life on a metaphysical level, so that’s what
spilled over. More or less, I informed the eldritch horror it had no business
existing with so much aggression that I shoved it entirely out of reality, and I
then went on from there to try and insist that a whole lot of the stuff around it
should also stop this absurd pretense of continuing to exist.



This was especially awkward because a lot of the Scholomance doesn’t
exactly exist. It’s made of real material, but the laws of physics get quite
flexible in the void, so most of that material has been stretched thinner than it
should be, the engineering doesn’t meet the regs, and the number one thing
keeping it up is that we’re all believing in it as hard as we can stare. And that’s
what I took out: in one horrible moment, I made the four other kids in my
seminar extremely aware that the only thing between them and howling
nothingness was a tin can held together by happy thoughts and pixie dust.
They all screamed and tried to get to safety, only they couldn’t, since they
were carrying the lack of belief along with them, and the seminar room and
then the entire corridor started to come apart around them.

The only thing that stopped us taking out a massive swath of the school
was that I hadn’t stopped believing myself. Still half groggy with eldritch
vision, I stumbled after them out of the room into a corridor which was
starting to bend and warp like aluminium foil under the weight of the entire
massive school above it, and in my confusion I thought it was just me being
drugged, so I shut my eyes and told myself firmly that the corridor was not by
any means wobbling and put out my hand to the wall with the expectation that
the wall would be there and solid, and so it was again. I yelled after the other
kids, “It’s fine! It’s just eldritch gas! Stop running!” and when they looked
back and saw that the corridor was fine around me, they were able to
persuade themselves I was right, and then they started believing in the school
again.

A moment later, I realized that actually I’d been wrong, because as soon
as the corridor stabilized, the Scholomance slammed the door of the room
shut and sealed it away behind a permanent hazard wall, which are normally
reserved for lab rooms on the second floor where there’s been an alchemical
accident so horrible the deadly effects won’t resolve for a decade or more. As
the hazard wall shot down from the ceiling beside me, almost taking off my
thumb in the process, I startled and glanced over long enough to catch just
half a glimpse of the excessively real wall of the seminar room beyond it,
crumpled into accordion folds. That’s how I worked out what I’d done.



I didn’t really know any of the other kids in the seminar. They were all
languages-track seniors like me, of course, and one of them, Ravi, was an
enclaver from Jaipur, so the other three had sat round him, the better to offer
him help on his papers and exams. None of them had ever spoken to me. I
only knew Ravi’s name because one of the others was a blond German girl
named Liesel who had a violently annoying habit of cooing “Ravi, this is
extremely excellent,” every time he let her edit his papers. It made me want to
hurl a dictionary at both their heads, and all the more so because I’d seen her
submitting a paper once—that’s how I knew her name—and that one peek
had been enough to tell me she was probably going for valedictorian and at
least ten times smarter than him, since he wasn’t even smart enough to have
figured out that she was the best in the class; he usually gave his papers to one
of the other boys and wasted class time flirting with her and staring at her
breasts.

Of course, brains aren’t everything in all circumstances. Ravi was able to
convince himself everything was fine a lot quicker than anyone else; by the
time I got over to them, he was recovered and saying with easy assurance,
“We’ll go to the library. We can’t be marked down if the classroom’s been
shut. You’re welcome to come,” he added to me, in a tone of lordly
generosity, and had the gall to gesture to the corridor, indicating that I was to
take point position in exchange for the condescension. What made it even
worse was that just a few weeks ago, without Chloe’s power-sharer on my
wrist, I’d have had to do it and be grateful for the lucky chance of company.

“If I’m taking point for a walk mid-period, I’ll go by myself,” I said, rude.
“Especially since none of you thought of mentioning the eldritch shine.”
They’d all been in class before me. Since none of them had been attacked
handing in their own assignments, they’d clearly spotted the signs—there’s a
sort of faint iridescent glitter to the air near an eldritch horror that I wouldn’t
have missed ordinarily—and pushed their own papers in from a distance.
None of them had said a word as I’d stepped up to the slot myself.

“You’ve got to have your own lookout,” one of the boys said to me, a little
defiantly.

“That’s right,” I said. “And now you can have yours.”



“What was that?” Liesel said suddenly. She’d been looking at the
stabilized walls and the hazard door with a lot more suspicion than the rest of
them, which she’d now translated into staring at me. “That spell which you
used. Was that—La Main de la Mort?”

It had, in fact, been La Main de la Mort. She’d obviously done French at
some point, assuming she hadn’t grown up bilingual anyway, and it’s not a
hard spell to recognize; there’re not that many three-word killing spells. The
difficulty of casting it isn’t learning the words, it’s just got a really extreme
amount of the je ne sais quoi that a lot of French spells have: you’ve got to be
able to toss them off blithely, effortlessly. Since La Main de la Mort kills you
instead of your target if you get it even the slightest bit wrong, very few
people feel blithe about giving it a go, unless for instance they’re inside a
maw-mouth where death would be a reasonably good outcome. Also you’ve
got to be able to channel a truly outrageous amount of mana without
displaying the slightest effort, which is tricky for most people who aren’t
designed to be dark queens of sorcery et cetera.

“Look it up yourself if you want to know,” I said, taking refuge in more
rudeness, and walked away from them as fast as I could towards the stairs, but
even Ravi was gawking at me.

At that point it wasn’t exactly transmutation of matter to work out that I
had something substantial and disturbing under the hood. When I came in at
lunchtime, I saw Liesel stopping to talk to Magnus at the New York table, and
he was waving a couple of his hangers-on over to open a spot for her to sit
down next to him. “Well, I’m fucked,” I told Aadhya and Liu, succinctly, as
soon as I reached our table and sat down with them. And how right I was.

OceanofPDF.com



M um spent a lot of time in my formative years gently reminding me
that people don’t think about us nearly as much as we think they do,

because they’re all busy worrying what people are thinking about them. I
thought that I’d listened to her, but it turned out I hadn’t. Privately I’d
believed, on some deep level, that everyone was in fact thinking about me all
the time, evaluating me, et cetera, when really they hadn’t been giving me
much of a thought at all. I had the pleasure of uncovering this exciting truth
about myself because all of a sudden, a substantial number of people did start
thinking about me quite a lot, and the contrast was hard to miss.

In retrospect, everyone had quickly written off the weirdness of Orion
Lake falling for the class loser. He was already weird by all our usual



standards. Even Magnus and the other New York enclavers, offering me a
guaranteed spot: they hadn’t really thought I was anything unusual; they
thought Orion was choosing to be odd in yet another way. And as for my
surviving the graduation hall escapade, everyone had assumed that was Orion
saving me. But Liesel spreading it around that I could sling La Main de la
Mort while high on eldritch vapors was one straw too many for the collective
camel. And once the other New York kids did actually spend a few moments
thinking about me, of course it took them less than a day to realize where all
their mana was going.

That night when I left the library to go down to bed, I glanced back and
saw Magnus and three friends closing in on Chloe around a couch in the
reading room, the dismay on her face clear to read even from between their
backs. I thought about going back, but what was the use? Was I going to ask
Chloe to lie to her enclave friends, the people she’d spend the rest of her life
with, just so I could keep sucking down mana from them? Was I going to beg
them to keep letting me cling on? Obviously not. Was I going to threaten
them? Tempting but no. There wasn’t anything else to say or do. So I just
turned my back and went down, in the firm certainty that they’d insist on
Chloe cutting me off first thing the next morning. Actually, that was my
optimistic scenario. Really I expected Magnus to appear at my door leading a
school-wide mob with not-necessarily-metaphorical pitchforks.

The thing is, I’m not actually unique in the history of wizard society; not
even Orion is, really. We’re both once-in-a-generation talents, but those
happen, as you might have guessed, once in a generation. It is a bit of a
coincidence that we’re in school at the same time, and that we’re both fairly
extreme examples. But I’m reasonably sure that’s because there’s some
violation of balance being redressed on our backs. Dad nobly walks into a
maw-mouth for an eternity of pain to save me and Mum; she gives out too
much healing for free; I end up with an affinity for violence and mass
destruction. The year before that, twelve maleficers murdered the entire
senior class, so a hero who would save hundreds of kids in school got
conceived. The moral physics of the principle of balance: equal and opposite
reactions totting up on both sides.



The point is, wizards like us do come along every so often: a single
individual powerful enough to shift the balance of power among the enclaves
depending on where they land. Roughly forty years ago, a hugely powerful
artificer with an affinity for large-scale construction came through the school.
Every major enclave made him offers. He turned them all down and went
home to Shanghai, where his family’s ancient former enclave had been
occupied by a maw-mouth. He organized a circle of independent wizards to
help him, personally spearheaded the effort to take out the maw-mouth, and
as you might imagine was immediately acclaimed as the new Dominus, not
three years out of school. It still looked like a bad deal for him: the enclave he
rescued was ancient and had soaked up magic for centuries, but it was small
and poky by modern standards, and at the time most of the really talented
Chinese wizards headed straight to New York, to London, to the California
enclaves. Even Guangzhou and Beijing had to recruit from the second string.

Well, after four decades of Li Shan Feng’s rule, Shanghai’s got six towers
and a monorail inside the enclave, they just opened their seventh gateway, and
lately they’ve been signaling that they’re thinking of splitting off the Asian
enclaves and building a new school themselves. And that’s part of what makes
Orion so important, so important that New York was willing to throw a
priceless guaranteed enclave spot at some loser girl just because Orion liked
her. Everyone knows there’s a power struggle coming, and Orion’s not just a
top student inside the Scholomance; he’s a game-changer on the outside. No
one’s going to go to outright war with an enclave that has an invincible fighter,
and that’s not even touching on the resource he represents if he can convert
mals into mana. And he belongs really securely to New York: son of the very
likely future Domina, no less, and I’m sure he’s at least partly responsible for
her being in that position. All the kids from Shanghai in here probably came
in with instructions to keep a close eye on him, and gather as much
information as they could. They haven’t got any less anxious about him over
the last three years, while he’s been busy building a substantial fan club of all
the kids he’s saved.

What I hadn’t realized, as I went down to bed, was that I was about to be
promoted to game-changer status alongside him.



Chloe didn’t try to lie to Magnus—she’s a terrible liar anyway. She fell
back on desperately arguing that they had to keep giving me mana or else, and
went into a lot of detail about the grisly potential else, with a vivid description
of my dismemberment of her cushion mals. A normal person would have
been terrified to find out about nuclear bomb me waiting to go off. Magnus
decided that he quite fancied bringing a tidy nuclear bomb home to his
parents.

By breakfast the next morning, I’d gladly have faced any number of
pitchforks instead of having to see his smug rubbish dump of a face smirking
at the Shanghai kids across the cafeteria, like he’d done something clever or
recruited me by hand, instead of having done his level best just last term to
kill me. The Shanghai kids all looked grim and worried back, for that matter.
By that afternoon, I knew for a fact that they were offering stuff to people for
details about me, because they had another go at questioning Sudarat: one of
them had actually offered her a power-sharer for the rest of the year, which
was almost guaranteed to keep her alive that long. “Take it,” I told her
bitterly. “Someone ought to do well out of this.”

I suppose I didn’t have the right to complain: New York wasn’t cutting me
off after all, so I still had lovely torrents of mana coming. If anything, the
other New York kids had all got more enthusiastic about building mana now
that they knew where it was going. Because of course they expected to get a
handsome return on investment, namely me, a massive gun tucked neatly in
their enclave’s back pocket, ready for use in case of emergencies. They were
all delightedly hoping to give me exactly the post-Scholomance life I’d
dreamed of for years. The bastards.

Two days later, Orion said to me, of all things, “Hey, after graduation,
what do you think of taking a road trip?”

I stared at him. “What?”
“The guys were talking about our doing a group road trip,” he said

earnestly. “The enclave has this really great customized RV, they’d let us take
it, we were thinking…” He trailed off, possibly alerted by my expression of
total incredulity that there was something odd about this conversation. It
wasn’t just that he had actually out-loud attempted to make concrete plans set



in the future that required making the assumption that we’d all survive to
appear for these plans—horribly taboo among all but the richest enclavers,
and even they have the tact to avoid the topic in mixed company—but he was
trying to suggest that I voluntarily spend time with the rest of the New York
enclavers.

I knew he hadn’t come up with the idea on his own. Chloe had once told
me with a perfectly straight face that Orion didn’t want anything except to kill
mals, which was absolute bollocks, but it was the kind of absolute bollocks
that I’m certain everyone around him his entire life had so strongly
encouraged that it had got lodged in his own head. And the power-sharer he
wore only went one way, so he had to go round killing them if he wanted
mana, which all of us do. They’d programmed him really thoroughly to spend
all his time thinking about hunting. The only other thing I’d ever heard him
actually express wanting was me, which I choose to believe meant anyone at
all who’d treat him like a person instead of a mal-killing automaton.

That was the scale of things for which he could express desire: friendship,
love, humanity. But he didn’t care where in the cafeteria he sat, he didn’t care
what shirt he wore, he didn’t care what classes he was in or what books he
read. He did his work more or less dutifully, was polite, and preferred to
avoid hero-worshippers while feeling guilty about it, and if I said, “Let’s go
stand on our heads on the cafeteria mezzanine stairs,” he’d probably shrug
and say, “If you want to.” He certainly hadn’t come up with the sudden desire
to go on a road trip away from his enclave. He’d been fed the idea, and the
idea was very clearly to get me into the New York crowd. Before they’d been
worrying about someone else using me to get Orion; now they were trying to
use Orion to get me.

“Lake,” I said in measured tones, “why don’t you tell Magnus actually
you’d like to go backpacking in Europe with me instead. See what he thinks
of that. We could do the Grand Tour! Start in Edinburgh, visit Manchester
and London, go on to Paris, Lisbon, Barcelona, Pisa—” I was rattling off the
names of every city with an enclave I could think of, and Orion got the point,
scowled at me, and sloped off.



I felt pretty pleased with myself afterwards, until that evening when I went
on a snack bar run with Aadhya, and Scott and Jermaine from New York
passed us on the stairs and said a cheery, “Hey, El, how’s it going? Hey,
Aad,” with a friendly wave.

She waved back and said, “Hey, guys,” like a civilized human being, while
I delivered the coldest possible, “Hi,” in return. As soon as they were out of
sight, she looked at me and said, “What now?”

I hadn’t ranted about the charming road-trip scheme to her because I
couldn’t without breaking the horrible taboo myself, and being tactless into
the bargain. Aadhya’s family lived in New Jersey, and while she hadn’t said
outright that she’d have liked a New York enclave spot herself, it was what
virtually every wizard for three hundred miles around the city aspired to,
since they were all more or less working for the place anyway. “They’d like to
make plans for my future,” I said, shortly.

She sighed, but once we were back in her room and eating our makeshift
parfaits—strawberry yogurt out of slightly aged tubes, topped with fruit-and-
nut mix and whipped cream out of a can; we’d regretfully discarded the tin of
vienna sausages, which had been not merely dented but slightly punctured,
with a bit of greenish ooze round the edges of the hole—she said, “El, they’re
not that bad.”

I knew she wasn’t talking about the parfaits, which were fairly ambrosial
by our standards. “They are, though,” I said, revolted.

“I’m not saying they’re sterling examples of grace and nobility,” Aadhya
said. “They’re all kind of dickish, but they’re the same kind of dickish that
anyone is when you put them in an enclave. Magnus, okay, that boy is trying
way too hard to be big man on campus. But Jermaine’s a nice guy! Scott is a
nice guy! Chloe is practically too nice. And you actually like Orion, who is
kind of creepy—”

“He’s not!”
“Excuse you, he totally is,” Aadhya said. “Half the time he can’t recognize

me unless I’m with you. He pretends to when I say hi to him in shop, but
every time his brain goes into this panicky loop like who is she oh no I’m
supposed to know her oh no I’m failing at human. And it’s not just me, he



does it to everyone. He could probably tell you every last mal he’s killed in
the entire time he’s been at school, but us human beings all get filed under the
generic category of future potential rescue. I don’t know why he can see you,
I think it’s because you’re some crazy super-maleficer in waiting. Creepy.”

I glared at her indignantly, but she just huffed and added, “And you have a
hard time accepting that anyone has a right to exist if they won’t jump three
lab tables to save the life of a total stranger, so you guys are totally perfect for
each other. But sorry to break it to you, you both still need to eat and sleep
somewhere and, even worse, occasionally interact with other humans. Why
are you setting every available bridge on fire?”

I put down my empty yogurt cup and pulled my knees up and wrapped my
arms round them. “I’m going to start thinking Magnus put you up to this.”

She rolled her eyes. “Oh, he tried. I told him that I wasn’t a crazy person
and I’d take a place in New York in a hot second if he offered it to me, but he
wasn’t going to get any closer to bagging you. My point is—look, El, what are
you even going to do?”

Aadhya wasn’t asking me to make plans; she just wanted to know what I
was going to do with my life. She waited for me to offer something, and when
I didn’t she said, to drum it in, “I know what I’m doing. I don’t freaking need
Magnus to make me offers. I’ve sold seventeen pieces of spell-tuned jewelry
out of the leftover bits of sirenspider shell and argonet tooth you gave me.
They’re not just junky senior stuff, they’re really good, people are going to
keep them. I’ll get my own invites. I know what Liu’s doing. She’s going to do
translations or raise familiars, and her family are going to have that enclave
up in twenty years. Chloe’s going to be getting her DaVinci on and putting
frescoes up all over New York, and she doesn’t even really need to do that.
And I know that you’re not going to an enclave. That’s it. And not-enclaver is
not a life.”

She wasn’t wrong, but I couldn’t say anything. My beautiful shining
fantasy of the life of an itinerant golden-enclave builder withered in my
mouth completely before her recitation of excellent and sensible and
thoroughly practicable ideas. I couldn’t bring myself to describe it to Aadhya:
I could just see her face going from doubtful to incredulous to horrified with



worry, like listening to a friend earnestly telling you about their plans to climb
a tall mountain, with dangerously insufficient preparation, and then going on
to describe how, once they got to the top, they’d jump off and sprout wings
and fly away to live in the clouds.

She sighed into my stretching silence. “I get you don’t like to talk about
your mom, but I’ve heard about her and I live on another continent. People
talk about her like she’s a saint. So in case it doesn’t go without saying, you
don’t have to be your mom to be a decent human being. You don’t have to live
on a commune and be a hermit.”

“I can’t anyway, they won’t have me,” I said, a bit hollowly.
“Based on what you’ve said about the place, I’m going to go out on a limb

and say they’re justifiably afraid you’re going to set them all on fire. It’s okay
for you to go live in New York with your weirdo boyfriend if you want to.”

“It’s not,” I said. “Aad, it’s not, because—they don’t want me. They want
someone who’s going to cast death spells on their enemies. And if I gave them
that, I wouldn’t be me anymore, so I might as well not go live in a bag of
dicks. And you think that, too,” I added pointedly, “because otherwise you’d
have told Magnus that you’d try and talk me into coming if he’d get you in the
enclave.”

“Yeah, because that would work.”
“It might work to get you in,” I said. “He’d promise you an interview for

sure.”
She gave a snort. “That’s not actually a stupid idea. Except I don’t want to

talk you into New York, I’m just…” she trailed off. “El, it’s not just Magnus,”
she said bluntly. “I’ve had a bunch of people asking me. Everyone knows
about you now. And if you don’t go to some enclave—they’re going to
wonder what you are planning to do.”

And I didn’t even need to lay my idiotic plans out before her to know
without question that they’d believe in them even less than she would.



To further gladden my heart, our midterm grades were coming in that week.
No matter how hard you’ve worked, there’s always something to worry about.
If you’re going for valedictorian, anything less than perfect marks is a
sentence of doom, and if you do get perfect marks, then you have to worry
whether your courseload is heavy enough that your perfect marks will scale
well against all the other kids going for valedictorian with their perfect marks.
If you’re not going for valedictorian, then you have to spend the bare
minimum of time on your actual coursework in order to maximize whatever
you are actually working on to get you through graduation—whether that’s
expanding your spell collection or creating tools or brewing potions, and of
course building mana. If you get good marks, you wasted valuable time you
should have spent on other things. But if your marks are too bad, you’ll get hit
with remedial work or worse.

If you’re wondering how our marks get assigned when there are no
teachers to evaluate anything, I’ve heard a million explanations. Loads of
people, mostly enclavers, say with great assurance that the work gets shunted
out of the Scholomance and sent to independent wizards hired for the
marking. I don’t believe that for a second, because it would be expensive, and
I’ve never met anyone who knows one of these wizards. Others claim the
work gets graded through some sort of complicated equation based almost
entirely on the amount of time you spend on it and your previous marks. If
you want to really set off any valedictorian candidate, try telling them that it’s
partly randomized.

Personally, I’m inclined to think we’re doing the marking ourselves, just
because that’s so efficient. After all, we mostly know what marks we deserve,
and we certainly know the marks we want to get and what marks we’re afraid
of getting, and whenever we see bits of someone else’s work we get an idea of
what they ought to get. I’d bet that the school more or less goes by the sum of
the parts, depending on how much will and mana each person has put behind
their judgment. Which also handily explains the bloc of self-satisfied
enclavers who annually fill up the class rankings only a little way down from
the actual valedictorian candidates, despite not doing nearly as much work
and not being nearly as clever as they think they are.



None of these possibilities told me what to expect in the way of marks for
myself, since this year I was entirely alone in the one seminar to which I’d
devoted massive amounts of time and energy and passion and mana, and
apart from that I was in three other small-group seminars that I’d aggressively
neglected.

You’d think that marks wouldn’t matter very much senior year unless you
were going for valedictorian, since we literally don’t take classes for the
second half of the year. After the class standings are announced at the end of
the first semester, seniors are given the rest of the year off to prep for their
graduation runs.

But that’s in the nature of a grudging surrender. Graduation wasn’t
designed to be a slaughterhouse gauntlet of mals. The cleansing routine we
fixed last term was intended to winnow them down to a reasonable level every
year before the seniors got dumped in to make their escape back to the real
world. After the machinery broke four times in the first decade, and the
enclaves gave up on repairing it, seniors largely stopped going to class,
because there’s a point where training and practicing with the spells and
equipment you’ve got is more important than getting new ones. When there’re
a thousand howling starved mals coming at you from all sides, you want your
reactions worked thoroughly into your muscle memory.

So the powers that be running the school at the time—London had taken
it over from Manchester by then, with substantial support from Edinburgh,
Paris, and Munich; opinions from St. Petersburg, Vienna, and Lisbon taken
under advisement; New York and Kyoto occasionally given a patronizing ear
—decided that they’d accept the reality and turned it into a deadline. And up
to that deadline, the school does its best to make marks matter. The penalties
get especially vicious for our last semester. Finals are the worst of it, but even
midterms are generally good for taking out at least a dozen seniors.

I was relatively safe for the Proto-Indo-European seminar because I’d
cheated on that one essay, which always gets you good marks. The school’s
perfectly willing to let you leave dangerous gaps in your education. The only
risk there was that I’d actually done some work on the thing beyond copying
it out; I’d get marked down for that, although probably still not to failing level.



The translation I’d handed in for my final Myrddin seminar poetry
assignment was a rotten half-baked job I’d run through in two hours, guessing
wildly at the many words I didn’t know. It hadn’t left me with any spells I
could even sound out, at least not if I didn’t want to risk blowing the top of
my own head off. I’d got top marks on the lovely deconstruction spell I’d used
on Chloe’s cushion-monster, though, which was likely to pull my grade there
to safe levels.

Aadhya had helped me with the maths in my Algebra course, and I’d done
a load of translations for her. Artificers don’t get language classes in their
senior year; instead they just get assigned a design project in one of their
other languages. Design projects are a really special fun thing for artificers.
You’re given a set of requirements for some object, you write down the steps
to build the thing, and then the Scholomance builds it for you. Exactly
according to your instructions. Then you have to try the resulting object out
and see what it does. Three guesses what happens if your instructions turn out
to have been wrong or insufficiently detailed.

Having to do a design project in a second language makes it even more
exciting. And in this case, Aadhya’s languages are Bengali and Hindi, both of
which she knows really well, except the school swerved and gave her the
projects in Urdu instead, which happens sometimes if it’s feeling particularly
nasty. She didn’t know the script well, and anyway subtle differences in
meaning matter quite a lot in these circumstances. You’d really like to be
confident that you’re not building a blasting gun backwards, for instance.

You would also really like to build something that might be of some use at
graduation, but her choices were a mana siphon, a shell-piercer, and a garden
planter. A mana siphon is a flat-out maleficer tool and anyway the last thing
anyone allied with me would ever need. A shell-piercer would’ve been a
terrific weapon against constructs, except in the very last line of the
specifications, the assignment said that the purpose of this particular one was
to acquire usable miercel shells. Miercels are these self-reproducing construct
mals that look rather like wasps the size of my thumb. Their shells are made
of a mana-infused metal and are quite useful, but a shell-piercer of any
combat-appropriate size would fracture them to tiny bits.



“You could probably sell that second one to an enclaver?” I said.
“Not until we’re out,” Aadhya said, making the face it deserved: she was

right, nobody inside the school was going to buy a modestly good artificer
tool. It wasn’t like the phase-control spell from my sutras, where it was so
useful and so expensive on the outside that it was worth someone trading a
substantial advantage in here to get it for their family’s future use. Also, there
was the question of how the Scholomance would have her test it. I’m sure it
would have been generous enough to provide an entire hive of live miercels to
practice on.

The last option was a combination sunlamp and self-watering planter that
could be stacked to make a vertical garden while using very little mana, for
setting up a greenhouse in a tiny space with no natural light. It would have
been very nice to have in a Scholomance room, so of course the specifications
required the planter to be fifteen feet long, which meant it wouldn’t fit in even
a double-wide room. After I finished translating that bit, I realized to my
dismay that the one place these planters would have worked perfectly was in
those small Golden Stone enclaves I’d been so energetically dreaming of
setting up. It was probably my fault Aadhya had got stuck with it: spend a lot
of time with your allies, and sometimes their intent can start to influence your
own work.

“Sorry,” I said grimly when I handed it over for her to look at.
“Ugh, and it’s going to take forever to meld these layers of chalcedony

with the sand,” she said in dismay. “And I’m still not done with the lute.”
She’d been working on the lute in her every free minute since last term,

but she badly needed more of them. Aadhya’s got an affinity for exotic
materials, especially ones taken from mals. As you might imagine, they have
loads of power, but most artificers can’t handle them; either they just don’t
work, or more likely the artifice goes wrong in some excitingly malicious way.
Aadhya can almost always coax them along into her projects, but the lute was
ten times more complicated than anything else she’d done. The sirenspider leg
I’d given her had gone to make the body of the lute, and the argonet tooth had
made the bridges and the frets, and she’d strung it with the hair Liu had cut
off at the start of the year. And then she’d etched sigils of power over the



whole thing and lined them with the enchanted gold leaf her family had sent
her on induction day. Pulling the whole thing together would’ve been a
challenge for a professional artificer with a full workbench of favorite tools,
and we’d pinned a large number of our graduation hopes on it.

Senior year, you spend half your time staying alive, half your time on your
lessons, and half your time working out a graduation strategy to get you
through the hall. If you can’t make that equation add up properly, you die.
Most teams spend a lot of time identifying their best approach—are you
going to rely on speed and deflection, dodging your way through the horde;
are you going to build a massive forward shield and try to bowl yourselves
straight to the doors; are you going to turn yourselves gnat-sized and try to
hop from one team to another and let them carry you; et cetera.

Our alliance had a very obvious basic strategy: everyone else would keep
the mals from interrupting my casting, and I would slaughter everything in a
tidy path straight to the doors. Perfectly simple. Only it wasn’t, because most
spells can’t slaughter everything. Even La Main de la Mort doesn’t work on
everything; it’s useless on the entire category of psychic maleficaria, since
those more or less don’t actually exist to begin with. They can still kill you,
though.

And not even a share in the New York mana pool was going to be enough
to power more than one of my major workings. There were six other New
York seniors who’d be in the graduation hall at the same time as Chloe, all
wanting hefty quantities of mana for themselves and their own teams, and
even if they didn’t mean to cut me off beforehand, they were very definitely
going to ration just how much mana I could take during the main event.

So all our planning took place at one remove: how could we get enough
mana for me to keep slaughtering mals all the way to the gates. The two key
pieces were Aadhya’s sirenspider lute and Liu’s family spell. Liu’s
grandmother had sneaked her a really powerful song-spell for mana
amplification to bring in, even though she couldn’t cast the spell alone—her
affinity was for animals, and anyway it usually took two or three of her
family’s most powerful wizards to make it work. After a lot of careful
Chinese coaching, I’d got the words down. Our strategy was, just before we



sailed into the hall, Liu would play the melody on the sirenspider lute while I
sang out the lyrics, and then she’d carry on playing even after I finished. With
a magical instrument, the spell would keep going, and our whole team would
have the benefit of amplified mana. So Liu would be in the middle of our
team, sustaining the spell; Chloe and Aadhya would be on either side of her,
covering her and me, and I’d take the lead.

That was the theory, at any rate. Unfortunately, the lute wasn’t quite
working according to plan. We’d made one experiment with it a few weeks
back while still urgently trying to make a honeypot for Orion. Liu had written
a Pied Piper spell for mals with the idea that we’d do a little parade through
some section of the corridors one evening, me singing and her playing, and
Orion whacking the mals one after another as they popped out at us.

I’ll leave you to imagine how appealing I found the prospect of wandering
around loudly calling, Here, kitty, kitty. I’ve spent my entire life trying not to
lure mals. But we needed to try out the lute, and Orion didn’t quite beg and
plead for us to get him some mals to kill, but he clearly wanted to beg and
plead, so after Aadhya finished the last bit of inlay, we agreed to give it a go.

We bolted our dinners and hurried to a spare seminar room down on the
shop level, so everyone else would still be upstairs and not in range to see us
doing anything this unbelievably stupid. Orion hovered around hopefully, and
this time we tied all the mice securely into their bandolier cups as a
precaution. That seemed to have been a good idea, because they all set up a
frantic squeaking from inside as soon as Liu started tuning the lute and I
hummed the line of melody.

In retrospect, the mice were just trying to warn us. Liu hit the first notes, I
sang three words, and the mals came from everywhere. The baby mals. Agglo
grubs came out of the drain and larval nightflyers started dropping from the
ceiling and thin scraps that looked like flat handkerchiefs that were probably
going to be digesters peeled off the walls and blobby mimics the size of a
little toe and a thousand different unrecognizable flabby things all started
coming out of every possible nook and cranny of the entire room and
converging on us like a slow horrible creeping wave swelling out of every
surface around us.



“It’s working!” Orion said delightedly.
The rest of us, not being absolute madmen, all ran for the door at once,

with mals crunching and squishing under our feet and more of them still
coming, crawling out of tiny gaps between the metal panels and oozing from
the corners and falling from the ceiling and pouring in a torrent out of the air
vent and the drain. Orion barely made it out before we had the door slammed
and were barricading it fervently against the solid mass of mals. Chloe rushed
to seal up all the edges with an entire syringe of mana-barrier gel while Liu
and I reversed the invocation and Aadhya unstrung the lute. We locked in
place there staring at the door, ready to flee, until we were sure it had stopped
bulging out any further, and then we all jumped up and down and shook
ourselves wildly and pawed and batted at one another to get the larvae out of
our hair and clothes and off our skin and onto the floor where we stomped
and crushed them in a frenzy. We’re used to flicking off larval mals—it’s
always satisfying to take them out that small when you have the chance—but
there’s a horrific difference between one tiny digester trying very hard to eat a
single square millimeter of your skin and a thousand of them speckled all
over your body and clothes and hair.

All the while Orion stood in the corridor behind us and said, exasperated
and plaintive, “But you barely even tried!” and other insane and stupid things
until we turned on him in unison and yelled at him to shut up forever and he
had the gall to mutter something—under his breath, he wasn’t suicidal—
about girls.

I was grateful that we no longer needed to find a way to provide Orion
with mals, because after that experience, none of us wanted to keep trying.
Except him. He even went so far as to talk to other human beings to try and
get more information about honeypots himself. He spent a lunch period with
half a dozen kids from the Seattle enclave and a desperate expression, and
came up to our study corner in the library afterwards and said, “Hey, I’ve
found out how you make honeypot bait,” urgently. “The main ingredient is
wizard blood. You just hold a blood drive and everyone donates…” He trailed
off, I presume as he heard the words coming out of his own mouth and saw



our faces, and then just stopped and sat down with a glum expression. That
was the end of working on honeypots.

However, we did still urgently need the lute. And instead of getting to
work on that, or at least something else useful, Aadhya had to very carefully
design a garden planter, then I had to rewrite her design back into Urdu for
her, also very carefully, and when the Scholomance delivered the finished
product to be tested, the most useful thing she could do with it was plant
some carrot tops from the cafeteria. It produced carrots roughly the size of a
gnome’s top hat. We fed them to our mice. Precious ate hers very daintily,
sitting up and holding it in her forepaws and nibbling it from tip to end before
carefully handing back the leafy top to be planted again.

At least the planter was reasonably sure to net Aadhya a decent mark. I
was less sure to get decent marks in Development of Algebra: all the readings
were in the original languages, and specifically in Chinese and Arabic, the
ones that I’d just barely started. Aadhya could generally figure out for me
what the actual equations being described were, so I could do the problem
sets, but sitting the midterm essay exam—compare and contrast Sharaf al
Tusi’s explanation of polynomial evaluation with that of Qin Jiushao, including
examples of usage—had been an experience worth forgetting as quickly as
possible. The only part of those readings I had actually done were the names,
which had been enough for me to look the authors up in the library, find out
that Horner had reinvented the same process, and learn it in English instead.
I’d felt so clever, too.

So I was holding my breath when I went to class that whole week. We
don’t know exactly when we’re going to get our marks. Predictably, I got my
safest one first: a B+, for the Proto-Indo-European seminar. Our class was
now being held on the second floor, but in an even smaller room and sharing a
wall with the alchemy supply room, so we were constantly hearing banging as
people went in and out. Liesel glared at me through every class session with
cold resentment, and mals would often attack the alchemy supply room
thanks to my being on the other side, which made me as wildly popular as
you’d think. Enough mals were creeping out of the woodwork at this point in



the year that they’d finally started to come after people other than me once in
a while, but I remained top item on the menu.

The rest of my marks trickled in grudgingly over the next couple of days:
a B+ for the Myrddin seminar and a pass on my shop assignment—a
sacrificial obsidian dagger, clearly intended for unpleasant purposes, which I’d
chosen because it was the quickest of my options to knock off, so I could use
the free time to finish the book chest for my sutras. I also netted a pass for my
alchemy section, where I’d had to brew a vat of sludging acid that could etch
through flesh and bone in three seconds.

The next Monday morning I finally I got my algebra results, a D, and
wiped my metaphorical brow, and then just had to wait for my last mark, on
my independent study. I’d really wanted the bad news already, so the whole
week after midterms, I tried to bait it out: I kept my head down and focused
on my desk the entire time, and then looked away for a solid thirty seconds
only right in the middle of class, so there was only the one opening for it to
drop, which usually gets you the mark early on. But instead it didn’t come
until the tail end of the week.

Except that day I was working on the last piece of the first major working
of the sutras, and I’d got so deep into it that I forgot to pause mid-class. My
bolted-down desk was a monstrous thing of wrought iron—I scraped my
knees on the underside every other week at least—and the only silver lining
of it was having the space to spread out. I always kept the sutras right in front
of me, wrapped up in a leather harness Aadhya had made me: it went over the
ends of each cover, with soft wide ribbons that I kept tied down around all the
pages except the handful that I was working on that day. It had a foot-long
strap attached that buckled around my left wrist, so at an instant’s notice I
could just leap up and the book would stay with me even if I had to use both
hands for casting. I stood my dictionaries open on end above it, and I used a
three-inch memo pad for my notes, which I held in my hands braced on the
edge of the desk so it wouldn’t touch the sutra pages.

It’s not that the book was so fragile; it was made out of really lovely heavy
paper and didn’t look like it had aged more than two months since the last bit
of gilt had dried. But that was clearly because it had snuck away from its



original owner roughly two months after the last bit of gilt had dried, and I
didn’t want that to happen to me, so I cosseted it as much as possible. It was
worth having sore wrists at the end of each class. Whenever I ran out of space
on my tiny notepad—often—I just tore off the filled sheet and stuck it into a
folder I kept on the side, and each night I rewrote them into a larger notebook
in my bedroom.

That day I had filled about thirty tiny pages with tight handwritten notes.
The bell was about to ring and I was still going when the whole folder did a
sort of angry jerk and went flying sideways off my desk, scattering paper
everywhere; I gave a yowl of protest and grabbed for it, too late, and then had
to pack up in a hurry, expecting something to jump me at any moment. I only
realized that it had been my mark being delivered when I finally had all my
notes collected again. I opened the folder to stuff them back in, and the little
slip of green paper was tucked in the pocket, with adv. readings in sansk
poking out above the top. I pulled it out and glared at the A+ with a footnote
asterisk going to special commendation at the bottom, which was just
rubbing it in: Look at all your misspent time. I could practically hear the
Scholomance sniggering at me from the ventilation system. But that was just
pettiness, and overall I heaved a sigh of relief; it could’ve been loads worse.

It was loads worse for other people. At lunch that day, Cora came to our
table with her face tight with pain and her arm wrapped up in her beautiful
yellow head tie with the embroidered protection charm, blood soaking
through it in spreading dark patches. “Failed shop,” she said, her voice
ragged. She had her tray held tight against her waist with her other arm, and
the contents were pretty scanty. But she didn’t ask for help. She probably
couldn’t afford it. She hadn’t nailed down an alliance of her own yet.

She and Nkoyo and Jowani were friends, and they’d been great help for
one another for tables and walking to class, but the same reason they’d been
great for that was why they weren’t a viable graduation team: all three of
them were incantations-track, and doing all the same languages. And Nkoyo
was going to get decent alliance offers. In fact, she probably had one already,
since just that morning she’d carefully mentioned that she might sit with
someone else tomorrow for breakfast. A lot of alliances happened after



midterm marks cleared. But Jowani and Cora were going to be stuck until
after the end of the semester, when the enclavers had got their alliances set
and the leftovers sorted themselves out.

It’s not that they were loads worse as students, even. As far as I knew, they
were all three somewhere in the middle of the pack as far as classwork went.
But Nkoyo was a star, and they weren’t. She’d always been the one who made
the friends and connections, and when you thought of the three of them, you
always thought of her in the lead. They’d leaned on her social skills the whole
time, and that had been good for them—right until now, when everyone
thought Nkoyo, and not one of them.

Most years, that meant their odds were going to be somewhere in the 10
percent range. The rule is that 50 percent of the graduating class makes it out,
but that doesn’t mean it’s even odds. The kids in enclaver alliances almost all
get out, with maybe one or two members picked off each team—rarely the
enclave kids themselves—and that’s roughly 40 percent of the class. So the
ones who die almost all come out of the 60 percent who don’t have an
enclaver on their side. Of course, even that leaves you with better odds than
you get on the outside of the Scholomance, which is why kids keep coming.

If the cleansing machinery down in the graduation hall really had got
fixed, if it stayed fixed this year, they might make it out after all. But it
wouldn’t improve Cora’s odds any to be going into the second half of the
semester with a bad arm that she’d got because she’d screwed up and
misjudged the amount of effort to put into her shop assignment. No enclaver
was going to look at that arm and ask her to join their team. She sat down
carefully, doing her best not to jostle the wound, but once she was down she
still had to shut her eyes for a few long minutes, taking deep breaths before
she tried to fumble at her milk one-handed and shaky.

Nkoyo silently reached over and got it and opened it. Cora took it and
drank without looking at her. Nkoyo hadn’t taken unfair advantage. She’d
helped them make it this far; it wasn’t on her if she couldn’t take them the
whole way, if they weren’t good enough and she had to jettison them to make
it herself, like boosters of rocket fuel falling away spent while the orbital
module went flying on past gravity. There wasn’t anything she could do to



save them, and they’d made their own choices, getting here. But Cora still
didn’t look her in the face, and Nkoyo still didn’t say anything to her, and all
of us at the table pretended we weren’t looking at Cora’s blood-stained arm
when of course we were.

I didn’t know I was going to say anything until I did. “I can patch the arm
if everyone at the table will help,” I said, and everyone paused eating and
stared at me, either sidelong or just straight-out gawking. I hadn’t thought it
through, just blurting it out, but the only thing to do in the face of the stares
was push onward. “It’s a circle working. No one has to put in any extra mana,
it’ll work if we all just hold the circle, but everyone already here has to do it.”

That’s actually a simplification of how the spell in question operates. The
underlying principle is that you have to get a group of people to willingly put
aside their selves and offer their time and energy to help perform a working
for someone else’s benefit that doesn’t help any of them directly. And the
trick is, once you ask a particular group, if anybody in the group refuses or
can’t make themselves do it, the spell fails. It’s one of Mum’s, if you couldn’t
tell already.

Nobody said anything for a moment. It’s not even remotely how things
work in here. You don’t do anything for anyone without some kind of return,
and the return’s always got to be something solid, unless there’s some more
substantial connection in place: an alliance, dating, something. But that’s why
I knew the spell would work if everyone did agree. It means a lot more in
here than outside to do something for nothing. Even Cora herself was just
staring at me confused. We weren’t even friends; she was willing to sit at a
table with me now, when Chloe Rasmussen from New York was my ally and
Orion Lake himself would be here as soon as he came off the line with his
tray, but she’d barely tolerated my company all those years when Nkoyo used
to let me tag along behind them on the way to language lab in the mornings.
She was standoffish in general, and had always been a bit jealous of Nkoyo’s
company, but it was more than that: she was aces at spirit magic, her family
had a really long tradition of it, and she had clearly thought—and probably
still did—that I was carrying some kind of unpleasant baggage on mine.



Nkoyo didn’t say anything. She was staring at her own tray without
looking up, her lips curled in between her teeth, her hands curled on either
side, waiting, waiting for someone else to speak. I really wished Orion had
made it to the table already, and then Chloe said, “Okay,” and held a hand out
to Aadhya, who was sitting between us.

Aadhya was definitely in the sidelong-eye camp, less at the request than at
me: I could all but hear her saying okay, El, are you trying to develop a martyr
thing of your own now or what, but after one good hard look, she just sighed
and said, “Yeah, sure,” and took Chloe’s hand and held her other out to me. I
took it, and as soon as I did I felt the living line of the circle building. I turned
and offered my other one to Nadia, Ibrahim’s friend. She glanced over at
Ibrahim but then after a moment took it, and he took hers and reached out to
Yaakov across the table.

I’d been in circles with Mum a handful of times. She hadn’t asked me very
often, almost always only when it was magical harm, usually someone
suffering from a spell a maleficer had put on them or a complication from
some spell they’d cast themselves, or the attack of some maleficaria. Healing
something like that is a lot easier if you have another wizard helping, even a
kid, instead of just you and a bunch of enthusiastic mundanes who can’t
actually hold mana. But she didn’t ask me a lot, because most wizards who
came to her for help couldn’t keep from getting uneasy round me. They were
already vulnerable, so when they looked at me they were rabbits looking at a
wolf—a half-starved wolf who sometimes snapped even at the hand that fed
her because it also kept her on a leash. I never really wanted to help them.
They were sick and weak and cursed and poisoned and desperate, but they
were still part of the pack that hated me, that left me alone and scared and
desperate myself. So Mum only asked me when she badly needed the power
that came from me agreeing to help anyway, because otherwise she knew I’d
say no sometimes. And I’d done it, grudgingly, partly to make Mum happy,
partly to try and prove to myself I wasn’t what they saw when they looked at
me.

But I’d never cast a circle by myself before. The idea’s straightforward
enough: the mana everyone puts in flows through all of us in the circle, and



because everyone shares the same purpose, it gets intensified. So you just let
the mana keep circling around until it builds up high enough. But just because
the idea is easy to describe doesn’t mean it’s easy to do.

In fact, I realized too late it was going to be even harder because everyone
else around the table was a wizard. With Mum’s spell, you can heal internal
injuries with a circle of ordinary people because you don’t need any more
mana than you produce just by making the effort to stay in the circle, and you
just need one wizard in the mix to “catch” the mana and hold it for long
enough to pour it into the spell. With a bunch of almost adult wizards, we
were building up a lot of mana really fast, and I could already feel everybody
else sort of tugging on it. It wasn’t even on purpose; if anyone had deliberately
tried to grab the mana for themselves, the circle would’ve fallen apart. But all
of us are actively thinking about some kind of magical work every minute of
the day and most of the night; we’ve all got spells half worked out and artifice
projects in progress and potions brewing in the lab and graduation graduation
graduation in our heads, and here was all this mana to work with, and I was
asking them to think about using it to save Cora’s arm instead of their own
necks.

It was hard for them and hard for me. I had to concentrate ferociously
hard on the healing spell while the circle grew along the sides of the table and
one by one everyone a little uncertainly added their hands. Jowani and Nkoyo
closed it at the end, their hands clasped behind Cora’s back, and when they
did, the circle established and the full mana flow started. Everyone jumped or
squeaked. I should’ve warned them, but I couldn’t actually say anything at this
point that wasn’t the spell. Anyway, I didn’t have any mental energy to spare.
Everyone kept hold, the mana of that choice feeding along, being reinforced
over and over by all of us intent on the same goal, one that wasn’t for us, so
there wasn’t much of either hope or fear to cloud the intention. And the
surprise didn’t hurt, it helped, because everyone chose to stay in the circle
anyway.

Well, it helped build mana. But I started to feel more or less like I’d
volunteered to ride a particularly violent horse and it was doing its best to
heave me off while I clung in desperation to the edge of the saddle. The mana



was a building wave traveling around the circle, getting bigger as it went; I
tried to cast the spell literally the first time it came by me, but it happened so
fast that I missed, which meant the wave got even bigger the next time around
and even more unruly: that much mana surging through everyone was
extremely inspiring to everyone’s imagination. When it came back a second
time, I had to make a tremendous mental heave to drag it firmly out of the
circle and into the spell.

At least the words weren’t hard to remember. Mum doesn’t like complex
or detailed incantations. You don’t need them when you go straight for the
requirement of pure noble unselfishness. “Let Cora’s arm be healed, let Cora’s
arm be whole, let Cora’s arm be well,” I said, feeling like I was gasping it out
while treading in deep water, my head tipped back to keep my mouth above
the surface, and the mana went roaring through me and out of me.

The spell blew the wrap off Cora’s arm with the crisp snapping sound of
someone shaking out a freshly laundered pillowcase. She made a squawking
noise and grabbed at her elbow: just like that, her whole arm was smooth and
unmarred as if nothing had happened to it at all. She opened and closed her
hand a couple of times, and then she burst into tears and put her head down
on the table with her arms huddled around it protectively, trying to hide from
us all while she sobbed. The yellow tie, hanging from the crook of her elbow,
fluttered one more time like a banner, even the bloodstains gone.

The rule is, when someone has a breakdown, you carefully don’t pay any
attention to them and just carry on the conversation until they get hold of
themselves. But the circumstances were a bit unusual, and it’s not as though
there were an existing conversation to carry on. Yaakov said a prayer in
Hebrew softly to himself, and bowed his head, but none of the rest of us were
religious, so while he had a nice spiritual moment with himself, we all just
carried on being awkward and glancing round at each other to avoid staring at
Cora, which obviously we all wanted to do. Jowani, who was on her left, was
losing the fight and letting his eyes slant down to peek.

“What did you do?” Orion demanded, and made me jump; he’d come up
to the empty seat Aadhya had left for him, next to me, and he was staring at



Cora exactly the way the rest of us were trying so hard not to. “What was
that? You just—”

“We did a circle healing,” I said, dismissively, which took some effort.
“You’d better hurry up and eat, Lake, it’s nearly to the warning bell. Have you
got your alchemy seminar marks yet?”

He put his tray down and sat next to me almost like he was moving in slow
motion, without taking his eyes off Cora. He hadn’t shaved in a week, and
he’d been looking unkempt even before that; his hair had grown back out to a
length that required at least running your fingers through it to keep it in order
—we have low standards—but he wasn’t doing even that. His Thor t-shirt
hadn’t changed in four days and was more than usually aromatic, and there
were lingering smudges of soot and glittery blue asphodelium powder on his
cheek. I was resolutely not saying a word, because it was none of my affair
and it was going to keep being none of my affair until he became so stinky
that I could justify complaining purely on the grounds of sharing a table, by
which point maybe someone else would beat me to it. Probably not: most kids
in here are more likely to bottle the scent and sell it as Eau de Lake or
something. I suspected that he’d been spending the last few weeks hunting
those just-past-larval-stage mals that had started creeping out of the
plumbing.

I jabbed him in the side with an elbow, and he finally jolted out of it
enough to stare at me instead. “Food. Alchemy marks. Well?”

He looked down at his tray: oh, how surprising, food! Things to eat to
keep you alive! That’s about as much as you can say for Scholomance cuisine.
He started eating it fast enough after he got over the massive surprise of
rediscovering its existence, and said out of the corner of his mouth, “No,
today I guess, or Friday,” but he kept staring at Cora until I poked him again
for being a rude wanker and he realized it and jerked his eyes down to his
plate.

“You’ve had to see a circle working sometime, living in New York,” I
said.

“They don’t feel like that,” he said, and then had the nerve to ask me,
“Was there any malia in it?”



“That’s meant to be funny, is it?” I said. “No, you aardvark, it’s one of my
mum’s healing circle spells. You don’t get any return at all.”

That’s not true, at least according to Mum: she insists that you always gain
more than you give when you give your work freely, only you don’t know
when the return will come and you can’t think about it or anticipate it, and it
won’t take the shape you expect, so in other words, the return is completely
unprovable and useless. On the other hand, no venture capitalists are lining up
to give me rides in their private jets, so what do I know?

“Huh,” Orion said, sounding vaguely dubious, like he wasn’t sure he
believed me.

“It’s negative malia if it’s anything,” I said. Occasionally, a repentant
maleficer comes to Mum for help, someone like Liu was on the way to being:
not the gleefully monstrous ones but the ones who went partway down the
road—usually to make it through puberty alive—and have now changed their
minds and would like to go back. She won’t do spirit cleansing for them or
anything like that, but if they ask sincerely, she’ll let them join her circle, and
generally once they’ve spent as many years doing the circle work as they did
being maleficers, they come right again, and she tells them to go and make a
circle of their own somewhere.

“Maybe that’s why it feels weird to you,” Aadhya said to Orion. “Are you
seeing an aura?”

“Nmgh,” Orion said with half a pound of spaghetti dangling out of his
mouth. He heaved the rest of it in and swallowed. “It’s more like—for a
minute, she had these really crisp edges. Like you do sometimes,” he added
to me, and then he blushed and stared down at his plate.

I glared at him, completely unflattered. “And why exactly did that make
you think it was using malia?”

“Uh” was the feeble response. “It’s—maybe it’s just power?” he tried,
kind of desperately.

“Do mals have these crisp edges?” I demanded.
“No?” Under my continuing glare, he wilted. “Some of them?

Sometimes?”



I stewed over it while shoving in the rest of my own dinner. Apparently I
looked like a maleficaria to him occasionally? Although Orion didn’t see
anything odd about human maleficers: he hadn’t noticed our life-eating
neighbor Jack was one until after that charmer had tried to leave my intestines
piled on the floor of my room. And all right, there’re so many wizards who
use small bits of malia here and there, stolen from things like plants or bugs
or filched from a piece of work that someone else left unattended, that Orion
could plausibly have a hard time picking the hardcore maleficers out. Those
of us who strictly use only mana that we’ve raised ourselves or that someone
has given us freely are the minority. But still: apparently I’m visibly more of a
monster than an evil wizard is. Hurrah.

And an even larger hurrah: Orion found that appealing. It sounded too
much like Aadhya had been right about what Orion saw in me. I’m not some
sort of pallid romantic who insists on being loved for my shining inner being.
My inner being is exceptionally cranky and I often don’t want her company
myself, and anyway one of the main reasons I’d been avoiding Orion’s room
lately was the strong feeling that it would be for the best for all concerned if I
didn’t see him with his shirt off again anytime soon, so that would be pot and
kettle. But I was unenthusiastic about the prospect of being found attractive
because I seem like a terrifying creation of dark sorcery instead of despite it.

I stewed enough over it that I completely missed the implication of the
rest of what Orion had said until I was slogging upstairs to my Wednesday
library session. Just short of the top stair—where my entire gaggle of
freshmen were waiting for me to lead them to whatever potential doom I was
scheduled to save them from today—I halted, and realized that if Orion
hadn’t got his results from his senior seminar yet, it wasn’t because he was
going to get an A+, since he’d been falling down on everything badly enough
to forget changing his t-shirt. He was going to fail.

And when you fail alchemy, you don’t get attacked by mals. You just get
to interact very intimately with your last brewing assignment, and being an
invincible monster-killing machine does you absolutely no good against being
doused in a vat of etching acid used to carve mystical runes into steel, which
had been Orion’s midterm assignment.



I stared up the last few stairs at the eight freshmen, who were all peering
anxiously back at me, and then I said, “Right, field trip today,” and turned
round to lead them downstairs on a three-stairs-at-a-time rush barely short of
sending them pell-mell the whole way to the bottom. I had to actually grab
Zheng to stop him tumbling past the alchemy floor landing. Once I’d steadied
him, I ran for it down the corridor with the pack of them behind me, as fast
as their considerably shorter legs could carry them. I didn’t know what room
Orion was in, so I just shoved open every lab door I saw and yelled in,
“Lake?” until someone yelled back, “He’s in two ninety-three!” I turned and
ran past the pack of freshmen still going the other way, all of them wheeling
to follow me like a flock of confused geese. I passed the landing and went on
the other way, threw open the door to 293, and without even breaking stride
tackled Orion away from the lab bench, just as the bell for the start of class
rang and all the complex brewing equipment at his station started to rattle and
belch smoke.

The large copper vat foamed over so energetically that the whole lid got
lifted off and clanged away onto the floor atop a massive and expanding
column of violet foam that poured over the sides and then cascaded down
from the surface of the table and over the floor, enormous black billows of
smoke hissing up in its path. There was a lot of screaming and running from
the rest of the students that only made things worse, other experiments going
up as they were hastily abandoned. We fumbled up to our feet together, but
we couldn’t see a thing; I kept a death grip on Orion’s wrist and would have
walked us both the wrong way, only the freshmen all started yelling from the
door, “El! El!” and Zheng and Jingxi and Sunita—I’d been trying really hard
not to learn their names, but it wasn’t going very well—even made a line into
the room and cast light spells to give us a path.

We were still coughing horribly by the time we managed to make it out
into the corridor, and I couldn’t speak afterwards until Sudarat came round,
giving us each a drink of water out of her charmed portable flask, but I could
and did immediately smack Orion along the back of his unnecessarily thick
skull and then waggled my hand with all five fingers spread out in his face, for
emphasis. He gave me a halfhearted scowl and batted it away.



OceanofPDF.com



“I should do this in the lab,” Orion said.
“You don’t need the equipment in front of your face to copy out a

clear recipe, Lake, and you needn’t think you’re being clever, either,” I said,
because what he really meant was, he should get to wander around the
corridors and poke his beaky nose into every room on the alchemy floor until
he found some poor unsuspecting half-grown nightcrawler or striga and got to
slaughter them. “How you’ve got through three and a quarter years in here
without learning when you have to pay attention to your work is beyond me.”

He groaned deeply and put his head down on the desk, which was my old
study carrel in the nook of the library. I’d taken great pleasure in using New
York mana to clear out the still-waiting booby trap that Magnus had left for



me last term; it was one of the first things I’d done when Chloe had given me
the power-sharer. Hauling Orion up to the library and shoving him into a dark
corner was my latest attempt to actually get him to do his remedial alchemy
assignment, which was absolutely going to disintegrate him before the end of
the month, along with several innocent bystanders and possibly me if he didn’t
actually buckle down to it. I’d started making him show me his progress every
evening at dinner, and since there hadn’t been any in the week and a half
since the last time he’d nearly got me disintegrated, I’d dragged him out of
bed at first bell this fine Saturday morning and marched him upstairs after
breakfast.

Even in here, with no distractions, he spent at least ten minutes gazing
woebegone at his lab instructions for every one minute he spent actually
reading them. “What is wrong with you?” I asked, after another hour and
several more heaved sighs. “You weren’t a complete incompetent before. Are
you getting senioritis or something?” That’s a highly fatal condition in the
Scholomance.

“I’m just tired,” he said. “The mals keep hiding from me, there aren’t
enough of them, I’m low on mana all the time—no, I don’t want it!” he added
with a snap, when I reached for the power-sharer on my wrist again. “If I
could find any mals to use mana on, I wouldn’t need to suck it from the pool!”

“What you need to use mana on is your alchemy assignment, so stop being
a numpty, take some, and get it done!” I said.

He ground his teeth and then said sulkily, “Fine, but just give me some,
don’t give me the sharer.”

That made less than no sense, since you lose some mana in each transfer.
Not loads or anything, but even a little bit was a pointless waste of someone
else’s deeply annoying work. “Is this some sort of kinky thing you’ve got
going?” I said suspiciously.

“No! You know I can’t have access to the pool.”
“Right, because you’ve got lousy mana discipline and you’ll pull gobs

when you’re not paying attention,” I said. I wasn’t going to coddle him about
it. “So what? Pay attention for five seconds.”



His alchemy assignment had suddenly developed a powerful fascination,
judging by how hard he was staring down at it. “It’s not—it doesn’t work that
way.”

“What, if you get access you’ll suck the whole thing dry involuntarily?” I
said, sarcastically, except he flushed red as though that was really on the table.
“Are you speaking from some kind of experience here, or—”

“I got a power-sharer to practice with six months before induction, like
everybody else,” Orion said in totally flat tones. “I sucked the entire enclave’s
active reservoir dry in half an hour. Even my mom couldn’t pull me off it.” I
gawked at him in disbelief. He didn’t turn his head, just twitched his
shoulders in a stiff, brief shrug. “She thinks it’s got something to do with me
being able to pull from mals. That it’s the same kind of channel, and I can’t
tell the difference.”

I was staring at him in fascination. “Why didn’t you just—pop?” It
sounded like filling a water balloon from a firehose. I’ve got what anyone
would call a reasonable mana capacity, namely a hundred times the average,
and even that couldn’t be a noticeable fraction of the active mana reservoir of
the entire New York enclave. He only shrugged impatiently, as if he’d never
bothered to give it a thought.

“And what on earth did you use it all for? That much mana, you should
still be coasting along for the next ten years even if you were doing major
arcana every day.”

“I didn’t want to take the mana! I put it back! As soon as my dad made
me the one-way sharer.” He held up his wrist with his narrow band around it.
He sounded a little frayed, and it occurred to me: of course those wankers at
his enclave had probably made him feel like a maleficer over it, or worse. One
of the more common ways that enclaves get taken down is if one of their
enemies gets a traitor on the inside to steal a batch of the enclave’s mana pool
and hand it over, and then the enemy enclave can destroy them using their
own power. It’s happened a handful of times, all of them a popular subject for
wizard storytelling, at least among kids who don’t live in enclaves. It might
well be how Bangkok had been taken down, in fact.



“How long did it take your dad to make it?” I asked, and Orion’s shoulders
hunched.

“A week,” he muttered. I imagine all the grown wizards in New York had
really enjoyed a thirteen-year-old walking around with the mana to wreck
their entire enclave in his belly, and had made sure he enjoyed that week just
as much as they did.

I wanted to go throw rocks at them, and also possibly to put my arms
round Orion and hug him, but obviously those were equally impossible, so
instead I just gave him a bracing thump on the shoulder and said heartily,
“Let’s set you to rights, then.”

I pulled a substantial helping of mana through the power-sharer. I’d only
ever been taking mana out of the pool for crisis situations; it felt odd doing it
deliberately, without anything threatening me. It wasn’t like getting mana out
of the crystals Mum gave me, the mana I stored myself; that mana had a
different kind of feel to it, a bit rougher round the edges, like I could still feel
the work and pain that I’d put into it. Or maybe it was just that when I did it,
I was always thinking of the work and pain I’d have to go through to replace
anything I took. It was easier and smoother to pull mana back out of the
shared pool, the pool I didn’t have to fill up all by myself, and I was already
hopelessly used to it. Orion wasn’t the only greedy one. I could’ve gladly
drunk of it until I filled up every empty corner of myself.

But instead I took a carefully measured amount, the amount I usually put
in on brewing an alchemy recipe myself, and I put my hand on his chest and
nudged it at him. He gave a gasp and shut his eyes, covering my hand with his
and pressing it there a moment, and I could feel his chest expanding and his
heart beating thump and his skin warm through the thin worn fabric of his t-
shirt—at least it was clean, I’d made him change it and shower this morning,
but we’d climbed four flights of stairs and I could smell him a bit anyway,
except it was a nice smell, and he opened his eyes and stared at me and kept
his hand over mine, mana flowing between us, and I was almost certain
something was going to happen and that I wasn’t going to stop it happening,
and while I was also almost certain that it was a bad idea, it felt like the sort
of bad idea that’s great fun at the time, and then Orion yanked his hand back



squalling, “Ow!” His thumb was dripping blood. Precious had climbed out of
her cup and down my arm without me even noticing and bit him.

I glared at her incredulously while Orion whimpered his way through
digging out a plaster from his backpack and covering up the mark of her
deeply planted incisors. She sat on the edge of the desk washing her face and
whiskers with an air of enormous satisfaction. “I don’t need a chaperone,
much less one who’s a mouse,” I hissed at her under my breath. “Aren’t you
lot having babies when you’re a month old?” She only twitched her nose at
me dismissively.

Orion avoided looking at me at all the rest of the morning, which was
quite a trick when we were sitting next to each other. Of course, I managed it
myself, too. I wasn’t at all tempted to do otherwise. Even in the moment,
whatever we’d been about to do had seemed like a bad idea, and thankfully I
wasn’t in the moment anymore. I’d never been in a moment with anyone
before and I didn’t like it at all. What business did my brain have coming up
with a patently stupid idea like kissing Orion Lake in the stacks instead of
doing my classwork? It felt like nothing more than the symptoms of a
mindworm infestation, per the description in the sophomore maleficaria
textbook: mysterious and uncharacteristic foreign thoughts inserting
themselves at unwanted and unpredictable times. If only I had a mindworm
infestation. All I had was Orion sitting next to me in his too-small t-shirt from
sophomore year that was the only clean one he had left this week and his arm
about four inches away from mine.

I spent those three hours staring at my latest poem from Myrddin class,
which strangely refused to translate itself. At this rate, soon I’d start failing
my own classes. To add insult to injury, when the bell for lunch rang, Orion
sat back in his chair and sighed and said, “There, I got it,” and he’d finished
the entire worksheet. He’d still have to actually brew the potion, but that
wasn’t a horrible burden: it was a reflex-boosting concoction that would make
him even more of a terror to mals everywhere. It was an outrageously good
remedial assignment. My remedial alchemy assignments are always poisons
that kill instantly, kill gruesomely, or sometimes kill instantly and
gruesomely.



“Good,” I said sourly, packing up. “Do you need any more help with it,
Lake, or do you think you can manage the measuring spoons after lunch
without supervision?”

“I’ll be fine,” he said, with a glare, and then he remembered that
something had almost happened and apparently he didn’t think it had been
such a bad idea as all that, because he stopped glaring and blurted, “Unless
you want to come,” which was horribly absurd: Want to come help me with my
remedial alchemy assignment down in the lab was possibly the worst date ever
and he had absolutely no business inviting anyone to do it, and I had
absolutely no business even thinking about saying yes.

And I’d also promised Aadhya to help her tune the lute this afternoon, so I
couldn’t say yes. Just as well. “Don’t be ridiculous,” I said coolly, as I
snatched up my last two books. He went sheepish and curled in, and I swept
away into the aisle back towards the reading room and the stairs, silently
congratulating myself on having stomped on his aspirations, except as we
started to clear our trays, Aadhya said to me, “Are we still on for tuning the
lute now?” and Orion shot a narrow-eyed look across the table at me like Oh
so you would have said yes otherwise wouldn’t you. I avoided his eyes. He
didn’t need any more ideas than he already had, and neither did I. Instead I
hurried off with Aadhya to an empty classroom to work on the lute, only the
instant we got clear of other people she nudged me in the arm and raised her
eyebrows and was all, “Wellllll?”

“What?” I said.
She gave me a shove. “Are you dating now?”
“No!”
“Oh, come on, seriously, look me in the face and tell me you didn’t kiss at

least once up there,” Aadhya said.
“We didn’t!” I said, in glad and perfect honesty, and at dinner I grudgingly

gave Precious the three ripe red grapes out of the fruit cup I’d bagged that
was otherwise only full of tired-looking honeydew and pale underripe
pineapple chunks that stung in my mouth. “Don’t take this as
encouragement,” I told her. She accepted them with smug graciousness and



ate all three one after another and went to sleep in her cup with her tiny belly
distended.

There’re almost no holidays in the Scholomance. They’d be a pointless fiction,
but that’s not why we don’t have them; we don’t have them because we—and
the school—can’t afford them. We need to be working, all the time, just to
keep the lights on. So there’s only graduation and induction day, on the
second of July, and the semesters are divided around the first of January,
which is also when the senior class rankings get posted and the winter
cleansing happens. But that leaves one extra day in the first semester, which
the Americans decided was a terrible problem that obviously had to be
addressed. So one day each fall, after the last of the remedial post-midterms
work has been turned in—or not—we have Field Day.

It is a notable milestone in the year: it marks the start of the killing season.
By then, all the mals that go into hibernation or reproductive phases after
graduation have woken up and are finding ways back upstairs, or their
adorable new babies have squirmed their own way up, and the competition
among them gets more aggressive. Roughly one in seven freshmen die
between Field Day and New Year’s, as I’d loudly and repeatedly informed all
of mine, whose names had all got into my head at this point despite my best
efforts. It’s never a good idea to get attached to freshmen, and doing it this
early in the year was an invitation to misery, but after they’d saved me and
Orion from blundering around almost choking ourselves to death, it had worn
off enough of the cold-aloof-senior mystique I’d cultivated that they’d started
talking to me. Even my most aggressive snappishness wasn’t discouraging
them sufficiently anymore.

I gather that the usual purpose of a Field Day is to build school spirit by
letting people run around doing sport in the fresh air and cheering each other
on in their achievements. We don’t have any fresh air or school spirit, so
instead we all gather together down in the gymnasium and cheer each other



on for having stayed alive long enough to experience another Field Day.
Attendance is mandatory, and enforced by the cafeteria being closed all day,
so the only place to get food is the buffet that gets laid on in the gym in an
enormous bank of antique Automat-style cases that are trundled out for the
occasion. I have no idea where they go the rest of the time. You can only
unlock them by feeding in tokens, which you can only get by participating in
the various delightful games like relay races and dodgeball. To add to the
festive atmosphere, normally at least one or two kids get eaten on the way
down to the gym, since there are enough mals out there who can remember
dates and know there’s going to be a buffet laid on for them along the stairs
and corridors.

When the Scholomance first opened back in 1880, there were several
really complex multilayered spells on the gym to give students the illusion of
being outside in nature, complete with trees and open skies above that would
go from day to night. It was the masterpiece of a crack team of artificers from
Kyoto. Even at the time, Kyoto was powerful enough that Manchester
couldn’t afford to just blow them off completely when the school was being
constructed, so instead Manchester fobbed them off with the gym. Kyoto
took revenge by making it so spectacular that everyone who got to tour the
place couldn’t talk of anything else. There are several raving accounts framed
up on the walls amid the blueprints, with antique photos that are supposedly
of the gymnasium but look exactly like photos from a guidebook to the
Japanese countryside.

No one’s seen the illusions working in more than a hundred years. After
Patience and Fortitude, our resident maw-mouths, first made themselves at
home in the graduation hall, and all the maintenance started being done by
students, the whole thing fell apart. The plants all died so long ago that there’s
not even dirt left, just the empty ironwork planters, and the color has faded
out of the distant shifting murals of hills and mountains, so now they look
like a landscape out of the afterlife. There’s one week in springtime when a
scattering of bleached-white ghostly scraps come drifting down mysteriously
—all that’s left of the cherry blossom experience. Occasionally stark bare
trees sprout up, and there’s a small pagoda that occasionally appears and



vanishes again. I don’t think anyone’s ever been mad enough to go inside, but
if they have, they’ve never come out again to report.

But the sunlamps still work, and at least there’s wide-open room to run
around and move, with an enormously high ceiling that lets you see mals
dropping on you with plenty of warning. Most kids love the gym. I’ve avoided
the place for virtually my entire Scholomance career. Mals come to the gym
all the time; it’s on the lowest floor, so it’s the first stop for any of them who
have managed to squirm past the wards from below. It’s a bad place to be a
solitary zebra. And if I ever tried to join anything as casual as a game of tag,
within a few minutes everyone else in the group had mysteriously decided
they were moving on to something else that involved picking teams, and I’d
always be odd one out. I did try to go running on my own instead, but that
made me just a bit of an appealing target, and the other kids would make
things worse. They’d deliberately move their game or some piece of
equipment they’d cobbled together so that I’d have to run through a narrow
lane near the walls, or cross some convoluted bit of greyish landscaping just
right for mals to hide in. It wasn’t simply out of pure dislike. Not that they
didn’t dislike me, but anything that got me would be something that didn’t get
them.

So I don’t go to the gym. Instead I exercise alone in my room to build
mana, and it’s always good for a boost if I first dwell on why I’ve got to do it
alone in my room, and being rejected and outcast. That’s the kind of thing
that makes you really not want to exercise and just lie on your bed and eat ice
cream, except there’s no ice cream to be had in the Scholomance, which
makes you feel worse, and if you can force yourself to exercise anyway
despite being miserable and not wanting to, voilà, extra mana.

But I’ve gone to every Field Day. I could never afford to miss a day of
eating, much less one of the best days of eating we get each year. At least on
Field Day, the activities are set and you just queue up to do each one, so I
couldn’t be left out comprehensively. And because of all that exercise I do
alone in my room, I usually come out with a fair haul of tokens. And an even
larger haul of resentment, since I’m clearly a good choice for teams and still
never get picked.



Even this year, going into the gym I was ready, automatically, for Aadhya
and Liu to ditch me. I don’t mean I expected that to happen—it would’ve
been a horrid surprise—but some part of my brain was planning for it
anyway, working out the kind of strategy I’ve always needed to have for Field
Day. First I’d go for the rope climb, because everyone avoids it early on, when
there still might be some mals hiding in the ceiling panels or camouflaged
against the dingy mottled grey that was once the sky. So the queue is short
and you can get the tickets quick, and while you’re up there, you take a look
round and see which other activities have the short queues, because if you
don’t have allies watching your back, overall your best odds are to take a few
risks up front and get enough tickets to spend the rest of the day eating and
performing perfunctory cheers until people start to head back to their rooms.

So I was primed and ready to be abandoned and left on the sidelines.
What I wasn’t ready for was Magnus. Oh, I’d have reacted at speed if he’d
tried to slip me some kind of contact poison or if he’d sent some minor
gnawing construct to chew through a rope while I was on it. I was, however,
completely unprepared for what he actually did.

A shoving match started while I was queued up with Aadhya and Liu and
Chloe for the relay race, and a bunch of big senior boys went tumbling across
the queue, cutting me and Chloe off. It turned into everyone shoving angrily,
trying to keep their places or get better ones in the confusion, and we ended
up pushed out of the queue and staring at Aadhya and Liu across a messy
knot of people. We’d already been queuing for twenty minutes, and the line
had grown a lot longer in that time. If Aadhya and Liu gave up the spot and
came back to us, we’d all end up losing the time for a full activity or two. But
everyone in the queue was keyed up, and no one was going to let us get back
to our original places without a fight.

“Chloe!” Magnus yelled from the nearest queue, where he was about to go
into the tug-of-war. “That’s Jaclyn and Sung behind your allies, let them have
your spots and come over here!” Aadhya was already waving a thumbs-up at
us from over the sea of heads, and Chloe grabbed my hand and ran with me
over to where Magnus and Jermaine had stiff-armed a couple of juniors in



the queue behind them, who weren’t brave enough to start arguing when they
let us in.

I was so completely bewildered by Magnus going out of his way to be
helpful that I had my hands on the big rope before I worked out that the
whole thing had been a setup: his ally Sung had definitely been one of the
kids in the shoving match, and I was sure a couple of the others had also been
New York hangers-on. I craned over for a look at the other queue: Aadhya
and Liu were still another five minutes back from the start of the relay races,
which meant that when we had finished here, in order to hook back up with
them, Chloe and I would have to waste that time just standing around like
target mannequins. It would make much more obvious sense for them to stick
with Jaclyn and Sung and for us to go on to something else—with Magnus,
who apparently now wanted my company. Or rather wanted to cut me away
from Aadhya and Liu, and make sure I was firmly embedded in the New
York crowd.

“Tebow, if no one’s ever told you, you’re a soggy dishcloth,” I told Magnus
when we got off the tug-of-war—our side had won; I’d yanked with a lot of
vengeful fury involved. He stopped open-mouthed in the start of whatever
hurrah-go-team speech he’d been about to deliver, so likely no one ever had,
even though the resemblance was uncanny in my opinion: cold, useless, clings
when all you want is to shake it off. “Sorry, Rasmussen, I’m not spending all
day with this wanker,” I told Chloe, and marched off towards the long line for
the egg-and-spoon races. Those are always popular, despite being possibly the
stupidest activity a human being could engage in, since even if a spoon turns
out to be a mimic or an egg hatches something unpleasant halfway through
the race, they usually can’t be very terrible if they’re only the size of a spoon.

Chloe joined me on the line a moment later, with a beleaguered
expression that annoyed me by reminding me of the similar look Mum
occasionally gets when she’s been trying to make peace between me and the
most recently irritated commune-dweller. At least Chloe didn’t try to
persuade me that I ought to try and see things from Magnus’s side, and call
forth his understanding by offering my own, et cetera. She was still trying to
think of what she did want to say—I don’t know why Americans won’t just



talk about the weather like reasonable people—when Mistoffeles suddenly put
his head out of the little cup on her chest and emitted a few alarmed squeaks,
at which point I noticed that eight kids from Shanghai enclave had casually
been drifting off the lines on either side of ours and were now very-not-
casually closing in around us. And one of them was already muttering away at
an incantation for something unpleasant that he was about to throw in our
faces.

Chloe darted a scared look over towards Aadhya and Liu—deep in the
relay race and not even glancing our way—and then looked around for anyone
else from New York, except Orion wasn’t anywhere to be seen, I presume too
busy hunting the mals in the stairways and corridors, and of course Magnus
the Magnificent had flounced off with the rest of his pals to huddle on the
other side of the gym and discuss what to do about my refusal to accept their
wide-armed welcome.

“A filthy soggy dishcloth,” I said, trying to vent enough of my fury to
think through the situation. It wasn’t the numbers: I can handle a thousand
enemies as easily as seven, as long as by handle you mean “kill in a grisly
fashion.” I hadn’t any idea what to do about them otherwise. I do have a top-
notch spell to seize total control over the minds of a group of people, only
there isn’t a constraint on the size of the crowd: you have to cast it on a
defined physical space isolated by things like walls, and then it grabs everyone
in it. In this case, we were inside the gym that was holding literally every kid
in the school. Also, the spell was quite vague on the aftereffects on the minds
in question.

I could just have waited until the other kid threw his spell, and then caught
it and thrown it back at him. It’s hard to describe how that works, and in fact
it doesn’t work for most people; the first-year incantations textbook informed
us firmly that you’re much better off either doing a defensive spell or trying to
get your own offensive spell out before the other wizard fires off theirs. But
I’m brilliant at reflecting as long as the spell being thrown at me is malicious
or destructive enough, and I had a strong presentiment that wasn’t going to be
a problem in this case.



And then I would have the pleasure of watching up-close while his skin
flew off his body, or his intestines exploded out of his mouth or his brains
dribbled out his ears or whatever horrible thing he meant to do to us, and it
would just be the purest self-defense; no one would even criticize me for it.
Not to my face, at any rate.

I would really have liked to be angry at them right then. I often haven’t
any difficulty in contemplating extreme violence and even murder when I’m
angry, and I can get angry at an enclaver at the drop of a hat. But I couldn’t
be angry at them, not that way, not with that helpful burning righteous rage,
because I’m really very good at knowing the right thing to do, the smart thing
to do, and picking a fight to the death with a wizard who’s capable of killing
with a wave of her hand isn’t it. If I was dangerous enough to warrant killing,
the smart selfish enclaver thing for them to do was to keep the bloody hell
away from me, as far as possible. They ought to have kept their heads down,
got out safely as they were all sure to do, and then gone home to tell their
parents about me. They were teenagers; they had every right to let me be the
grown-ups’ problem.

Instead here they were, all of them gambling with their safe, sheltered
lives—they had to assume I’d take out at least one of them, and as far as I
could tell, they didn’t even have loser allies along with them to take that
mortal blow. The boy in front getting ready to cast was an enclaver: his face
was vaguely familiar from the language lab, round and spotty with a mustache
he’d valiantly been trying to grow for the last two years. We’d never studied
any of the same languages; I didn’t know his name. But Liu might: her mum
and dad had worked for the enclave a few times. Their parents might know
each other.

And I did know the girl backing him up, Wang Yuyan, because everyone
in languages track knew her: she was doing twelve languages, which no
enclave kid needed to do. Either she was ambitious or she loved languages
madly or maybe she was just a tremendous masochist, I had no idea. I didn’t
really know her, we’d never had a conversation or anything. But we’d been in
the same Sanskrit section sophomore year, and one time I’d had a dictionary
she needed—when you’re trying to get the meaning of a more obscure word,



you often need to chase it down through three or four dictionaries until you
end up in a language you’re fluent in—and she’d asked me to look the word
up for her in a perfectly civil way, and offered to look one up for me in
return.

That might not sound like much, but for comparison’s sake, in freshman
year an enclave kid from Sydney glanced down at the really good French–
English dictionary I’d found that week in the library and said, “Let’s have
that, there’s a good girl,” not even asking. And because I told him exactly
where he could hop off, at the end of class he had two of his minion-friends
trip me going out of the room while another grabbed my entire bag and ran
down the corridor shaking all my things out, yelling, “Free supplies!” while
everyone laughed and grabbed.

I got up in the doorway with my lip bleeding and my forehead bruised. He
was standing right there with two more of his pals to enjoy the show, all of
them grinning, and then I turned and looked him in the face and thought in a
red haze of all the things I could have done to him, so he stopped grinning
and they fled the other way. Ever since, he’s firmly ignored my existence. Ah,
the advantages of being a monstrous dark sorceress in embryonic form.

But he wouldn’t have stopped on his own. That’s what enclavers are like,
most of them. Like Magnus, who was the reason we were exposed and also
the reason the Shanghai kids were putting themselves on the line to take me
out. Because they could imagine what someone like that would do with the
kind of power I had.

And probably, maybe, at least half of those enclaver kids closing in round
us were like Magnus themselves, but Yuyan wasn’t. I knew that much about
her, and I also knew what she was casting, because I’d overheard people
talking about this fantastic spell she’d got in her languages seminar that
allowed you to get behind someone else’s spell and push, meaning that
whatever spotty mustache boy was about to throw at us, she’d double it. That
meant that when I flung it back, she’d get hit with the reflection, too. And
maybe she deserved it, but I didn’t want to give it to her, to any of those kids
getting ready to kill us for no reason other than being absolutely terrified of
me and what I might do. It felt like making them right to have come after me.



But I even less wanted to let them kill me and Chloe, so I was just steeling
my gut to go ahead and reflect the spell back anyway, when Chloe pulled a
tiny plastic spray bottle filled with blue sparkling stuff from her pocket and
spritzed it in the air all round us. On the other side of the glimmering, the
whole room slowed down like everyone but the two of us was moving through
mud—which meant of course she’d sped the two of us up; much easier.

“Do you have enough for us to run for it?” I asked her, but she shook her
head, holding it up for me to see: the reservoir was the size of an underfed
caterpillar, and there was barely any of the blue stuff left in the bottom.

“I just couldn’t think of anything else to do that would be quick enough,”
she said. “I’ve got a blinding spray on me, but if I use it on those two
incanters, Hu Zixuan in the back is going to hit us, and I’m almost sure that
thing he has is a reviser. We’ve heard rumors about him working on one since
he got here, and he’ll have it powered up by the time they go down—”

She was pointing at a kid all the way in the back of the group on the other
side. I hadn’t paid much attention to him, because he was so shrimpy he
looked like a sophomore at best; I’d assumed he was just helping to provide
mana. But as soon as Chloe pointed him out, I realized it was the other way
round: the five people fanned out in front of him were screening him and
feeding mana back to him. Zixuan had a small pale-green rod almost
completely hidden in his hand, which was connected by a thin gold wire to
what had to be the rest of the artifact in his pocket: I could see slowed-down
light gleaming along the line.

“Right,” I said grimly. “Go ahead and blind the incanters. Is it
permanent?”

“You really want me to explain how it works now?” Chloe said. “It’s a
migraine inducer, and maybe they’ll keep having them for the rest of their
lives, and they’re about to fry us!”

“Yes, all right!” I said hastily. I was in fact perfectly all right with giving
someone migraines in exchange for attempted murder. “Go after the boy with
the mustache: Yuyan’s just doing an amplification; if you get him, her casting
won’t do anything.”

“But what about the reviser?” Chloe said.



“That I can handle,” I said, and I really hoped I wasn’t lying, but anyway
we were out of time. Chloe threw me one last desperate look that also hoped
I wasn’t lying as she got out the blinding spray, and then the blue haze was
settling down and my throat was hurting as if I’d been shrieking at the top of
my lungs. The people on either side of us in the line were cringing away, so
probably that’s about what our conversation had sounded like. Chloe was
already lunging with a last bit of unnatural quickness across the empty space
towards mustache boy, whose eyes went wide in alarm but stayed resolute.
He’d known he was going to pull the first attack, brave bastard, although he
screamed and crumpled when the spray hit him in the face just the same.

I turned towards the other group just as they parted and Zixuan, owlish
with his eyes magnified behind enormous farsighted lenses, brought the jade
rod up to mouth level and sang a single clear line at it. I couldn’t understand
his request, as he was casting in Shanghainese, but I could take a reasonable
guess: it was probably something on the order of please alter the floor so it no
longer encloses this girl.

I’d only seen a reviser in illustrations before. They’re used all the time, but
only in major enclave projects. It’s a generic device that allows artificers to
create vastly more complicated and difficult pieces of artifice—something
that no one person could keep in their heads—by starting with a completed
piece and then making it more complex, little by little. The first ones were
used to help build the Scholomance, in fact.

It was quite a clever approach to take against me. Dropping me out into
the void beneath the gym would certainly remove me as a problem, and I
couldn’t stop it with any kind of shield or even throwing the spell back,
because he wasn’t actually aiming a spell at me; he was aiming it at the school
itself. It was a small enough edit that he could get away with it, too. And I
couldn’t exactly destroy the piece of artifice he was using it on, at least not
without dumping us all into the void.

Fortunately, I knew what to do in this situation, because I’d had to spend
two months in my freshman year translating a charming cautionary tale in
French all about a truly horrible maleficer who maintained herself in gory evil
for about a decade at the expense of many wizard children in her vicinity.



Her shielding was so good that she was effectively invincible in a fight, so she
killed all the wizards who attempted to end her reign and mounted their heads
on the parapet of her elaborate and well-warded tower. She finally got taken
out by a young artificer she’d snatched: a boy with an affinity for
stoneworking. He didn’t try to attack her; instead he cast a working on the
stone of her tower, and walled her up with all her six layers of shielding, so
closely that she couldn’t move, and left her entombed to suffocate.

The school then assigned me a long essay—in French—explaining what I
would do in the same situation. It even flat-out failed my first half-arsed
attempt in which I suggested running away and not killing any more children,
so I had to spend a week in the library doing research for the makeup.

The answer I found was, when facing an artificer who’s about to turn the
environment against you, kill them first. But if that’s not an option you like,
your second best chance is to try and intercept the spell power, and then
override their alteration with your own.

Chloe wasn’t wrong to be worried about my doing that, however, because
if two wizards start wrestling over the same piece of artifice—which in this
case was the school itself—almost always the better artificer is the one who
ends up in charge.

If Zixuan could make a reviser of his own—you can’t bring one in with
you through induction, because they’ve got to be fed with a tiny thread of
mana constantly or they burn out—he had to be an absolutely brilliant
artificer. And I’m not good at artifice myself. Artifice is fundamentally about
giving the universe a long and complicated story complete with attractive
props in order to coax it to accommodate your wishes. I’m really more about
shouting the universe into compliance with mine.

But there was some tidy coaxing right at hand that had already been done
for me, more than a hundred years ago, by a whole pack of artificers far more
skilled than any senior kid could be. So when the green wave of power came
towards me, ready to revise the floor beneath my feet out of existence, I
stepped into it and spread my arms to greet it and said, “Set this right instead,
why don’t you?” then just heaved it up at the gym ceiling, with a push of extra
mana to help it along.



The power went boiling up from my arms into the mottled-grey ceiling. It
ran cascading down over the domed surface with the wild frothing of a power
washer, trickles of green dripping down and kids screaming and running
everywhere around me trying to dodge the rain. I was only vaguely aware of
them, deep in the breathless shock like standing under a waterfall, having to
look straight up into the flow with my whole face desperately scrunched up,
barely able to see or breathe or hear for the rushing fury of it. Zixuan and the
other kids had put a lot of power behind his working: if I had stopped
redirecting for a second, his original instructions would have been carried out,
too.

I didn’t notice when the screaming and running stopped around me; I was
still in the middle of the torrent, and I had to stay there until the last reluctant
trickling flowed through and I sank out of it gasping, to find Chloe standing
there in front of me with her hands over her mouth, crying in just a shocking
way—outright blubbing with her mouth turned down like a clown. I couldn’t
see Zixuan or any of the other Shanghai kids anymore, or anyone else I knew.
Everyone had been scattered around the gym like giant hands had gathered
them up in a sack and then shaken them out into the room again at random,
except for the small area right around me.

Almost all of the kids were crying, the older kids especially, or huddled
up on the floor like they wanted to be curled into a fetal position but they
couldn’t bear to put their heads down. All of us under the crisp blue of an
autumn sky, dry leaves on the air and crunchy under us, sunlight dappling in a
slant through the leaves of dark maple trees in a mix of brilliant crimson and
yellow and green around the edges of the room that was suddenly a forest
clearing, the faint gurgle of water running over stones somewhere not far
away like a promise, large grey stones emerging like islands from a carpet of
moss and leaves, while in the far misty distance a hill climbed a little way
above the tree line, with the wooden balcony and roof of a pavilion just
peeking out from more cascading colors.

I stood there stupid for a minute or two and then a bird called from
somewhere and I started blubbing myself, too. It was horrible. It was almost
the most horrible thing that had happened to me in here; it wasn’t exactly as



bad as the maw-mouth, but it was hard to compare because it was horrible in
such a completely different way. I have no idea what they were thinking when
they’d made it, except of course I do. They wanted to make a room that
would look charming on tours and impress other wizards, and make them all
say how lovely it would be for the kids to have such a nice place to come to
for exercise, how lovely to have this to make up for being trapped inside the
school for four years without ever seeing the sun or feeling the wind or seeing
a single green leaf, all the water you drink tasting faintly of sour metal, all the
food the regurgitated slop of massive kettles filled with different vitamins and
barely there enchantments to fool you into believing it’s something else,
knowing the whole time you’re probably never coming out again, and it didn’t
make up for any of that at all.

People started running out of the gym in droves. The only ones who didn’t
were the stupid freshmen, who were all wandering around burbling out
nonsense like, “Wow,” and “Look, there’s a nest!” and “It’s so pretty!” and
making everyone who’d been in here for more than five minutes during the
safest year on record want to stab them with knives. I would have gone
running out myself, only my legs were as mushy as if I’d just been born, and
so I just sat down on one of the picturesque rocks sobbing until Orion was
there grabbing me by the shoulders saying, “El! El, what happened, what’s
wrong?” I waved my hand frantically and he looked around with his face only
confused, and then he said, “I don’t get it, you fixed the gym? But why are
you crying over that? I gave up hunting a quattria to come back here!” in a
faintly accusatory voice.

It did help. I got a breath and told him flatly through my snot and tears,
“Lake, I’ve just saved your life again.”

“Oh for—I can take a quattria!” he snapped.
“You can’t take me,” I spat at him, and I heaved myself up onto my feet

and stormed out on the energy of pure fury, which at least carried me out the
doors and away from the grotesque lie of the grove.

I lurched away down the corridor, wiping my streaming nose on the hem
of my t-shirt—his t-shirt actually, the New York one he’d given me, which I’d
stupidly worn today, like a declaration; maybe that had been part of why the



Shanghai kids had come at me. Because they were afraid of what I would
help New York do to their enclave, their families, and why wouldn’t they be
afraid? I could do anything.

There were kids crying in huddles scattered around the corridors. I went
into the labyrinth and all the way to my seminar classroom, where at least I
could be alone except for any maleficaria that wanted to try to jump me,
which I’d have really appreciated at that moment. I went down the narrow
corridor into the room and shut the door and put my head down on the ugly
massive desk, and through the vent a faint breath of autumn leaves came into
the room, and I cried for another two hours without anything at all trying to
kill me.

OceanofPDF.com



N obody bothered me the last few weeks of the semester, except by sort
of sidling around me warily like I was a bomb that might go off

unexpectedly. Faint wafts of fresh air scented with crisp leaves and early frost
were now coming through the vents at occasional moments that emphasized
how awful the air was all the rest of the time. My delightful classroom up in
the library got them quite often. My freshmen all took deep breaths of it
while I did my best not to vomit. I saw kids occasionally burst into tears in
the cafeteria when one blew into their face. Every time, people would glance
at me sideways, and then pretend really hard that they hadn’t.

The Shanghai kids had all backed a mile off, and for that matter so had
the New York kids. During the previous month, people had briefly started



doing things like asking me to trade books or passing me a jar in lab or
loaning me a hammer in the shop. I’d been irritated at the time, since I’d
understood very well it was because they’d decided I was an important person
worth courting. But now they didn’t ask me for anything, and if I did say,
“Can I have the psyllium husks,” four kids would jump at the same time to
shove whatever thing I needed at me, more often than not knocking it over
and spilling it all over the floor, at which point they would collectively go into
a frantic routine of apologies and babbling while cleaning it up.

I did try saying things like, “I won’t bite,” only I said it while seething, so
the message that actually got conveyed was that biting would be mild by
comparison with whatever I would do instead. And of course they believed
me. I’d already done something horrible beyond imagining: I’d made the
Scholomance worse. Top marks for inflicting mass trauma. It was even getting
the freshmen, too: three of them had died in the gym during the last couple of
weeks. I made clear to mine that none of them were to go near the place, but
other, less-well-advised ones, kept making excuses to go down there to play
fun games of keep-away-from-the-surprise-mal or get-eaten-in-the-doorway.
The death toll would’ve been higher except Orion had begun patrolling the
place on a routine basis to hunt for the mals that were using it as a hunting
ground. I wasn’t clear on whether it counted as him using the freshmen as bait
if they were the ones staking themselves out.

We’re all wary of one another in here as a general rule. Budding
maleficers are at the top of everyone’s list of potential threats, followed by
enclavers, older kids, the better students, the more popular ones. Any other
kid could become a mortal enemy without so much as a moment’s notice if
the right conditions—usually a mal planning to eat at least one of us—came
along. But we knew how to be afraid of one another; what we might do to one
another had sensible limits. No one would ever in ten thousand years have
imagined that if someone tried to kill me in the gym, I’d respond by
rebuilding the gym fantasia and creating a fresh torment for everyone in the
school, including myself. I certainly wouldn’t have imagined it.

So now I wasn’t just a dangerously powerful fellow student, to be flattered
and watched and strategized over. I was an unpredictable and terrible force of



nature that might do anything at all, and they were all shut up in here with
me. Like I’d become part of the school myself.

As if to confirm it, the mals all suddenly stopped coming after me. I didn’t
know why. I spent a few weeks panicking until Aadhya worked it out. “Right,
here’s what’s going on,” she said, sketching it out on paper for us to
understand, on a stick-figure diagram of the school’s screw-top shape. “It
takes mana to run all the wards. Early in the year, when there’s not a lot of
mals, the school does this neat trick: it opens a few of the wards, aimed right
at you, and uses that mana to reinforce the other wards. The mals take the
path of least resistance, and voilà, you’re target number one. But by now
there’s too many of them and they’re squeezing through on their own as
usual.”

“And no maleficaria are going to come at you if they have any other
choice,” Liu finished, as if that were obvious.

“Yeah, aces,” I said. “Even the mals agree I’m poison. Ow! Get off me,
you little—!” Precious had just bit my earlobe. I swatted at her but she
scampered handily across my hunched shoulder blades and grabbed the rim
of my other ear meaningfully, a fairly potent threat given the stabbing pain in
my first one. “No treats for you,” I told her coldly, after I took her off—
carefully—and put her back into the carrying cup. But I did say, “Sorry,” to
Aad and Liu in a mutter. It really wasn’t on for me to be whining about being
unpalatable. I still remembered exactly how I’d felt about Orion telling me
that mals never came after him.

Of course, even if the mals had gone, my hair trigger hadn’t. I was still
jumping at every noise and nearly obliterating the occasional solitary fool
who came bumbling across my path at unexpected moments. They were
always the kind of pathetic friendless loser no one else would warn off from
going into the library corridor where I was lurking or taking a seat too close
to me. Just like I’d been. I’d almost have appreciated the distraction of
actually being attacked.

Orion would’ve appreciated it even more. He was still grumpy about
having passed up a full-grown quattria to race to my rescue. It seemed to
grow in size each time he complained about having missed it. No one had



seen the thing since—or rather, no one who’d made it out of Field Day alive.
There were four kids who’d gone missing during the mass exodus from the
gym, so almost certainly the quattria had successfully scored itself four
separate meals of sobbing kid in flight, one for each mouth, and had hidden
away somewhere in the depths for the next four years to digest until it split up
into four separate littler quattria.

I suppose I’d traded those four kids for the ones from Shanghai who’d
actually attacked me. Was that better because I hadn’t meant to do it? Or was
I just being a stupid wanker who thought she was too good to look people in
the face while I killed them?

I knew what Mum would say: it hadn’t been me killing them, it had been a
quattria—or better yet the alchemist who’d taken four innocent baby animals
and squashed them together. Alchemists make quattria because if you starve
them of solid food for a month or so, then feed each one of the mouths a
different reactant, you get highly useful alchemical fusions out the other end,
some of which you can’t get any other way. But the quattria don’t like being
starved, as you might imagine, so they break out fairly often, and then they
start eating other creatures with mana because that’s the most efficient way to
get enough mana to keep themselves going.

It’s always convenient to be able to blame things on people who aren’t in
the room, but I wasn’t sure it made me feel any better. Fine, some vicious
alchemist had bashed together a quattria a century ago and it was his fault
really, but he was long dead and the quattria had eaten four people just last
week.

Meanwhile Orion was scrounging around in corners for scrawny and
pathetic mals that even a freshman could have taken out. He did catch a nice
fat polyphonic shrieker in one of the sophomore girls’ bathrooms a couple
weeks after Field Day; I understand there was a lot of non-maleficaria
shrieking while he chased it through the communal showers during the
evening rush, although no one really objected to him barging in on them,
given the alternative had a lot more tentacles and smelled even worse than
unwashed boy, which he wasn’t anymore by the time that fight ended.



The week after that, a gelidite quietly grew itself over the doors to the big
alchemy lab during work period, froze them completely shut, and then started
creeping steadily onwards into the room. Happily for all concerned—namely
the thirty-odd kids in the room—Orion was sulkily doing his—already-late—
homework in one of the smaller labs at the time, and he instantly abandoned
it to be of service. Normally you can only kill a gelidite by piercing its solid
core with a specially enchanted fire arrow, but Orion just started whacking
big chunks off it with a metal chair and incinerating those with fire blasts
before they could merge back into the rest. Eventually he took off enough
mass that he could jam the remaining chair leg down onto the core, and then
he heated the leg until the metal melted and ran down all over the core.

“Well, Lake, it’s not getting added to the recommended means of
destruction in the textbook, is it?” I said coldly at dinner that day, when he
displayed the metal globe that was all that was left of the gelidite, ostensibly
because he wanted opinions on whether the thing was really dead or not. I
wasn’t fooled: he was just trying to excuse himself for having left a week’s
worth of lab work to dissolve on his own bench, when he could have spent
thirty seconds to suspend the reaction before he’d charged heroically to the
rescue.

What business of mine, you might say, and then I’d explain at length how
I’d had to rescue him yet again just two days before. He’d got to his lesson
and started straight in on an overdue batch of spelled dye without paying any
attention to the fact that the four other members of his senior lab section had
all skived off that day. Of course all the ventilation in his lab had quietly shut
itself down, and he didn’t notice, just went straight on blithely stirring up
more toxic fumes for himself to inhale while increasingly vivid daydreams of
pythagorans and polyvores filled his head.

The only reason I’d known in time to save his stupid useless life was
because one of the other students noticed all of her other classmates were in
the library working, and decided to score points with New York by scuttling
over to Magnus to tell him that Orion was all alone in a lab section. She could
have scuttled over to me directly: I was at the center table in the reading room
at the time, with seven fat dictionaries spread out round me in a vengeful



spirit. There were nine seats completely open at the best table in the reading
room because Chloe and Nkoyo were the only ones there who dared sit with
me. Magnus didn’t even nerve himself up to come over; he sent one of his
minions to get Chloe, told her, and let her come back and tell me.

By the time I got down to the lab, Orion was hallucinating so hard he
thought I was a pythagoran myself and tried to throw an immobilizing spell at
me. If it had landed, I suppose we’d have died hallucinating together; how
romantic. I caught it and hurled it right back at his head, and he promptly
toppled over with a crash, taking out three stools on the way down. At least
that got him out of my way so I could get on with vaporizing his cauldron of
increasingly toxic dye, along with a substantial chunk of his lab table.
Overkill, but I was vexed. I didn’t get any less vexed after dragging his
lockjaw-rigid body out into the corridor. I vented my spleen by haranguing
him for the next five minutes while he still couldn’t move, but he was still
high as a kite and only kept staring at me glassily until I finished and then he
said in a soupy way, “El? Is that you?” Then the immobilization spell wore off
and he sat up and vomited purple all over my feet.

So he had no business getting himself into avoidable trouble with his
classwork, and he knew it, and he could just stuff his large frosted beach ball
into the nearest bin. He squirmed away from my glare and looked an appeal
over at Chloe, who’d been trained up to be nice to him all her life. “Well, I
think it’s probably dead, but you could try a scrying on the internals,” she said
cooperatively.

“Yes, you could, if only you weren’t six weeks behind on your
schoolwork,” I said through clenched teeth.

“I’m not!” Orion said. “I’m only four weeks—” He stopped himself too
late and glared at me while everyone at the table, including even Chloe, made
the appropriate squawks of horror at him. I smirked back over folded arms.
That evening he got told off by Magnus and Jermaine, by which I mean they
cornered him in the boys’ bathroom and earnestly talked to him about the
need to catch up properly and how silly he was being to let his work get away
from him for no reason when it could be so easily managed. I wasn’t there to
hear it, but I didn’t need to be; they were enclavers.



I did see them going in after him, so I hurried to brush my own teeth and
then waited in the corridor until Orion sloped out again, properly chastened; I
fell in with him and said, “So, Lake, going to let your enclave pals shove your
schoolwork off onto some poor sod desperate to get in with them?”

He threw me a look of outrage: having got him into trouble in the first
place, couldn’t I at least have the decency to let him just look away while
Magnus made his work conveniently disappear? But as I clearly couldn’t, he
sighed and muttered, “No,” reluctantly.

I nodded and asked very sweetly, “Going to keep shoving the
consequences off onto me?”

The right answer to that question wasn’t very hard to find, either, although
he did scowl at me before handing it over. “No.”

“Good,” I said, with satisfaction, and stopped by his bedroom door and
pointedly waited for him to go and shut himself in with his overdue
homework.

He looked at the door and then back at me. “El—if the cleansing runs
down in the graduation hall again—”

“At New Year’s, you mean?” I said. The end-of-semester cleansing isn’t
nearly as thorough as the graduation day cleansing. School maintenance had
to be cut back a great deal in quantity and ambition once they had students
doing it instead of teams of grown professional wizards coming in through the
graduation hall. One of the places where they decided to cut back was the
mid-year cleansing. Only about a quarter of the walls of mortal flame go, in
order to save on wear and tear. That leaves plenty of survivable escape routes
available, so the cleansing really only winnows back the more mindless mals.

Of course, where a lot of the smarter ones retreat to is the graduation hall.
If the machinery did run down there, then we’d very likely end up with all the
mals cut down back to the nonexistent levels from the start of the year.

“Yeah,” Orion said, glumly. Poor him: the greatest hero in generations and
no evil monsters for him to fight. Precious made a dismissive squeak from her
cup, but lucky for him, he wasn’t in range for biting. At least he wasn’t trying
to complain of it to anyone but me, the one other person who had a decent



reason to dislike the idea. If the mals did get cut back that far, the school
would probably be able to funnel all of the attacks right back at me again.

But I wasn’t going to commiserate with him out loud. I was in range, and
I’d been bitten twice that week already. “Much difference it’ll make if you get
yourself turned into goo beforehand because you couldn’t be arsed to do a
few worksheets,” I said. “It’s thirteen seconds more to New Year’s, and then
you won’t need to do any more classwork ever, unless you completely flunk
everything. Do you need another helping?”

“No, I’m okay,” he said, although he had to drag his eyes away from the
power-sharer when I waved my wrist at him. “I’ve got enough, I just—got
used to it, I guess.” He shrugged away the misery of his lot with one shoulder,
but he was still staring at the floor, and after a moment he brought out the real
problem: “It’s not like there’re loads of mals in New York. In the enclave, I
mean,” he added. “Not much gets through.”

I couldn’t help myself. I blurted out, “No one’s chaining you down in New
York.”

That was a nice and sympathetic thing to say to a boy who wanted his
mum and dad and his own bed as much as I did. But I’d been overwhelmed
by an instant éclat of idyllic vision: the two of us wandering the world
together, welcomed everywhere by everyone, him clearing out infestations
and then watching my back while I put up Golden Stone enclaves with the
power from the mals he took out.

You could say I was just offering him a different future, and I had as much
right to put that future on the table for him as he did asking me to come to
New York, only I didn’t feel as though I did. I’d like to have felt that way; I’d
have argued myself breathless and blue if anyone else had tried to tell me I
didn’t. But there wasn’t any convenient opponent around to be argued with,
and on the inside of my own head, I didn’t really believe I had any right to ask
Orion Lake to walk away from a future of safety and ease in the most
powerful enclave in the world, just to spend his life as an itinerant bodyguard
at my heels.

And even if I could squash that particular squidgy feeling, my vision
would still mean asking him to walk away from his family and everyone he



knew. He wasn’t saying he didn’t want to go home, he was saying he didn’t
like the idea of spending the rest of his life having to go begging to Magnus
Tebow every time he wanted a cup of mana. I wouldn’t have liked asking
Magnus Tebow for pocket lint. I felt like a selfish beast as soon as the words
came out of my mouth.

“If you just set up shop, you’ll get booked to come out and kill the worst
mals the world over,” I added, as if that was all I’d meant. “Orion Lake:
Maleficaria Hunter for Hire, no mal too large, some too small.”

He huffed a noise that aimed for laughter and stopped at a sigh. “Am I a
jerk?” he asked abruptly. “Everyone always acts like—” He made a frustrated
wave of his hand in the direction of the legions of his fan club. “But I know
that’s just…”

He was being about as articulate as, well, the average seventeen-year-old
boy, but I understood him perfectly. He’d been trained to think he was only
good if he ran around being a hero all the time. Naturally as soon as he dared
think about what he might want, surely that made him a monster. But as
someone who’s been told she’s a monster from almost all corners from quite
early on, I know perfectly well the only sensible thing to do when self-doubt
creeps into your own head is to repress it with great violence. “What do I look
like, your confessor?” I said bracingly. “Go and do your homework so I don’t
have to cobble you back together out of spare parts, and have your existential
crisis another time.”

“Thanks, El, you’re such a pal,” he said, in tones of deep syrupy affection.
“I am, aren’t I,” I said, and left him to it. And then I went to my room and

didn’t do any of my own homework. Instead I spent the entire time reading
the Golden Stone sutras and translating more bits of it and doodling stick
pictures of tidy little enclaves in my notes. Precious scampered around the
desk messing my pens about and cracking sunflower seeds out of her food
bowl and occasionally coming to inspect my work. She didn’t approve of the
bit where I scribbled in a little stick figure with a sword killing mals; when I
looked away, she slipped under my arm and deposited a dropping in exactly
the right spot so I put my hand right down on it when I started writing again
and squished it over my own artwork.



“It’s not like he’s any use in an enclave,” I muttered while I poured half
my jug out over my besmirched hand, scrubbing it clean over the room drain.
“I expect he’d rather come round the world hunting mals with me.”

But of course she was right; it was an unbelievably stupid thing to be
thinking about. There were very good odds that at least one of the small
handful of people in the world that I loved only had months left to live, and
that one might well be me if I let myself get distracted. I’d lectured Orion
about neglecting his work, but at least his hunting was to some reasonable
immediate end: he actually got mana out of it, and every mal he killed in the
corridors would be one less jumping at our heads at graduation time. But I
wasn’t going to be building any enclaves until after I got myself and everyone
I cared about through the doors, so I could stop wasting my time on the idea
right now.

Go on, ask me how much time I wasted on it before the end of the semester.
Or don’t; I don’t really want to do the gruesome tally of the hours I poured
down that drain. The school rubbed it in for me well enough on New Year’s
Day. The whole day was screwed on the wrong way from the very beginning:
the night before I fell asleep still reading the sutras—I was starting to be able
to get a vague general understanding of a new page just by sounding it out a
few times—and when I woke up, they were still open on my bed. I made the
mistake of looking at the page again and started sounding it out from the
beginning. It felt as though it had become easier overnight; it was amazing.
Half an hour and two paragraphs later, I noticed what I was doing, and had to
run unwashed to catch up the last few stragglers and get into the very tail end
of the senior queue for the cafeteria line. All I got for breakfast was a scanty
bowl of the dried-out scrapings from the sides of the porridge vat.

“You could have bitten me usefully for once,” I told Precious as I came out
with my unpleasantly light tray. She ignored me to keep gnawing on the dry
heel of the loaf I’d scrounged for her, and only squeaked a complaint when I



jumped a mile because the food service door slammed shut behind me: I had
literally been the last senior to get breakfast.

That wasn’t nearly the end of it. Sudarat was queueing up along the wall
with the other freshmen waiting for their turn to come, and as I passed her,
she said to me, “Congratulations, El,” like she meant it.

“What?” I said. She pointed at the class standings, which had been posted
up in gold letters under our class year on the big placard on the wall. I hadn’t
bothered to look at them yet, since I didn’t really care which one of the
twenty snarling beasts who’d been fighting it down to the wire had actually
made valedictorian, and I knew I wasn’t anywhere near the top hundred
myself.

Well, I was right about that bit; I wasn’t near the top hundred. My name
was listed well above everyone else—next to algernon dandridge sinnet
prize for special achievement in sanskrit incantation. I didn’t even know
there were prizes to be awarded; I’ve never seen anyone get one before.

And before you ask, yes, there was an actual prize. I slunk over to the
table with my allies, who could now all see in bright gilt letters just how much
time I’d been frittering stupidly away, and when I put down my tray, it didn’t
lie flat. Obviously I said, “Look out, clinger on my tray,” and jumped back
from the table along with everyone else except Orion.

He promptly reached out a finger and zapped my entire tray with one of
his stupid but highly effective lightning-bolt spells, charring the already
inedible porridge into a solid cinder, and then he frowned and said, “No there
isn’t,” and tipped the still-smoking tray up to reveal that what was making it
lie askew was my award: a small round medal stamped out of some dull grey
metal, hanging from a blue-and-green-striped ribbon with a top bar pin,
apparently designed to be worn on a lapel along with my other military
honors. It was only lightly singed.

“Oh, that’s really cool, El, congrats,” Chloe said, in all apparent
seriousness. She wasn’t even a freshman.

I dangled the thing out to Aadhya without dignifying that with a response.
“Is it worth melting down?”



Aadhya picked it up with both hands and rubbed her thumbs over the
front surface, murmuring a quick artificer’s testing charm. The little relief
carving—possibly meant to be Ganesh; the nose looked vaguely elephantine
—glowed pink for a moment, and she shook her head, handing it back. “It’s
just pewter.”

“Congratulations, Galadriel,” Liesel said to me a little coldly—she had in
fact bagged valedictorian—when she went by the table a few minutes later.
But what she meant was fuck you. At least that was fair enough; if I’d spent
all that time cooing at enclaver boys and doing their homework, I’d have
wanted to stab anyone who’d got their name jumped up over mine for a single
seminar. But I wasn’t going to be sorry for her. She was walking away from
breakfast with Magnus, and she’d scored her first points with him by carrying
tales of me. I suppose she’d decided to make New York her target. I wouldn’t
have gone for it at the price of courting Magnus, but she obviously had a
higher tolerance for soggy dishcloths than I did.

A lot higher, in fact. I came down from the cafeteria late, because Zheng
ran over to me while Min held his place in the freshman queue, and told me
that he and the other kids from the library seminar would try and get me
something when their turn came. You rarely manage to get much more than
you want as a freshman—the opposite, in fact—and that was even before the
survival rate in the Scholomance rose to Orion Lake levels. But across the
eight of them, they were able to rustle up a bread roll and a carton of milk, so
at least I wouldn’t lose our whole free morning light-headed as well as
irritated.

It was worth waiting for them, but by the time I finished, the first early
warning chimes were going off delicately, ding dong death by fire coming, to
remind anyone who’d missed it that the cleansing was about to get under way.
I made a dash to the girls’ to get my teeth brushed and my face washed, so I
wouldn’t be grotty for hours, and stopped short in the doorway aghast: Liesel
was in there doing her makeup.

The use of cosmetic in here is roughly as high as it was in my first year of
primary school. However low the odds that you make a mistake when mixing
up your lipstick in the alchemy lab and melt half your face off, they’re still too



high for most people. If you’re good enough to be sure you won’t, you’re good
enough to get an alliance in a more reliable way. Dating doesn’t guarantee you
an alliance any more than friendship does. But nevertheless here Liesel was,
putting shiny pink lip gloss on her valedictorian mouth and dabbing a bit of it
as color onto her cheeks. She’d already taken her hair out of the tight short
plaits she always wore and had shaken the blond waves over her shoulders.
She’d put on a crisp white blouse, actually ironed, and she’d unbuttoned it just
far enough to leave a decent bit of cleavage showing, with a gold pendant
hung round her neck. She would have looked nice enough for a date outside;
in here, by comparison with our usual state, she might as well have stepped
off the cover of Vogue to dazzle ordinary mortals.

I have to confess, I reacted atrociously. “Not Tebow,” I blurted, from the
door.

Her shiny lips pressed into a thin line. “Lake seems quite busy,” she said,
through her teeth, and I couldn’t even say anything to that under the
circumstances; she had every right to be as angry with me as she was. Maybe
she wanted to shag Magnus, who was after all heading for six feet and would
himself have not looked out of place in—well, an Argos catalog, or at least a
pound-shop flyer.

Yes, maybe, but my imagination has limits and that’s beyond them. So I
didn’t even leave bad enough alone; I said, “Look, it’s no business of mine,”
which coming out of my own mouth should have been a strong hint to me to
stop there, but instead I went on, “but you should know, they’ve already
offered me a guarantee.”

In my defense, that piece of information probably did matter a great deal
to her. Even if Magnus Tebow was her ideal of manhood and charisma, she’d
made bleeding valedictorian with three and a half years of brutal unrelenting
work, and she couldn’t have wanted to throw that away on someone who
couldn’t even offer her a guaranteed spot in an enclave. New York had too
many eager applicants, most of them proven wizards who’d left school years
ago and done significant work; there wasn’t any way they were letting their
kids give out more than one guaranteed place in a year to a raw eighteen-
year-old, and Chloe had made anxiously clear at every opportunity I gave her



that the spot was being held for me. Even if I didn’t ever take it up, that didn’t
mean that Liesel would get invited after the fact.

Of course, it wouldn’t have said much for her brains if she wasn’t smart
enough to make sure that she was getting a guaranteed spot before she
unbuttoned her blouse the rest of the way, so even if I was handing her useful
information, there was an implied insult going along with it. She took it
accordingly. “How nice for you,” she said, even more furious, closed her lip
gloss with a snap, swept the handful of jars and things on the counter back
into her washbag, and marched out of the loo without looking back.

“Well done,” I told myself in the mirror around my toothbrush. I had to
rush now, since the first warning bell was going, so I scrubbed my teeth as
quick as I could before dashing back out into the corridor, where I skidded
right off my heels and smashed my head backwards onto the floor. Liesel had
poured out the rest of her hard-brewed lip gloss into a puddle just outside the
door, enough of a sacrifice to cast a clever little trip the next person who comes
along hex. I knew what had happened even while I was on the way down: the
moment I’d stepped on the slick patch, I’d felt the malicious intent of the
spell, only it was too late for me to do anything about it.

I did manage to twist a bit falling, which either helped or made things
worse, I don’t know. I didn’t die and I wasn’t knocked unconscious, I don’t
think, but it was certainly bad enough. My whole head was a church bell
someone had clanged back and forth with too much enthusiasm, and my
elbow and hips would have been in screaming pain if screaming out loud
wasn’t the equivalent of shouting, Dinner is served! to every mal in hearing
range. Instead I curled into a ball like a child and shut my mouth tight over
stifled high-pitched sobbing, both my hands wrapped around the throbbing
back of my skull and my whole face screwed up with tears.

I didn’t move from there for much too long. The second warning bell went
off somewhere behind a distant mountain range, and only the certain
knowledge that I was about to be incinerated got me into motion. I levered
myself onto my hands and knees and started lurching down the corridor in a
three-legged crawl, still pressing down on the back of my skull with the hand
that had got banged. Of course I should have pulled myself together and



taken some kind of remedy, but at the time, I was still completely sure on
some visceral level that I was keeping my brain from falling out of the back
of my head.

Somewhere behind and above me, I heard a door bang shut loudly and
footsteps coming, along the metal walkway and down the spiral stairs and into
the corridor. I kept on creeping along, too slow but moving. I knew it wasn’t
anybody I knew, and then I knew it was Liesel, but I still kept crawling
because I couldn’t do anything else yet. Then she caught up and grabbed me
under the arms and heaved me standing. Her face was still angry and flushed
under the pink shimmer, but what she said, harshly, was, “Where is your
room?” and she helped me limping on towards it.

We got about halfway before the final warning siren went off, and as it
did, the door three down from where we were slid open and Orion came out.
He froze like a deer caught stealing hubcaps in the headlamps of a police car,
then noticed that I was there to fall down in front of a wall of mortal flame
and die rather than to yell at him. Not that I didn’t do my best to combine the
activities as he grabbed me under the other arm, but he ignored the violent
wheeze I aimed in his direction and helped Liesel get me into his room just as
the loud crackling went off behind us, accompanied by the first panicked
scrabbling of mals starting to run. Orion paused in the door to throw a last
longing look down the corridor, then slid it shut with an unhappy bang as
Liesel heaved me onto the bed.

“What happened?” Orion asked, coming over.
“She fell coming out of the bathroom,” Liesel said shortly.
I didn’t fill in the additional details. Knowing she got furious enough to

commit murder but also couldn’t go through with it in the end gave me rather
a fellow feeling for her. “Give me a glass of water,” I muttered, and when
Orion gave it to me, I took a few deep breaths to temporarily keep from
vomiting and then sat up and cast the simplest of my mum’s healing charms
on the water. Then I took out the little plastic bottle I keep on hand for
exciting emergencies like this one, downed it, and drank the whole glass of
water as fast as I could. I managed to keep it down for a count of fifteen, and
then I lurched over to the floor drain and did vomit, energetically. Afterwards



I rolled away and curled on my other side with a groan, but it was a conscious
protest, not whimpering; I was already better.

“What is that?” Liesel said, picking up the bottle from where I’d dropped
it, and giving it a wary sniff.

“Tabasco and butterscotch,” I said. That isn’t actually part of Mum’s
charm; it’s my own addition, of which I’m sure she’d disapprove quite a lot,
but something about forcing the horrible mixture down makes the healing
charm work lots quicker. I think there’s even some kind of science behind
that, worse-tasting medicine works better or whatever, but it might just be the
mana from deliberately making myself swallow something that awful. It
doesn’t actually have to be Tabasco and butterscotch, it just has to be
absolutely vile and yet still technically edible, so you don’t waste the healing
charm on being poisoned.

Anyway, after that I wasn’t concussed or in howling pain anymore, but I
still felt extremely sorry for myself. I climbed back onto Orion’s bed and just
lay there for a bit to recover. Liesel started talking to Orion like a normal and
civilized person, getting back only mumbled and distracted answers. “If he
tries to open the door, brain him with the chair,” I muttered after the third
time.

“I’m not going to open the door,” Orion said sulkily.
“Shut up, you lunatic, you’d absolutely open the door,” I said. “What if the

wall down by Aadhya’s had gone this time?”
“I’d just—have come back here,” Orion said, as if it were that simple to

deal with being caught between two walls of mortal flame sweeping towards
each other, each with a leading wave of frenzied mals, and no exit anywhere
in between. Nobody would open the door in a cleansing, not even if they
heard Orion Lake or for that matter their own mum calling on the other side.
Anybody stupid enough to do that died during freshman year when they did
open the door and got eaten by the myna grabber on the other side. “I wasn’t
planning to go anywhere.”

I opened my eyes to glare at him. “That just means you didn’t have a plan,
not that you weren’t going.”



He scowled at me and stomped off to his desk and pretended he was
working on something in a notebook. Liesel made a faint snort and sat down
on the bed in an open spot near my midsection. I eyed her. “What?”

She looked at me pointedly, but I still didn’t follow until she said, “And
your room?” and I realized she thought Orion had actually been planning to
creep down the corridor to spend the day with me. I was about to explain that
Orion wasn’t enough of a moron to risk going out in a cleansing to spend the
day sitting in my room getting yelled at for having gone out in a cleansing, he
was in fact much more of a moron, only then it occurred to me that she was
half right: if he had got caught between two walls of flame before reaching
the main stairs, he would indeed have come and banged on my door for
safety. And yes, I’m stupid enough that I would have opened it when he
banged, even if I’d have kept a jar of leftover etching acid handy. Which
meant spending the day with me had been his backup plan.

I even got confirmation: he was sitting with his back to us, but he’d got his
hair buzzed lately at my insistence—let’s not talk about the state it had got
into—and the tops of his ears were visible and bright red.

“Lake, if you’ve ever for a second entertained a lurid fantasy that you
might possibly have it off on some occasion and that I might in any way be
involved, I want you to erase even the memory of having the thought from
your brain,” I said deeply and earnestly.

“El!” he squalled in protest, turning to dart a mortified look at Liesel. But
it was nothing more than he deserved.

Anyway, so that was loads of fun, spending the day in Orion’s room with
him and the girl who’d tried to kill me. Actually, Liesel was all right. She and
I ended up playing card games; she had a deck of tarot cards she’d made
herself that she carried around with her, and she taught me canasta using all
the major arcana as jokers. She got a bit narrow-eyed when I kept getting the
Tower and Death, but it wasn’t my fault; she was the one carrying them
around and imbuing them with divinatory power.

Orion joined us a couple of times, but he kept getting distracted and going
to the door to listen to the crackling as the wall rolled back and forth through
the hall. On New Year’s they go several times, which in theory and not in



practice makes up for the reduced number. We did hear the dying shrieks of
mals a few times, and there was a scrabble at the drain at one point that made
him jump up hopefully and scatter the cards all over, but it didn’t come
through even when the mad muppet actually pulled off the drain cover and
stuck his head close to peer inside it.

Liesel flinched away from him with her expression somewhere between
horrified and just disgusted. I took the chance to scoop all the cards back into
a facedown pile before she noticed that the Tower and Death had both landed
faceup in my lap that time, along with the Eight of Swords, which in Liesel’s
illustration was a woman sitting cross-legged and blindfolded half caught in a
thicket of eight massive silver thorns in a circle pointing in at her. How
encouraging.

“Why don’t you try putting out milk?” I said to Orion snidely. That
technique did actually work in the olden days, when there were more minor
mals that don’t need much mana to survive, and more mundanes who
sincerely believed in them and were therefore vulnerable to them. If you
deliberately put out a bowl of milk for the little people, or whatever
equivalent gesture, they’d come and suck up the tiny bit of mana that came
from your intent, and then they’d leave your house alone in order to preserve
the regular supply. But most of those mals are gone now; they got eaten up by
more powerful mals who consider a mundane person the equivalent of an
already open packet left on the side of the road with suspicious stains and two
stale crisps in it.

Orion didn’t bother looking abashed. He just sighed and put the drain
cover back on and slunk back to the game, for lack of anything better to kill
than time, but he didn’t even notice that I didn’t deal him in for the new
round. Liesel and I played several more games, until the sixth time I turned
over the Tower, and she grabbed it out of my hand and shook it in my face.
“You are cheating!”

“Why would I?” I snapped at her. “Just take it out of play if you’re going
to be so fussed about it.”

“I did!” she snapped back, and grabbed her case and opened it up in front
of me to display its entirely empty innards to us both, and after staring into it



for a moment, she collected up all the other cards and put them into the case
and stashed it away in her pocket without saying another word.

After that it was awkward silence all round. I shoved aside enough of
Orion’s dirty laundry to clear a rectangle of floor and did push-ups for mana,
spiced up by the faint throbbing still going in my head. I was tired and sore
and hungry enough that the exercise was highly productive as long as I could
do it, but I ran out of steam sooner than I ran out of time and then I just
flopped myself back onto Orion’s bed and lay there even more tired and sore
and hungry and now sweaty, too. Liesel was sitting at Orion’s desk working
on something, which I only realized was his work when he did and said, “Hey,
you don’t have to…” in the most halfhearted way those words had been
spoken ever.

“I have nothing else to do now,” Liesel said. “Later you can pay me back.”
“He’s guarding the room, isn’t he?” I said.
Liesel shrugged. “He’s here, too. It doesn’t count.” I rather thought it did,

since he didn’t want to be in here and would have gone like a shot if we hadn’t
been here, but I was the only one arguing his case. She added to him, “I will
need amphisbaena scales.”

“Oh, sure, no problem,” Orion said, very enthusiastically. I scowled at him
across the room, but I didn’t have a leg to stand on even metaphorically; that
was a completely reasonable trade for someone doing your homework, and
even if you thought it was in some way his duty to go hunt down amphisbaena
for nothing, which I didn’t, that still wouldn’t mean he wasn’t entitled to get
something back for taking the trouble to collect the scales.

Anyway he probably wouldn’t hunt amphisbaena for nothing; they’re only
slightly more dangerous to us than the agglos, which they eat. Their worst
quality is every decade or so enough of their predators get wiped out in a
cleansing, and then the amphisbaena lay a bumper crop of tiny rubbery eggs
in nice warm damp spots like for instance around the hot-water pipes, and
when they hatch shortly after New Year’s, the babies pour out of the taps and
the showerheads in droves, both heads hissing and biting. Which you’d
justifiably say is in fact nightmarishly bad, but the poison isn’t strong enough
to do more than sting at that stage, and it doesn’t get stronger until they’re big



enough that they don’t fit through anymore. You just hear them stuck in there
and hissing as you wash and hope very hard that the showerhead doesn’t
break off today.

There almost certainly would be an infestation this year, now I thought
about it. I’d have to pass the word, and also spend some of my crochet time
making mesh bags to put on the showerheads. Liesel must have seen it
coming a while ago and worked up a strategy using what was about to
become an abundant resource; clever of her. Even more clever to take
advantage of a golden opportunity to have Orion do the harvesting, in
exchange for her doing the remedial homework she would probably knock off
in the next two hours.

I sulked on the bed in completely unjustified resentment while she
motored through the entire stack of worksheets with about as much effort as
it was taking me to lie there. The only thing that slowed her down even a little
were the places where Orion had dripped food and/or maleficaria innards on
some of the questions, and she had to get him to help her reconstruct what the
unspattered words had been. Actually I overestimated vastly: it took her
thirty-eight minutes, and that includes the time she spent sorting it neatly into
deadline order and putting it into a pair of folders for him and also tidying up
absolutely everywhere.

I veered from being annoyed at her to being annoyed at Orion when he
received the folders and just perfunctorily put them on the side of his desk
and said, “Great, thanks. How many scales do you need?” It wasn’t effusive
enough for me, much less by American standards.

“What Lake means is, he’s pathetically grateful that he doesn’t have to
spend the last six months of term dodging vats of strong acid because he
couldn’t be arsed to do his own homework,” I said peevishly.

Liesel just shrugged with all the weariness of a veteran of the wars—I
suppose she’d worked her way through the entire time doing homework for
enclavers—and said to Orion, “Can you get thirty hides? I need them at least
two weeks old.”

“Sure,” Orion said blithely, and I didn’t literally gnash my teeth because
no one does, do they, but I felt as if I were gnashing my teeth. With no



justification in the slightest. Liesel had made a good deal for her, and so had
Orion, and for that matter it was good for me, too, because I wouldn’t have to
keep saving his thick plank self all the time. I didn’t even need to be worried
that he was neglecting something important that would come back to bite him
the way neglected assignments usually did. He didn’t need to practice his
alchemy, either to graduate or for any other reason; he didn’t have any special
affinity for it as far as I’d ever seen. I didn’t even know why he’d done
alchemy track in the first place. New York surely had all its lab space packed
with geniuses; he wasn’t going to graduate and go be a modestly competent
alchemist the rest of his life.

It annoyed me more and not less because I didn’t have a good reason for
being annoyed. I couldn’t even come up with anything to say about it. If I’d
tried to put into words what I was feeling, it would have been something
unpleasant and envious and whinging like Why should you get to make easy
deals that suit you perfectly to get out of the things you don’t like with the
strong implication of when I never do, which wasn’t even true anymore since I
had a New York power-sharer on my wrist.

So I didn’t put it into words; I just lay curled on his bed in an unpleasant
stew of cooled sweat and resentment while they discussed their happy
arrangement. Orion even stopped being so distracted: even if the mals did get
purged back, Liesel had just cleared his slate completely of anything but
hunting and eating and sleep, with the last two as optional as he wanted them
to be. She even offered to help him brew up some amphisbaena bait.

The one thing I wasn’t, at all, was jealous. I was so far from it actually that
I didn’t even think about being jealous until Liesel shot me an exasperated
look and I realized that she’d very much have liked to make me jealous, and
would have had a strong go at it if the field had been the least bit open. I
couldn’t blame her. She wanted that guaranteed spot in New York enough to
have seriously contemplated both Magnus Tebow and murder for it; I
certainly ranked Orion higher than those alternatives. If he had so much as
taken a first glance at her cleavage, she’d have been a plonker not to make
sure he got a second.



But he hadn’t, and when I realized he hadn’t, I started to feel more than a
bit panicky, because he hadn’t any excuse not to be taking a first glance. I’m
only mildly motivated in that direction myself and I absolutely had taken both
a first and a second glance at the cleavage and the bouncy golden curls and
shiny pink lips. I think anyone who wasn’t really impervious would have. If
you haven’t eaten anything but tasteless slop in years and suddenly someone
offers you a slice of chocolate cake, so what if you don’t especially like
chocolate cake; if you were interested in food at all, you’d at least think it
over before you said no thanks.

Orion had no business saying no thanks. I was fairly confident he did like
cake, or at least was quite ready to give it a try, and he wasn’t getting a bite
off my plate if I had anything to say about it, which I did. He ought to have at
least licked his chops, even if he didn’t want to dive in, and instead he didn’t
so much as drop his eyes for a peek. He wasn’t a good enough actor to have
been faking it, either.

Which irritated Liesel, understandably. It was like the homework; that
much bloody effort deserved a smidge of appreciation. So when the all-clear
bell rang, she said stiffly, “I will be going to my room now,” and cleared out
before I had a chance to jump on the bandwagon and leave with her.

“I’ll be going too,” I said in a hurry, swinging my legs over the side of the
bed, and Orion came over and said, “Are you sure you’re okay?” a little
wistfully and then had the unmitigated nerve to have a quick peek at my
breasts, which were currently under a second-day top marred with alchemy
stains and soot, with the sawn-off ends of my hair obscuring the view.

“I’m fine,” I said sharply.
“I’ll walk you back to your room,” he said.
I should just have let him; Precious was in my room. Instead I said, “I

don’t need help going nine doors down, Lake,” and then my stomach growled
and he said, “And you threw up your whole breakfast, you need to eat
something,” and jumped to grab me a sealed muesli bar only eight years past
its best that he must have been gifted by some adoring fan. It wasn’t cake
maybe, but by Scholomance standards it still qualified as haute cuisine. I
stupidly took it and stupidly sat there on the bed eating it—so stupidly that I



have the bad feeling I did it on purpose—and obviously he sat down on the
bed next to me. He tentatively crept his arm round my shoulders when he
thought I wasn’t paying attention, and I pretended I wasn’t paying attention,
and then he said in a faintly hopeful voice, “El,” and I told myself to shove
him off the bed.

I didn’t. In fact, mortifyingly I kissed him first, and then it was all up,
because I’m starving, and I do like cake, and after I’d taken the first bite I
wanted another, and another after that, and I put my hands under his shirt to
press them flat against his warm bare back, and it was so good to be this close
to someone, only it wasn’t just someone, it was Orion, and he shivered all over
and put his arms around me and I could feel how strong he was, the muscles
moving under his skin that he’d built over years of fighting all the very worst
things that come out of the dark. His mouth was all warm and wonderful and
I can’t even describe how good it felt and how much better it made
everything. I was one of those poor stupid freshmen longing inside the
gymnasium fantasia I’d made, only this was real and I could really have it,
inside and after we graduated and forever, and the rest of my dream along
with it—a life of building and creation and good work, and every prophecy of
evil and destruction could go fuck right off and I could start the rest of my life
right now, and I wanted to, so much I couldn’t stop, couldn’t want to stop.

So I didn’t. I just kept kissing him and running my hands all over him and
breathing in time with him, our foreheads pressed together making a warm
private space between us to catch our breath in, full of gasps. Orion had a
hand all tangled up in my hair, moving around like he wanted to feel the
strands running over his fingers, tightening his grip and relaxing in small
bursts, his own breath coming out in hard panting raspy gulps, and it felt so
good I laughed a little into that open space between us and reached down to
grab the bottom of his shirt.

He gave a convulsive shudder and jerked back, pushing me to arm’s
length, and crackled out, “No, we can’t,” in a rawly agonized way.

I’ve been mortified in all sorts of awful ways in the course of my life, but I
think that might possibly have been the worst. It wasn’t because he didn’t
want to; that would’ve been all right. But he wanted to just as much as I did,



and he’d nevertheless managed to stop himself, and I hadn’t, like some
undisciplined yahoo grabbing at the shiny treat that I knew perfectly well
would lead to complete disaster. He even heaved himself off the bed in the
next moment, all but levitating to the other side of the room.

“Right you are,” I said, and fired myself out the door and into the still-
lightly-toasted corridor at once.

Precious was right on the other side of my door when I shot it open, so
frantic she was leaping almost as high as my waist. I caught her right out of
the air and said furiously, “Will you stop? Nothing happened, no thanks to
you.”

I slammed the door hard behind me and slumped onto my bed. Precious
crept up my arm to my shoulder and sat there silently until I finally admitted,
“No thanks to me, either,” as bitter as rotten squash. She crept closer to my
ear and rubbed the lobe with the tip of her little nose and made a few
comforting squeaks as I put up my hands to rub away a few leaking tears.

OceanofPDF.com



O rion didn’t even have the bare decency to avoid me the rest of the day.
In fact, he spent all of lunchtime casting pathetic looks of desperation

and longing in my direction, exactly as though I’d been the one who’d fired
him up only to cruelly leave him hanging. Nobody made a peep about it in
my direction, but I could tell they all assumed that I had done just that. When
I complained to Aadhya about it that afternoon, she told me—with a total
lack of sympathy—that no one was spending that much time thinking about
my love life, but what did she know?

“You should just be grateful he saved you from yourself, anyway!” she
added.

I glared at her. “And who was just asking me for all the salacious details?”



“That doesn’t mean I wouldn’t have thrown a bucket of cold water on your
head if I’d been in range. What were you thinking? Do you even know when
your last period was?”

I really couldn’t argue with her especially since no, I had no idea when my
last period was or when the next one was due. Thankfully, that’s one thing
magic is good for; whenever the first signs show up, you brew yourself a cup
of nice go-the-fuck-away tea—an easy alchemical recipe every wizard girl
can brew in her sleep—and that’s the end of it. Some of us do have to keep a
sharp eye on the timing, because theirs starts with blood spotting, and you
don’t want mals to get a whiff of that. But my first symptom is a nice sharp
whanging cramp in the midsection, completely unmistakable, and it arrives
with a good five hours’ warning.

Unfortunately, one thing magic is not good for is avoiding pregnancy. The
problem is, if you deliberately do something that you are conscious and
deeply terrified might cause pregnancy, the magical intent gets confused.
Protective spells are about as reliable as the withdrawal method. Science is
much more reliable, but then you have to either invest some of your very
limited induction weight allowance to bring in condoms or pills and then use
them properly, or get an implant or an IUD before you get inducted and cross
your fingers that nothing goes wrong with it over the four years you’re
hopefully going to be in here before you next get to see a gynecologist. I
didn’t see the point. Or rather, I hadn’t seen the point four years ago, when I’d
been reasonably sure no one was going to talk to me, much less date me.

“It’s just—” I stopped squabbling and sat down on the floor of her room in
a thump and said, “It was just so nice,” and maybe that sounds stupid but I
couldn’t help my voice wobbling. Nice was what we didn’t have in here. You
could manage desperate victories and even dazzling wonders sometimes, but
not anything nice.

Aadhya sighed out a long deep breath. “Well, forget it. I’m not getting
eaten by a maw-mouth because you got yourself knocked up.” I sat up with
my mouth open in low-blow outrage, but Aadhya just looked at me hard-
faced and serious, and she was right; of course she was right. I’d already been



screwing around excessively without making it literal, and if I kept on, I’d
very likely end up with something even less helpful than a pewter medal.

We didn’t know what we were going to find when we got down to the
graduation hall, and in some ways that was worse than knowing it was going
to be the same terrible horde of mals that seniors had faced every year for a
hundred years and more. We couldn’t even guess based on the early accounts
of the days when the cleansings had been running, because the school had
been brand-new then, and the only mals had been the first squirming pioneers
to find their way through the wards. Now there were century-old infestations
and colonies buried deep in dark corners, ancient maleficaria rooted into the
foundations, generations who’d never lived outside the machinery. Maybe
there had been enough survivors of the cleansings to start a sudden population
explosion in the available space, like the oncoming wave of amphisbaena, and
we’d be dumped into a ravening horde of recently hatched and starving mals,
so many of them and so small that most of our strategies wouldn’t apply, just
like that horrible mass we’d accidentally lured with Liu’s honeypot spell only
ten thousand times worse.

Or maybe they’d all be dead. Maybe they’d eaten each other all the way
down the food chain, and there would be no maleficaria left except Patience
and Fortitude themselves, guardians on either side of the gates, and they’d
have nothing left on the menu except us.

If that’s what we found down there—I had no idea what I’d do. There was
an obvious and sensible thing to do, which was to pass the word to our entire
graduating class in advance that if it was us against the maw-mouths, they’d
all make one enormous circle and feed me mana, and I’d try to take them out.
But just because that was obvious and sensible didn’t mean I was going to do
it. I had killed a maw-mouth the only way you could, from the inside out, and
if I tried to think even in a very vague distant way about doing it again, a faint
incoherent screaming started up inside me that took up all the room there was
in my brain, like standing next to a fire truck with siren wailing while
someone tried to talk to you, their mouth moving with no sound at all coming
through because the whole world was full of noise.



Maybe I’d get over it if I saw the maw-mouths coming and there wasn’t
any other choice. Maybe. I wasn’t at all confident, for all I was about to have
six months of honing my reflexes to razor sharpness. It wasn’t the same. It
wasn’t remotely the same. Having to choose to go inside again—I don’t know
if it’s a choice anyone could make more than once. There certainly haven’t
been many people who’ve had the chance to consider it. If I do make it out of
here, I should look up the Dominus of Shanghai. He’s the only other living
person who’s ever done it. We could compare notes. Or we could look each
other in the face and just start screaming together, which feels more
appropriate to me.

Of course, it was extremely likely that it wouldn’t work anyway. The maw-
mouth I’d killed had been a small one, maybe budded off one of the big ones
or however they spawn—no one’s spent much time studying the reproduction
of maw-mouths as far as I know. It had managed to squeeze through the
wards and make it upstairs. I don’t know how many people had been inside it,
how many lives; I’d been far beyond keeping count of the deaths I’d dealt out.
But I did know that it hadn’t been anywhere near as big as Fortitude, much
less Patience, who’s been lording it over the killing grounds almost since the
hall first opened. I don’t think even I can do that much killing. The only way
they’re going is if the whole school goes.

The point being that we still needed a better strategy for graduation than
Wait and see if El can keep her big-girl pants on, and here I was whinging on
about how nice it would be for me to do something unbelievably stupid
instead, like Orion. Aadhya had every right to cram my face in it.

“Sorry,” I muttered. She just nodded, which was kinder than I deserved,
really, and then said, businesslike, “So I think I’ve figured out a good gym
schedule,” and rolled out a timetable for me to look at.

After New Year’s, half of the gym gets cordoned off exclusively for the
seniors, and every week, it lays out a fresh new obstacle course for us, so we
can get as much practice as possible running flat-out through forests of sharp
things trying to kill us. It’s excellently realistic, full of artificial constructs
pretending to be mals, and also the many real mals who show up helpfully to
populate it. It’s a testament to our top-quality educational experience how few



of us die. Please envision me saying this with my hand held piously over my
heart. But really, we were all hitting our stride by now. There isn’t anything
much more dangerous in the world than a fully grown wizard. That’s why the
mals have to hunt us when we’re young. We’re the real apex predators, not the
maw-mouths that after all just sit by the doors mumbling to themselves and
occasionally groping around for some supper. Once through the gates, we’ll
be carving our dreams into the world like gleeful vandals scratching graffiti on
the pyramids, and we won’t look behind us. But only once we’re out.

Ordinarily the reserved gym is a useful and highly valued privilege. No
one was very enthusiastic about it this year, but there wasn’t any other option
for practice. The fundamental goal of graduation is to get from the nearest
stairwell to the gates as fast as possible without getting stopped along the way.
It’s roughly a distance of 150 meters, about the same distance as from one
end of the gym and back, and aside from throwing spells left and right, you
also have to run.

“Mornings?” I said, in protest, because Aadhya had us meeting three
times a week at eight, which meant hauling ourselves out of bed at the first
quiet chiming to get breakfast and make it downstairs; we’d be first through
all the corridors, not to mention—very important to mention—first into the
obstacle course every week, without any warning how bad it was going to be.

“I talked to Ibrahim and Nkoyo today, during the cleansing,” Aadhya said.
“We made a deal. They’ll go right behind us with their teams, on either side.
We take the heat up front, and they keep us from getting flanked. We’ll
practice together each morning.”

That kind of arrangement is normally a supremely terrible strategy for the
lead group, to the point that you’re explicitly warned against it in the pre-
graduation handbook we’ll all be getting in about three months—much too
late to be of real use; we’re all using copies we bought in our sophomore years
off that year’s seniors, who’d bought their own copies two years before, et
cetera. The advice changes a little from year to year, but one of the most
consistent points is that taking the lead is absolutely not worth whatever
advantage you might get from the groups covering you. As soon as you’re in
any danger of being overwhelmed, they’ll hop to one side and let whatever



they’re holding off come at you, meaning that you won’t even have a chance
to recover, while they take the opening created by the pile-on and go sailing
onwards with a substantial improvement to their odds, taken out of yours.

It’s not great to be the one taking the lead even within an alliance, but at
least in an alliance, you’ve been practicing together and integrating your skills
tightly, so it’s not actually a good idea for your allies to cut and run. Unless
you’re close enough to the doors, at which point loads of alliances do fall
apart. And that, boys and girls, is why enclavers never take the lead.

Aadhya wasn’t making a mistake, though. There’s one situation where
having someone covering you does in fact make excellent sense: if it’s never
going to be a good idea for them to ditch you. For instance, if all they’ve got
is knives and your team’s got a flamethrowing machine gun. So she was
confirming that yes, our entire strategy was going to rest on my keeping my
big-girl pants on. “Right,” I said, grimly, because what else was I going to
say? No, don’t rely on me? No, I won’t do my best to get you to the gates, the
way you’ve done for me? Of course she was going to build the strategy
around me. And of course I had to let her.

“El,” Aadhya said, “you know we’d take Orion,” and you might think that
was a hilariously absurd thing to say—yes, out of the generous goodness of
our hearts we’d take the invincible hero along with us—but I knew what she
really meant. She was saying Orion’s not on our team, and if I was, that meant
I couldn’t ditch them to go help him, even if, for instance, I looked over and
saw him being dragged into the guts of a maw-mouth, screaming the way that
Dad’s been screaming in Mum’s head since the day she crawled out through
the gates with me in her belly. If that was the monstrous fate Mum had been
trying to warn me away from, she’d know, she’d know the way no one else in
the world would know just how horrible it would be to live with someone you
love screaming in your head forever.

“I’ll ask him,” I said without lifting my head, pretending I could still see
anything when actually I had my eyes shut to keep from dripping on Aadhya’s
carefully written timetable. She put her hand on my shoulder, warm, and then
she half put her arm around me, and I leaned into her a moment and then
shook my head wildly and sucked in a big gulping breath, because I didn’t



want to get started. What was the point? I couldn’t do anything about that,
either.

I did ask him that night as we walked up to dinner, because I had to, just
in case. He had the nerve to say, “El, you’re going to be fine,” in reassuring
tones. “There’s plenty of mana in the pool, I’ll get more in now that there are
more mals around, you’ve got Chloe and—”

“Shut up, you cartwheeling donkey,” I snarled at him, and he recoiled and
wobbled between baffled and offended for a moment, then said, sounding
confused, “Wait, are you worried about—?” and just stopped to gawk at me
as though the shadow of the idea that any living being might at any point
entertain a fraction of concern for his health and well-being had never crept
across the windowsill of his molluscular brain, and I ran up the rest of the
flight of stairs away from him because it was that or punch him in his beaky
nose, which I’d caught myself idly thinking just that morning across the table
at breakfast had a hint of young Marlon Brando, which might convey to you
the depths to which I was sinking if your mum thinks, like mine does, that
the height of appropriate children’s entertainment is antique movie musicals.

Aadhya and Liu and Chloe had gone on ahead, but I caught up to them
before they actually went into the food line. “Thanks for holding a spot,” I
said, grabbing a tray, without saying how it’d gone, and Chloe bit her lip and
Liu looked sorry and thank goodness Aadhya just said, “What do you guys
think of asking Jowani?” and got us discussing the merits.

I could list them out for you. He had a really top-notch perimeter-warning
spell, the kind you cast once and then it lingers for half an hour; his was
notable because it worked off intent rather than physical presence, which
meant it would warn you about incorporeal mals. He’d give us a solid personal
connection across our little trio of alliances, because Cora had teamed up
with Ibrahim and Nadia and Yaakov. And boys are undeniably useful for
heavy lifting; I was the closest thing to brawn on our team at the moment.
The discrepancy hadn’t seemed as significant at the start of the year, but lately
it felt like all the senior boys were expanding up and out when we weren’t
looking, and they were suddenly doing things like toting an entire crate full of
iron all the way across the shop under one arm.



You might think those all sound like minor advantages, and they were,
relatively speaking. Everyone in the school could make themselves somewhat
useful—that’s what all of us have been doing all four years of this, finding
ways to make ourselves useful. And now that everyone knew I was very useful,
we could have cherrypicked ourselves one of the top kids. In fact, I suspected
that at least two of the near-miss valedictorian candidates had made overtures
of their own to Aadhya: I’d seen them stopping by her room.

None of us raised those objections. We all agreed that Jowani would be
helpful and a good strategic addition to round out our team. But we didn’t talk
about why. We didn’t say that we didn’t want him to get left behind. Ever
since Cora’s arm, we’d all been eating together as a group almost every day,
and each day at the start of breakfast, he would bring out a tiny book full of
incredibly thin pages—one for each day of four years, I realized after the first
few times—and he’d softly recite out loud a short poem or an excerpt of one
that his dad had copied out by hand into the book, in one of a dozen
languages, each one a piece full of love and hope: have courage. His voice
reading them smoothed out even my most snarling mornings.

Before then, I’d never heard him emit more than a monosyllable. I’d
always assumed that was dislike on his part, but actually it hadn’t anything to
do with me in the slightest. He had a stammer, which didn’t trip him up when
he recited poetry, and luckily also not when he was casting spells, but made it
almost impossible for him to get out a word in conversation unless he really
knew you. And that was why he’d held on to Nkoyo’s social coattails past
when that had stopped being a good idea, and why he was now having a lousy
time of finding himself an alliance. And if he didn’t get an alliance, he wasn’t
going to make it out.

We didn’t say any of that to one another. You didn’t, ever. Ibrahim and
Yaakov and Nadia hadn’t taken Cora because they remembered making the
circle around her, mana flowing through us all like a river to heal her arm, a
gift that hadn’t cost anything but caring to give. They’d taken her because she
and Nadia both knew how to dance spells—there’s quite a lot of spells that
get more powerful if you dance them along with the incantation—and were
now working out a magical sword-dancing routine using blades that Yaakov



was making; Ibrahim had scored a major matter-phasing spell to put on them
from one of his other enclaver friends, who’d traded it to him on the cheap
after putting together his own alliance, as apology for not asking him. That
was a good solid fighting team, and they’d got offers from at least two or three
enclavers to join up. That was why. You couldn’t choose people because you
liked them, or because you wanted them to live.

But we did scrape together good enough reasons to say yes to Jowani, and
when we got to our table, Aadhya pulled him aside and asked him, and after
that all three of our alliances were firmed up, and everyone agreed we’d go
for the first run the very next morning. Even Orion. He was clearly not even
bothering to think up any kind of plan for getting to the doors beyond Kill
things until there aren’t any more, but he overheard us discussing the merits or
lack thereof for going first thing, and how we’d have to keep a sharp eye out
for any real maleficaria that had crept into the gym overnight and hidden in
the course. At which he perked up and said, “Oh hey, do you mind if I come
down with you?” It will shock you to hear that nobody minded.

So we all trooped down after breakfast the next morning. I hadn’t been
back to the gym myself since Field Day. I was braced, but not enough. The
place had got even worse. Some birdwitted freshmen—it could only have
been freshmen—had replanted the big planters along the walls with seeds out
of the alchemy supplies, and the spell machinery had worked them in,
currently as hedges, so now you couldn’t even tell where the walls met the
floor, and it was an even more perfect illusion of being outdoors. The big
trees in the distance had let their leaves fall, and there was a feathery dusting
of snow on their wet dark branches, broken by the occasional red huddle of a
tiny bird, and every delicate blade of the grass underfoot was crisp with frost.
Our breath fogged.

“What,” Jowani said, and stopped there, which actually did pretty well to
encapsulate all our feelings, I think.

Well, not all our feelings. “It’s so nice, El,” Orion said to me, almost
dreamily, arms outstretched and his face turned up to the artful flurry that the
sky allowed to fall to greet us. “I can’t even tell we’re not outside.” I think he
meant to be complimentary.



You could pick out the boundaries of the obstacle course with a good
squint: there was a low wooden fence running down the halfway mark
dividing the obstacle-course area off from the rest of the gym. But apart from
that, the illusion artifice had integrated the obstacles fully into the
environment: bristling thornbushes, trees with grabby-looking limbs, a steep
hill covered with snow; a thin grey fog lying over a wide black slick of icy
river ready to break into jagged shards and an ominous handful of ways to
cross: a thin rickety board, a scattering of slippery rocks poking up above the
ice, a healthier-looking narrow stone bridge that was undoubtedly the most
dangerous option. If you looked up at the inside of the gym doors, they
seemed to be two enormous iron gates set in the wall of a mysterious and
alluring stone tower.

We’d already started wrong. The best way to use the obstacle course is to
just throw yourself at it instantly, the first time you see it, without taking time
to look it over. After you come out bruised and limping—assuming you do
come out—that’s when you go over all the things you did wrong, and try new
things the rest of the week, and then the new course comes out on Monday
and you do it all over again. And if you’re lucky, every week you get better at
doing it the first time, with no planning. You don’t get any planning time at
graduation. But in our defense: What.

“Let’s get going before the next teams show up,” I said. Then I realized
that everyone else was waiting for me, which was both obvious and terrifying.
I stared out at the perfectly lovely expanse of winter-touched wilderness. Any
mals out there were in hiding, except for the faint dancing lights visible on the
other side of the river, glowing in colors through the fog, exactly as if will-o’-
wisps had moved in to take up residence, only those are largely decorative
constructs and not much use for the purposes of practice. They might have
been some variety of soul-eater, but real soul-eaters that close to one another
would have merged into one very hungry soul-eater, so a pack of them wasn’t
much use for practice, either. But that would be useless in a more dangerous
and unpleasant direction, and therefore more likely. The fake mals the course
produces are very much like the ones that get put on display in Maleficaria
Studies—just because they’re not real doesn’t mean they can’t kill you, and



sometimes the real ones sneak in and pretend to be fake just long enough to
get hold of you. But we weren’t doing ourselves any favors by waiting to find
out which these were. I took a deep breath, nodded to Liu, who started
playing the lute, and I sang out the mana-amplification spell in a slightly
squeaky voice and ran straight in.

The snow burst open all around us before we were more than a stride away
from the doors, jagged scything blades curving out with the tips lunging for
our guts, and after that I couldn’t tell you what order any of it came in. We
had to cross the river both ways, both going and coming, but I don’t
remember whether I turned it to lava on the way out or the way back. We
didn’t actually make contact with the wall, since the gym illusion was trying
very hard to convince us there wasn’t one: when we got close, a sudden
blizzard came howling into our faces with quavery ghost voices, telling us to
turn back.

Actually the lava was definitely on the way in, because on our way back
out, the obstacle course was still trying to reset around the lava spell, so
instead the river fired geysers of superheated steam at us through cracks in
the ice. One of them caught Yaakov’s leg. He fervently yelled out what I’m
absolutely sure were wild curses with every step the rest of the way back to
the doors: he was usually such a nice, proper boy, carefully polite; it would’ve
been funny under any other circumstances. But not here: it meant he was in
the kind of desperate pain where all you can do is drop where you are and
howl, and he couldn’t do that, because he’d die. The instant he got out into the
corridor, he did drop, and started trying to pull out a bandage to wrap around
the blistering skin, still gasping curses under his breath with tears gathering in
his eyes. His hands were shaking so hard he couldn’t unroll it.

“You can’t keep yelling!” Ibrahim snapped, even as he dropped to a knee
next to him. He dragged his arm across his forehead—not very effective; each
one smudged some streaks of blood on the other—and took the bandage out
of Yaakov’s hands to put it on for him.

“No,” Liu said, panting; she was on her knees on the floor mostly draped
around the long neck of the sirenspider lute. “No, it was all right. It went into
the music. We should all yell, I think, or sing.” She was better off than most



of us; she’d been playing the whole way from inside the sheltered place at the
center of our alliance.

Chloe was shivering with her eyes wide enough to be on the edge of
shock, and she was fumbling out some bandages of her own; Jowani was
helping her. Her whole right side—the exposed side—had been perforated
with one too-close swipe from one of those clawing tree branches, blood and
skin showing through open gaps in her clothes from her shoulder down to her
thigh, the frayed edges stained dark. Aadhya had been bringing up the rear;
she was standing with her arms wrapped around herself, her hands still
clenched tight on the fighting-sticks she’d made for the run. I didn’t see any
wounds, but she looked pretty sick. I was just about to go to her when she
pulled in a deep breath and then went to Liu to look at the lute and make sure
it had stayed in tune.

Nkoyo’s team had been hit by a spray of razor-blade-sized slivers of
sharpened ice and were all even bloodier than the rest of us, except for their
resident enclaver, a boy named Khamis from Zanzibar, who’d been very
firmly ensconced in the most protected spot in their team, at the center. He
was an alchemist and armed only with a bandolier of spray bottles, one of
which he was wielding right now on Nkoyo’s slashed arm: the wound
underneath was disappearing along with the blood as she wiped tears from
her face.

All of us were freaked out and shaking, from a dozen near-death
experiences crammed into the span of five minutes and also from the even
worse knowledge that this was nothing, absolutely nothing. It was the first
obstacle course on the first day after New Year’s, it was warm-up material,
and there was nowhere to go from here but a long steep road uphill all the
way. Most of us were used to being jumped by mals, but there’s a substantial
difference between one attack and an unending stream of them. About half of
us were crying, and the other half wanted to cry.

When I say us, what I mean is them. I felt fine. No; I felt like I’d woken up
after a long sleep and had a good workout in the fresh air and a really nice
stretch and was now contemplating with interest the idea of a hearty lunch.
Sitting on edge in a classroom for hours surrounded by fluffy peeping



freshmen waiting for one mal to pop out at me: nightmarish. Summoning a
river of magma to instantly vaporize twenty-seven carefully designed attacks
at once: nothing to it.

“Hey, that looked pretty good,” Orion said encouragingly, coming to join
us with a bounce in his step and the mangled corpse of something spiky
dangling from his hand: he’d somehow managed to sniff out the one real mal
hiding amidst the fakes. Normally every word out of his mouth automatically
produces a burst of adulation, but everyone in our group had spent enough
time sitting at meals with him for the shine to wear off a bit, and under the
circumstances, they all glared at him with pure hatred. I’m fairly certain I
saved him from bodily harm when I interrupted his attempt to dig himself a
deeper grave—“I mean, you all made it okay”—and said, “Lake, what is that
dead thing and why are you carrying it around?”

“Oh, it’s—I don’t know, actually,” he said, lifting it up: it had a vaguely
Doberman-sized body with dachshund legs and was covered with narrow
cone-like spikes that had tiny holes at the tips. I had no idea what it was
myself. Mals are always mutating, or being mutated, or new ones get made, et
cetera. “The spikes put out some kind of gas. I didn’t want to leave it out
there; it was covered with snow and the gas blended into the fog. I thought
somebody might step on it.” Very thoughtful of him.

Other seniors were beginning to cautiously trickle down from breakfast by
then. As we dragged ourselves off to lick our wounds both metaphorical and
literal, I overheard someone asking Aadhya, “Hey, you’re taking first run?”
and she shrugged and said, “We’re thinking about it,” meaning that we were
open to offers: at least one or two teams would be glad to bribe us to be the
very first ones through the doors, so they could come down bright and early
themselves and still know that someone else had already cleared the way. If
we were going to do it anyway, we might as well get paid for it.

She negotiated the arrangement at lunchtime, with three alliances who
wanted to share the time slot after us, and got us a promise of cleanup help
from them, meaning we wouldn’t have to waste our own healing and mending
supplies. That was a good deal for us: helping us right after we slogged out
meant they had to wait instead of starting their own runs before anyone else



showed. They agreed because they had to wait anyway: the obstacle course
took a good long while to finish resetting itself after we’d gone through.

Normally that process takes place in the time it takes for the doors to
close on your heels and open up again. The runs aren’t actually real. A
thousand wizards all hurling their most powerful spells around three times a
week would wreck the place almost instantly, and also if we were actually
casting our most powerful spells, we wouldn’t have enough mana for
graduation, our works of artifice would get worn out, our potions would get
used up, et cetera. So instead the obstacle-course magic fades everything out:
when you cast spells inside, it feels the same, but you’re only casting half of
one percent of a spell, and the course fakes the reaction so it’s as if you’ve
cast the full thing. You think you’re taking a big swallow of potion, but it’s
being diluted down; you think you’re using a piece of artifice, but it’s wrapped
in a traveling-protection spell. And when you come out, swish, everything
goes back to normal—except for any injuries you’ve picked up, those are
entirely persistent, the better to encourage rapid improvement—and the next
round of eager seniors gets to go in.

And all of that works because we voluntarily enter the course: consent is
the only way for someone else’s magic to get at your mana and your brain on
that level. Well, except for violence. There’s always violence.

However, apparently there was still substantial effort required to clean up
even one half of one percent of a giant river full of lava. The particular spell
I’d used on the river this morning had come from an overambitious maleficer
from the Avanti kingdom who decided his evil fortress would be much more
impressive if only it was surrounded by a moat of lava. How right he’d been.
The teams behind us had been forced to twiddle their thumbs on the
threshold for ten minutes until the doors opened up again on the charming
wintry landscape of murder.

We spent the rest of the day the way we’d be spending all our days from
now on: gathered around a table in the library, going over every move we’d
made and trying to decide what we’d done wrong. As noted, I had almost no
idea what moves I’d made, and no one else did, either, which made our first
postmortem difficult. Everyone did very clearly remember the river boiling up



into lava, points to me, so we frittered away quite a lot of time discussing
whether we should make that the centerpiece of our strategy: just have me
bang a molten river of magma down the middle of the graduation hall, throw
a cooling spell on our feet, and all run along it to the doors. It did sound good,
nice and simple, but there are plenty of mals who are just fine with even
boiling-lava amounts of heat, and anyway every single kid would get on the
highway to heaven right behind us, which would concentrate mal attention too
much. Mals would force each other into the lava by sheer pressure of
numbers, and the second wave would climb over the charred bodies to get at
us. Also, not only would the maw-mouths not mind the heat, they’d just flop
parts of themselves over onto the path and make it their serving tray as soon
as we started running towards them. It’s not like we could just stop. There
aren’t a lot of cooling spells that will last long if you keep standing on lava for
any length of time.

“What if you throw it across the room the other way, right behind us?”
Khamis said. “You could keep the mals off our backs.”

I said levelly, “I’d also block any other kids behind us.”
He clearly considered that their lookout and not ours, but he was a smart

guy; he didn’t say so to my face. I’m fairly sure he did say so to Nkoyo’s face,
though, in the vein of Can’t you reason with your silly friend? I saw him pull
her back to talk to her as we went downstairs for dinner, and she was all
controlled resignation when she got to the queue, her usual sparkle dimmed.

There was a man who came to the commune once with his girlfriend and
patronized everyone, asking overly polite questions with a sneer in the smile
that he always tacked on, and you all really believe in this sort of thing? It was
a familiar sneer: the exact one that filled my own heart every time someone
tried to tell me earnestly about how I would really clear my chakras if only I
would wear this set of beads or that magnetic copper bracelet. They’d always
get wound up when I told them that putting on a thing churned out of a
machine from ore that had been strip-mined by underpaid laborers wasn’t
likely to improve my mana balance any. But I still hated this wanker the
instant he turned up. He’d only come, as far as I could tell, to make his
girlfriend feel bad about having a nice weekend doing yoga in the woods with



people kind enough to ask her how she was feeling, even if they did it with a
bunch of blather about her chakras.

The tired way she had looked, that was how Nkoyo looked, and it made
me just as cross to see, cross enough that back at the commune I’d actually
gone up to the guy and told him that he should get out and stay away. He
laughed and smiled at me and I just stood there looking at him, because that
usually did the trick even though I was only eleven years old at the time, and
fifteen minutes later he did indeed leave. But he made his girlfriend go with
him.

So I didn’t go tell Khamis to get out. I just made sure to bus my tray with
Nkoyo and told her, “Feel free to tell that prick that I kicked off at you when
you even tried to suggest the idea,” and she glanced at me and her mouth
quirked, a little of the sparkle coming back. I should have felt proud of
myself; I’m sure Mum would have told me I’d grown. I’m afraid all I felt was
an even more passionate desire to drop Khamis down a maintenance shaft.

When we ran the course again two days later—we each get to go every
other day; anyone who tries to hog the course more than that starts to have
unpleasant experiences, like for example their spells not working at all at a
critical juncture—I didn’t turn the whole river to lava. Instead I summoned
just enough lava at the bottom of it to boil the whole thing up while
simultaneously cooling the lava down. The variety of traps and simulated
mals lurking in the river almost all got encased in the new stone, or at least
became completely visible, and we could just walk across at any point we
liked.

“El, that was the right thing to do,” Liu said to me afterwards, intently.
We’d made it to the far end and back without any serious bloodletting that
time, which made that seem obvious, but she meant it more generally. “It was
the right thing to do because it gave us choices. Having a choice is the most
important thing.”

I’d heard that before. It’s a bullet-point line in the graduation handbook:
As a general rule, regardless of the specific situation in which you find
yourself, at every step you must take care to preserve or widen the number of
your options. It hadn’t quite sunk in properly, but now it did. Having a choice



meant being able to choose something that worked for you and whatever you
were carrying and whatever you’d prepared. Having a choice meant you got to
choose getting out.

Liu looked back at the doors. “Six months left.” I nodded. We went
upstairs to get back to work.

OceanofPDF.com



I’ d like to say Khamis improved on acquaintance, but he didn’t. The
second week of the obstacle course, we did it properly: I sang the mana-

amplification spell before the doors even fully opened and charged in without
stopping to let myself look. I went straight into a knee-high snowdrift in a
glacial mountain landscape, empty except for massive tall stone boulders
jutting out of the ground like pillars, intermittent blasts of snowy wind
coming into our faces almost as hard as the boundary blizzard from last time.
It was still beautiful, but it was the kind of beautiful that normally you only
get to see in person if you spend a week hauling yourself up a mountain with
a backpack longer than your torso.



I floundered a few steps in, and then my foot just went out from under me
and I headed over backwards. If it hadn’t been for Aadhya’s shield holder—
after I’d told her about my little run-in with Liesel, she’d tweaked them to
handle accidental falls along with deliberate impact—I’d probably have
concussed myself properly that time. As it was, I went down hard, and the
snowdrifts on either side of me fell in on top of my head and started actively
trying to smother me. Jowani hauled me out of it and put me back on my feet
—oh I was glad to have him along—just as the boulders all unfolded
themselves into troll shapes like Transformers made out of rock and started
flinging chunks at our heads.

We all came out with numb bodies and a lot of bruises, and Chloe had a
broken collarbone and cracked shoulder and a bad limp: she’d been hit by one
of the flying rocks. Our helpers patched her up a little, while inside the gym
the boulders reassembled themselves out of the mass of crushed pebbles and
dust that I’d left behind me, but she was going to need more healing than we
could expect from the deal. “Let’s get you to your room. We can work in
there instead,” Liu said, and Chloe just nodded without saying anything, her
eyes lowered and her mouth thin, and Khamis came up and said to her,
“You’re the one putting up the mana. Next time, you go in the middle.”

I’d spent the week congratulating myself repeatedly on my self-restraint,
but it had run out, and I was about to tell him that actually Liu was bringing
at least as much mana, by carrying the mana-amplification spell on the lute
the entire time we were running, and also I was going to lay out exactly what I
thought of him, and offer some detailed suggestions of where he could shove
it, but before I could open my mouth, Aadhya said, “Seriously? A big boy like
you, afraid of some scrapes and bruises?” He rounded on her; she just waved
a finger back and forth across his chest in over-the-top disdain. “You want to
take your first hit when it’s for real, son, you go ahead, keep hiding in the
middle. Chloe’s going to be out the doors before you are, for sure.”

Chloe darted a look up at her out of shiny eyes. To be honest, I don’t think
she’d thought of it that way any more than I had, but Aadhya was right.
Enclavers didn’t get hit, not like the rest of us, not day-to-day. Once a month
maybe they’d see a mal, with mana at their fingertips and lots of help and



easier targets both close to hand. Enough for practice. Not enough to get hurt.
I don’t know that Chloe had ever actually been tagged before. Definitely not
the way I had, but not even the way Liu or Aadhya or Jowani or any average
loser kid had, at least half a dozen times. It didn’t matter sometimes if you
had all the mana in the world, all the equipment in the world. All it took was
getting unlucky once. If you got hit hard enough, you went down, and if you
didn’t get back on your feet fast enough, you stayed down forever. And you
couldn’t learn how to get back on your feet until after you’d been knocked
down.

Chloe swallowed and said to Khamis, “Thanks for looking out for me. I’m
good with my team.”

He didn’t like it, especially since he probably couldn’t help seeing that
Aadhya had an alarmingly good point that he was now going to have to worry
about, but he took it, although he gave a snort and looked at Aadhya as if he’d
have liked to have a minion push her over in a corridor sometime before he
turned around and walked away back to his team.

That said, good point or not, I’d never seen Aadhya have a go at an
enclaver before. She wasn’t a committed suck-up like Ibrahim, just too
sensible to do anything that—well, that stupid. Unlike certain other people
who will remain me. “Wow,” I said to her just under my breath as we went
downstairs.

“Yeah, like I had a choice,” she said, with a huff, and gave me a pointed
look. I would like to say I felt ashamed of myself for putting her in the
position of having to snap someone back just so I wouldn’t try to disembowel
them, but I was too unrepentantly happy that someone had told Khamis off.
Aadhya sighed. “Just do me a favor, keep a lid on it until the end of the
month.”

“Then what?” I said.
“Then he can’t walk away anymore with Nkoyo, hello.”
My turn to sigh. “Yeah, all right.” Sometimes when your friends are right,

you’re pleased, and sometimes it’s unbearably annoying.
But she was right, so I bit my tongue repeatedly over the next weeks while

the last alliances got locked down and we invested enough mana and time in



our collaboration that he really couldn’t just flounce off and find himself
another arrangement, dragging Nkoyo and her friends with him. The jerk
even started taking a partially exposed position on our second runs, trying to
arrange himself just the right amount of pain.

I was counting down the minutes until I’d get to slag him off properly
when we started our fifth week. All the runs so far had been varied winter
wonderlands of death: a thick forest, deep and hushed; a wide frozen lake
stretching so far we couldn’t see the other bank. Today it was a wide snowy
meadow scattered with placid ordinary shrubs and tiny blue flowers peeking
out from the snow—and absolutely nothing came at us. We ran to the wall of
trees at the far end and back like we were doing an ordinary sprint, and then
just as I’d made it to the doors, there was a deep rumbling noise and the
snowfield split open maybe ten meters behind us and what seemed like a
thousand spiked thornbush vines burst lashing up out of it.

Almost everyone had made it to the other side of the split by then; it was
only Yaakov and Nkoyo still behind the line. Yaakov was close enough that he
just yelled and threw himself over before the vines got high enough; he fell
down on the other side with them grabbing at his legs and trying to pull him
back. Cora and Nadia were close enough to slash through the vines with their
swords while Ibrahim and Jamaal grabbed his arms and hauled him away.

But Nkoyo had been one step further back, and that one step had put a
solid wall of vines between her and the gates. I tried to cast a spell of
putrefying rot at the vines, which ought to have wiped them out along with
most of the rest of the landscape, but instead nothing happened, and I looked
down and realized I hadn’t just made it clear, I was out: I was standing in the
corridor, just outside the gym doors. I couldn’t help Nkoyo any more than I’d
be able to help her in the graduation hall once I’d passed through the gates
and was standing back in Wales.

But if I’d gone through the gates downstairs, I also wouldn’t have still been
standing there to watch my friend get torn to shreds. Nkoyo was casting
withering spells, whirling-quick touch spells, but she could only do them one
vine at a time, and she was running out of both mana and breath. She couldn’t
make an opening big enough to jump across the chasm without being pulled



down, and the vines kept coming and coming. One of them made a darting
lunge out of the mass and got round her throat and started to strangle her so
she couldn’t cast anymore, blood running down her neck and her arms from
the thorns as she grappled with it desperately.

I didn’t know what I was going to do, but I wasn’t going to stand there.
Even though I would have to do something real, something permanent—as
bad as what I’d done to the gym in the first place. The mana was at my hands
and the spell was on my breath, my tongue curling around the words: a spell
of destruction and tearing-down, a spell to rip the obstacle-course machinery
apart, bring the whole gym down if I had to—

And then that absolute wankstain Khamis went back for her. He poured a
bottle of green liquid out over several writhing nests of vines, and they burst
into flames and burnt up in a single roaring instant, opening up a wide gap in
front of her. He jumped through, grabbed Nkoyo under her armpits and
knees, and more or less threw her bodily through the opening—he was a big
boy—before he jumped after her and shoved her along the rest of the way
ahead of him through the doors, staggering as the last vines grabbed and
clawed at his own legs, leaving a trail of fresh blood drips on the churned
snow before the doors slammed shut on his heels.

And yeah, you never wanted to lose a member of your alliance this close
to graduation, and it was Nkoyo’s team more than it was his; he’d just agreed
to put up the resources and a shedload of mana, and she’d pulled everyone
else together out of her big network, the loads of people who were happy to
join up with her. But that work was done, and she wasn’t irreplaceable as an
incanter by a long shot. In fact there were enough losers left floating around
without an alliance that he could have subbed in two kids as replacements,
who’d be desperate enough by now to agree to an even more exposed position
further in the rear and a smaller share of team resources.

Instead he’d put himself as far out as anyone would go, just to save her.
Mum always told me that you couldn’t know what people would do in a crisis,
but I’d thought she just meant you should forgive people for behaving like
weasels under bad circumstances, not that a stale biscuit like Khamis might
suddenly come over all heroic in a tight corner.



After the first moment of what just happened, the rest of our crew
gathered round the two of them in the corridor, a yammering of noise and
congratulations; even the next group of seniors just waiting their turn to go
crowded in: they were helping gladly this time, offering bandages,
handkerchiefs, good salves. We’re all fans of near escapes, of far escapes, of
any escapes at all; we want so much to believe in them, even after all these
years in here. Nkoyo just sank down on her knees on the ground in front of
the doors, her eyes shut with two fat streaks of tears running shiny down her
face; her other allies Janice and Fareeda were holding up her limp arms to
bandage them. Khamis was sitting next to her staring at the bloodstained
gashes in his trousers and shoes. He seemed roughly as shocked as anyone
that he’d done it.

I’d got out of the way at some point, I don’t remember when; I’d backed
up from the doors to make room for everyone helping, the crowd of them
framed in the archway of the big metal gym doors. Only Ibrahim was off a
little way down the corridor with Yaakov, their foreheads together and his
hands cupping Yaakov’s face, tears streaming down his own; he jerked in to
snatch a fast desperate kiss that made Yaakov lose it and shut his eyes and
start crying, too.

I stood there with my back against the far side of the corridor, well away
from them all, the working of destruction still alive in my mouth and the
mana I’d pulled still churning inside me. We’d been running the obstacle
courses for a month and we were already so much better, so much faster. We
needed the gym, we needed the course. If I’d smashed the whole thing to save
Nkoyo, I’d have been making another bargain with the lives of people I didn’t
know, faces I wasn’t looking at, the way I’d traded those kids from Shanghai
for the ones the quattria ate.

I didn’t have the right to do that. I didn’t have the right to do anything
except the one thing I had the right to do—to get out of the gates—because
we all agreed that we had that right. We all agreed we had the right to get out
any way we could, within the one narrow limit of actually killing each other
—and even that could be handwaved off as long as you did it unobtrusively
enough. It was understood that you only promised to help other people



because they’d help you back, and it was understood that your promises
stopped counting when you got close enough to the gates, and nobody would
ever blame you for going through as soon as you could, even if everyone else
on your team died. Nobody would ever expect you to turn back and nobody
would promise to do it.

If you even tried, nobody would believe you, because maybe you couldn’t
know what people would do in a crisis, but you could know that. If you
turned back, you didn’t save anyone, you just died along with them. At best
you died instead of them; you put yourself into a maw-mouth for eternity to
get them out the doors instead of you. That’s all anyone could reasonably
hope to do, so it wasn’t something you could ask anyone to do. You could ask
people to be brave, you could ask them to be kind, you could ask them to
care, you could ask them to help; you could ask them for a thousand hard and
painful things. But not when it was so obviously useless. You couldn’t ask
someone to deliberately trade themselves away completely, everything they
had and might ever be, just to give you a chance, when in the end—and the
gates were the end, the very end of things—you knew you weren’t any more
special than they were. It wasn’t even heroism; it was just a bad equation that
didn’t balance.

Except for me. I could turn back. With just an ordinary amount of nerve,
not even as much as Khamis Mwinyi had dug up out of his own guts with no
advance warning to anyone, I could turn around at the gates and wave
everyone on my team through and wreak destruction on every mal that came
in range, until all of my friends were safe. So I had to. Of course I had to. I
couldn’t go running through the gates to safety, to the green woods of Wales
and Mum hugging me tight, while anyone I loved was still behind me. I had to
turn back and keep the gates clear for them until they all made it through.
They hadn’t asked me, they wouldn’t ask me, because that went against the
rules we all understood, but I’d do it anyway, because I could. I could save
Aadhya and Liu and Chloe and Jowani, and I’d save Nkoyo and Ibrahim and
Yaakov and Nadia.

And then, once I’d done that, then I could go through the gates myself. I’d
rescue the people I cared about, and then—I could turn my back on everyone



else. I could go through, and leave them to find their own way out or die. I
didn’t owe them. I didn’t love them. They’d done nothing for me. Except
Khamis, who was sitting on the floor there shaky with blood trickling over his
legs in rivulets and puddling beneath him, blood he’d spent to save Nkoyo
when I couldn’t. I’d save Khamis. I’d keep standing by the gates long enough
to save Khamis, who I didn’t love in the least, because how could I do
anything else now?

I stepped back from the knot of people gathered round him and Nkoyo,
the strangers helping someone I cared about, in the small ways they could
afford. I took another step back, and another, and turned, and three breaths
later I was halfway down the corridor and running, running like the gates
were up ahead of me and I could make it out, I could escape. There were
more seniors heading for the gym by then. Their heads turned, anxious to
follow me as I passed, wondering what was I running from, only I was
running from them, from any of them who might turn out to be a decent
person, who might turn out to be just as special as the people I loved. Who
might deserve to live just as much as they did.

I sped up even more, which I could do because for the last five weeks I’d
been sprinting for my life on a near-daily basis, only that turned out to be a
terrible idea because I ran straight into Magnus. He was coming off the stairs
to go practice with his own team: a pack of five boys who took up nearly the
full width of the archway so I couldn’t dodge round them and had to pull up
hard instead, and he reached out instinctively to steady me and said, “El?
What happened? Is Chloe okay?” as if even he had a thought to spare for
another human being, as long as she was someone he’d grown up with. Or
maybe as long as he could risk caring about her because he knew the odds
were she wasn’t going to die before her eighteenth birthday.

“Oh, I hate you,” I said, childishly stupid; I was about to burst, into tears,
into something else, I have no idea what, when Orion got literally bowled
down the stairs and knocked all six of us off our feet like a perfect strike. A
monstrous roaring slitherjaw, thrashing squid-sucker tentacles around a
prehistoric-shark mouth, came humping down the stairs after him, gargling



and grabbing, and all of the boys screamed and tried to get away, which was
hard to do when we were tangled up on the floor in a heap.

At least Magnus didn’t do anything heroic; he scrabbled wildly for escape
just like the rest of them. There wasn’t any, though; it was on us, arms already
grabbing Orion and all of Magnus’s teammates and dragging them towards its
gnashing mouth, more coming for him and me, but after it pulled Magnus off
me, I sat up and screamed at it, “Shrivel up and die, you putrescent sack of
larva!”

Those weren’t actually the right words of the rotting spell that I had been
trying to cast on the vines, but apparently that didn’t matter, because the
slitherjaw obeyed me without the slightest hesitation, its skin shrinking down
until it popped along seams that unleashed a writhing mass of tiny horrible
maggot-like grubs all over the floor, half burying the boys as it dropped them
—still screaming, possibly even louder—in its disintegration. They all flung
themselves out of it and went wildly careening into the corridor, frenziedly
shaking off grubs in every direction and crushing them underfoot as they went
grape-stomping around. Except for Orion, who just surfaced out of the sea of
maggot-things, shook himself off without an iota of decent horror—they were
in his hair—and looked around at the rapidly disappearing remains of the
mal: the larvae were fleeing down the drains en masse, leaving behind nothing
but the two enormous bony jaws full of serrated teeth, hanging still wide-
open on the floor like something out of a natural history museum.

He didn’t have the nerve to reproach me, but he did heave a faintly
disappointed sigh. “Don’t even start, Lake,” I said. I felt better; maybe
because I’d blown away my gathered mana forcing a new spell into existence,
or maybe it was just the same kind of calm as going through a crying jag and
coming out the other side, where you know nothing’s changed and it’s all still
horrible but you can’t cry forever, so there’s nothing to do but go on. “Tell me
something, what’s the plan? Is there one, or were you just going to improvise
the whole thing?”

“Uh, the plan?” Orion said.
“Graduation,” I said, making sure to enunciate every syllable in case he

missed one. “Taking out the mals. Before they eat everyone.”



He glared at me. “I don’t need a plan!”
“In other words, you can’t be arsed to think of one besides ‘run in and

start killing mals until one of them gets you.’ Well, too bad for you, that’s not
what we’re doing.”

“What we’re doing?” he said after a moment, warily.
“Well, look at you,” I said, making a condescending wave to take in the

still-writhing mess of the stairs. “If I let you clear the hall on your own, you’ll
trip over your own feet and get yourself eaten by a grue in five minutes; it’ll
just be embarrassing.”

He wasn’t sure whether he wanted to be offended more than he wanted to
be pleased, and he obviously also had a brief thought about making a
chivalric protest of the no you mustn’t do something so dangerous variety, but
he thought better of that and shut his mouth before it escaped him. Instead he
folded his arms over his chest and said, coolly, “So what’s your plan? Turn all
the mals into maggots? That would be fun for everyone.”

“They’d take it and say thanks if they knew what was good for them,” I
said.

I hadn’t any better plan to offer, in fact, than “run in and start killing mals
until one of them gets you.” I didn’t know what I was going to do. I only knew
what I wasn’t going to do. I wasn’t going through. I wasn’t going through until
everyone was out.

OceanofPDF.com



O f course, nobody else even noticed my grand noble decision to save all
their lives, as I started with the only thing I could think of, which was in

fact just not going through the gym doors until everyone else had made it out.
But that wasn’t noticeable, because given this week’s ridiculous course, that
was the only sensible thing to do. The course usually doesn’t change
throughout the week, but we thought possibly this one time there would be
additional attacks during our second and third runs, because it was so
aggressively useless otherwise, but no. For that whole week, for everyone who
ran it, that’s all the course was: a good sprint with one not-actually-surprise
attack at the end.



Even if I had been full of ironclad determination to abandon everyone
behind me and run through the graduation gates at the first chance, it would
still have been stupid to let my teammates get picked off in the gym during
practices.

So no one batted an eye when I stopped at the doors on Wednesday and
Friday and turned round to disintegrate the entire forest of vines even as they
came whipping out. We didn’t even discuss strategy or anything; there wasn’t
any strategy to discuss, except to agree after the Wednesday run that Nkoyo
and Khamis should just take Friday off and build mana while they healed up.
That wasn’t even a nice break for them; it was making the best of a bad
situation. None of us wanted a break. What we wanted was more of the
practice that we desperately needed to get out alive. Personally, I wanted it
even more than I had before.

I tried going round the school hunting with Orion to make up for it, but
that was even more useless. Nothing whatsoever attacked us, and if there was
ever a faint scritching noise somewhere, he’d instantly abandon me and take
off at top speed to go and get it. At best I’d catch up and there he’d be
satisfied with himself standing over some dead thing. At worst, I’d have to
spend half an hour wandering around the seminar-room labyrinth trying to
find him again. Wait, no, sorry. At worst, I spent half an hour wandering
around trying to find him, slipped in a giant puddle of goo that was the
solitary remnant of whatever thing he’d killed, and then gave up and found
him in the cafeteria eating lunch, still satisfied with himself. He didn’t say
outright that I’d asked to be covered in goo, but his expression was perfectly
explicit. At that point I realized the only thing I was going to kill was him, so
I gave it up.

Then the next week rolled round, the course changed again, and the
school made clear it was more than ready to make up for the slow week. We
couldn’t cover ten meters of ground before yet another thing came at our
heads. To fully convey the experience, on Friday the previous course had
taken us a grand total of three minutes start-to-finish, including the time it
took for me to wither all the vines into dust. Even on a more typical course,



the average run only takes ten minutes. When a real graduation run takes
more than fifteen minutes, it normally means you aren’t getting out at all.

On Monday, I didn’t come out until the twenty-seven-minute mark, into a
crowd: we’d taken so long that there were about eight other alliances already
downstairs and waiting outside the doors for their turn. None of them looked
very enthusiastic. Usually you avoid finding out what’s in the obstacle course
so you can have a blind first run, but this time the waiting teams were all
busily interrogating everyone in our group who’d come out, and going into
huddled negotiations with other alliances to run it together.

I don’t think my appearance was reassuring. I emerged trailing clouds of
dark-green smoke flickering phosphorescent with crackles of lightning, the
dwindling remnants of the hurricane I’d whipped up to dissolve the shambling
army of frozen-mud-things. There was also the large ring of glowing orange-
purple balefire spheres orbiting round my waist. The workings all fizzled out
as I came through the doors, but they hung in the air just long enough to
make a fashion statement of the behold your dark goddess variety, and
anyway I’d been standing there just short of the threshold for five minutes,
siccing spheres and thunderbolts on strategic targets to clear a way to the
doors. Everyone else on our three teams was staggering. Nkoyo even sat down
in the corridor right there and shut her eyes and leaned her head on Khamis’s
shoulder when he sat down next to her. The worst of the gouged marks
around her throat were barely healed and some of the scabs had cracked and
bled again.

“Righty-o, who wants a rundown?” I said, waving away the last trailers of
smoke in as prosaic a way as I could manage. Which wasn’t very, but
desperation still drove people to talk to me, or at least to creep close enough
to overhear what I said to the braver ones. I stayed there in the corridor for
the next ten minutes, answering questions to help everyone work out their
strategy for running the course. Then the four alliances who’d been lined up
to go after us gave it a go, together. They made it about ten meters from the
door and then gave up and ran back out. At that point, everyone else just left.
The new course was useless in the opposite way: it was too hard for anyone to
get through. Except for me.



On Wednesday morning, we came out of our run after only fourteen
minutes; we’d thought up loads of better ways for me to take out everything
in our path. There was nobody outside waiting at all. We had to patch
ourselves up, which went slowly; everyone in our group was exhausted.
Except for me. I felt energized and extremely ready for lunch.

During which, it occurred to me that if no one else was trying, the course
was wide open. Normally the school goes after you if you try to run the
course more than three times a week, to keep people from hogging it, but
you’re allowed to take an extra run if there’s literally nobody else queued. “I’ll
be up to the library in a bit,” I said abruptly to everyone as we got up to clear
our trays. “Come on, Lake.”

Orion whinged all the way down the stairs—all the real mals had
abandoned the gym, since nobody was down there trying to run the course, so
as far as he was concerned there wasn’t any point—but he gave in and came
with me. We ran it together.

It was an even worse idea than hunting with him, in a completely different
way. Blazing through endless hordes of fake mals, Orion killing them left and
right in a sulky bored way and keeping me clear, with no one at my back I
had to worry about, utterly free, utterly fearless. I made him do it three times
in a row, and when he balked at a fourth run, I jumped him right there in
front of the gym doors. We were kissing and everything was going really well
in my opinion, and then he put a hand on the side of my breast mostly by
accident and panicked and jerked back from me and babbled, “I’ve got, it’s,
uh, I didn’t, you have, we,” incoherently, and nearly walked himself
backwards right onto the corpse of the very real drencher he’d killed in our
first run, which was still sopping wet and perfectly capable of dissolving the
flesh off his feet and legs if he touched it on his own. I had to jump after him
and drag him to one side, and he didn’t even notice why, he just pulled free of
me and fled, leaving me standing alone in front of the doors.

But this time, not even that humiliation could bring me down. I went
upstairs breathing deep and full of my own power, helplessly happy, even
though it had obviously been stupid in every respect. I’d already known that I
could get out if I didn’t bother worrying about anyone else. I didn’t need to



shove my own face in how lovely and easy it would be, and especially I didn’t
need to contemplate how much fun I could have with Orion in the process.

If I had needed help recognizing the stupidity of it all, Precious was
waiting eagerly to provide it, perched on a shelf just inside the library doors.
We weren’t taking the mice with us on the obstacle course; they weren’t the
kind of familiars that help in combat situations, so instead we were practicing
with small stuffed balls tucked into safe places in our gear. But I didn’t need
to be bitten on the ear by the time I got up there; I’d had several long flights
of stairs on which to contemplate the folly of my ways. “Yeah,” I told her
shortly as I reached up to take her down, and she just nosed at the knuckle of
my thumb and scampered back into her bandolier cup.

In the reading room, I stopped by one of the teams Aadhya had made our
cleanup deal with, and told them if they did come down on Friday, I’d do
another run with them after ours. They all stared at me like a herd of
wildebeest being offered safe passage across the Nile by a very large
crocodile. “Or don’t,” I said crossly. “I can use the practice if you want it,
that’s all.”

They couldn’t decide that they did, but evidently they shared the offer
around to get opinions, because on Friday, the other two teams were waiting
when we came out. They didn’t actually ask me outright to go with them, like
I was a person or anything; they just looked at me sidelong. I swallowed it and
told Aadhya shortly, “I’ll see you upstairs,” and after my team had gone off
down the hall, I said, “Let’s go,” and marched myself back in.

The other team weren’t as good as mine—or at least they weren’t as good
as we’d become after six weeks of running the course together—but I got
them all out again still alive. I did have to turn one of them to stone at one
point to save her from being bitten in half, but I turned her back afterwards,
so I don’t see what the problem was.

Everyone but me was waiting with enormous anticipation for that course
to be swapped out, but on Monday, the next one was just as bad. All three of
our cleanup-crew teams were waiting by the open doors when we came out,
with their faces blankly appalled. I turned right round and did another run
with them, and when we got out, there was a new team waiting—Liesel’s



team. After New Year’s, she’d apparently crossed Magnus off and had instead
settled for allying with Alfie, from London. I didn’t know what she had
against the Munich enclave, which had three strapping senior boys to choose
from if that was really one of her primary criteria, but there was presumably
something, since these days Munich was a better choice than London for a
German girl who was apparently viciously determined to get a seat on a top-
tier enclave council before she was thirty. Unless there was something
especially right with Alfie, but I hadn’t seen any notable signs of that in the
last three years and change.

“El, how are you?” he said, exactly as if we hadn’t seen each other for ages
and he was delightfully surprised to find me here.

I ignored him and said to Liesel, “Right, let’s go.” She nodded back coldly
and we went. A woman after my own heart.

Also, she was really good. She wasn’t Orion, but she was miles better than
anyone else I’d run with, even though I tried not to notice out of loyalty. Her
whole team was better, actually. Even Alfie wasn’t remotely a weak link: he’d
taken the middle, obviously, but he wasn’t sitting there cowering; he was using
the position to throw complicated defensive spells to all sides to cover
everyone else, and he was really good at it. He had fast reflexes and what must
have been an encyclopedic defensive collection that he knew backwards and
forward: he kept steadily pitching exactly the right spell at exactly the right
time to exactly the right place, so the rest of us could just trust him and go
totally on the offensive. We made it through in eleven minutes; it had taken
me twenty-two on the first run with my team.

Of course, twenty-two was better than never, which is what it would’ve
been for Liesel and company if they hadn’t had me along. They all flinched
when we got to the homestretch and the icy ground we’d been running over
abruptly folded itself up round us into towering slabs toothed with jagged
spikes the size of tyrannosaur femurs, and seething with ectoplasmic vapors
that suggested they had psychic form and not just physical. Alfie threw up
what was the very best group shield I’d ever seen, which might have held for
one or two hits, but there literally wasn’t anywhere to go.



Until I spoke the seventh spell of binding from The Fruitful Vine, which
was the very first Marathi-language spellbook ever written. It was put
together by a group of poet-incanters from the Pune area who wanted more
spells in their own vernacular—the better you know a language and
understand its nuances, the better your spellcasting is going to be—so they
gathered for a writing and spell-trading session. It went so well that they
formed a long-term circle and kept going, their spells went on getting more
and more powerful, and eventually the collection was so valuable they were
able to trade just the one book to Jaipur for enclave-building spells.

Immediately after which, their group imploded into a massive internecine
fight. Most of them died and a few went to Jaipur and a couple of others
renounced magic and purged all their mana and went to live in the wilderness
as ascetics, and that’s why there’s no enclave in Pune. But before that, they
wrote some real corkers, including this series of increasingly complex binding
spells, the hardest of which really only ever gets hunted up by the sort of
maleficer who wants to bind one of the more nasty mals in the manifestation
category as a personal servant. Well, or by a circle of decent wizards trying to
get rid of one of those mals, but you can guess why the school gave me a
copy. The soles had started to come off my trainers halfway through my
freshman year, and I thought I was being adequately specific when I asked the
void for a spell to securely bind them back up, but no. You’d be amazed at
how little call I’ve had in the last four years for a pet benibel that would need
to be fed on a steady diet of human corpses, although I suppose you could
accuse me of a lack of imagination.

But it was just the spell you wanted when facing a possessed entity the
size of a glacier. This was my third time through this course, and I’d got the
hang of doing it, so it was fairly painless as an experience; I just banged out
the spell, commanded the gnashing ice peaks to lie flat, and off to the doors
we went. But that didn’t make it less maddening for Liesel and her crew. The
problem was, no one other than myself, no matter how brilliant or
hardworking, could have done much of anything in the situation. Even if
you’d got hold of the binding spell, it normally calls for a circle of twelve
wizards chanting for an hour. Her face was rigid with fury when we got out



the doors. I didn’t even blame her for stalking off without so much as a thank-
you. Alfie was better programmed, so he did say, “Thanks, El, fair play,”
before going after her, but even for him it was mechanical.

By lunchtime word had got round, and everyone started to panic. Aside
from the very real danger of dying for basic lack of practice, the new course
made no sense in a particularly alarming way. There are some mals as big as
mountains out there in the world, but you might as well say there are blue
whales in the world. If a blue whale happened to appear smack in the middle
of the graduation hall, it would certainly present a challenge to us all, but it
wouldn’t have got there on its own initiative. So why was something like that
suddenly showing up in the obstacle course? Either the school was just
throwing it at us out of nastiness, on the justification that at least one student
could get past it, even if that made the course totally useless to everyone who
didn’t have me along—which would be bad enough—or there was something
on that scale down below.

No one else could think of any other reason why it was happening; as far
as they knew, nothing had changed. I was the only one who knew what had
changed. I’d changed. And the brutal courses were too obviously a response.
You want to save everybody, you silly girl? Right, let’s make that harder for
you: nobody gets any practice the rest of the term, so they’ll all be panicking
and fumbling around down in the hall. Good luck saving them then.

I wasn’t sharing my grand plan, though, so everyone else kept laboring
onward in ignorance and spreading alarm. That afternoon in the library, a
couple other teams got up the desperation to ask me to do a run, and the next
morning, Ibrahim did them one worse: he cornered me on my bleary way to
the girls’ and sidled round the subject for nearly five minutes before I finally
understood that he was trying to work out if I had any sort of opinion about
him kissing Yaakov.

He hadn’t done anything wrong by Scholomance standards, not telling me.
You do have to disclose any conflict of interest like that to your potential
allies before you ask them to go with you and your significant other—it
clearly wasn’t an accident that in his team, he was in the lead and Yaakov was
bringing up the rear, the two most dangerous positions and the most



separated, where they wouldn’t have a chance to ditch the others and take off
together. But I wasn’t one of his allies. My name wasn’t written up on the wall
with him and Yaakov, so he hadn’t owed me a thing, my opinion shouldn’t
have made a difference. But here he was trying to find it out, as though it
should have mattered.

It was horrible, and I couldn’t even howl at him, because it did matter,
now, by the standard operating procedure of Scholomance losers. Aadhya had
made a tactical deal for us with their alliance, but it’s always understood in
those deals that either side has the right to jettison the other and trade up if
the opportunity permits. And the opportunity did permit, now that I had
become an extremely scarce and valuable resource. If we took the chance to,
oh, upgrade to running with Liesel and Alfie, Ibrahim and his team would
suddenly be just as stuck as everyone else who didn’t have me to run with.

And it wasn’t an accident that he and Yaakov hadn’t let on that they
weren’t just friends, all those nights we were sitting together studying in
Chloe’s room. We’re all fairly nose-to-grindstone in here, but one of the most
reliable topics of conversation was nevertheless gossip about who was dating
who or wanted to. It was second only to gossip about who was getting allied
with who.

There wasn’t actually very much of the gossip to be had, because oddly
enough constantly being on the verge of malnourishment, exhaustion, and
mortal terror isn’t really conducive to romance, but we extracted all the
entertainment we could from the couples that managed to have the energy—
most of which involved at least one enclaver, unsurprisingly. We knew when
Jamaal started coordinating his snack runs at the same time as a girl from
Cairo—her with a group of girls, him with a group of boys, all very by the
book. We knew that Jermaine from New York had spent the last year in a
competitive love triangle with a boy from Atlanta over one of the top
alchemists, and we all knew when in a perfect storm of gossipy delight it
turned into a trio and an alliance, halfway through the first month of term.
Everyone else also had the fun of pestering me about Orion while they were
at it. Ibrahim and Yaakov had decided not to share the information. They’d
decided it was a risk they couldn’t afford to take.



Lots of enclavers, especially from the most powerful Western enclaves,
like to go on about how enlightened wizard society is, relative to the masses
of the mundanes. From their rarefied perspective, I suppose it’s true. Spend
decades recruiting the most brilliant wizards from all round the world,
because they’re the ones who can best save your kids’ lives and make your
enclave even richer and more powerful, then you can look round your diverse
and tolerant international enclave and pat yourself on the back in a
congratulatory way. But that doesn’t mean there aren’t any bigots among us. It
only means that we’ve got this one additional dividing line of our own that
stops right at the enclave doors, and it’s sharp enough to cut your throat.

And Ibrahim wasn’t on the safe side of that line. He’s not an enclaver; he’s
not one of the top students, who could count on getting an alliance with one.
His primary gift, the one talent that he’d marshaled to get himself all the way
through school and into his alliance with Jamaal—the boy from Dubai who
was going with his team—was that he was a really determined and
enthusiastic suck-up. If you liked a tidy bit of flattery and someone who’d
cheer you on and comfort you when you were down, pat you on the back and
tell you that you were brilliant and in the right even if you were really quite
blatantly in the wrong, help you talk your way through any inconvenient fits of
guilt or conscience, then he was your lad, and loads of enclavers did indeed
like that.

Which is hardly a unique approach. Roughly half of the indie kids are at
least partly on the minion track: some of them offer up labor or muscle; the
more desperate ones offer themselves up more or less explicitly as human
shields. They take the worst seats at the cafeteria tables and in the classrooms;
they fetch supplies and drop off homework; they walk the enclaver kids to
their dorm rooms at night and keep watch for them in the showers without
even asking for turnabout. Because almost all enclavers except the very
richest ones will end up with a few filler positions in their alliances, open to
average kids who can do four or five decent castings in ten minutes and have
built a modest sum of mana on top of their schoolwork, and have been lucky
enough to stay able-bodied and in solid physical condition through years in
the Scholomance.



That was the kind of opening Ibrahim was aiming for, his whole time
here. He didn’t have other options. He was perfectly competent, but that
didn’t make him anything special, not by the standards of the graduation hall.
And if you’re on the minion track, you can’t afford to prioritize anything as
unimportant as your most passionately held beliefs or your deepest emotional
needs. You don’t even get to prioritize your own bloody life when you’re
going down the stairs first with your heart in your throat, just so if there is
something waiting, it’ll get you instead of the enclaver seven steps behind you,
who you’re both pretending really hard is being such a good friend for letting
you have the chance.

That was why he’d kept it quiet. He wanted to keep the option to glom on
to an enclaver who was the kind of rusty hinge who cared about other
people’s business, and now he was asking me if I was one of those—because
his life depended on it.

I wanted to yell at him in a fury and stomp away, but I couldn’t. He looked
ready to cry, the way you would if you had to desperately beg some girl you’d
been rude to on the regular for your life and the life of someone you loved.
He’d have been a complete nutter not to lie to me in any way I wanted him to,
if that got me to keep running with his alliance. For that matter, if he were
really clever, he’d know I didn’t care and have the conversation anyway, as an
excuse to exhibit his commitment to servility.

But I knew Ibrahim wasn’t that kind of clever. He was so good at sucking
up because he was sincere about it. I think he really liked people to begin
with—a foreign concept to me—and he was earnestly starry-eyed. He’d kept
on sucking up to Orion long after it’d become clear that Orion wasn’t in the
market for minions. For that matter, Ibrahim had been stupid enough to fall in
love inside school; and it really had to be love, because hooking up with
Yaakov for an alliance was an obviously bad idea that had put them both in
those more dangerous spots.

So instead I muttered, “I’m not a wanker, Haddad. Have your own fun.
See you tomorrow morning,” ungraciously, and then stomped away.

That same day at lunchtime, Magnus had the bald-faced cheek to ask
Chloe to pass along an invitation to join his team if I still wanted more



practice, which I suppose in his mind was the equivalent of Ibrahim’s
desperate begging. I gritted my teeth and did a run with them that afternoon.
They were just as good as Liesel’s team, and they would have been just as
dead without me.

When I went down with my own team again on Wednesday morning,
there were roughly thirty people downstairs waiting even before we got there,
and they were all angry—furiously angry. They still didn’t know I meant to
help them. What they did know was, if they wanted any practice, they had to
go to me hat-in-hand for help that they weren’t going to have on graduation
day, because of course I wasn’t going to help them then, and when they saw
thirty other kids lined up to ask, they knew that today was the day I’d start
charging for my help, and I’d want things they couldn’t afford to give away.

I don’t know if I could have fixed the situation by telling them I was going
to save them all. I don’t think they’d have believed me. But I can’t say for
certain, because I didn’t even try. They were looking at my friends; they were
looking at Aadhya and Liu and all the people who’d taken a chance on me;
and they were losers looking at enclavers, except fifteen minutes ago they’d
been the enclavers, the ones who were going to live. Alfie with Liesel and the
brilliant team she’d built, Magnus and his wolf pack; they hadn’t spent four
years being slowly taught over and over that another kid had the right to live
and they hadn’t.

And I could see in their faces that if they could have taken me, if I’d been
a piece of artifice they could wrestle away or steal, they would have: they’d
have used every unfair advantage they had and gone after my friends, and at
this very moment probably most of them were trying to think of some way to
do it, just like Magnus with his Field Day stunt.

“Lots of us up for first run today,” Alfie said, in the bright sort of way that
someone might say, Well, looks like rain, doesn’t it! when it’s sheeting down
and you’ve taken shelter under an awning with five people who’ve all got
knives drawn, and you’re quietly reaching into your pocket for a handgun.

So I didn’t say anything reassuring like, You can stop fretting already,
Orion and I are going to get all of you useless gits out. I didn’t even say
anything sensible about going with everyone in turn. Chloe glanced at me and



I could see her getting ready to say something sensible for me, play
peacemaker with the enclave boys, and before she could, I said, “No sense
waiting for any more to show,” and I marched for the doors, flung them open,
and sailed in. There was a confused scramble behind me, and then everyone
reached the same conclusion at the same time: if they wanted to be sure of
getting in a run with me, they had to go now. They all poured in after me
together.

Doing the course with fifty people at once isn’t normally a good idea,
because you make it through all right, but you don’t get enough practice. That
wasn’t a problem when we were being deluged from all sides. I realized
afterwards that actually it had been terrific practice for me, the closest I could
get to the real thing, all of us being dumped into a sea of maleficaria at once.
But right then in the moment, I didn’t have time to think about anything but
fighting, casting desperately in every direction to take out attacks that were
about to overwhelm someone’s defenses. It was like one of those horrible
twitchy games where there are seventeen things to do on separate timers and
you frantically dash from one to the next and you’re always on the verge of
missing one. It was just like that, except I had forty-seven timers running, and
if I missed even one of them, somebody was going to die. It was a massive
relief when we got to the final attack and I could just cast the one nice
relaxing hideously powerful spell and let everyone else run for the gates while
I held the eldritch glacier down.

We limped out with skins more or less intact but utterly exhausted. Even I
felt drained, my whole rib cage aching; my heart was banging around inside
like it’d had an argument with my lungs and now it was in the kitchen putting
pots and pans away angrily while they tried to find a way out through my
breastbone. Which I suppose was good really, as it meant I’d got some proper
exercise in, but I wasn’t for taking the long view at the moment. Some other
teams had come down and were waiting, but after I staggered out, they took
off without even trying to bribe me for a run, so I gather I looked the way I
felt.

There wasn’t any conversation afterwards. Aadhya said, “I want a shower,”
and I said, “Yeah,” and basically all twenty-seven girls of our group trudged



off to the showers together. It was almost time for Orion to harvest the
amphisbaena for Liesel; the juveniles had stopped coming through with the
water a week ago or so and now were just hissing and banging impotently at
us from inside the showerheads like the steam pipes had gone mad. There was
one moment when the wall cracked around one of the showerheads and the
amphisbaena inside started to thrash around wildly to try and finish breaking
out, but it was just an amphisbaena, so the girl using the shower didn’t even
stop rinsing her hair, she just grabbed a long enchanted stiletto-knife out of
her bathroom bag and stabbed it into the opening. The showerhead stopped
moving around. It would be unpleasant if the dead amphisbaena started
rotting in there, but probably the others would eat it before that happened.

None of us talked. We took our turns washing in almost complete silence
broken only by the occasional “has anyone got shampoo to trade for
toothpaste” and the like. We got our clothes back on and straggled up to the
library for our respective postmortems, and still no one said anything to me or
to each other until I sat down at our group’s table. But the boys were there
waiting for us—and stinking, which was a lot more noticeable since we’d got
ourselves clean—and before I’d even quite got my arse in the chair, Khamis
demanded peremptorily, “What was that?” like he’d been holding the words
back on a tight leash until I got in range and he could let them loose.

I gawked at him. Yes, I’m perpetually complaining about everyone
cringing away from me, but of all the people to think they could safely have a
go at me without getting knocked back—and then I had a moment of even
greater indignation as I realized he’d been biting his tongue for a month the
same way I had, waiting until enough of the term was gone and we’d locked
things down and I couldn’t shove him off anymore without crossing the line of
what passes for common decency in here.

“What’s the matter, Mwinyi?” I snapped back. “Picked up a splinter
today?”

“What’s the matter?” he said. “I’ll tell you what’s the matter! Six times
today—six times—Fareeda went down.” He jerked a thumb at poor Fareeda,
who was just sitting down herself, three chairs away from him. She was an
artificer friend of Nkoyo’s I didn’t know very well, and she very clearly did



not think she could safely have a go at me. She darted her eyes between us
and slid the rest of the way into her chair while doing her best to convey that
her entire being was on another plane of existence and it was just a mistake
on our parts if we thought she was there. “On Monday, she only went down
once. What do you say about that?”

There’s a lovely spell I know that makes your victim’s organs all desiccate
while still inside them. The original was developed ages ago for perfectly
respectable mummification purposes and fell out of fashion roughly along
with that practice, but the version I’ve got is the really nasty nineteenth-
century English one that everyone’s favorite Victorian maleficer, Ptolomey
Ponsonby, worked up in translation out of his father’s collection of Egyptian
artifacts. At the moment, I felt roughly as though someone were casting it on
me.

“She didn’t stay down, did she?” I squeezed out of my shriveling entrails.
Khamis wasn’t wrong to be concerned if Fareeda was going down a lot: she
was in their team’s lead position. She’d spent all the fall semester building a
massive forward shield, which would have been a bad strategy on an
individual level except it had bought her a place in an enclaver’s alliance, even
if it was an extremely dangerous place.

“Nkoyo pulled her up three times, James pulled her up twice. I got her up
once myself,” Khamis said. “What were you doing? I’ll tell you. You were
taking out a razorwing coming at Magnus Tebow. I don’t see Magnus at this
table. Do you think we’re putting ourselves out to cover you so you can help
all your New York friends?”

Chloe was on Aadhya’s other side, or on the astral plane along with
Fareeda—almost everyone at the table was halfway to joining her, or trying
to transmute themselves into unmanned ventriloquist dummies—but at that
she let out a small strangled squawk, and then covered her mouth and looked
away when everyone glanced at her.

“Tebow had a really good go at killing me about seven months ago, right
in that corner over there,” I said, stupidly grateful for Khamis to have given
me ground I thought I could stand on. “I wouldn’t lift a finger to put him at
the gates ahead of one single person in this school.”



“Ah, so he’s not your friend,” Khamis said, loading on the sarcasm. “You
don’t like him, you don’t want New York to take you.”

“El’s already got a guaranteed spot,” Chloe said, obviously deciding that
she had to come in after all if this was going to be some kind of challenge to
New York.

Everyone round the table twitched instinctively; it’s the kind of gossip we
all pay attention to because you can usually trade it for something, but no one
really looked surprised. “Which I’m not taking,” I said through my teeth. “I
don’t like Magnus, and he’s not my friend, and I’m not going to New York.”

Everyone did look surprised then, and Chloe flinched. But Khamis just
stared at me incredulously, and then got angry, really angry, like he thought I
was telling him a lie so stupidly obvious that it was insulting I expected him to
swallow it. He leaned forward and said through his teeth, “Then I have to ask
you again. What was that? Why are you helping Magnus Tebow, who you
don’t like, who isn’t your friend, whose enclave you don’t want to join, when
you’re supposed to be helping us?”

But getting mad at me isn’t safe, because it gives me permission to get
mad, too. I put my hands on the table and half came up, leaning forward, and
I didn’t do it on purpose, but I don’t have to do this kind of thing on purpose:
the lights in the room started to dim and stutter, except right around me, and
the air got cold, and the words came out on a thin stream of fog when I
hissed, “I helped Magnus because he needed it. The way I blocked the stone
storm from crushing your skull when you needed it, and if Fareeda had gone
down and stayed down, I’d have helped her, too. And if it’s too much to ask
you to help her cover your massive front so I can save someone else’s life in
the meantime, then you can try going it without me at all, you selfish toerag.”

Khamis was leaning far back by then, with the iridescent green sheen of
the light reflecting off his cheekbones and in the dark rings of his wide eyes,
but he was stuck, after all. Maybe if he had been a coward, he’d have shut up
just to get me to back away, but he wasn’t, worse luck for both of us, and I
had to be lying, because that couldn’t be the truth in here. He took a gasp of
cold air and said thinly, “That’s crazy. What are you going to do? Save
everyone? You can’t save everyone. Not even you and Lake.”



“Watch me,” I said, furious and desperate, but even while I was snarling at
him, I knew that the wheels were coming off and the wreck was coming. I’d
just barely made it through the obstacle course with fifty kids—not quite fifty
kids—and there were more than a thousand of us: the largest senior class in
the history of the entire Scholomance. The senior class that Orion Lake had
made by saving us and saving us. A thousand timers running out, all at the
same time.

Khamis had been in the gym for the run himself, so after I said those
stupid words, he wasn’t angry at me in the same way anymore, because he’d
worked out that I wasn’t lying to him. It was the difference between someone
threatening to shoot you and someone running around in circles screaming
wildly while emptying a gun into the air. He shoved his chair back and stood
up. “Get everybody out? You are crazy!” He spread his arms to the whole
table. “What happens to us while you’re busy saving all these people you don’t
like? You’re going to get us all killed while you pretend to be a hero. You
think you can take our mana, take our help, and do whatever you want, is that
what you think?”

“Khamis,” Nkoyo said, low and urgent; she’d got up too, and she was
reaching out to put a hand on his arm. “It’s been a hard morning.” He stared
at her incredulous, his whole expression twisted up with indignation, and then
he looked round the table at everybody else—everybody else who wasn’t
saying anything to me, in exactly the same way no one had ever said anything
to him, all these years—while he took their mana and their help and did
whatever he wanted, because there was no point saying anything when the
answer was yes. It was just rubbing your own face in it, and the only reason he
didn’t already know that was he’d never been a loser before, lucky enclave
boy.

But he was now. He was a loser, and so was Magnus, so was Chloe, so
was every last enclaver in the place, because they weren’t getting through the
obstacle course without me. It was entirely possible that they weren’t getting
through the graduation hall without me. So if I offered any of them a place at
my side, in exchange for everything they could possibly scrape together, mana
and hard work and even friendship, and if I took everything they gave me and



used it to pretend to be a hero—even though of course they didn’t want me
to, because that was, actually, very likely to get them killed—still they’d take
it and say thanks, if they knew what was good for them. Thank you, El.
Thank you very much.

The silence got longer. Khamis didn’t say anything else, and he didn’t look
at me. He wasn’t stupid any more than he was a coward, and he’d got it now
that he had rubbed his own face in it. And mine, of course, but that wasn’t
quite the same thing. From this side, it was only embarrassment, really. How
unfortunate that someone had made such a scene, such an unnecessary fuss.
If only I’d been an enclaver myself, I expect I’d have been trained up to
handle moments like this with grace. By now, Alfie would have said, a little
rueful, Do you know, I think we could all do with a nice cup of tea, and he’d
have reached into his ample purse of mana and turned our jug of water into a
big steaming teapot, with milk and sugar on the table—just the soothing
comfort his own lightly chafed spirit needed. And everyone else would have
taken it, not because it helped the gaping wound on their side, but because
when you had nothing, you took what you could get.

But I wasn’t an enclaver, so I didn’t handle it gracefully, and they didn’t
even get a cup of tea for their pains. I just turned and ran away into the
stacks.

OceanofPDF.com



A adhya found me a while later. I don’t know what time it was. There
isn’t any daylight in here and the surroundings never change and I was

alone in the little library room where you couldn’t hear the bells, the room
where no one else had ever had a class, where the Scholomance had tried and
tried all this year—not to kill me, but to make me turn my back and let other
people die, kids I didn’t know. As though the school had known what it
needed to worry about, long before I’d worked it out for myself. The way it
had known that I could kill a maw-mouth, and had tried to bribe me into
going the other way.

My freshmen were still coming up here for their session every Wednesday,
but Zheng had told Liu that the attacks had stopped completely. This ought to



have been the safest place in the school to begin with, and now it was. There
wasn’t any point shunting mals over here anymore. The school had tried, and
it hadn’t worked. I hadn’t learned my lesson; I hadn’t turned my back.

“So this is nice,” Aadhya said, from the doorway, looking around the
room and seeing it the way I’d seen it my first morning, a promise of safety
and shelter and quiet, before I unwisely signed my name on the schedule and
picked up the gauntlet the school had hurled at my feet. She came in and
dragged around the desk in front of me, sitting down to face me. “The others
went down to lunch. Liu and Chloe are going to get us something. Everyone’s
still on board, if you were wondering.”

“Not really,” I said, and laughed a little, jangly and helpless, and put my
hands over my face so I didn’t have to look at her, my friend, the first friend
I’d ever had, besides Orion, who didn’t count; the first normal sane person in
the world who’d looked at me and decided she was going to give me a chance
to not hurt her.

Then Aadhya said, “I had a sister,” so I picked my head back up to stare at
her. She talked about her family all the time. She’d given me a letter for them,
the way she and Liu and Chloe had letters for Mum, just in case, but even
without looking at the envelope, I already knew the address of the big house
in the New Jersey suburbs with the swimming pool in the backyard. I’d heard
endless painfully appetizing descriptions of the ongoing and deeply vicious
cooking competition between her grandmothers, Nani Aryahi and Daadi
Chaitali, and a whole line of bad jokes acquired in her grandfather’s garage
workshop, where he’d taught her how to solder and how to use a saw. I knew
all about her sharp and sharp-dressed mum who wove enchanted fabric by
hand, fabric that went to the enclaves of New York and Oakland and Atlanta.
I knew about her quiet dad who went out six days a week to do technomancer
work at whichever enclave had hired him for that month. I knew their names,
their favorite colors, which Monopoly tokens they liked to play. She’d never
once mentioned a sister.

“Her name was Udaya. I wasn’t even three when she died, so I don’t really
remember her,” Aadhya said. “Nobody in my family ever talked about her.



For a while I thought that I made her up, until when I was ten I found a box
of photos of her in the attic.” She gave a snort. “I freaked out.”

I knew what she was doing, and what I was supposed to do. I was
supposed to ask what happened, and then I was supposed to let Aadhya tell
me about her sister who’d died in here, maybe during graduation, and then
Aadhya was going to tell me she understood I had to try and save as many
people as I could, and then I was supposed to come downstairs and if I
couldn’t get my head out of my arse long enough to make everyone a nice cup
of tea, Chloe would probably do it for me, and we’d all go back to work on
our strategy this afternoon as if nothing had changed. And I knew why:
because that was the only sensible, practical thing for her to do, even if what
she really wanted was to yell at me twice as loud as ever Khamis had.

“I can’t do this,” I said, my voice as quavery as if I’d been crying, even
though I hadn’t been, I’d just been sitting there alone. “I’m sorry. I can’t.”

I fumbled for the power-sharer, and Aadhya reached out and grabbed it
down around my wrist, pinning it to the desk. “Again? All I actually need is
for you to put aside the drama in your own head and shut up and sit there and
listen to me for like five minutes. I think you can do that much.”

I couldn’t exactly say no. Anyway, she’d have been in her rights to smack
me into next week, because what good would it do her for me to pull out?
Liesel had Alfie’s buckets of mana, and brains and ruthlessness and a team
totally dedicated to getting the hell out, and it hadn’t been worth two shits
when the Himalayas attacked. Everyone else was still on board for exactly the
same reason everyone was ever on board with anything in here, which was
exactly the same reason everyone ever put themselves into this hellpit of a
school, and that’s because it was better than the alternatives. That was all I
could be: the lesser evil.

Aadhya gave it a few narrow-eyed moments, until she was sure I’d been
cowed, before she took her hand off and sat back. “Okay, so, let’s pretend
after I told you about Udaya, you said, What happened to her? like a normal
person.”

“She died in here,” I said, dully.



“This is not a guessing game, and no,” Aadhya said. “My parents were
really young when Udaya was born. They were living with my dad’s parents,
and his dad was incredibly old-school. He insisted that my mom homeschool,
and we were never allowed to go anywhere, not even the playground down the
block. We couldn’t even play in the yard without a grown-up right there. I
actually do remember that; he put a ward on the back door that zapped us if
we tried to go through it alone. Udaya got sick of it. When she was eight, she
climbed out the window and headed to the playground. A clothworm got her
before she made it halfway down the block. They would come around our
house sometimes to lay eggs, so their babies could sneak in through the wards
and chew on my mom’s weaving. It just got lucky.”

“I’m sorry,” I said, feeling stupid in the way I’m sorry always feels stupid
when you mean it.

Aadhya just shrugged back. “Mom asked her parents to stay in the States
after the funeral. My aunt had married into Kolkata by then, so they could.
She took me to live with them in a one-bedroom and put me in a mundie
preschool next door. Dad joined us after a month. A couple of years later,
they took everything they’d been saving to buy into an enclave, turned it into
cash, and got our house across the street from a good school, and they made
sure it was always full of tons of food and toys so all my school friends would
want to come over to my place, even though it meant they couldn’t do magic
when my friends were around. Daadi came to live with us when I was in
kindergarten. Daduji was dead by then. Nobody’s ever told me for sure, but
I’m pretty sure it was suicide.”

I was, too; there aren’t that many causes of death for wizards between the
ages of eighteen and a hundred. Cancer and dementia eventually get too
aggressive to stave off with magic, and if you live outside an enclave, sooner
or later you become the slow-moving wildebeest and a mal picks you off the
end of the pack, but not until then.

“I yelled at my mom for hiding it from me,” Aadhya said. “She told me
she didn’t want me to be afraid. Daduji loved us, he wanted so bad to protect
us, that’s all he was trying to do, but he couldn’t. And Mom wanted to protect



me, too, but she also wanted me to live as much as I could while I had the
chance, because Udaya never got to live at all.”

Really, it wasn’t a shocker or anything. It was just maths. Have two wizard
kids, odds are you’re not going to see them both grow up. Possibly not either.
Udaya had only got a little more unlucky than the average. Or a lot more
unlucky, if you considered she’d spent every scarce minute of her entire life
shut up in a nicer version of the Scholomance itself.

“Anyway, that’s how long I’ve known that I was probably going to die
before I was old enough to vote,” Aadhya said. “And I don’t want to die, I
want to get out of here, but I’m not going to put off being a person until I
make it. So I’m not going to pretend like I didn’t know. I knew when I asked
you to team up, I knew that I’d just gotten lucky. It wasn’t anything I did. I
was just a loser girl like you and a desi girl like you, and I wasn’t a complete
jerk to you, so you let me get close enough to figure out that you were a
rocket and I could grab on.”

“Aad,” I said, but I didn’t have anywhere to go from there, and I don’t
even know if she heard me. It came out as thin and crackly as broken glass,
and she wasn’t looking at me; she was staring down at the desk and tracing
back and forth over the graffiti on the edge with her thumb, let me out let
me out let me out, and her mouth was turned down.

“Somebody always gets lucky, right?” she said. “Why not me? Why
shouldn’t I be the one who wins the lottery? I told myself that, but I didn’t
believe it, because it was too lucky. I knew I had to do something to deserve
it. Like I knew you’d had to do something to deserve that book you got. And I
hadn’t. So first I kept waiting for you to ditch me, and then I kept waiting to
have to do something, but I didn’t. And I’m telling you about Udaya because,
in my head, at some point, I think I decided, okay, it was like a trade. I didn’t
get to have my sister, so I got you.”

I had a horrible gargled noise stuffed up in my throat, because I couldn’t
ask her to stop. I couldn’t want her to stop, even if I had my hands pressed
over my mouth, and there were tears building up along the ledge of my
fingers.



Aadhya just kept talking. “I knew that was bullshit, but it made me feel
better about not doing anything. So all these months, I’ve been letting that sit
in my head, and that was stupid of me, because if you’re who I get instead of
my sister—I can’t just leave you behind and still be a person.” She looked up
then, and it turned out she was also crying, tears trickling down her face and
just starting to drip off her chin, even though her voice didn’t sound any
different. “I’m not leaving you behind.”

I really wanted to be blubbing like a child, but instead I had to pull myself
together and stop her. “I don’t want that! I’m not asking you or anyone else to
stay behind with me.”

“Right, obviously.” Aadhya swiped her sleeve across her face and sucked
in a snuffle. “You’d rather run away and wallow in angst than ask for help or
anything else extremely horrible like that.”

“If you want to help me, you’ll get out the gates as fast as you can. That’s
the whole point! Whatever Khamis thinks, I’m going to get you there—”

“Not all on your own you’re not,” Aadhya said. “Khamis is a bag of
wieners, but he’s not wrong. I don’t care if you get your biggest superhero
cape on, you can’t just carry a thousand people out the door on your back.”

“So what are you going to do? If you turn round at the gates and make a
stand with me, you’ll just be another target for me to cover. I’m not going to
stand by and let people die, but that doesn’t mean I’m going to trade you for
them. I’m not.”

“Uh, not telling you to?” Aadhya shook her head and pushed herself up
out of the chair. “Come on. I don’t know what I’m going to do, but I know I
can come up with something better than Book it out the gates without giving
you a second thought or Die tragically and pointlessly at your side, neither of
which sound genius to me. Since that’s all you’ve got so far, pull your head
out of wherever you’ve shoved it and consider the crazy idea that maybe us
pathetic little people could help you solve this problem. I know it’s against
your most sacred principles to ask anyone for anything, and obviously we
don’t have any reason to care about figuring out how you could save
everybody’s lives, but maybe some of us are really bored and don’t have
anything better to do.”



It still sucked. Maybe Aadhya didn’t want to leave me behind, but Khamis
would’ve been just fine with it, and I was pretty sure that the difference
between him and everyone else was, he had either the nerve or the guts to let
it show. Of course they didn’t want me saving anyone else’s lives if it meant I
didn’t have as much time to save their lives. That didn’t make them
grotesquely selfish; it just made them people. It was even fair, when they were
the ones I’d actually made a deal with, the ones who were planning to have
my back. That deal meant I was supposed to have their backs, too. And yeah,
Aadhya had given me an out, saying she hadn’t done anything to deserve me,
but they’d all done more to deserve me than anyone else had, if I even did call
for being deserved.

The only thing that helped was Aadhya had done more than any of the rest
of them. If she wasn’t demanding that I put her first, nobody else had the right
to demand it, either. But that didn’t give her or me the right to volunteer them
to save everyone. I didn’t have the right, but I had the power, because their
only alternative was to quit our alliance, or maybe open up one of the floor
drains and jump in, which looked roughly as good a survival plan. And they
all knew it, and I knew it, and that meant I was making them do it, just as
much as Khamis taking the nice safe center position in his team.

But my only alternative was to tell them never mind, I wasn’t going to save
everyone, I was just going to concentrate on getting our group to the gates,
and after that I’d help whoever was left. Which wouldn’t be very many. No
long tedious graduation ceremonies for us. Historically, according to the
graduation handbook, about half the deaths happen before the first person
reaches the gates, and the time between when that first lucky survivor gets out
and when the last lucky survivor does is close to ten minutes, year after year.
I’d be tenderly shepherding my own little flock to safety past a few hundred
kids screaming as they were butchered. By the time we got to the gates and I
turned back, most of them would already be dead.



I couldn’t stand it either way, which was too bad for me, since there wasn’t
a third option as far as I could tell. The way I attempted to make one appear
was sitting at the library table like a plank without looking anyone in the face,
staring fixedly at the bread roll that Chloe had brought me without eating it. I
pretended the stabbing pains in my stomach were hunger, and left it to
Aadhya to say, “Okay, let’s figure this out,” to everyone else sitting round the
table in the depths of awkward silence.

“What is there to figure out?” Khamis said coldly; he was sitting with his
arms folded over his chest, glaring at me so hard that I could tell he was doing
it even without looking anywhere near his face. “Are we supposed to be
worrying about how to save Magnus, now, too? I don’t think he’s returning
the favor.”

Everyone shifted awkwardly, and then Liu said, “Well, he should.”
“What?” Khamis said, but Liu wasn’t talking to him; she’d turned to

Chloe. “What if we invited Magnus and his team to join up with us?
Wouldn’t they say yes?”

Chloe stared at her. “Well—” She looked at me and then back. “I mean,
yes, of course, but—” She stopped and looked at me again, and fair enough,
I’d clearly conveyed to her on more than one occasion that I could think of
many uses for Magnus, in the line of testing sharp objects and toxic
chemicals, so she had a reasonable cause for doubting whether I’d be on
board with signing him on. But I didn’t look up. I didn’t feel I had the right to
object to any other ideas anyone had, given I’d rejected the one that involved
all of them getting to live.

“That’s the only way this can work. Anyone who wants to run the course
with El has to join us, really become allies,” Liu said. “It can’t just be El and
Orion covering all of us. They won’t be able to do it. We all have to help
cover each other so they can fight the worst mals, or save anyone about to go
down.”

No one else was really participating in the conversation; almost certainly
all just wondering what on earth they were going to do to save themselves
while I was busy saving everyone else. But Yaakov had been listening, and
apparently he was sincerely giving it a think, because he said, “But if this



keeps happening, soon we will have everyone trying to run the course at the
same time.” Ibrahim actually blinked over at him in surprise that he was
taking the conversation seriously.

“Okay, so?” Aadhya said. “Most years, sure, we’re all trying to get private
time on the course. But that’s not the problem we actually have. Did anyone
here feel like the course wasn’t hard enough this morning? Even with fifty
kids running?” Nobody had, very clearly; Aadhya didn’t even bother
answering her own rhetorical question. “Let’s say El and Orion run the course
twice a day. Everyone who wants to run with them gets to go once every
other day, like we’re all supposed to. Even if literally everyone joins up, that’s
fine; the gym can handle a few hundred kids at once, no problem. This isn’t
rocket science or anything. We already know that we need allies. If we didn’t
team up for graduation, if we all ran solo, practically everybody would die.
This is just—the next level. We’re all going to be allies, because it’s worth it
to help some rando kid if that means five minutes later, El’s going to be able
to stop the volcano from falling on your head.”

“All of which is true right up until we all get to the gates at the same time,
and Patience and Fortitude come for everybody at once,” Khamis said, the
bastard, and Aadhya looked at me, asking the question I still wanted to run
away from while screaming loudly. But it was only fair, after all: if I was
making them jump through all these hoops, just so I could be a hero, I had to
be a bloody proper one, didn’t I?

“I’ll take them out if I have to,” I said. I was just trying to get the words
out without hysterics, but it came out like I was performing deadpan. Half the
table thought I was making some sort of joke and gave it a polite laugh by
way of telling Khamis to shut up and stop making things unnecessarily
awkward, but Liu and Chloe both understood instantly that I wasn’t joking at
all, and Khamis was still glaring daggers at me so hard that he presumably
could tell that I was thirty seconds from projectile vomiting into his stupid
face, and with all of them staring at me, the tittering died off and then
everyone went through a round of looking at one another sideways to check
Do we think El’s gone off her trolley for good, and then there was a round of



uncertainty over whether I was just saying it or whether I had any actual
reason to imagine that I could do anything of the sort.

I don’t think everyone had decided yet when Nkoyo said, “We should split
up by language. You’ve got the big four, right?” she asked me, meaning
English, Chinese, Hindi, and Spanish, and I managed a short nod. I suppose
now I had to be grateful for my library seminar after all, and all Liu’s
coaching.

Liu said, “We’ll write it up next to the gym doors,” and after a very
abbreviated discussion, we broke up to start spreading the word.

Aadhya took me in tow—I think she felt I wasn’t to be trusted not to go
skulking off again—but she didn’t move quick enough. As soon as I was
plausibly but not actually out of hearing range, everyone else started
whispering about it and I overheard Cora say, “Orion never found it, and she
was so sick that day,” and I told Aadhya, very calmly in my opinion, “Sorry,”
and ran ahead to the stairs and down to the nearest loo, outside the cafeteria,
where I threw up what felt like most of my stomach lining, and then just sat
crouched there over the toilet crying with my hands over my mouth. In here,
by the end of freshman year you learn to cry with your eyes open, without
making noise. Except of course nothing was going to come after me anyway,
because I could kill maw-mouths as long as I had the mana, and there was a
New York power-sharer on my wrist at the moment, apparently not to be
removed no matter how ludicrous a swerve I took, so what mal would be
stupid enough to come after me anymore?

Aadhya came in after a few minutes and waited for me outside the stall. I
finally got hold of myself and crept out to wash my face. She kept watch for
me until I had finished and then said, “Let’s get started.”

Orion gave me a poke in the back at lunchtime—the kids behind me in the
queue let him ahead of them without his even asking—and said, “Hey Orion,
I’ve got this great idea, how about you stop hunting actual mals that are eating



actual people, and spend six days a week doing fake gym runs twice a day
instead.”

I didn’t stop; I wasn’t going to miss out on the rice pud that for once was
actually rice pud. There was a colony of the usual glutinous maggots growing
rapidly through the big metal pan, but they’d only got halfway through so far,
and I managed to get a bowlful. Ah, the privileges of being a senior. I also got
three apples, despite the faint greenish shine you could see if you held them
to the light at just the right angle: Chloe had a really brilliant spray that would
take off the toxic coating. “Lake, I know you like your walkies, but fewer
than twelve people have been eaten this year so far, and five hundred are due
to be gobbled in the first ten minutes downstairs. Don’t be a twat. You can run
around and play with the mals after the work’s done.” He scowled at me, but
the numbers were too pointedly on my side, so he stopped arguing and
sullenly took a scoop of the spaghetti Bolognese, and sprinkled it with a thick
helping of shaved antidote in lieu of Parmesan.

We gave it an hour after lunch, to let the word spread a bit, before we
went down for the first Hindi run. There were perhaps twenty kids waiting:
two teams mostly made of friends and trading acquaintances of Aadhya’s,
including one girl from Kolkata enclave who knew her cousins. My freshman
Sunita had talked her older brother Rakesh into talking his team into coming,
which included one wary enclaver from Jaipur.

The handful left over were stragglers, kids who hadn’t got into any alliance
yet. There aren’t many Hindi-speaking stragglers. The enclaves in India and
Pakistan only have enough spare seats for half the indie kids who would like
to come, so there’re brutal exams and interviews before you even get
inducted, and even the worst of the kids who make it in are almost always a
cut above the straggler level of Scholomance loser. But some parents will
spend huge amounts of money buying seats, even if their kids can’t qualify on
their own merits. Sometimes those kids turn out to be great at making
friends, or sometimes they get better under the pressure, and sometimes they
get lucky, and these were the ones who hadn’t.

They’d come down for the run because they didn’t have much hope
anyway, so a grasp at any straw was worth it. It was a tiny bit useful just to



come here and meet some kids who did have alliances, because those kids
might end up with openings they’d have to fill. But they all looked deeply
skeptical while Aadhya gave everybody the official lecture that they each had
to help anyone they could, or they wouldn’t be welcome to run again. This
boy Dinesh with really awful alchemy scars that had melted half his face—an
accident it would probably cost five years of mana to fix if he got out of here
—stared at her while she was talking as if she were an alien from several
galaxies over.

But when we crossed the river for the first time, and the rilkes came out of
the half-frozen mud on the banks and lunged with shredding claws for him
and the two straggler kids next to him, he went ahead and threw up a shield
over them all instead of just himself, which won me the ten seconds of
casting time that I needed to finish disintegrating the massive hungerhowl
erupting from beneath the ice, which was about to swallow them whole along
with the rilkes and several other members of our group.

They all still looked fairly shell-shocked coming out of the gym, but one
of them offered Dinesh a drink from a water bottle, and he walked away
down the corridor with them. And I came out panting for breath, but nobody
had got killed, and I wasn’t a twitchy wreck, either.

Orion wasn’t panting at all, just sullen and bored as he trailed out after
me. “You really want to do this twice a day, every day?” he said, with a
whinge to it. I have to confess I felt meanly pleased the next day during the
first Spanish run when the crazy evil glaciers reared up a few minutes earlier
than before, and he tripped, because he hadn’t been paying proper attention. I
had to use a telekinesis spell to scoop him out of the giant toothy blue
crevasse and toss him—possibly a little more vigorously than necessary—into
a snowbank.

“Maybe you do need a bit more practice, Lake,” I said sweetly to him out
in the hall as he irritably brushed off the snow and scowled at me. I beamed
back and flicked a blob of snow off his nose, and then he visibly stopped
being annoyed and started wanting to kiss me, but there were people there, so
I glared him off.



The Spanish run was almost too easy to be good practice: it was an even
smaller group than the Hindi one, just a handful of Puerto Rican and
Mexican kids who’d heard about the plan from friends allied with New York
enclavers, and one alliance headed by a kid from the Lisbon enclave who was
friends with Alfie. But that made it easier to spot who wasn’t actually trying to
help anyone else; three guesses who, and no prizes if you got the Lisbon
enclaver on the first go. She got huffy and indignant when I told her
afterwards she wouldn’t be welcome if she did it again, and that if she wanted
the chance, she’d be spending her mana to patch up all the assorted injuries
from the run.

“Is that what you think?” she said, sharp with outrage. “I’m following your
orders now? I don’t think so. Who needs you anyway? Come on, we’re
leaving,” she added to her team, except we’d just finished a course that had
made abundantly clear that they needed me, very badly, and her top recruit,
Rodrigo Beira—sixth in the class rankings, in sniffing distance of
valedictorian—got up from where he’d been crouched on the floor gulping for
air and quietly went over to start help tending one of the Puerto Rican girls
who had a badly lacerated arm filled with spiky bits of ice that were melting
only grudgingly. Enclaver girl stared after him, and then jerked a look at the
rest of her team, none of whom met her eyes, and all of whom one after
another went to help Rodrigo.

If I was feeling a bit smug afterwards, which I might have been, the
afternoon took care of that nicely: when Orion and I went down with Liu for
the first Chinese run, there wasn’t a single person there. We waited for nearly
twenty minutes, Liu biting her lip and looking sorry. Chinese and English
circles are fairly separate in here, since you can go your entire career doing
lessons in only one language or the other, but a Chinese-speaking team of
kids from Singapore and Hanoi had been among the crowd at the gates two
days ago, and Jung Ho from Magnus’s team did lessons in a mix of Chinese
and English and had promised to spread the word, which surely hadn’t needed
much spreading.

Which meant, I realized when we finally gave up waiting, that someone
had sent round a different word: Stay away.



“I asked around a little at dinner,” Liu said that evening. She was sitting
cross-legged on her bed picking softly at the lute while I sat against the wall
doing crochet in a sluggish desultory way, every stitch reluctant. I looked up
at her. “The Shanghai enclave had a meeting of their seniors yesterday, about
the runs. After I asked a few people about it, Yuyan sent someone to invite
me to meet her and Zixuan in the library.”

I sat up and left the crochet in my lap. “And?”
“They wanted to ask me a question about how you do magic,” Liu said. “I

agreed I would tell them, if they told me why they wanted to know.” I nodded
a bit grimly; that was a sensible information trade—if also the kind you only
carefully negotiate with someone you’re considering a potential enemy.
“Zixuan asked me if you have trouble doing small spells.”

I stared at her. If I’d had to guess at his question, that wouldn’t have been
anywhere on the list. I’d been braced for the one about what I’d do to get the
power for my spells, if for instance I ran out of mana on graduation day, or
maybe how exactly I was so good at controlling gigantic maleficaria. Most
wizards don’t give a rat’s arse whether I’m bad at boiling a cup of water for
tea once they see me setting lakes on fire. “I have trouble getting small spells.”

“You’ve got trouble casting them, too,” Liu said. “I didn’t realize it was
important until Zixuan made me think about it, but I did notice—you
remember back in August, when we were just starting to work on the
amplification spell, and I tried to teach you that little tone-keeper spell first, so
you wouldn’t accidentally sing the wrong tone and change the meaning?”

“Ugh,” I said, which comprehensively described that afternoon’s delights,
which, yes, had lodged firmly in my memory. I had ten goes at the spell and
my tongue felt like it had been clamped in a shop vise before I gave up and
told Liu I’d just have to learn the bloody tones properly on pain of blowing
myself to bits.

Liu nodded. “It’s meant for really little kids who are just learning how to
talk, so you can teach them the ‘yell for help’ spell. I could cast it when I was
three.” I must have been gawping at Liu openly with my doubt on my face,
because she added, “It’s happening for you with Precious, too.”



My hand instinctively went up to wrap around the bandolier cup on my
chest, where she was curled up sleeping. “There’s something wrong with
her?”

Liu shook her head. “Not wrong. But it took so much longer for her to
start manifesting, and now she’s already a lot stranger than the others. I saw
her try to bite Orion once in the library when he was about to put his arm
around your shoulders. That means she’s exercising judgment that’s
independent of yours. That’s not really a thing that happens with mice.”

I was about to claim that my judgment was perfectly aligned with Precious
on the subject of Orion putting his arm around my shoulders or on any other
part of me, but Liu gave me a pointed look and I couldn’t make the words
come out of my mouth.

“Anyway, I also realized, you almost never use normal spells,” she went
on. “You’ll even sweep the floor with a broom before you’ll use a spell.”

“My spells are more likely to sweep every living person in the room into
the nearest rubbish bin,” I said.

Liu nodded. “Yes. And those are the spells you’re good at, the ones that
come easily. So you don’t ever use magic when you can use something else.”

“But how did Zixuan guess all that?” I asked, after a moment. I was
having some difficulty digesting the idea. I never do get ordinary spells, and
the ones I get are almost always unnecessarily complicated—like those Old
English cleaning spells I’d got last term, which turned out to be worthless for
trade even beyond being in Old English, because they took twice as much
mana to use as the modern cleaning charms everyone else had, and needed
more focus besides. I’d assumed that was the school—or, well, the universe—
being out to get me, not because there weren’t ordinary cheap spells, for me. I
wasn’t sure whether that ought to make me feel better or worse, actually.

“He said it’s the same way a reviser works,” Liu said. “It abstracts away
detail and allows you to operate on a higher scale, control more power. But
you can’t use a reviser to do detail work. So—you’re like a living reviser.
That’s why you have trouble with little spells, and not really big ones. He
guessed because you could channel the power from his reviser so easily.”



“I wouldn’t have called it easy, myself,” I muttered, but that was just
grousing. I would’ve quite liked a chat with him myself, actually; it sounded
as though he might know more about how my magic worked than I did. “But
in that case, they know I’m not lying—they know I really can get them
through the course. Why wouldn’t they come?”

“They don’t believe you could really have hidden your power from
everyone,” Liu said. “They think New York knew all along, and you’ve been
in with them from the start, and just hiding it so none of the other enclaves
would know about you before graduation.”

I groaned and thumped my forehead down against my knees. The problem
was, I couldn’t see any way to disprove it. It made all the sense in the world
from their perspective, which was limited by the language barrier that runs
through the middle of the school. Over my four years in here, I’ve shared a
class with at least half the kids in the English-language track, and almost none
with Chinese-track kids. I know the ones like Yuyan who are doing enough
languages that we’ve overlapped once or twice, and the bilingual Chinese-
track kids who take their general classes in English to count for their language
requirement. But that’s it. Most kids don’t cross over very much to begin with
—most group conversations in this school happen either in English or in
Chinese, so you hang out with the kids who prefer the same one you do. Liu
deliberately chose to spend more time with the English-speaking crowd
because she’s working on spell translation, which requires as much fluency as
writing complicated metered poetry with lots of long obscure words in a
foreign language.

But I crossed over not at all, because I wasn’t in any conversations, period.
I went to my classes and spoke to almost no one, ate alone, studied alone,
worked out alone, tucked away in my own cramped little cell, exactly as I
would have if I’d been deliberately hiding a very bright light under a bushel.
The actual explanation, which was that I hadn’t had any alternatives because
no one liked me, only invited the question of why I hadn’t made any of them
like me by giving them a good look at the aforementioned bright light,
thereby getting myself courted by all instead of dangerously isolated.



That was such a good question that I’d literally spent three years
aggressively telling myself I was going to join up to an enclave as soon as I
got the chance, and then carefully avoiding any possibility of a chance while
pretending to myself I was playing some sort of extremely long game. If I’d
ever acknowledged to myself that possibly my mum had been right and I
didn’t want to join an enclave after all, I’d probably just have lain down and
died in hopelessness at the prospect of—the rest of my life. I’d only been able
to admit it to myself after Orion, Orion and Aadhya and Liu; after I wasn’t
completely friendless anymore.

“I don’t suppose they let you talk them out of it?” I asked, without any real
hope. It looked stupid in retrospect even to me, so I didn’t think Yuyan and
Zixuan were going to believe it. Maybe someone who’d been among the kids
who’d deliberately avoided me, but the Shanghai kids hadn’t any clue that
loser-kid me even existed until suddenly I erupted into prominence. And then
Chloe and the New York kids suddenly embracing me en masse, offering me
an alliance and a guaranteed spot, just because Orion had been hanging
around me for a few weeks? I’d thought they were completely mad. It would
make loads more sense if actually I’d secretly been part of their crew all
along, or at least for a year or more.

Liu shook her head. “They were polite, but I’m pretty sure the other
reason they wanted to talk to me was to get an idea if you had tricked me, or
if I was trying to establish a relationship with New York.”

I blew out a breath. That was Liu trying to be polite to me, but I knew
what she meant was, the Shanghai kids wanted to get an idea if she—and by
extension her family—were getting ready to undercut the established Chinese
enclaves and make an alliance with New York to get their own enclave.
“Which did they pick?”

Liu held up her hands in a shrug. “I told them that I couldn’t prove
anything. But you were my friend, and you really wanted to get everyone out,
and you aren’t going to New York. So…they think you tricked me.” She gave
a small sigh.

It wasn’t even especially paranoid of them. The Asian enclaves have been
in a slow and increasingly vicious decades-long wrestling match with New



York and London to force them to hand over more Scholomance seats. The
Chinese-language track of general classes literally only started in here in the
late eighties. Before then, it was English or nothing, even after a good quarter
of the school was coming in with some dialect of Chinese as their first
language, and it only finally changed when the ten major Asian enclaves,
Shanghai in the lead, publicly announced an exploratory committee to build a
new school under their control.

Of course, the enclaves didn’t really want to follow through on that threat.
The wizard population has been growing steadily since the Scholomance
opened, but as of right now, adding a second school and splitting the enclaver
population across them would mean they’d have to compete with the
Scholomance for indie kids. Both schools would have to sweeten the odds for
us—at the cost of their own kids. And that’s apart from the massive cost of
building the school itself.

What they really wanted was what they got: more Scholomance seats for
their enclaves to hand out, and classes in an easier language for their kids.
Not much to ask, but they’d had to make the threat to get it, and the allocation
is still a far cry from fair. I’m in here myself thanks to a spot London really
shouldn’t still have had to give out, and meanwhile indie kids all over Asia are
still doing those grueling exams for the chance to be among the one in two
kids who get a place.

But that can’t be fixed any more without starting to take places away from
the very top international enclaves in the US and Europe, none of whom want
to give up a single one. The next reallocation is coming soon—and there’s a
real fight brewing over it. New York and Shanghai and their allies on both
sides have been doing increasingly nasty things to one another for the last few
years, jockeying for position. It would be a bit of a shocker to find out that a
New York ally had gone after Bangkok and literally taken the enclave down,
but we can all imagine it. Everyone knows it’s entirely possible that there’s a
full-on enclave war happening right now.

Everyone including me, but the truth is, I’ve only known it in a vague
background-noise way. All these years I’ve been a loser struggling in the
soup; the geothaumaturgipolitical dancing among the top enclaves of the



world didn’t matter to me anymore than pariah-loser me mattered to the top
kids from Shanghai enclave. But it mattered now, and the more I thought
about it, the more of a desperate mess it looked. Of course Yuyan and Zixuan
wouldn’t trust me. They thought I was planning to graduate and head straight
to New York, where presumably I’d be trying to help kill them and their
families. Why wouldn’t I just do for them in here if I had the chance?

“But what’s their alternative?” I said in frustration, having gnawed it over
in my head without finding a way through. “No matter what, they still can’t
get through the obstacle course without me, and if they don’t get any practice
in, they’ll die anyway. I’ll grant you it’s a bad chance, but it’s the only chance
they’ve got. Why not give it a go? Or—why not at least send a few minions to
give it a go, and make sure?”

Liu shook her head. “The course is in the gym.”
I groaned and lay myself out flat on the ground, staring at the ceiling. The

gym, which I’d completely overhauled this past Field Day, in a bizarre and
utterly nonsensical use of power which would suddenly make fantastic sense
if what I’d been doing was, for instance, arranging some kind of mysterious
sabotage of the obstacle course that would force people to put themselves in
my power. Ideally in some way that would allow me to maintain power over
them even after they left school and went home to their enclaves. That’s the
whole idea behind the obstacle course to begin with—giving your consent is
necessary to make it work. If some maleficer—some maleficer—managed to
wriggle their way into it, that would be an excellent mechanism to use to force
people to become their mindless zombie servants et cetera.

“I’m sorry,” Liu said softly. “I did already try asking a few indie kids to
come, but…they don’t really trust me.” She put her hand up to run it back
and forth over the short spiky fuzz of her head, an unconscious gesture she’d
picked up ever since it had been cut. She hadn’t made that many more friends
than I had, in her first three years in the Scholomance. Her family hadn’t
needed her to network. They’d needed her to stay alive, and keep her kid
cousins alive through their freshman year, and she’d been meant to do it with
malia. And when you’re just a low-level maleficer, people pick up on that sort



of thing and get nervous. “And they do trust the Shanghai kids. Most of them
wouldn’t have spots in here at all if Shanghai hadn’t fought for them.”

I’d have debated the purity of the enclavers’ motives, but I’ll grant you that
I didn’t have very good ground to stand on, me with my for-granted spot that
Mum asked me if I wanted to take. “Do you suppose it would help things if
we told them that I’ve actually got a mind control spell that works on masses
of people at once?” I said aloud.

“No,” Liu said, positively. Then she said, “…do you?”
I grimaced, enough of an answer. She was right, of course; that’s not very

confidence-inspiring.
But if we couldn’t find a way to change their minds—if Zixuan and Yuyan

and the other kids from Shanghai didn’t come, if they all stayed away from
our obstacle course runs, because they were afraid that it was a massive setup
meant to take control of their brains and turn them all into trojan horses—and
then graduation came, and they all died, in droves, because they hadn’t had
any practice, while everyone who’d followed New York’s lead came sailing
out home to their families—then it would in fact turn out to be a massive
setup, in result if not intention, and I didn’t think their parents would be
particularly interested in what my intentions had been.

As if to emphasize the problem, next morning there were more than a
hundred kids for the English run. That many kids all in one place was so
much temptation that a squad of extremely real, extremely hungry mals
jumped us during the run, bursting out of snowdrifts and from behind jagged
towers of ice. It wasn’t very wise of them; we could all tell they were the real
thing, because they hadn’t been in the run earlier that week, so Orion made a
beeline for each one. He took them all down without a worry, except for the
massive manta-ray-sized digester that peeled itself off one face of the glaciers
during their attack and tried to just flop itself completely over him. That one I
just disintegrated whole.



I had the attention to spare, because everyone else had already got better.
Thanks to Liesel, I was grudgingly forced to admit; she had been waiting right
in front of the doors while everyone gathered, and as I got there, she
preemptively announced in projecting tones, “We must approach the run
differently. Stop thinking how you can help the people nearest to you. Think
about what help you can give best, and look for the nearest person who needs
that help.”

That was completely unintuitive, and very few people were willing to let
go of their alliances quite that thoroughly yet. But by halfway through the run,
it was so obviously the better approach that everyone was at least trying to do
it. By the end I almost felt as if Orion and I were running it on our own—the
same exhilaration except even better, though the run was still a thousand
times harder—because the plan was working. Everyone was helping everyone
else, saving everyone else, and all I had to do was jump in when anyone’s luck
went a bit sour.

There were a lot more kids at the Hindi run in the afternoon, too: Ravi
and three other enclavers from Jaipur showed up with their teams, so
evidently Liesel’s cooing had paid dividends after all. Still nobody from
Mumbai, though; not from anywhere in Maharashtra. That wasn’t really a
surprise. Back at the start of freshman year, when all of us who weren’t
enclavers ourselves were in the first frantic rush of trying to make friends, the
other kids started going to lengths to avoid me by the second time meeting
me. But the kids from Mumbai would literally pick up and move away from
me without another word as soon as they heard my name.

I don’t know exactly what they’ve heard about me. My dad’s family haven’t
actively spread the prophecy round, I don’t think. If they had, surely some of
those enclaves I’m supposed to darken and destroy would have taken a much
more energetic interest in my well-being, or lack thereof, some time before
now. So I assume all they know is that the family were going to take me and
Mum in, and we didn’t last a night inside their compound walls.

Perhaps that doesn’t seem like enough to merit instantly ostracizing me,
but the Sharmas have a reputation among the wizards in Maharashtra roughly
like Mum’s got in the UK. They’ve produced several acclaimed healers of



their own, but what they’re really known for—and how they keep their
increasingly large family—is divinatory magic, with a twist. Divinatory magic
doesn’t generally work out well for many reasons, but one of them is because
human beings aren’t very good at predicting what will make them happy. I
don’t mean if you wish for something and then get it twisted in some horrible
way like that stupid story about the monkey’s paw; I mean in the same prosaic
way that you can sincerely be certain that you’d like a dress you see in a shop,
and you buy it and take it home, and then it sits in your closet unused for
years while you insist to yourself that one day you’re going to wear it, until
finally you give it away with a sense of relief.

Well, my dad’s family have seers who can tell you how to get what will
actually make you happy. The most famous living one of whom is my several-
great-grandmother Deepthi, who nowadays mostly gets approached in
supplication by the Dominuses of enclaves that are in a difficult strategic
position, who pay her in the equivalent of millions of pounds for a single brief
chat. The legend about her goes that somewhere round her third birthday, she
looked up from her toys while her family were idly discussing marriage
prospects, and very seriously told them not to worry about it until she
graduated from the Scholomance. That was quite baffling to them, since this
was 1886, before the cleansing equipment had broken for the first time, and
back then the school was only open to actual enclavers. Even enclave kids
from Mumbai had to compete among themselves for the six seats that
Manchester had begrudgingly allocated to them. Not to mention that it was
perfectly obvious to them that you’d never spend a priceless Scholomance seat
on a girl.

She was seven years old when London took over, subdivided the
dormitory rooms, quadrupled the seats, and threw admission open to
independent wizards. By then, her family already knew that if they ever did
get a Scholomance seat, they were absolutely sending her, and also they were
going to have to find a husband willing to marry in. No wizard family gives
away a girl who can accurately tell you about significant future events that are
years out.



She was perfectly right about not arranging her marriage beforehand, too.
By the time she graduated, her family had racked up enthusiastic offers from
virtually every Indian boy who’d been in school with her at any point during
the past four years, all of whom she’d quietly given various bits of advice
along the way, such as, “Don’t go to your lab section today,” on a day when
their usual seat got incinerated in a pipe explosion, or “Learn Russian and
make friends with that quiet boy in your maths class” who turned out to be
the valedictorian and invited you to join his alliance. There was apparently
even a group of boys who offered to marry her together, like the Pandavas or
something. She picked a nice young alchemist from an independent wizard
family outside Jaipur instead—already vegetarian and strict mana—who had
two older brothers and was indeed willing to move in and join the family.
They proceeded to have five healthy children, four of whom survived
graduation, considerably better than the usual odds, and carried on from
there. My father was apparently her cherished favorite great-great-grandchild,
out of several dozen. I don’t understand why she didn’t warn him about
getting too friendly with that blond Welsh girl in his senior year, although
perhaps she did, and he listened as enthusiastically as teenagers ever do to
that sort of warning. I would never ignore similar good advice myself if it
were given me, of course.

Whatever advice Dad got, he didn’t follow it well enough, and as a result
here I am, and here he isn’t. And I’m not a Sharma from Mumbai, I’m a
Higgins from Wales, because thirty seconds after meeting me, Great-
Grandmother pronounced my quite horrifying doom—well, horrifying for
everyone else alive; for all I know, I’d find my own bliss in becoming a
grotesquely evil maleficer blasting enclaves into submission. I certainly can’t
claim the idea doesn’t have a lot of visceral appeal. So then Mum had to tote
me all the way back to the commune because my father’s family were ready
to put baby Hitler me to death, in order to save the world that I’m slated to
cover in darkness and murder et cetera.

I should note that this is the same family who are so devoted to
nonviolence that they turned down a priceless offer to move en masse into



Mumbai enclave, because the place wasn’t strict mana and they wouldn’t
cheat at so much as the cost of the life of a beetle.

You can see why their rejecting me might make the people who are
familiar with their reputation look at me askance. Even lacking the details, it’s
hardly unreasonable to imagine there has to be something extremely
unpleasant in my future. And at that, no one’s imagining anything quite as
extreme as the actual prophecy.

So I quickly stopped trying to introduce myself to any Marathi-speaking
kids. In fact I’ve spent most of the past three years with a low-grade worry
about what they might tell people about me, which helpfully filled all the
hours where I wasn’t worrying about more immediate problems, such as
whether I’d get enough to eat that day, or if something were going to eat me.

Of course, now I didn’t need to worry about that anymore. They could
have stood up in the cafeteria with an amplification spell and repeated the
prophecy word for word, and the people joining me for these runs wouldn’t
have trusted me one jot less. They didn’t trust me to begin with; they weren’t
here because they really believed I was going to save them. They were joining
me because even if I was a vicious maleficer, there still wasn’t any other
option for getting in any practice. Surely almost all of them were quietly
making secret plans with their allies and other teams for what they’d really do
in the graduation hall, and especially what they’d do if I did in fact turn out to
be a vicious maleficer.

That was what made Liesel’s edict so important. It wasn’t possible to go
through a run, even just one single run, with everyone round you all working
to their own strengths and your most urgent needs, and not realize how much
better it was than anything we could manage in a private alliance, even the
very best. It was so much better that even if it turned out that I was a vicious
maleficer and planning to cull some substantial number of the class, they were
all probably still better off sticking to the strategy and accepting the risk of
me instead of the risk of everything else down there.

That became just as clear to the kids in the Hindi run as it had to the ones
in the morning, and word kept spreading. On Saturday morning there were



almost eighty kids for the Spanish run, and that afternoon, the first five kids
did finally turn up for the Chinese run. They were all stragglers.

There’s no single thing that marks someone out as a straggler. Sometimes
it’s just bad luck—you’ve been jumped too often, blew all your mana fighting
off mals, and now you haven’t anything to contribute to a shared pool.
Sometimes it’s even worse luck—you’ve got an affinity for something truly
useless, like water-weaving. That’s tidy on the outside, you’d make a fortune
helping enclaves with their sewer lines, but you won’t have the chance, since it
doesn’t do yourself or anyone else any good in here. Sometimes you’re just
not very good at magic and not very good at people—you can get by with one
or the other, but if you haven’t either, you’re in trouble.

I’ve tried not to think about what it would be like—the idea of having to
wade into the graduation hall all alone, the mass of the crowd breaking for
the gates ahead of you, a sea of people with plans and friends and weapons,
warding spells and healing potions, and the maleficaria all around already
beginning to rip kids out of the mass, shredding them into bones and blood—
running because your only hope was to run, knowing that actually you hadn’t
any hope, and you’d die watching other people going out the gates. I spent
three years trying not to think about it, because I thought that was going to be
me.

In this case, one of the poor bastards had developed shakes that
occasionally interrupted his spellcasting, probably aftereffects of a poisoning,
or perhaps just trauma. There’s no shortage of that in here. Another one of
them had Chinese about as good as mine, which was a bad sign given that it
was presumably the language she’d been taking classes in for all four years.
It’s not actually worth it, statistically speaking, to send your kids in here if
they aren’t properly fluent in English or Chinese to begin with, which
generally also is a sign they’re no good at languages. It doesn’t matter how
brilliant a wizard they are otherwise: they’ll be at too much of a disadvantage
when they can’t keep up with their general subjects. You’re better off keeping
them at home, guarded as best you can, teaching them in the vernacular they
do know. But some families try it anyway.



And in fact none of the five were any good during the run. The wisdom of
our crowd is vicious, but it’s rarely wrong. The boy with the shakes, Hideo,
would’ve been a quite good incanter, except that he’d have died twice during
the single run when he interrupted his own invocations. But it didn’t matter;
with only five kids in the run with me and Orion, we still all sailed through.

Afterwards I made myself tell Hideo, “I’ll get you a potion that will hold
you for the run.” My mum’s got a recipe for something she calls calming-
waters. She makes a monthly batch to give to wizards who’ve got muscle
spasms brought on by overcasting—when you try to cast a spell you haven’t
quite got enough mana for, you can make up the difference out of your own
body, but it often has side effects that are brutal to get rid of. I was reasonably
certain it would work for his shakes, too.

The sticking point was, I couldn’t actually brew it myself. I had to ask
Chloe to do it for me. I gave myself the reward of a silver lining: I asked
Orion to come down to the labs, too. He got all bright-eyed and enthusiastic,
and then gave me a look of wounded disappointment when he discovered that
Chloe was coming, which was exactly why I had asked him. The next time I
asked, he’d be sure to ask if there was going to be any company, and then I’d
have to say yes or admit I was asking him on a date, which I absolutely wasn’t
going to do. It was the best protection against myself that I could come up
with.

He was even more annoyed when it took us three hours to get the bloody
thing concocted. Chloe kept asking excellent questions like, “Do you grind
the scallop shells fine or just pound them to coarse bits?” and “Do you stir
clockwise or counter?” none of which I could answer except by pantomiming
Mum doing it, trying to remember with my body, and then guessing as best I
could. I’m rubbish at alchemy in general, and I’m rubbish at healing in
general, too, so the combination is almost always a disaster. The last time
Mum tried to teach me, the test drop disintegrated a chunk the size of my fist
out of the floor of our yurt.

“That can’t be right,” Chloe said, looking into the seething angry yellow
boil in the pot, which indeed did not look anything like calming-waters.



“It’s not,” I said grimly. “I think I got the timing of the salt and the sulfur
wrong.”

She sighed. “We’ll have to start over.”
“Oh, come on,” Orion moaned outright. In justice, which he wasn’t going

to get from me, it was take four.
“Stop complaining,” I said. “Pretend you’re staking us out as bait. The two

of us alone in this lab are as likely as anyone in the entire school to get
jumped.” Judging by her sidelong look, I’m not sure Chloe really appreciated
my argument.

The fifth attempt actually came out vaguely resembling the cool green-
blue it was meant to be, only with a thick streak of muddy yellow-brown
winding through it. I had absolutely no idea what we’d done wrong at that
point, but Chloe very cautiously dipped in a lock of her own hair, rubbed it
between her fingers, then sniffed it, and finally just barely touched it with her
tongue. She made a face and spit into the sink and said, “Okay, I think I’ve
got it,” then cleared the decks with a brisk cleaning spell and dived in once
more. She went much quicker this time, and I couldn’t even spot what she did
differently, but when she was done, at the end the yellowy mud streak got
swallowed up smoothly and vanished away, and a single drop on my tongue
was enough to tell me she had got it.

The drop wasn’t enough to keep away the burst of sour jealousy: I couldn’t
brew calming-waters, my own mother’s recipe, and Chloe could. I’d have had
to drink a triple dose to clear that taste out of my mouth.

But she made a big batch and we bottled it into thirty vials. It would take
care of Hideo for the rest of the term, and leave enough over for anyone who
panicked on graduation day: there were usually a reasonable number of
unexpected freakouts. Orion lugged the crate downstairs to Chloe’s room for
us and threw me one last reproachful look before flouncing off to go hunting,
since I very firmly parked myself into one of the beanbags and made clear I
wasn’t going anywhere alone with him.

Chloe bit her lip and didn’t say anything, but she continued not to say
anything even after he left, which wasn’t usual for her. It was clear she could
have happily used a dose of calming-waters herself to stop worrying: Is El



going to take Orion away from us. I didn’t want to think about that myself, as
letting the idea into my head was likely to lead me in the direction of many
terrible decisions. “Were you always planning to do alchemy?” I said instead,
by way of distracting us both. “Aren’t your parents both artificers?”

“Yeah,” Chloe said. “But my grandma’s an alchemist. She started by
teaching me to cook, when I was about ten. She was really happy that I
wanted to learn; my mom and my uncle never did. She got in for working on
the cafeteria overhaul,” she added.

For all that the food in here is mostly awful and regularly contaminated,
we’re lucky to have it. Originally the Scholomance cafeteria dispensed a
nutritious slurry three times a day—thin and watery enough to pass through
the very narrow warded pipes—and if you wanted it to be something else,
you had to transmute it yourself, which no one could afford to do.

Actually making a particular food out of something else with magic is
almost impossible, because you aren’t just interested in how you experience it
in your mouth: you want the food to work as nutrition for your body once you
send it down into your stomach and forget about it. If you turn a box of nails
into a sandwich, you might think you’ve eaten afterwards, but you’ll be
wrong. And for that matter, if you turn gruel into bread, you’ll generally be
wrong then, too, because gruel and bread aren’t actually that similar as far as
your digestive enzymes are concerned. It has been done, but only in alchemy
labs funded by enclaves, by the kind of wizard who will finish their
Scholomance training and then go off to spend ten years in a mundane
university getting advanced degrees in chemistry and food science.

You can start with something that technically qualifies as nourishment and
then just put a sensory illusion on it, but the illusion will break down as soon
as you start chewing. The result is generally more unpleasant than just
choking down whatever you started with. The only practical solution is to
selectively transmute whatever parts come into significant contact with your
senses: you lose the nutrients out of the bits that were transmuted, but that
sends the rest successfully down.

However, that’s loads more complicated and expensive mana-wise than
just waving a hand and turning, say, a stick into a pen, where you don’t care



in the slightest what’s happening on the molecular level as long as you can
write with it. Not even enclavers could afford to do it on a regular basis. Most
kids came out more or less malnourished, and everyone spent most of their
weight allowance bringing in food. It was enough of a factor in deaths that
after ten years or so, the decision was made to open up a hole in the wards for
transporting in small amounts of actual food, enough to give everyone our
thrice-weekly snack bar visit.

But shortly after World War II, New York and a consortium of the US
enclaves swooped in and very cheerfully took over the school—London
wasn’t in any shape to put up a fight—and they hired a batch of those
chemist-wizards who went into their labs and developed a food-transmutation
process to run on the slurry that was an order of magnitude cheaper than the
best solutions before then.

Evidently Chloe’s granny had been one of the alchemists who had made it
possible—good enough to get a place in New York enclave for the work. I
already knew her dad had been allies with her uncle, during graduation, and
he’d got in by marrying her mum. So her dad and her granny had been indie
wizards who’d made it in by clawing and scratching and working themselves
to the bone; her family weren’t high up in the council or anything, they were
relatively new. No wonder she was so anxious about not losing the Domina’s
son.

But I couldn’t say anything to reassure her. I wasn’t coming to New York.
I wasn’t making her grandmother’s bargain, not even the better version of it
that I could have struck. So if Orion wanted me more than he wanted New
York, I suppose I was going to take him away, and I wasn’t going to feel
guilty about it, either. Not after the way they’d treated him, raised him to be
their hero instead of just another kid. I’d spent most of my childhood yelling
at Mum for not taking me into an enclave. It hadn’t occurred to me what any
enclave would do with someone like me, what they’d want of me, what they’d
tell a kid too young to resist them, just to get what they wanted.

I wasn’t going to give in to them. I wasn’t going to give in to anyone: not
Magnus, not Khamis, not Chloe, not even Orion, if he asked me himself. I



wasn’t going to give in to New York, to any of the enclaves, and most of all, I
wasn’t going to give in to the Scholomance.

After I left Chloe in her room, I walked alone to the gym. The doors were
closed today: there were no runs on Sunday. On the other side, the low
grinding and clanking noises were going steadily as the obstacle course went
on rearranging itself to try to kill us, all in the name of making us stronger. I
stood in front of them listening for a long time. I could; nothing tried to jump
me. “That’s right,” I said, aloud, defiantly. “Don’t even try. You’re not going
to win. We’re going to get everyone out. I’m going to get everyone out.”

OceanofPDF.com



D ramatic pronouncements are all very well and good, but on Monday,
two hundred kids turned up expectantly for the next English run, and

Orion and I started to hit our limits.
The new course itself was absolutely awful. The gym was full of plum

trees on the cusp of blooming, with a soft gurgling brook winding among
their roots, the last traces of ice clinging to the banks and a pale edge of frost
limning the grass. Sunlight dappled down through the leaves and small birds
darted around in the distance, chirps coming from amid the branches, lovely
and inviting, at least until we got close enough for the trees to start savagely
clubbing us with thorny limbs that shredded most shielding spells, and the



tiny birds bunched up into a flock that came at us en masse and turned out to
be shrikes.

I tried to hit the whole swarm with a killing spell, but it didn’t work. Just
before the spell landed, the cloud of shrikes all burst apart and started
attacking us separately. Orion spent the whole run weaving back and forth
through the crowd, shooting them down one at a time, but I couldn’t do that:
throwing one of my killing spells at a single shrike while it was flying rapidly
around a person pecking at them was an excellent way for me to miss the
shrike entirely, and kill the person and their three closest neighbors at the
same time.

The only thing that saved it from disaster was that everyone did keep
helping one another—throwing fresh shields over people who had been
clubbed, picking the shrikes out of the sky one at a time if they came close
enough, neutralizing the poison clouds that occasionally spurted out of the
plum blossoms. I wasn’t useless, either; halfway through, the trees got
inventive. A dozen of them pulled up their roots and wove themselves
together into a living wicker man. It went crashing about, grabbing enormous
handfuls of people and shoving them inside the basket of its own chest, and
then erupted into flames with them imprisoned and screaming just as a
second batch of trees followed the first.

The shields that everyone had to keep up against the shrikes were totally
useless against the tree-basket-men, and even Orion couldn’t make a dent in
the things. They weren’t consumed by their own fire, which was presumably
psychic instead of corporeal. They just kept merrily burning on, right until I
tore them all apart with a handy spell I have for constructing a ritual dark
tower. It uses whatever construction materials are in the area. The people
inside got dumped out, and the trees got shredded apart and reassembled into
a tidy hexagonal tower of solid walls bristling with upcurved sharpened stakes
placed at intervals that looked exactly as though the structure was designed to
have people impaled all over the surface. Even dodging shrikes, everyone
gave it a very wide berth.

Nobody died, but seven people came out with exposed bone, a dozen with
severe burns, and two people had lost eyes. A couple of enclaver alchemists



grudgingly shared drops of restorative tinctures, which were good enough to
heal the damage once they emerged from the gym, and nobody complained if
they made it out of graduation alive at the cost of an eye, but it had been a
sharp lesson in our limitations. There were plenty of small, quick mals. In fact
they were excellent candidates to have survived the cleansing, down below.

In the library afterwards, Magnus pulled Orion aside into a corner of the
reading room for a deep heartfelt chat, out of earshot of where I’d been
before I got up and quietly snuck after to eavesdrop. “Look, bro, I’m sorry to
have to be saying this, I know you’re trying to move mountains here, but—
we’ve got to have a plan for when you can’t,” by which he meant, a plan for
leaving people behind. That was what every enclaver had.

“If that happens, I guess we’ll have to let the best-prepared fend for
themselves, Tebow,” I said, sweet as a poisoned apple, from behind his back.
He flinched and glared at me before he could help himself.

But the truth was everyone had that plan: how to recognize when one of
your allies had gone down too hard, and it was time to cut them loose and
keep going. I’d lived with that plan in my own head for years and years, and
just declaring that I was giving it up wasn’t actually a solution to the
underlying problem. We needed a plan to save everyone instead, and we
demonstrably still didn’t have one. Magnus wasn’t wrong about that.

But we still had a better option than any of the other available ones. More
kids kept joining the runs all week long, except in the still-almost-empty
Chinese section. One of the former Bangkok enclavers did show, warily, and
later in the week, Hideo—calming-waters did beautifully to stop his tics, for
half an hour at least, which was plenty of time to do the run—brought a
group of three other kids with him, a loser-alliance that he’d had an
agreement to follow after in the graduation hall, with no other benefits: even
the worst stragglers can get that kind of lousy deal. I think he’d asked them to
come and watch him perform with the tics medicated, in hopes they’d agree
to let him properly join up, and the prospect of a real fourth brought them—
that, or they liked him, and wanted to be convinced.

Apparently they were convinced, and it was contagious, because the
following Monday—after the gym debuted yet another completely



unsurvivable course—all of the Japanese enclavers turned up for the Chinese
section en masse, bringing their allies with them, which made it suddenly a
substantial crowd. The biggest Japanese enclaves all have each of their kids
make their own team, with no more than one or two carefully picked potential
enclave recruits from among the independent Japanese kids, and the rest of
the kids are foreign wizards whom they’ll aggressively sponsor into foreign
enclaves after graduation, the idea being to create relationships all over the
world. Loads of kids take Japanese and compete for the slots as a result, since
it’s substantial help to get into the enclave you actually most want to live in.
Mostly people consider themselves lucky to take whatever enclave they can
get, even if it means moving halfway round the world from your family.

Some of them had been coming to the English runs before now, since
most of them knew both English and Chinese, but it obviously made more
sense to come to the less crowded run. They just hadn’t wanted to pick a fight
with Shanghai enclave, and who could blame them. Turning up like this was
the equivalent of them saying publicly they were convinced that they weren’t
getting out alive otherwise, a vote of no confidence in whatever the Shanghai
kids were trying to organize.

What they certainly weren’t organizing was runs of the obstacle course,
since as far as I knew, no one in the school but me could mind-prison a
castigator, which was this week’s special guest star. It took me a full ten
minutes of wrangling the thing while it bellowed and roared and thrashed
hideous slimy limbs dripping with acid all over the gym, eating enormous
holes in the wide spring meadow buzzing with seventeen different swarms of
mana-eating insects that everyone else desperately had to keep off. Orion
literally had to go across the gym and back thirty-two times in the single run
with a net spell, which kept coming apart every time one tiny drop from the
castigator’s arms hit it.

“Maybe it doesn’t matter,” Liu offered wearily, that afternoon in the
library, as we sat slumped round the table. Orion had put his head down in his
arms and was snoring faintly from inside them. The rest of us were trying to
think of ways to talk the Shanghai enclavers round. “Nobody will turn down



help on graduation day, and the really desperate ones who will need the most
help are coming to the run. Maybe we’ll be able to just include them.”

“Yeah, it’s not like they’re going to be useless,” Aadhya said. “They’re
doing something. They’re in the workshop all the time; I’ve seen Zixuan in
there working with at least a dozen kids every time I go in for supplies.”

“This is nonsense. They are not going to be prepared,” Liesel said. If
you’re wondering how Liesel came into our discussions, so were the rest of
us, but she was both impervious to hints that she wasn’t wanted, and also
hideously smart, so we hadn’t actually been able to chase her from the
planning; in fact she had edged her way further up the table at every session.
“There are more than three hundred of them and they are not coming to a
single run. We cannot yet manage a group even of two hundred properly. Are
we useless? Have we not trained? But it is only lucky that no one died this
week. And it is still only the beginning! If they don’t start practicing before
the end, there will be no hope for them. Put that out of your heads.”

“I suppose you’d like me to just abandon three hundred people, then,” I
said sharply.

She rolled her eyes. “Oh, the great heroine is angry. If they want your help
they will come. Until then you should worry less how you will save them and
worry more how they will get in your way. Now is it possible we can talk
about the order of entry? We cannot keep running in without any
organization. This is not a good strategy when we are all collaborating.”

She then hauled out four separate diagrams with multiple color-coded
alternatives and spread them out on the table. “We must systematically try
each of these options over the next six runs. First we will begin with the
students with the strongest shielding, and attempt to create a defensive
perimeter which can be monitored closely—”

I’ll draw a merciful veil over the rest. Liesel was clearly right, so we
couldn’t stop her marching us off firmly in the proper direction, but for my
part, I did feel very much like I’d just been put against the wall by the most
dragonish dinner lady at primary school.

That week, without bothering to mention it to anyone, Liesel also
marshaled every creative-writing-track kid out of our runs and gave them



marching orders to invent minor cantrips that would do things like highlight
anyone in trouble with an aura that would shade from amber to bright red as
their situation worsened—not something that anyone in the graduation hall
would ever previously have wanted, since it was more or less like putting out a
beacon for mals—and automatically mark the ground where a person last saw
a mal, to warn off the people behind them. Again, not something anyone
would’ve spent mana on in the past. The first I knew about this clever
program was when people started glowing all over the place on Friday, and
Liesel lectured me and Orion sternly after the run not to even bother looking
at anyone who wasn’t bright red.

I’d have had several things to say about her high-handed behavior, except I
was lying flat on the floor with my eyes shut trying to convince my heart and
lungs that really everything was fine and they should just calm down and keep
working, and Orion was sunk over his own knees gulping for air, his entire
shirt soaked completely through with sweat. We’d reached three hundred kids
in the English run.

All of whom had in fact come out alive, and no one had even suffered a
half-dissolved limb in the process, because launching behind a perimeter of
the students with the best shielding was, in fact, extremely effective, and so
were the new warning systems. By the time I had managed to haul myself up
to the cafeteria and fork in my lunch and recovered enough energy to
contemplate squabbling with Liesel, I had grimly realized that the only
possible grounds on which I could squabble with her were that she was seizing
authority that nobody wanted to give her. As grounds went, that had the
solidity of a bog. At least she was doing it on the basis of terrifying
competence and not just the random chance of affinity.

Anyway any spare energy I might have had for squabbling was soon to
disappear. That afternoon we were up to 150 kids in the Hindi run: the
Maharashtra kids all finally turned up. They were still keeping as far from me
as they could, but they’d come. The next morning the Spanish run had more
than a hundred as well. I was pathetically grateful that the Chinese run was
still thin; running with forty kids felt like a relaxing stroll by comparison. It



was all the more clear that without Liesel’s ruthlessly imposed improvements,
we’d have been losing people left, right, and center.

Which didn’t actually reconcile me to her approach. “How exactly have
you managed to spend your entire career until now pretending to be a nice
person?” I demanded grouchily as I stomped down to the cafeteria on
Monday the next week: in our library session after the English run that
morning, she’d brought out a long checklist of the many, many things I’d done
wrong or inefficiently that needed correcting, all of which she’d carefully
observed while somehow managing to sail through the run completely
undistressed herself. She was still demanding my attention for a few more of
them on the stairs even after the lunch bell rang.

She sniffed disparagingly. “It is not a complex problem to appear nice to
people! You identify the most popular targets in each of your classes, learn
what they value about themselves, and give them a minimum of three relevant
compliments each week. So long as they think you are agreeable, others will
follow their lead.”

It hadn’t occurred to me that there was an answer to my question,
complete presumably with regularly tended checklists. I must have looked
aghast, because she scowled at me and said sharply, “Or instead you can
spend years sulking around the school letting everyone believe you are an
incompetent maleficer. Do you know how much simpler everything would be
now if only you had given us any reasonable time to prepare? Not to mention
we would not be having all these difficulties with the Shanghai enclavers! You
had better be careful. They are waiting too long.” She flounced on from me to
join Alfie and the London kids further ahead in the queue. They all moved
back to make room for her right behind him, even Sarah and Brandon,
although they were enclavers and she wasn’t.

“She’s a monster,” I said flatly to Aadhya and Liu as we queued. They
were both quite shadowy under the eyes themselves: on top of all going in the
English runs together, Liu was going with us in the Chinese runs, and trying
to push the mana-amplification spell out to cover as many people as she could
each time, and Aad was doing the Hindi runs, not to mention they were both
actually suffering Liesel far more on a regular basis than I was, since they and



Chloe had been doing all the managing. I was grateful to have to spend much
more of my time running desperately for my life.

“She’s the valedictorian,” Aadhya said, which was in fact a good point:
terrifying ruthlessness is close to a necessary criterion. “Stop picking fights
with her. We need everything that’s coming out of her giant brain. We’re all
getting wiped out as it is. Even the kids doing only one of the runs.”

I was tired enough myself that I hadn’t really been paying attention, but
when she waved an arm round the cafeteria tables where people were already
sitting, I could see instantly she was right: anyone who’d been doing the runs
with us was more or less slumped over their tray in a way that would’ve been
an invitation to be pounced on by at least three different mals in an ordinary
Scholomance year. You could literally pick out the lingering objectors just by
seeing who wasn’t falling into their vegetable soup. Loads of the kids who’d
come out of the English run this morning were literally not eating yet; they
were taking turns doing catnaps on the tables.

“Why are we getting so wiped out?” I said. “Do you think the school’s
draining our mana somehow?”

But I looked back and Aadhya and Liu were both giving me the same kind
of level, murderous looks I’d seen aimed at Orion in the past. “We’re all being
attacked much more in every run than ever before,” Liu said. “It’s not just the
extreme maleficaria. At this time last year, the obstacle course only had ten
attack stations, all separate. The general melee runs aren’t supposed to start
until June.”

“Oh, right,” I said awkwardly, as if I’d just needed to be reminded.
We went through the line and loaded up our trays with bowls of spaghetti

—we had to pick out the red mana leeches hiding among them, but we were
all used to that—and big helpings of sliced peaches in hallucinogenic yellow
syrup that Chloe would probably be able to neutralize for us when we got it
back to the table she was arranging. Annoyingly, the last helping of sponge
cake they were meant to accompany went just in front of us, to a boy from
Venice who had a tidy fishing tool he used to snag it from among the
surrounding spikegrubs. Even more annoyingly, once he’d got it, he paused
and turned and offered it to me, exactly the way people sucked up to enclaver



kids all the time. And Aadhya gave me a jab with an elbow before I could
erupt in the boy’s face like I wanted to, so instead I just had to say in as
ungracious a tone as I could manage, “No. Thanks.”

“We need to think about it, though,” Aadhya said at the table, a while
later. I was sullenly eating the peaches without even being able to enjoy them,
and it wasn’t just because the neutralizer gave them a faintly metallic taste.
“What if the school is making it harder on purpose? What if it’s trying to
wipe you out so bad that it can hit you in a gym run, take you or Orion out?”

“Well,” I said, trying to think how to word it so I wouldn’t get more death
glares from the entire table. I was tired, but to be perfectly honest, I’d mostly
been whinging. You’re supposed to be tired during graduation training. If you
aren’t, you aren’t working hard enough. I was working-a-full-day tired, not
falling-into-my-soup tired.

Orion was, and I’d saved his bowl twice so far this meal, but that’s
because he was sneaking out to go hunting real mals after curfew. I’d tried to
persuade Precious to keep watch on him, but she wouldn’t; the only thing
she’d do is insist on coming along anytime I went over to his room to force
him to actually get into bed and shut his eyes and turn out the lights before
the curfew bell rang. If he did, he instantly fell asleep and stayed down until
morning; otherwise he’d be in the cafeteria at dawn, eating from a giant
heaped tray before anyone else got there. In case you’re wondering, staying
out past curfew is normally a death sentence and probably still was for any
other student even in this strange year, but at this point mals were all fleeing
Orion very energetically. Mostly he only ever got to kill them in the runs,
when one of them got too distracted trying to eat another student and blew its
cover.

“Or maybe it wants to kill some of us now in practice, in case most of us
do get out,” Liu put in, a perfectly reasonable concern which helpfully
relieved me of having to make a bright and cheery point of explaining that it
wasn’t that bad really, at least for me.

“What should we do?” Ibrahim said, anxiously.
“Why don’t we just take a break?” Chloe said, which I suppose was the

obvious solution if you were someone who had ever had the luxury of being



able to take a break. “We could take the rest of the day, skip tomorrow, and
Wednesday morning. Nobody would miss more than one run. That’s not
much.”

Almost everyone endorsed the idea as soon as it percolated outwards.
Even Orion perked up dramatically as soon as he woke up enough to hear it. I
assumed he was planning an all-day hunting extravaganza. I personally slept
in to the glorious hour of eight, just early enough to still make it upstairs for
breakfast dregs if I rushed, and was up and stuffing my hair into a short
ponytail when someone knocked. I’d got much more cautious about that sort
of thing since my delightful encounter with Jack last year, but with a vat of
mana available, that now just meant I kept a nice murder spell on the tip of
my tongue and opened the door at arm’s length.

Orion was standing there looking a bit nervous, carrying a large mug of
tea and an alchemy lab supply box heaped with three buns, a small glass full
of apricot jam and butter pats that were starting to permanently intermingle,
a bowl full of congee with a whole egg on it, and a half-green clementine. I
stared at him and he blurted, “Would—would you—have breakfast with me?”
and then realized as the words left his mouth that he hadn’t made the situation
horrible enough and added, “On a date?” in a squawky warble.

I slammed my hand down on the door of Precious’s enclosure, where I’d
tucked her in with some sunflower seeds, and latched it shut just in time. I
ignored the furious chittering and squeaks from inside and blurted back,
“Yes,” before anything resembling good sense could assert itself.

I had to work extremely hard not to think better of what I was doing, even
as I followed Orion through the corridors. I couldn’t even distract myself by
watching for attacks or traps; nothing with a mind, right or otherwise, was
attacking Orion lately. He’d grown three inches so far this year, at least, and
his shoulders and arms were straining every seam of his t-shirt, and he’d
showered and his silver hair was dark and curling round his neck, and I was
having to devote really enormous effort to ignoring that I was being a truly
colossal wanker, when I suddenly realized where we were, and stopped,
everything forgotten in appalled outrage, on the threshold of the gym.



Orion didn’t even break stride. He sailed onwards through the doors and
into the half of the gym that was left over from the obstacle course. The
famed cherry trees had appeared this week and were just getting ready to
make a proper scene, tiny pink and white buds dotting the dark limbs.

I almost couldn’t believe he’d done it. I went after him blankly, waiting for
him to explain this was some sort of joke, which would itself be in poor taste.
He just stopped under one particularly laden tree and earnestly began
spreading out a ragged blanket for our picnic, while I stood staring down at
him, trying to decide if he was literally insane, and whether I liked him
enough to pretend he wasn’t. I had already liked him enough to drink the
horrible tea-stained hot water he’d brought me, so the answer to that was
almost certainly yes, but I wasn’t sure I liked him enough to picnic in the gym
with him.

It’s just as well that I was too appalled to move, I suppose, because that’s
why I was still on my feet when Orion looked up and saw something coming.
I had no idea in that first moment what it was he’d seen; his face didn’t
actually reach any kind of positive or negative expression, he only focused on
something behind me. But I knew that something was coming at my back,
and that I hadn’t heard it or picked up on it. That was warning enough.

Even as I turned round to find out what it was, my hands were already
moving in the shielding spell that Alfie had given me, two weeks ago. I’d
bitterly made myself ask him for it, knowing he’d say exactly what he said,
“Of course, El, delighted.” Bollocks. It had to be one of the best spells even
his London enclave family had, worth loads in trade. In here it would
probably have brought more than my sutras, since a decently skilled senior
could cast it during graduation, and the sutras wouldn’t do anyone any good
until they got out alive.

It wasn’t a shield spell, really. It was an evocation of refusal—not to be too
boringly technical, an evocation is more or less taking something intangible
and bringing it into material reality. What the evocation of refusal produced
—in Alfie’s hands—was a neat translucent dome roughly seven feet across.
As long as he could hold it up—casting alone he could manage as long as
three minutes, which is an eternity in the graduation hall—he could refuse



anything he didn’t want inside, including mals, hostile magic, flying debris,
loud farts, et cetera. And while there’re plenty of spells that will let you seal
out the world, the extremely special quality of this one was that it let in all the
things you did want, such as oxygen untainted by any poison gas in the
vicinity, or healing spells from your allies. I’d seen Alfie use it for the first
time back during our run against the evil ice mountains. He’d brought it out
several times since then to save random other kids’ lives. He wasn’t one of the
enclavers who whinged about helping other kids; his grace went both ways, or
maybe he’d secretly internalized the fantasy of noblesse oblige, because he’d
dived wholeheartedly into the project of rescuing everyone in his path.

But when I cast the evocation, I got a globe nearly twelve feet across,
which showed every sign of staying up for as long as I bothered to keep it
going, and after I put it round something, I could move the globe and all its
desirable contents, meaning I could scoop up a double handful of kids and
deposit them in a different spot on the field, no mals included. That was a
game-changing move. I could claim that was why I’d asked for the spell, for
everyone’s sake, but that would be bollocks, too. I hadn’t known for sure what
I could do with it when I asked him to give it to me. I’d just known it was a
really top spell, and I could see that it had room to grow—the kind of room
that I could fill up.

I had the smooth dome of it up over me and Orion before I finished
turning round, which was good, because we very much didn’t want any of the
literally twenty-seven different killing spells and deadly artifices that came
flying at our heads, five of them backed by a true circle working. I don’t think
I could have blocked or turned them all any other way. But none of them
could make it through the impenetrable no thanks very much of the globe.
Most of them just dissolved. The more elaborate workings slid down to where
the globe intersected with the floor, and dissolved into a frustrated cloud of
churning smoke in a dozen different colors that ringed us, bubbling and
seething, until one after another they finally dissipated.

By then Orion was standing up next to me, staring out of the shimmering
wall into the faces of the thirty-two kids who’d just had a really good go at
murdering us. I recognized Yuyan at the front, and Zixuan was standing with



the circle—all of the Shanghai seniors, in fact, along with their allies, and a
dozen other kids I was pretty sure were from Beijing and Hong Kong and
Guangzhou.

It didn’t surprise me at all, except that I’d been taken by surprise. I ought
to have known it was coming. But Orion just looked confused at first, as if he
didn’t understand how they could possibly have made such a bizarre mistake.
It took the grim disappointment on their faces as they watched their spells
dissolving to drive home the idea that they’d meant it.

I imagine they were very sorry about that a moment later, and so was I,
because that made him angry, and it turned out I’d never seen Orion angry
before. Not really angry. And I realize I haven’t one metacarpal to stand on
here, but I didn’t like it. And I wasn’t even the one he was angry at. For a
horrible moment I had the vivid sensation that I wasn’t holding the dome up
to protect him anymore: I was keeping him away from them.

“Lake!” I said, trying to make it sharp, but it came out with an awful
wobble I didn’t like. I couldn’t help it. His face looked all wrong, his lips
peeled back in a snarl and a faint glimmer of eldritch light coming through
his eyes, so much mana gathered for casting that you could almost see it with
the naked eye, like a fist clenching. I had a clear and terrible vision of him
just mowing gracefully through them, the way he did with a horde of
maleficaria, conscious thought going entirely out of it until everything—
everyone—was dead.

But thankfully, he grated out, “They wanted to kill you,” and despite my
visceral horror, I managed a spark of indignation over that, just enough to
light up my ever-helpful reservoirs of irritation and anger.

“I don’t seem to have been in any danger!” I said. “What were you going
to do, I’d like to know. Probably get your bones dissolved into goo, if you’d
had it all to yourself. That’s up to eleven for me, by the way.”

It distracted him from the confrontation, just long enough to crack his
own fury a bit. “Eleven!”

“I’ll write out the tally for you later,” I said, managing a decent façade of
coolness. “Now let’s pack this up and go and have our picnic in the library,
like normal people. What are you going to do otherwise?”



That was a wrong question to ask, because Orion looked back at them and
still clearly felt that kill them all was a perfectly valid response—and when I
say perfectly valid, I mean that he was an inch away from going at them, and I
hadn’t any idea what to do, but the choice was abruptly not mine anymore,
because people literally started appearing round me in bunches, starting with
Liesel and her crew: Alfie with his face screwed up in strain, holding up his
own casting of the evocation of refusal as they flew in through the doors.

It wasn’t just them, though; other teams were all shooting into the gym
around us with the bungee quality of yanker spells going off, all of which I
realized after an incredulous glance were keyed off the shield holder on my
belt. Ibrahim and his team appeared; even Khamis had come, with Nkoyo.

And more to the point, Magnus and his team sailed in, along with
Jermaine and his; then a team from Atlanta, another from Louisiana—and in
minutes, what any outside observer would’ve said was going on was that the
New York and Shanghai enclavers had squared off, with their various allies,
all of us ready to tumble down into the open waiting jaws of Thucydides’s
Trap together. It would be at least as effective at killing wizards off as a horde
of maleficaria, especially once any survivors went home and told their parents
that the war everyone was half expecting had started here on the inside.

I had no idea how to stop it. One look told me Orion wasn’t going to be
any help: he was going to be the spearhead. Magnus had already led the New
York kids to form up behind him. And the only people who weren’t there
were Aadhya and Liu and Chloe, presumably because whoever had organized
this protective scheme—three guesses, all Liesel—had known that they’d tell
me about it in advance, thus denying her the satisfaction of getting to rescue
me.

As if things weren’t bad enough, at that very moment the school jumped
on the bandwagon, too: we all paused as we heard the grinding of the
obstacle-course machinery disengaging—the way it did at the end of each
week before the place reconstituted itself, only it was twice as loud when we
were all inside at the time—and then the entire floor beneath our feet lurched
and went pliable, open to reshaping.



We’re all on alert for anything like a potential advantage, so everyone
started grabbing for it immediately. Like the opening rounds of some strategy
game where everyone’s trying to establish their positions before they start
lobbing bombs. The green hills swelled and heaved like rolling waves as
everyone tried to re-form them into handy things like trenches and
fortifications. It felt like trying to surf a continental plate over the ocean with
nothing more to steer by than a horse bridle.

And as soon as I came up with that metaphor, I realized I only had one
possibly useful working: the one and only spell I’ve ever successfully written
by myself. It’s also the one and only spell I’ve ever tried to write, because
what I produced in that shining burst of creativity was a spell for setting off a
supervolcano. I burnt the parchment instantly afterwards, but the spell has
remained firmly lodged in my mental catalog along with all the other most
horrible spells I’ve ever seen.

I pulled mana in on one breath and spread my arms out on the exhale,
chanting the opening incantation. Two glowing ley lines branched out over
the floor to either side of me and began spiraling over the entire floor like the
arms of a galaxy, and everywhere they touched was abruptly and vividly in
my head, brought under the power of my incantation. Everyone else kept
trying to hold on to the small chunks they’d managed to control, but the spell
ruthlessly tore them away and gave them to me, until I’d got the entire gym
seething and shuddering in my mental grip.

And round then, the better incanters all began to realize where my spell
was very clearly going—namely straight for some kind of gigantic mass-
extinction-level eruption that would take out everyone in the room and quite
possibly all four floors directly overhead.

“What are you doing?” Magnus yelled at me in absolute panic—he was in
fact quite a good incanter—and there was a perfectly clear tipping moment
when everyone in the gym stopped worrying about the other side and started
worrying about me.

As well they should have, since I’d hit the end of the opening incantation,
and once I started into part two, there wouldn’t be any stopping it. I halted
with my whole body clenched up around the gathered power and flattened the



gym out with both my hands, so abruptly that half the kids fell over as hills
vanished from beneath them and trenches popped them up into the air.
Everyone still on their feet was backing away from me, eyes wide with horror,
and I snarled at all of them universally, “Stop it. Just stop. If I wanted you
dead, if I wanted any of you dead, you’d be dead! Rú guǒ wǒ xiăng nǐ sǐ, nǐ men sǐ dìng

le!” I translated, in my flabby Chinese.
Which was so patently true under the circumstances—since I was having

to work extremely hard to not kill them all—that it made a visible impression
all round. Well, as much as it could while everyone was actively terrified that I
was in fact about to kill them all. At least they had certainly stopped worrying
about doing any killing of their own. Even Orion had got over being enraged
and was just standing gawking at me—in an infuriatingly starry-eyed way, in
his case, demonstrating his continuing total lack of judgment and sense.

When I was satisfied that everyone had stopped, I let my control over our
alarmingly malleable surroundings slide slowly out of my hands, hills and
valleys lurching themselves back into place, trees unfolding up from the
ground in an unnatural fashion as they crept back into the illusion. Untangling
from the spell took me nearly fifteen minutes, but absolutely no one did
anything to interrupt or distract me; a few kids even went to the gym doors to
stop anyone else coming in. I was shaking when I’d finished, nauseated. I’d
have liked to go lie down in a dark room for a significant amount of time, but
I gulped air and grated out, “What I want is to get you out. To get all of us
out. Do you think you could pull your heads out of your collective arses and
help?”

OceanofPDF.com



O n Thursday, four hundred kids showed up for the Chinese run.
Afterwards Orion and I dragged ourselves into the library and each

crawled onto one of the couches and lay there letting everyone else do the
postmortem over our heads. I felt like a sheet of kitchen roll that had been
used more than once and wrung out thoroughly in between.

It wasn’t just the larger number: most of the new kids hadn’t learned any
of our completely unfamiliar strategies, and apart from that, the obstacle
course bloody works. So skipping it for seven weeks had put them
substantially behind the rest of us. The only reason there hadn’t been a metric
shedload of deaths today was because I had cheated in pure desperation by
using Alfie’s evocation to toss bunches of students and mals together out of



the obstacle course into the other half of the gym. The mals had then
dissolved, as they were just fake constructs. The mals in the graduation hall
were not going to dissolve conveniently of their own accord, so it wasn’t going
to be a helpful maneuver in the actual event. But I’d had to do something just
to get everyone out of practice alive.

I wasn’t paying much attention to the discussion, since everyone agreed
the main point was that the new cohort all had to catch up, which was fairly
obvious. Yuyan—she’d joined the planning team—suggested letting them run
every day for the next two weeks and giving everyone else—except for me
and Orion, obviously—more time off. Everyone agreed on this, and then
Aadhya said thoughtfully, “Actually, we probably want to have everyone from
the Spanish and Hindi runs join up with either English or Chinese anyway
pretty soon. We want to start doing five-hundred-person runs—in a month!”
she added, when she noticed I’d craned my head up from the couch in
outrage.

I put my head down again, briefly mollified, but Liesel gave a loud
exasperated sigh, too pointed to miss. I glared at the patched threadbare
upholstery just past my nose and gritted out, “Next week for English. The
week after that for Chinese.” Orion groaned faintly on the couch
perpendicular to mine, but he didn’t argue. We were already looking April in
the face. Less than three months left.

I’m not going to claim that I enjoyed the next week, but by Wednesday,
the Chinese run was in spitting distance of survivable, and after Friday’s run,
Zixuan approached Liu and Aadhya and offered to use his reviser to improve
the sirenspider lute. They spent the whole evening in the workshop together,
and on Saturday, when Liu struck the first chords and I sang the spell, the
mana-amplification wave rolled out over the entire mass of kids and gonged
against the gym walls and came back for a second pass that quadrupled the
power of everyone’s workings. I didn’t have to cheat once; I wasn’t even
exhausted at the end.

“He didn’t make you give it to him?” I muttered to Liu afterwards:
everyone was clustered round Zixuan gushing congratulations. I’d just
incinerated an entire anima-locust swarm so large that it had blotted out all of



the hideously blue sky: they just kept spawning afresh so I had to literally
keep a hurricane-sized psychic storm burning over everyone’s heads the entire
fifteen minutes of the run, but I was old hat at that by now. Or possibly the
storm had been so disturbing that everyone was blocking it aggressively out of
their memories; one or the other.

Liu and Aad had already talked over the lute and agreed that Liu’s family
would pay Aadhya for it, assuming Liu and it got out. The deal would
establish Aadhya’s going rate as an artificer and give her a big chunk of seed
resources to start a workshop with, and Liu’s extended clan would have a lot
more use for the lute than just Aad and her family. But usually the cost for
revising some piece of artifice is three-quarters the value of the result. Zixuan
had every right to consider himself majority owner at this point, and since he
was a Shanghai enclaver, he could probably buy Liu out a lot easier than she
could buy him out.

I was just asking, I didn’t mean anything by it, except to wonder if there
were some angle involved. Of course the upgrade was clearly in everyone’s
interest, but someone was going to get the lute after, so it would have struck
me as odd if there hadn’t been any negotiation on the subject. But Liu turned
very red and then compounded the effect by putting her hands over her
cheeks as if trying to squish the red out of them, which certainly wasn’t
effective if her goal was to stop me gawking at her.

“He asked to come meet my family after we get out,” she said, in a
choked, stifled voice. I didn’t gawk any less; that was quite the declaration. It’s
not that enclavers—or people as close to becoming enclavers as Liu’s family
—all officially arrange dating and marriages or anything, but there’s often
some family involvement. All of the wizards in her parents’ generation and the
two before had been working themselves to the bone to get the resources to
buy the enclave-building spells. And not for a poky old-fashioned little
Golden Enclave like the ones out of my sutras, either: they were getting ready
to put up towers in the void, another modern star in the Chinese constellation.
Once they put together a package with the last of the core spells, they’d take
bids from the independent wizards in various Chinese cities. They’d pick the
city whose wizards put together the biggest offer, and the mana and resources



they provided would get the new enclave put up. The wizards who’d
contributed the most would get to move in straightaway; the rest would get in
over the next decade or two as the foundations settled and the place
expanded.

Liu had been born into that project, and she was expected and expecting
to contribute. And anyone she so much as dated was absolutely going to be
evaluated as a potential part of it, too. Her family might not be planning to
get actively involved with the process, but they’d certainly be pleased if she
brought home an impressive candidate. Which an artificer from Shanghai
who was already good enough to whip up a reviser in school certainly would
be.

“So is that…good?” I prompted.
Liu stared at me with a half-bewildered expression, as if she didn’t know

what it was, then looked over at him and then back. “He’s—he’s nice? And
he’s very cute?” as if she were asking me. She’d never had a crush that I knew
of; I suspect she’d considered it as much a long-shot as I had, all those years
she was on the maleficer track. Maleficer relationships tend to go Bonnie-and-
Clyde or Frankenstein-and-Igor: not very appealing. So now she was opening
a newly delivered box and peeking under the lid for the first time.

“I see,” I said, solemnly, so obviously I stuck round until the very end. I
felt it was my job as her friend to observe closely and also my chance to
revenge a lot of giggling at my expense.

Liu might not have been sure about Zixuan, but she was definitely sure
that I should go away and stop making her squirm and kept whispering that I
could leave. I kept pretending not to understand her while the crowd very
slowly ebbed away from round Zixuan, until he managed to politely detach
from the last few hangers-on, at which point I casually edged back from Liu
but not so far away I couldn’t hear as he came over and asked her to walk to
the library with him.

Liu did turn to me and ask, “El, are you coming?”
“You go ahead,” I told her, and beamed at her as obnoxiously as I could.

She turned red again and made a quick face at me, then smoothed herself
down to calm dignity before she turned back to him. I was smiling the whole



time as I watched them walk away; it was just—so normal, an ordinary
fumbling towards a future outside this horrible place.

I suppose you could say the same of my own complicated dating situation,
but it felt a lot more uncertain and dramatic and fraught when I was the one
inside it, not to mention more impractical, seeing as me dragging Orion off to
join a quixotic project of building tiny enclaves round the world was a lot less
likely to be acceptable to his family. This was a happy ordinary human thing I
could actually enjoy, and it felt like the perfect period to that magical run.

For the first time, I almost felt that I could even let myself believe in the
plan—so much that when they’d gone out of sight, I gave a huff of laughter
out loud and turned back to the gym doors and said exultantly, “Still think
you’re going to stop me? You’re not. I am getting them out. I’m getting them
all out, and nothing you do is going to make me leave any of them behind.
You’re not going to get a single one of them. I’m going to beat you, I’m going
to win, do you hear me?”

“Who are you talking to?” Sudarat asked.
She gave me a bad start, which I entirely deserved since I’d been so

enthusiastic about my stupid ranting that I hadn’t noticed her, and when I’d
calmed down my racing heart and shoved down the sixteen different killing
spells that had instantly leapt to mind, I said with an attempt at being cool and
collected, “Nothing, I was only thinking out loud. What are you doing down
here?”

Then I looked at the little bundle she was carrying with the end of a loaf
of bread poking out of it, and realized, appalled, that she was of Orion’s
mindset about picnics in the gym. “You’ve got to be joking,” I said, revolted.
“Didn’t I yell enough? You’re only going to mess your own head about, if you
don’t get yourself killed. You’ve been in here long enough by now, you
must’ve started to understand. It’s not the real thing.”

She just stood there and took the lecture, small with her shoulders
hunched forward, gripping the handle of her little carrysack with both hands,
and then she said softly, “My mother used to tell me for a graduation present
she would take me to see the cherry blossom festival in Kyoto. But I will
never see it now.”



I stopped talking, stopped breathing more or less. She paused, but when I
didn’t say anything else, she said, “In my school—in the enclave—they taught
us how to pick out the smart kids, the good ones, the best ones to help us. So
I know what the good ones are like. And I’m not very good. And nobody
wants to be my friend. The enclave kids are all afraid. They don’t know what
happened in Bangkok. And I don’t know, either. Everyone thinks I’m lying,
but I don’t. I took my grandmother’s dog out for a walk and then we came
back and the door—the door to the enclave didn’t work anymore. It was just
a door to an empty apartment. And everyone was gone.” She swallowed
visibly. “My auntie was working in Shanghai, she came home and took care
of me. She gave me everything she could spare. But it isn’t enough to save
someone who isn’t very good, that nobody likes. I know it’s not.”

She stopped. I still couldn’t manage a word. After a moment I suppose she
got tired of hanging about in the corridor with a mute statue, and she went
politely past me and pushed the doors open. She went a decent way in: not so
far that she didn’t have several good escape routes, but far enough that she
was clear of the area round the doors. She settled herself at the base of a tree
putting on an immense display, dark boughs sagging with bloom, and took a
small box of strawberries out of her bag, which she must have wasted gobs of
mana enchanting out of some dingy fruit from the cafeteria. She sat there
eating them and reading a book, making a picture straight out of the
freshman orientation handbook, with tiny petals drifting across the scene like
pink snow. Living as much as she could, because she wasn’t going to get
much more of a chance.

The doors swung shut over the scene, wafting a sweet fragrance into my
face as they banged shut, and I said to them stupidly, “No,” which obviously
helped loads, and then I just laughed out loud at myself, high-pitched and
jeering. “God, I’m stupid, I’m so stupid, I can’t believe,” and I couldn’t go on.
I put my hands over my face and sobbed a couple of times, and then I lifted
my face and screamed at the doors, at the school, “Why did you even try to
stop me? Why bother? There’s no use. There’s never been any use at all.”

Like an answer, there was an immense crash of glass and cracking wood
behind me. I whipped round instantly. I’d been training for my Olympic-class



event in uselessness so hard, so earnestly, that it wasn’t a voluntary reaction;
I’d programmed my muscles so they could skip past my brain and just get on
with it, with saving all those lives, all one thousand of those fantastically
insignificant lives, so I whirled and my hands came up in casting position and
the adrenaline was already flowing like a smooth-running river in my
bloodstream before I even saw that the crash was just one of the heavy
framed blueprints off the corridor wall that had come down behind me, a
glitter of shards sprayed all round and the frame broken into kindling sticks,
pale where the dusty gilt-slathered wood had splintered apart.

I dropped my hands as soon as conscious thought was involved in keeping
them up, gulping for breath between the sobs and the instinctive alarm. “So
why shouldn’t I just give up after all—is that what you’re trying to say?” I
said, just a girl talking to myself in the hallway, a stupid girl pretending she
was a hero because she was going to save a thousand kids before she then
went skipping merrily through the gates, leaving behind—what were the
numbers? Twelve hundred kids dead out of every year, and it’s been 140
years, which worked out to a number I couldn’t fix even if I stayed behind to
guard the gates for my entire life. However many ticking minutes I had left,
I’d still only ever be a girl with her finger stuck into a hole in the dike, and
whenever I finally fell down, here the torrent would come.

“Is that what you wanted me to learn?” I said savagely to the pale blank
square on the metal wall where the frame had been, a window through the
grime of a century and more. “You should’ve done it quicker. At this point, I
might as well save everyone as not,” and then I looked down, and the crashed
frame wasn’t a blueprint. It was the front page from the May 10, 1880, issue
of The London Whisper, dominated by a large photograph of a gaggle of men
in Victorian suits, a grandly mustachioed blond one out in front with his arms
cocked out from his hips and a self-congratulatory air. There were copies of
that all over the building, too. For years I’d been reading it without paying
attention, in droning history lectures and the cafeteria queue, the way you
read the back of cereal boxes while you’re eating because you haven’t
anything else to do with your eyes.



But now I picked it up and looked at it properly. The men were standing in
a small and familiar wood-paneled room, lined with bookcases and full of
small heavy cast-iron chairs with wooden desks, and at the very edge of the
photograph a thick scroll covered with signatures was lying upon a massive
roll-top wooden desk. It was my own special classroom, up at the very top of
the school.

The article said, The final Scholomance binding spells were successfully
laid today through what must be considered the most extraordinary circle
working ever conceived by the mind of man, with fully twenty-one
representatives of the foremost enclaves of the world, uniting their wills and the
marshaled resources of all their several domains under the visionary
leadership of Sir Alfred Cooper Browning of Manchester, for the singular goal
of establishing an institution beyond all quarrels and disputes, whose
fundamental purpose shall be to offer sanctuary and protection to all the wise-
gifted children of the world.

I read it again and again, until I couldn’t possibly avoid understanding it
anymore. I knew all the words already, of course; I could probably have
recited it from memory. The same photo was literally in the freshman
orientation handbook they sent us before we came in, the exact same self-
aggrandizing article was on the wall in a dozen of my classrooms and in the
history textbooks. The words are even engraved on the stairway railings and
the upper molding of the library reading room, those precise words: to offer
sanctuary and protection to all the wise-gifted children of the world, only
absolutely nobody ever took them seriously. Even Sir Alfred Cooper
Browning and all his fellow smug waistcoats didn’t believe their own nonsense
at the time. They didn’t let in any children from outside their enclaves until
they had to, and when they did have to, they did everything they could think
of to give their own every possible advantage, and certainly not a single
student ever got through a single day in here believing them. No one thought
it was true.

Except, apparently, the Scholomance itself. And fair enough: twenty-one
of the most powerful wizards in the world had made a circle and forced the
words into the very bones of the place—the words they’d wrangled among



themselves into a warm mealymouthed lie they could all agree to tell together.
They built the Scholomance and told it very firmly that its fundamental
purpose was to offer sanctuary and protection to all the wise-gifted children of
the world.

And perhaps the school hasn’t been able to do that very successfully, but
apparently it still wanted to be—something besides a lesser evil.

I can’t pretend that I completely understood at first; quite the opposite. I
got the first vague inkling of the idea and then dropped the article back onto
the heap of broken frame and walked away down the corridor. I was moving
aimlessly, a cloudy blob of static from ear to ear, and anything at all could
have killed me. But nothing came at me, even though I kept wandering along.
I couldn’t have told you where I was, until the door I was passing slammed
open, loudly, and I saw it was the corridor going to my delightful private
seminar room, the one where I’d been attacked relentlessly the first two
months of the year.

Which suddenly took on a very different light. I stopped and stared down
the passage. The school hadn’t been trying to kill me, and it hadn’t been
trying to make me go maleficer. It didn’t want me to suck everyone dry and
fly out to darken the earth. So what did it want from me?

I went down to the room. The door was waiting open. I paused at the
threshold looking inside, and with a bang, one of the outer wall panels next to
the sink literally fell in, exposing a narrow shaft with a ladder, tucked into the
wall. I knew what it was: I’d been inside it at the end of last year, for another
one of the delightfully unique school experiences I hoped never to relive. It
was the maintenance shaft that went down to the graduation hall.

The message was extremely clear. My head wasn’t, which is why I didn’t
think as hard as I probably ought to have before I went and got on the ladder
and started climbing down, in the dark. But I didn’t even hear any sounds of
maleficaria, no scuttling or rasping or hisses or breath; only the gurgles and
bangs of the school itself, the vast conglomeration of artifice running on,
steadily pumping air and water and cafeteria slop and wastes all round, the
low burring hum of mana being channeled into the wards. The climb didn’t
take very long: the school wanted me to get there quickly, and my brain was



so empty that it didn’t insist on the climb taking a rational amount of time. It
felt like only a few minutes, and then I was climbing down off the ladder into
the skinny maintenance chamber at the bottom, the place from which we’d
sallied forth on our grand mission to repair the cleansing machinery.

I made a light. It shone onto the blank, curved metal wall—dented a bit
from the outside, as if the mals had beaten on it trying to get through after
we’d made our yanked escape. The graduation hall was on the other side,
along with whatever the school had been preparing us all—preparing me—to
deal with. This whole term, all the endless outrageously horrible unsurvivable
runs, pushing and pushing and pushing all of us to find completely new
strategies, to learn to work as a single enormous alliance, to defeat—whatever
was on the other side. That’s what we had to overcome.

And apparently, it was time for me to face it. I didn’t have a maintenance
hatch with me, but one of the metal wall panels just popped itself open, rivets
pinging out of the seam and onto the floor one after another. I just stood
there and watched. The two panels of the wall fell open with an enormous
clanging, one towards me and one away.

Nothing came through the opening.
It wasn’t especially shocking; I’d understood by then. I knew what was on

the other side waiting, and they weren’t going to bother coming after one
measly student. I’d known all along what it was going to be, really, no matter
how hard I’d pretended I didn’t. It wasn’t going to be evil glaciers, or an
anima-locust swarm, or a castigator demon. The school had been treating me
gently, with kid gloves, bringing me along little by little, but time was running
out now, and I had to face it, so I could be ready on graduation day. I’d
promised, after all. I’d promised Khamis, and Aadhya, and Liu, and Chloe,
and everyone in the entire school.

I couldn’t make myself step through. Even if it was safe right now, in
some ridiculous sense of the word, I didn’t want to go look. I didn’t want to
have to go back upstairs and tell everyone what we were up against. I didn’t
want to spend the next three months thinking about them every single day,
making plans, discussing strategies for me to relive the most horrible thing
that had ever happened to me. I wanted to huddle into a ball against the back



of the chamber. I wanted to sob for Mum, for Orion, for anyone at all to save
me, and there wasn’t anyone. There was only me. And them. Patience and
Fortitude, waiting by the gates, so hungry that they’d licked the entire
graduation hall clean.

I knew I had to go look at them, so I couldn’t go back up the ladder—if
the school would even have let me run away—but I couldn’t move forward,
either. I stayed down there for a very long time. I think it had been close to an
hour when there was a small anxious chirp from the shaft, and Precious
poked her tiny nose out, clinging to the last rung of the ladder.

I put my hands up to get her, and I cupped her in my hands and put her
against my cheek, and my whole face crumpled like discarded classwork and
I just sobbed a few times, getting her fur wet with leaking tears. She just
poked at me with her nose and put up with it. When I managed to get myself
under control, she climbed onto my shoulder, tucked behind my ear, and
made soft small encouraging squeaks. I took a deep breath in through my
nose and made myself go out into the hall before I could lock up again.

The hall wasn’t completely empty: a family of mature agglos, their tidy
shells glittering with mana-infused jewels, bits of glowing artifice, and tiny
jars and vials of potions and unguents, had been sleeping peacefully against
the far wall, near the cleansing machinery we’d repaired last year. They all
woke up at the sound of my footsteps and started humping away into dark
corners at top speed, which in the case of adult agglos is about a quarter mile
per hour.

The floor was crunchy with amphisbaena scales and the dried-up moltings
of juvenile digesters, none bigger than a handkerchief. None of them were
actually in sight. The ceiling had faint dark lines patterned across it, the
ghosts of the century-old sirenspider webs that had been incinerated in the
cleansing. The only things left of the sirenspiders themselves were a few hard
melted lumps stuck to the ceiling among them, the stubs of legs poking out in
a few places. There was nothing left of other mals at all except a few
droppings and skeletons; a few construct mals had collapsed in mechanical
heaps here and there, out of mana. A few more scuttling larval things ran



away from me, so small I couldn’t even identify them, as I clenched both my
hands tight and turned myself bodily to face the gates.

“But,” I said, after a moment, out loud. I stood there stupidly until
Precious gave me a nudge, and then I walked across the whole graduation
hall, directly up to the massive double doors, the gates to the school. There
were two enormous scorch marks on the floor to either side, blackened
outlines where the maw-mouths had been, like a police tape to show the
position of a removed corpse. The marks had ripples: you could see the
mortal flame had burnt off a good few layers, although there had certainly
been plenty left of them afterwards.

I’d been half right. The cleansing had worked. Patience and Fortitude
hadn’t been killed, but they’d been burnt and blinded, probably thrashing
wildly, while the seniors ran out. They had missed their one annual meal.
Afterwards, they’d recovered and tried to fill their hollow bellies by devouring
all the rest of the surviving mals instead. But after they did that—when there
was nothing at all left for them to eat, they’d—gone.

I had no idea where. Had they hidden away somewhere inside the school?
They certainly hadn’t got into the main levels—we’d all have heard the
screaming. There’re pockets of dead space, many of them, in the hollow area
between the top of the graduation hall and the bottom of the workshop floor,
and those aren’t really warded, so they could have crawled in there, but they
still wouldn’t have had anything to eat. Maw-mouths don’t generally hide,
anyway. Had they left entirely? They could have; the wards stop maleficaria
from coming in, not going out, and if Patience and Fortitude had gone off to
roam the world and trouble enclaves for their suppers, we wouldn’t hear about
it until after we got out ourselves.

Which we’d apparently be able to do with no trouble at all. None of us
needed a day’s practice, not a single run. We could stroll right out.

I stared up at the enormous doors, cast from solid bronze. There were
diagrams and paintings of them scattered all round, like the blueprints, all a
bit different from one another. But I can’t imagine anyone had actually spent
as much as a millisecond looking at them since the day the school first
opened to students. A massive seal in the middle was engraved with the



school motto In Sapienta Umbraculum—In Wisdom, Shelter—and nested
circles round the seal were engraved with a warding spell that had been
layered through languages: so the same spell in English and Middle English
and Old English, one after another, all going round in a ring. It wasn’t just
English, either; there were rings of the same spell in dozens of languages, and
all the ones I knew well enough to recognize had multiple versions, too—
there was modern Arabic and medieval, modern French and Old French and
Latin.

Translating a spell and actually getting a spell on the other end is almost
impossible; it had probably taken a genius poet or a team of twelve for every
version of every language, and only possible at all because they weren’t very
complex spells: all the ones I could make out without a dictionary were just
one or two lines and a variation on Don’t let anything evil through these doors.
The English inscription was Malice, keep far, this gate wisdom’s shelter
guards, tied to the motto, obviously not a coincidence; some version of the
phrase was there in all the other languages I knew.

And they weren’t just an inscription. The letters had been engraved all the
way through the top layer of bronze, and some kind of illuminated alchemical
substance was being piped through behind them so the light shone out
through. They weren’t just glowing steadily, either: the light moved through
each inscription, at the speed and rhythm you’d have used to speak each spell.
It was effectively casting the incantations over and over again, renewing them
steadily. And the separate spells were even synchronized somehow—I
couldn’t follow it exactly, but I could tell that several of them started or ended
at the same time, new ones began as previous ones went out. Like a massive
choral piece with a few dozen separate lines of music going at once.

It mesmerized me; I could almost hear the spells going, and then I realized
I really was hearing them: there were bands of tiny perforations in the metal,
what I’d thought were just decorative dots, and when I leaned close and
peeked I could see there was a bit of artifice behind them that opened and
closed each hole individually. And when one of them opened, a puff of air
came through with a sound like a single letter or syllable, breathed out, and
each sound matched one of the characters being lit up at the time. I could



barely hear the whisper over the faint metronome ticking of the machinery
that was controlling the vents, the shushing and gurgle of the liquid being
pumped through, but they were there.

I’d never seen anything like it before, even inside the school. I know from
much droning in our history lessons that Sir Alfred had talked the other
major enclaves into building the school in stages—the expense of the thing
was as ruinous as you might imagine. He initially proposed just building an
ordinary enclave for kids to live in, just with these really powerful doors.
After the doors were built, that’s when he showed everyone the rest of his
even more elaborate plans, and supposedly they looked at the doors and
signed on for the rest. Standing here, I wasn’t surprised. I’d spent nearly four
years living inside the school, nearly dying over and over, and I still almost
believed it, believed that these doors would keep out all evil, keep out the
monsters and keep us all safe.

And obviously they had, more or less. I couldn’t even imagine how many
maleficaria would have been coming at us without them. The Scholomance
was a honeypot, the most alluring honeypot you could imagine: all the most
tender, mana-plumpest wizard children in the world gathered in a single
place. Any mal that so much as gets a whiff of this place would try to get in.
And some of them would make it, even with the doors. Every once in a while,
a letter didn’t light up, a puff of air didn’t make it through; there were surely a
few places in the massive composition that were a little weaker, where the
spells didn’t quite sound right at the same time, making cracks in the warding
where a really determined mal could make an effort and wriggle through, like
poking a loose brick out of the fortress wall. More than enough had made it
through, even in the first few years, to make this hall into a slaughterhouse.
The doors weren’t impenetrable.

But they were close. So after the mortal flame had actually worked last
year—and after Patience and Fortitude had eaten their way through
everything else—and after Orion had done for every mal that had dared to
poke its nose into the classroom levels—the whole room had been cleared.
For one shining moment, our one unbelievably lucky year, we’d be able to



come down here and walk straight to safety, the first class in the history of the
Scholomance to make it through graduation without a single death.

And then—the mals would all come back. Every single portal that opened
up to send one of us home would make an opening in the wards; two or three
mals would squirm through for every one of us that left. More of them would
tag along later that day with the newly inducted freshmen. Psychic mals
would follow a parent’s worried dream of their child; the eldritch and gaseous
mals would float up through the ventilation shafts, and the amorphous ones
would pour themselves through the plumbing.

And sooner or later, if Patience or Fortitude didn’t come back, a new
maw-mouth would ooze in through one of those openings and settle into
pride of place by the gates. The cleansing would break again. The death rate
would likely be back to normal by the time the current freshmen were
graduating, or at best a year or two later. Sudarat and Zheng and my other
freshmen wouldn’t get a free ride. That boy from Manchester, Aaron, who’d
brought me my tiny scrap of a note from Mum, for nothing. All the kids I
barely knew or didn’t know or had never met or who hadn’t been born yet.

That’s what the school had been working me up towards, all this time.
Luring me onwards with one crumb of power after another to teach me that it
wasn’t useless for me to care, that I could let myself care about my friends,
and about their allies, and then even about everyone in my year, and once it
had got me over that hump, now it was showing me that I didn’t need to
worry about any of them after all, so surely now I had the spare capacity to
care about—everyone else.

“But what do you want me to do?” I said, staring up at the doors. Surely
the Scholomance didn’t want to save one year’s worth of kids, or even four
years’. The school had already chewed up a hundred thousand children during
its relentless triage operation. No human who cared enough to try could have
stood it. But the school wasn’t human, wasn’t soft. It didn’t love us. It just
wanted to do its job properly, and here we were, dying all the time on its
watch, inexorably, three-quarters of every class lost. It wanted us to take this
wide-open shining window of opportunity and—“Fix you?” It was the only



thing I could think of, but it didn’t actually provide any direction. I looked
round the empty killing field: even the bones had been cleared away. “How?”

No answer came. I didn’t get any more helpful guidance, except from
Precious, who gave a chirp and prodded me with her nose, wanting to go
back. “I don’t understand!” I yelled at the doors. They went on placidly
ticking away: the work of an army of geniuses with all the time and mana in
the world at their fingertips, trying to build the safest and most clever school
in the world for their children, and that hadn’t been good enough, so what did
the Scholomance expect me to do?

Precious gave another squeak, vaguely exasperated, and poked me again. I
thumped the left door resentfully with my fist, and then wished I hadn’t: it
moved a little. Not really, not actually enough to go ajar or anything, it just
trembled, barely, under my fist, enough that I could tell that if I braced myself
on something and put my back and legs into it, I could have opened it. It
wasn’t held shut from this side. The outer edges of the gates were stained with
green and black mold, and the puffs of air coming in were coming in from
outside. This was the one place where the school wasn’t just floating in the
void. The real world was there, right there on the other side. If I pushed the
doors open, I could walk out, into whatever secret hidden place the enclaves
had chosen as the anchor point, and that would be a real place, somewhere on
the Earth, with a GPS location and everything, and surely I could find
someone in a day’s walk with a mobile who’d let me ring the main line of the
commune and talk to Mum.

It would be an absolutely stupid thing to do, because I wouldn’t have
graduated—we don’t march through the doors to get in, since if you turned
the physical doors into a single point of entry, all the mals in the world would
eventually be massed round it, and not a single freshman would survive the
gauntlet long enough to get inside. My vague understanding of the induction
spell is that we’re borrowed into here with the same kind of spells that
enclaves use to borrow space from the real world, and when we go through
the gates, what actually happens is we’re being paid back with interest,
through a portal that sends us right back where we were taken from in the first
place. If I hopped out the doors into the real world instead of going back out



through the proper portal, I’d more or less be making off without paying the
debt. I have no idea what the consequences would be, but they were bound to
be unpleasant.

But I could do it. It was the opposite of everything that was unbearably
horrible about the gym. The other side of the doors was undoubtedly deep
underground in some unpleasant and probably dangerously spiky place to
discourage both mals and mundanes from coming near; the smell coming
through had the thick mucky stink of a stagnant sewer—an entirely likely
location—and absolutely none of that mattered because it would be real, it
would be outside, and I wanted to go so badly that I turned round and ran
back to the maintenance shaft without letting myself look round even one
more time.

The climb up was not abbreviated. It felt more as if I were paying back the
speed from the earlier climb. But Precious was along with me, a warm lump
on my shoulder, or scampering up a few rungs ahead of me, her white fur
bright even in the dim light I’d cast on my hands. I finally crawled out of the
shaft and lay flat on the floor in the seminar room with my arms and legs
starfished out round me, too tired to groan more than faintly. She sat on my
chest washing her whiskers fastidiously and keeping an eye out, if that was
even necessary. The school was obviously looking out for me really hard. It
had only sent just the right level of mals to make me swallow the indigestible
lump of my pride and take mana from Chloe. If it hadn’t gone after me,
Aadhya and Liu and I would’ve spent this year working so hard to build a
decent pot of mana that I certainly wouldn’t have had the time and energy—
much less the mana—to imagine saving anyone else. And no one else
would’ve listened to me even if I had.

I stared up at the stained ceiling overhead as that thought sank in, and with
an effort lifted my still-leaden arm with the power-sharer up in front of my
eyes. I’d got so used to it by now I didn’t think about it anymore. But I had
been pulling oceans of mana with every run, even at the discounted gym
levels. Magnus and the other New York kids had probably gone round to the
other enclaves at some point and demanded that they share the burden—
implying that I’d kick them out of the runs if they didn’t.



No one would have listened to me if I’d gone to them with a crazy plan to
get us all out together. The school had made them listen, had made them all
come to me, by laying out one unsurvivable run after another. It had forced
everyone to give me those oceans of mana, to put their lives into my hands.
None of them had wanted to do that. So the moment I told everyone that
there was nothing down there at all, that we could sail right out—

“Mu-uum,” I groaned faintly, as if she were there for me to argue with
violently, but she was only inside my head, looking at me with all the
desperate worry in the world furrowing her face. Keep away from Orion Lake.
Was this what she’d seen? Had she caught some glimpse of what it would
mean to stack me and Orion up together in a single year, and what I’d have to
do in order to pay it off? Because of course I wouldn’t be able to do a thing if
everyone took back their mana. But if I took their mana with a lie—it
wouldn’t be freely given, after all.

Which wouldn’t hurt me in any obvious way, not the way outright
maleficers get hurt. If Prasong’s little freshman-flaying scheme had worked,
his anima would’ve been scarred so badly he’d probably never have been able
to build mana of his own again even if he’d spent the rest of his life trying to
atone and purify himself. That wouldn’t happen to me; I wouldn’t even get
black nails and a faint cloud of disquiet, like Liu had, punishment for
sacrificing a couple of defenseless mice to survive on. Maleficers got that kind
of damage because they were yanking mana out of something that was
actively fighting them, resisting them. That’s what turned it into malia. But
when you got someone to hand you their mana—it didn’t hurt. You could
trick someone, pressure them, lie to them, all you wanted. It wasn’t going to
damage you in any way that anyone else would ever see.

Which is why that’s what enclavers did. And then they pretended it wasn’t
malia, but it was. There’s a long distance between cheating someone out of a
scrap of mana they didn’t urgently need, and turning into a slavering
murderous vampire who couldn’t do anything decent ever again, but it’s all on
the same road. Mum taught me that, spent her whole life teaching me that,
and it had taken a while, but the lesson had stuck.



I knew what she’d say to the idea of doing it for someone’s own good,
much less for the sake of future generations. I was only alive because she
would never make that bargain. She’d been told flat-out that I was going to be
a monstrous killing scourge by people who hadn’t been lying to her, and she
hadn’t refused to hand me over because she didn’t believe them. She hadn’t
even refused because she loved me: if that had been the only reason, she’d
have taken me to live in an enclave when I was nine years old and mals
started to come for me, almost five years ahead of schedule. She hadn’t done
that either. She’d only refused because she wouldn’t take the first wrong step.

So maybe this was what she’d seen. Me with a beautiful gold-paved road
Orion had laid out in front of me, with all the best intentions in the world,
while never doing a wrong thing himself. But if I took my first wrong step
onto it, who knew how far I’d go? No one could stop me flying down it at top
speed, once I got started.

I sat up slowly. Precious scrambled up onto my knees as I folded myself
up and twitched her nose at me anxiously. “Well,” I said to her, “let’s go and
see.”

I put her into her cup and slogged up to the library. Half the reading room
had more or less been turned into a war room. Everyone else from our half-
official planning committee was up there: lunch had finished and Liu and
Zixuan were telling them all about the upgraded effects of the lute, with
pleased and happy—and massively relieved—faces all round. Orion was
snoozing on a couch with his mouth hanging open and one arm dangling off
limp.

“El!” Aadhya said, when I walked in. “You missed lunch, are you okay?”
Liesel didn’t wait for me to answer, just gave a quick exasperated flick of

her eyes as if to say You were skiving off, weren’t you, and said to me sternly,
“We have more work to do now, not less. We still do not know how far the
lute will reach. It may be able to amplify everyone’s mana, but to find out, we
must make an attempt at a full run sooner rather than later.”

“No,” I said. “We don’t need to do any more runs.” Everyone stopped and
stared at me—most of them with absolute terror on their faces; I suppose
they thought aha, it was time for the curtain to pull back from the monster or



something. One girl from Mumbai enclave who I suspected had joined the
planning committee to keep an eye on me even started doing a shielding spell.
“Not like that,” I said crossly to her, and let the irritation help me say it. “I’ve
just been down to the graduation hall. There’s nothing there.”

She paused with her hands in midair. Everyone else just gawked at me in
total confusion. They’d probably have felt more sure of themselves if I had
given out a maniacal cackle and told them to run for their lives.

Aadhya said tentatively, “So it’s just Patience and Fortitude…?”
“No,” I said. “They’re gone, too. There’s nothing at all. The whole place is

cleared out.”
“What?” Orion had sat up and was staring at me. He sounded actually

dismayed, which was a bit much, and got most people to look at him sidelong
—and then actually take the idea into their own heads, to think about what it
would mean, if there literally wasn’t anything—

“Are you sure?” Liesel demanded peremptorily. “How did you go down?
How close did you—”

“I kicked the bloody doors, Liesel; I’m sure. Anyone who doesn’t care to
take my word for it can go down themselves for the price of a ladder climb,” I
said. “The shaft’s in my seminar room, other side of the north wall of the
workshop. The school just popped it wide open and sent me down there to
see.”

That got variations on “What?” coming out of roughly thirty mouths, and
then Chloe said, “The school sent you? Why did it—but it’s been making the
runs this hard, it’s been making us do all this—”

A sudden roaring of wind blew through the room, the ordinarily
murmuring ventilation fans suddenly starting up loud as jet engines, and the
blueprints spread out on the table—the big central table, the largest one in the
reading room—all went flying off in every direction along with the sketches
and plans in a gigantic blizzard of paper, to expose the silver letters inlaid into
the old scarred wood: to offer sanctuary and protection to all the wise-
gifted children of the world, and at the same time all the lights in the
reading room dropped to nothing except for four angled lamps that swiveled



to hit the letters with broad beams that made them shine out as if they’d been
lit up from inside.

Everyone was silent, staring down at the message the school had given me,
given us all. “It wants to do a better job,” I said. “It wants us to help. And
before you ask, I don’t know how. I don’t think it knows how. But I’m going
to try.” I looked up at Aadhya, and she was staring back at me still stunned,
but I said straight to her, “Please help me,” and she gave a snort-gasp kind of
a laugh and said, “Holy shit, El,” and then she sank down in a chair like her
knees had given out.

OceanofPDF.com



I don’t think anyone really knew what to do with themselves. We’ve all
spent the best part of four years training as hard as we could to be

inhumanly selfish in a way we could only possibly live with because all of us
were going round in fear for our lives—if not in the next five minutes then on
graduation day at the latest—and you could tell yourself everyone else was
doing the same and there wasn’t any other choice. The Scholomance had
encouraged it if anything. Everyone-for-themselves worked well enough to
get 25 percent of the students out through the unending horde: I suppose up
until now that had been the school’s best option. And yes, it now very clearly
meant for us to start collaborating instead, but a large building might not
understand that human beings have a bit more difficulty shifting their



mindset. I wouldn’t have been surprised if all the enclavers had pulled out
instantly. I wouldn’t have been surprised if literally everyone had pulled out
instantly. In fact I expected the library to empty out within two minutes of my
announcement, theatrics or no.

Then Orion said, “I could come back? Whenever it needed to be cleaned
out again?” He didn’t even make it sound appropriately martyr-like; just
threw the idea out there as if that were a perfectly reasonable option for us all
to consider. I glared at him, but it did have the effect of making a lot of other
people shuffle uncomfortably.

“Yeah,” Aadhya said. “Look, Orion, we all know you’re practically
invincible, but that’s not the same as totally invincible. If you keep hopping in
through the gates, sooner or later some mal will get lucky.”

“They haven’t yet,” he said, perfectly sincere.
“Eleven times, Lake,” I said through my teeth. “This year alone.”
“I would’ve had them!” Orion said.
We were both ready to pursue that line of discussion further, but Liesel

headed us off. “Don’t be stupid,” she said loudly. “And give us back some
decent light.” That was directed to the room at large, and the library lamps
instantly put themselves right again, as if they were as afraid as the rest of us
to refuse her marching orders. “We must help. Do you not understand?” She
slapped the letters. “The purpose of the school is to protect wizard children.
But if we are in no danger, we do not need protection. This obviously creates
a thaumaturgic flow towards protecting the other children.”

I felt that obviously was a strong and unjustifiable word in this context—
as, I suspect, did three-quarters of the people in the room—but Liesel wasn’t
pausing to take questions. “If we do not assist the school to help the younger
children, then the flow will create an incentive for the school to trade away
our extreme safety to improve theirs. For instance,” she added pointedly, in
response to the blank expressions all round, “it may begin to lock us out of
the cafeteria. Or turn off the plumbing in our bathrooms. Or if another maw-
mouth should enter the school, open the wards to direct it towards our
dormitory.”



We’d all got the point by then. I’m not sure it was any better if everyone
else was forced to help by the school instead of by me lying to them, but I
couldn’t help being grateful that everyone had a good reason to do it. It didn’t
feel as wrong as me lying them into it, anyway. It was fair, as much as
anything in the hideous bargain of the Scholomance is fair: if you had offered
any of us a deal at the beginning of the year, that we could just walk out of
the graduation hall at the price of going filthy and hungry for three months,
eating nothing but what we could beg or trade from the other kids, we’d have
taken it like a shot. You could fatten yourself back up as soon as you were
safe at home.

“Okay, so—” Aadhya said after a moment. “This is all because the
cleansing machinery worked. So we just need to find a way to keep it
working, for good.”

That did sound promising, but Alfie said, “Oh, bugger,” half under his
breath, and then said, “You can’t. The cleansing machinery can’t be
preserved. You can fix it, but you can’t keep it working. Four years is the
absolute most you can get. The agglos will do for it by then.”

“The agglos?” Aadhya said. We all think of agglos as party favors rather
than maleficaria. Technically, they do need mana and they can’t build it
themselves, but they never hurt anyone. They just creep around very slowly
and collect any stray bits of mana-infused creations that have been left out
and then tack them onto their outer carapaces, like oversized caddisflies.
We’d all be delighted to meet a fully grown one that’s been accumulating
scraps of artifice and alchemical products for a decade or so. Which is why
you never do meet agglos in the classroom levels, except the tiny larval ones.
But there are colonies of grown ones in the graduation hall, like the group I’d
seen. They hide until graduation is over, and after all the other mals are well
fed and snoring, they creep out and collect up all the tidy bits that got
dropped by the students who didn’t make it out.

Alfie ran a hand over his face. “They get through the outer shell and just
gnaw on the machinery until it breaks.”

“That doesn’t make any sense,” Aadhya said. She wasn’t by any means the
only artificer looking baffled. “Why don’t you throw a five-minute warding on



it? They’re just agglos!”
“That’s why you can’t ward them out,” Alfie said. “Mortal flame is—well,

it’s arguably an entity, and one that consumes mana that it doesn’t make itself.
If you want to conjure a mortal flame and send it out, you can’t ward the
artifice you’re doing it with against mana-consuming creatures. You have to
ward it against malice. But the agglos aren’t malicious. They never take mana
against resistance. They just nibble on this thing we’ve left sitting out near
them, and sooner or later they make a hole in it, and then they squirm inside
and take bits of it until the whole thing comes apart. London enclave’s got a
laboratory with an agglo farm that’s been looking for ways to keep them out
for the last century. If we could, it would be worth doing anything, spending
any amount of mana, to get another team in to do a real repair. But we can’t
find anything that works for longer than bloody wrapping the thing in tinfoil
—the agglos like that stuff so much they’ll eat all of it before they bother
going into the artifice. And that would get you four years.”

We stood around dumbly for some time after he finished. The cleansing
was so stuck in all our heads as the obvious thing to fix that even after Alfie’s
explanation, at least half a dozen people opened their mouths to suggest some
other way to do it, only none of them managed more than “What if…” before
they realized that whatever their clever notion was, the brightest minds of
London had already thought of and tried it at some point in the last hundred
years.

“What if we just fix it every year from now?” one of Aadhya’s
acquaintances from Atlanta said finally, the first one to make it past the
sticking point. “A crew could go down right after New Year’s, when the hall
is freshly cleaned, and,” picking up enthusiasm, “we could make it the same
deal as last year. Anyone who signs on for the fix gets a spot, enclave of their
choice. Right? People would go for it.”

He was absolutely right; some desperate kids would go for it, year after
year, losing a few each time but keeping the machinery tidy, until finally one
group went down only to discover that surprise! The machinery had finally
broken again before they could fix it, and there was a hungry crowd of
maleficaria waiting for them. I was about to put up a howl of protest, but



Alfie was already shaking his head, in weary exasperation. “They’ve thought
of that. Posting guards, sending in maintenance crews every month, all of it.
And that would handle the agglos. But you can’t pay anyone enough to do it,
because a new maw-mouth will come into the school, very soon. There’s a
trace on the doors. Usually one or two manage it every year—they’re oozes,
those are always the hardest to keep out of anywhere. And they’ll set up shop
in the hall. Patience and Fortitude were protecting us, actually. They would
eat the newer ones.”

Everyone’s faces had downturned into masks of appalled horror; I cringed
inwardly and tried to tell myself that it wasn’t very long until graduation, and
surely there wouldn’t be a new maw-mouth that soon.

“What if we breed some mals to eat agglos?” some bright lad blurted out,
I didn’t see who; I think he ducked away behind someone else as soon as he
realized what he’d suggested and everyone turned to stare in his direction.
Breeding maleficaria is a very popular pastime for maleficers, because it
always ends in roughly the same way, with variation only in the amounts of
screaming and blood. Trying to do it with good intentions generally makes
the results worse, not better.

“We could build a construct to do it,” someone else suggested, which also
wasn’t going to work, since the other mals coming in would happily eat the
agglo-eating constructs, but at least that was less likely to create some kind of
hideous monstrosity shambling around the school devouring kids forever.

But more to the point, it was another suggestion, and the crowd in the
reading room was breaking up into small groups along preferred language
lines and starting to argue and discuss, to come up with ideas. Trying to help.
I didn’t care that all the ideas were useless; we’d literally only just started
thinking.

Aadhya came round to me and put her arm round my waist and said under
her breath, “Hey, she can be taught,” with a tease in her voice that wobbled a
little, and when I looked at her, her eyes were bright and wet, and I put my
arm round her shoulders and hugged her.



I did begin to care that the ideas were useless after an entire week went by
without any useful ones. We’d enlisted the whole school in the brainstorming
project, but so many people came up to the reading room to suggest that
someone go down to fix the machinery on some arbitrary day each year that
by Tuesday we were all yelling, “Maw-mouth!” before they got halfway
through their first sentence. All of these clever people were enclavers, I note.

A junior came up to propose our staying on an extra year to guard the
other students. He called his idea paying it forward, and it had the novelty of
making literally every senior in the room squirm with a violently stifled shove
it up your arse even before Liesel said in exasperation, “And where will we be
sleeping during this year? What will we eat?” He then revised it to suggest
that we come back in just in time for next year’s graduation. That didn’t even
merit a response beyond a flat stare: no one has ever volunteered to come
back into the Scholomance, and no one ever will. Barring the one incredibly
stupid glaring exception, who didn’t count.

For variation, one pale and bedraggled-looking freshman girl came up
with the notion that all of the underclassmen should graduate with us, instead.
I think she just couldn’t stand school any longer and wanted to go home to her
mum, and fair enough, except that her plan wouldn’t have protected and
sheltered her at all. She’d just be snapped up in a few months by some mal on
the outside, like ninety-five percent of the wizard kids who aren’t lucky
enough to get into the school. We more or less gave her a bracing pat on the
shoulder and sent her on her way, and that was all the time we alloted to her
suggestion.

But that afternoon as I was leaving lunch I saw her slumped in the
freshman queue, standing alone, and on an impulse, I stopped by Sudarat,
who was alone in the queue just a little further back. “Come on,” I said.
“You’ve got someone holding a place for you.”

She trailed after me uncertainly, and I took her over to the other girl: she
was an American, but just an indie, and I vaguely thought she was from



Kansas, or one of those other states you never hear about on the BBC news,
far from any enclaves. The point being, she didn’t have a smidge of a reason
to care about what had or hadn’t happened to Bangkok. “Right, what’s your
name?” I demanded, and the girl said warily, “Leigh?” as if she wasn’t quite
willing to commit.

“Right, this is Sudarat, she was from Bangkok before it went pear-shaped;
you’re Leigh, and you’re so miserable in this place that you’d rather trade for
the odds outside; that’s introductions sorted,” I said, getting the worst bits out
in front, for the both of them. “See if you can bear to sit together; it’s best to
have company for meals.”

I sailed away and left them to it as quickly as I could, so none of us
including me could think too hard about what the bloody hell I was doing. I
don’t think I could have done it, even a week before. I wouldn’t have
imagined doing it, I wouldn’t have imagined either one of them letting me do
it: a senior putting two underclassmen together, why? I’d need to have an
angle, and if I hadn’t an obvious one, they would have made one up for me,
and more likely than not actively avoided each other afterwards.

Maybe they still would: Sudarat had more reason than most to be wary,
and I didn’t know a thing about the Kansas girl beyond her being as miserable
as I’d once been, which might mean anything. Maybe she, too, was secretly a
proto-maleficer of unimaginable dark power, or maybe she was such a
reflexively nasty person that everyone avoided her for good reason—I
immediately thought of dear old Philippa Wax, back in the commune, who
almost certainly hadn’t got any nicer just because I wasn’t there, although
she’d often implied she would—or maybe Leigh from Kansas was just a loser
kid who was shy and bad at making friends, and who had nothing going for
her, so no one had bothered to make a friend of her. She wasn’t an actual
maleficer, because a maleficer wouldn’t have been that desperate to get out.

Anyway, Sudarat could decide for herself if it was worth enduring her
company. At least it was someone, someone who wasn’t going to be suspicious
of her, or even just hesitant to make a friend of her because other people
were suspicious of her. And I could imagine trying to help her, and help the



other girl into the bargain, because that was now a thing that could happen in
the Scholomance.

Assuming that they actually did sit together for at least that one meal, it
was also the most successful example of help that entire week, at least that I
knew of.

There were any number of charming additional proposals for maleficaria-
breeding, some of which got so far as to include detailed specs. One alchemy-
track kid actually had the gall to suggest to Liu that he could do it with our
mice: enchant them and leave them all living forever in the pipes of the
Scholomance to breed and eat agglo larvae. Liu didn’t get angry very easily,
but she did get angry then, to the point that Precious woke me up out of a nap
and sent me racing to her room just in time to collide with Mr. Animal
Cruelty, who beat an even more enthusiastic retreat when he saw me outside
the door with Precious poking a quivering-whiskered nose out of the
bandolier cup on my chest.

People also generated some less obviously bad ideas, like plans for
installing some kind of major weaponry in the dead space under the
workshop floor, which would be used to blast the graduation hall mals more
directly. The problem was that anything you installed outside the graduation
hall would require openings in the extremely powerful wards that keep the
mals in the graduation hall and out of the classroom levels.

We were a fairly glum group as we gathered in the reading room the next
Saturday. The obstacle course had reversed itself full-bore: instead of being
impossible to survive, it had suddenly got so easy that even freshmen could
manage it, so now they were doing runs instead of us. The school had in fact
started randomly locking seniors out of the cafeteria, and the only way to get
in was to give something useful to one of the younger kids. Small things like
individual spare socks or pencils were working this week, but you could see
the writing on the wall perfectly well. And grotesquely, of course most
seniors were giving the things to enclave kids, in exchange for nothing more
than the promise of putting a good word in with the enclave council when
they graduated.



“All of the proposals are still trying to repair the cleansing,” Yuyan said,
spreading the papers out over the tables. She’d taken over gathering them,
because she could read so many languages so fluently, and because unlike
Liesel she didn’t traumatize people with her comments, so we’d got a lot more
submitted after she put out the word that people should bring them to her. “I
think we have to accept that the cleansing approach to graduation is just a
failure. We need something different.”

“Yeah, well, we’re trying,” Aadhya said grimly. I knew she’d been in the
shop almost all week with Zixuan and a bunch of the other top artificers of
our year, trying to come up with things. “We’ve experimented with making a
corridor to the gates—like a tunnel of safety. But…” She shook her head. She
didn’t really need to say what the problems with that strategy were: you’d be
offering a single irresistible target to every last one of the mals, and how did
you decide who went first? “Anyway, it still feels too obvious. The grown-ups
would have tried something like that before.”

“Hey—here’s a thought. What if we did all graduate?” Chloe said. “What
if we bring all the younger kids out with us. When we graduate back to the
New York induction point, Orion’s mom will be there—she can get the board
of governors to cancel induction. If we did that, the school really would stay
clear, because no mals would try to come in if there weren’t any of us inside.
And then instead of just us trying to come up with something, we could have
every wizard in the world thinking about a better solution.”

Yuyan sighed. “We have been thinking about it, for years,” she said, which
made sense: if Shanghai had been able to develop a better solution, it would
have been worth their building a new school, and everyone would have
moved. She gestured to the nearest copy of the newspaper article, mounted
against the end of one of the stacks. “London has been thinking about it for a
century, and New York nearly that long. Nothing we’ve found gets us better
odds than the Scholomance.”

“Well, okay, but if we can’t think of anything better, at least nobody is any
worse off,” Chloe said.

“The younger children would be,” Liu said. “They’d be out there
undefended.”



“Just for a little while—it could be like summer vacation. We could all
help look out for them. And if it turns out there isn’t a fix, or it takes too long,
they could come back in,” Chloe said.

“Would you?” Nkoyo said, with an edge I felt in my own gut. “Come back
in? After you’d got out of here?”

Chloe paused. “Well,” she said, with a wobble. “They’d get to choose…”

but it was only a faint protest, fading off.
Liu was sitting on the couch next to her; she leaned over and bumped

shoulders with Chloe, comfortingly. “We should send the mals to school
instead,” she said.

Ten minutes before curfew that night, she came and banged furiously on
my door. I didn’t know it was Liu, so I jumped out of bed and threw up a
major shield, got a killing spell ready, and yanked the door open ready to
fight. I had to fling my arms to both sides as she lunged in and grabbed me by
the shoulders, with a few pieces of scribbled-on paper crumpled in her grip.
First she said something in Chinese too fast for me to follow, because she was
so excited, and then she said, “We should send the mals to school instead!”

“What?” I said, and the final curfew bell rang, and she jumped and said,
“I’ll tell you tomorrow!” and ran back to her room, leaving me to lie awake
for an hour trying to figure out what she was thinking. The crumpled papers
she’d left with me didn’t help: I could tell it was maths, but it was all in
Chinese numbers, in two sets of handwriting, hers and I thought Yuyan’s, and
even after I laboriously translated them, I could only guess what the numbers
were referring to.

“The honeypot spell,” she said, the next morning, meeting me halfway
down the corridor between our rooms.

“Right, I got that far,” I said: mals come swarming into the school through
the graduation portals anyway; if we used our honeypot spell, we could lure a
proper horde of them in. Theoretically tens of thousands over the half an
hour of graduation, if Liu’s calculations were right and I’d understood them
properly. “But what’s the idea? Are you thinking if we pack the whole hall
completely full of mals, they’ll—eat the agglos?” That was the best guess I’d
come up with in a night of thinking, although if mals were going to eat



enough of the agglos, they’d have eaten them already, but Liu was shaking her
head vigorously.

“Not the hall,” she said. “The school. The whole school. We leave, and we
fill the school with mals.”

I stared at her. “And then what? Boot it off into the void or something?”
“Yes!” Liu said.
“Er, what?” I said.

I could tell you all the details of the next two weeks, during which we came
up with five or six alternative plans and discarded all of them, and also had
about ten different false starts working out the rough details of this one, but it
was agony enough going through it once, so I won’t.

The main question was whether Liu’s idea would in fact work to protect
the wise-gifted children of the world. The Scholomance wasn’t built out of
some kind of passionate dedication to the concept of boarding-school
education. It’s just a casino, meant to tilt the odds in our favor, because
surviving puberty is a numbers game. Any wizard parent can save their kid
from any one mal. But when mals come fifteen a day, sooner or later one of
them is going to slip through your wards and shields and gates and get the
tasty treat you’re hiding from them.

And that’s why we get crammed in here instead, past the guarded gates
and only reachable through the narrow pipes covered with wards, and why we
spend a healthy chunk of our formative years in a prison out of nightmares. If
we could cut down the maleficaria population enough to give us odds of
survival outside the school that were as good as, oh, one in seven, most people
wouldn’t come to the school to get the one-in-four odds here. It’s too horrible.
And after Liesel pounced on poor Liu and dragged her into a room to check
the calculations a few million times, the two of them came back and
announced that we had a decent chance of getting the odds outside down to
one in two, and they thought the effect would last for at least a couple of



generations. That made it one of the few ideas on the list that couldn’t just
immediately be crossed off, unlike for instance that morning’s suggestion of
creating a flock of flying snake-tailed piranha vultures that would absolutely
have polished off the agglos in ten minutes and then come up to start on the
rest of us.

The rest of the issues with Liu’s plan were logistical. After poring over the
blueprints and maintenance documentation, we worked out that when you
touch the gates, your portal home opens at that precise moment, stays open
just long enough to return you to your induction point, and then slams shut
again in seconds—a sensible design meant to keep mals out. If we wanted to
lure in as many mals as we could, everyone would have to queue up and leave
slowly: a steady stream of kids going out, a steady stream of mals coming in,
so we could keep the honeypot spell working through the full half hour of
graduation.

Sorry, so I could keep the honeypot spell working. No one even bothered
discussing who exactly was going to be casting the spell intended to call up a
vast tidal army of maleficaria. Well, it was a fair cop.

“How are we going to keep the mals from just killing everyone in line?”
Aadhya said.

“As long as the honeypot spell is going, they’re just going to follow it, I
think,” Liu said.

“So El has to be somewhere far from where they come in, to pull them
deeper,” Magnus said. “Can she cast the spell up in the library and still have it
work at the gates?”

“How am I getting out of the library afterwards in this scenario?” I said
pointedly. I was very conscious that if the school didn’t mind being hacked
off into the void itself—it hadn’t raised any objections so far—it would
certainly consider me expendable, too. I couldn’t refuse to risk my life, but I
wasn’t keen on accepting martyrdom before we even began.

“For that matter, how are you just not getting smothered in five minutes?”
Aadhya said. “If this even works, a billion mals are going to be coming right
at you.”



“Why don’t I just kill them all as they come in?” Orion said, without the
slightest doubt in his ability to kill a billion mals.

“Shut up, Lake,” I said, having many doubts about his ability to kill a
billion mals.

That left Liu’s idea as just one of the many very-long-shot possibilities on
our list, but Yuyan talked it up to Zixuan, and three days later, he came up to
the library with a solution for the problem of luring the mals throughout the
school: a speaker system. The idea of it was we’d make hundreds of tiny
speakers—magic ones, not the electronic sort—strung on a line, and then run
this line in a gigantic loop throughout the entire school, starting and ending in
the graduation hall, through all the corridors and stairways on every level,
branches going off into every classroom; up to the library and winding
through all the endless stacks, and then all the way back down into the hall.
At one end of the loop would be me, standing near the gates: I would sing our
alluring honeypot spell into a capturing mouthpiece, and it would get piped
through the entire system and come back out at the very last and largest
speaker, standing right in front of the gates, to broadcast the song out to any
mals in listening range of the portals.

What would make the mals actually follow the line and go into the school
was a single brilliant twist to the design: an enchantment so you only heard
the sound coming out of the one speaker just ahead of you, and as soon as
you got too close to that one, you’d start to hear it only from the next speaker
along instead. The mals would come because they heard the song being
blasted out, and then they’d chase it onward to the next speaker, and the next
one, all the way through the school.

That certainly made Liu’s plan seem tidy, until you considered that there
would be more than four thousand kids going out the gates, spanning the
whole globe, and with hundreds of them headed to the huge city enclaves that
were surrounded by hungry maleficaria. Broadcasting a honeypot spell out of
the Scholomance—already the most tempting honeypot in the world—would
be gilding the lily. If any of the mals didn’t come, it would likely be because
they’d got stampeded or eaten by other mals rushing to get to the suddenly
wide-open doors, or because they couldn’t make it to a portal in time.



“We’d be luring in all the mals in the world,” Chloe said nervously, and
she wasn’t wrong. It was obviously insane.

However, it still didn’t get crossed off the list, because we only crossed
ideas off the list when we were sure they wouldn’t work, not just because they
were mad. The list wasn’t long even so. Most of them came off when Alfie
said, “Yes, tried that,” often without even taking his head off his fist where he
was slumped next to Liesel at the head of the table; others got crossed off
because Yuyan or Gaurav from Jaipur admitted their own enclave laboratories
had tried it. Surprisingly, no one in any enclave had ever explored the brilliant
idea of destroying the entire school.

More seriously, it was an idea that they couldn’t have come up with,
because it needed—me. You could have cast the honeypot spell with a circle
of twelve wizards, or thirty if you wanted it to keep going for half an hour,
and then you could have taken another thirty wizards and cast a spell to break
the school off from the world, but you certainly couldn’t have got them all out
again in time. As it was, I’d be yelling the last syllable of what was turning out
to be my surprisingly handy supervolcano spell as I was jumping through the
portal, or else I’d go toppling off into the void with the school. Oh well; if that
happened, hopefully the accumulated mals would eat me before I had an
opportunity to experience the full existential horror of being totally severed
from reality.

And no, I wasn’t nearly that blasé about the prospect.
But we hadn’t found any better ideas, other than Chloe’s solution of just

running out and throwing the problem into the laps of the adults. We all liked
that solution quite a lot: the only problem with it was that it didn’t provide us
with any work to do, and meanwhile the Scholomance was impatiently
tapping a metaphorical foot. Over the next week, Zixuan started actually
tinkering around and building the speakers, and other senior artificers started
asking to help him, because anyone who wasn’t helping in some way started
having their already dim room lamps go completely out, or having the water
shut off to the bathrooms just when they got there, or being shut out of the
cafeteria or the workshop.



The school only got meaner from there. There didn’t seem to be any big
dangerous mals left—if there were, Orion was undoubtedly nabbing them
before anyone else caught a glimpse—but we were all shaking ratworms and
cribbas out of our bedclothes and having to cast purifications every night or
wake up with mallows infesting our tear ducts, and one morning we got to the
cafeteria and the food line was nothing but vats of the original thin nutrient
slurry until after the last senior went through.

I have to say, I have no idea how anyone survived eating it long enough to
graduate. We all ended up eating mad things: full English breakfasts, waffles
slathered in berries and whipped cream, shakshuka with gorgeous heaps of
fresh tomatoes and cucumbers; Aadhya had this amazing thing her nani had
invented, thin pancakes stuffed with a puree of cholar dal and topped with
toasted meringue. Once you’re spending the extremely expensive amount of
mana it takes to transmute a meal in the first place, you might as well
transmute it into something you actually like. But we’d all had to spend a
week’s worth of mana to do it.

After breakfast every last senior was fairly clamoring for something to do,
and since we didn’t have anything better on offer, they all started to grab bits
of Liu’s plan, because it was the only one that was far enough along to start
doing work, and it began to lurch down the runway like a half-built plane that
people were literally holding up and carrying while other people were still
putting on the wheels and wings and seats, trying to get the steering and the
engine in order, and other people were running after it carrying the luggage.

The artificers and the maintenance crews started spinning out the speaker
cabling and running it through the school, and building the speakers
themselves—Zixuan had got a prototype working just in time; they’d have
stolen the sketchy designs and built dozens of wrong ones otherwise. We even
got the first positive sign that the school was endorsing our demolition plan,
because after a fight broke out in the workshop over the last coil of metal
wire, one of the metal ceiling panels fell in painfully on the squabblers’ heads,
like a pointed message.

After that, maintenance-track kids started ripping down less important
panels throughout the school and delivering them to artificers in the



workshop, who shredded them into speaker cabling and wound them onto
fresh coils and handed them right back. Alchemists started brewing actual
honeypot bait—seniors unexpectedly did prove willing to donate blood to this
project, since, creepily, a 10ml syringeful turned out to be good enough to get
you into every meal of the day—with the idea that we’d spread it in the
dormitories to lure some of the mals off from the crowded main stream of the
spell. Other seniors started dragging the younger kids down to the gym at
regular intervals and making them pretend to queue up for the doors, so they
could work out the right pacing.

Liu and Aadhya and I didn’t have to look far for work: we spent our
mornings up in the library trying to find some better alternative plan, and our
afternoons down in the workshop with Zixuan, tweaking the lute and the
speakers and the mouthpiece—he was building that crucial bit himself—to
work best with the honeypot spell. Yuyan migrated along with us. She was
also a musician, and had offered to be backup for Liu on the lute, in case
anything happened to stop her playing; they were practicing the song-spell
together most nights. No one was going to be backup for me.

The furnaces were going full blast with all the other artificers frantically
trying to do something, so it was hot and tedious work, and my voice was
ragged and croaky by dinnertime every day. For consolation, it was quite
good fun wagging eyebrows at Liu, who kept turning red with confusion—
Zixuan was clearly running a determined campaign on that front alongside the
engineering work; he found time during the process to make her a set of tidy
little metal egg-shaped protective cages for the mice that would lock into the
bandolier cups, for graduation, with a tiny little spell-extension hook on the
top that would attach into our shield spells.

Chloe started spending her own afternoons brewing throat-cooler for me,
and salve for Liu and Yuyan’s fingers, and invited other alchemists to join her.
She ended up with more hands than the work needed, so she took the best of
them and started working on developing a second recipe meant specifically to
enhance the honeypot song-spell, which I hadn’t even known you could do
with alchemy.



A few days later, she gave me the first tiny thimbleful to try. The honeypot
spell had still been doing a wonderful job of summoning larval mals, by the
way, and in case you were wondering what we did about it, the answer was
that for the first week, we cast it from inside a ring of mortal flame I
summoned, all the while pouring out buckets of sweat. But we gratefully
stopped doing that after the first week, because the swarms stopped coming.
By the time Chloe gave me the sample, we were pretty sure we’d completely
cleared the workshop environs of every last living mal.

And we had, only an isk had apparently laid a batch of eggs in the workshop
furnaces some time ago. They weren’t due to hatch for a decade or so yet, but
after I drank Chloe’s potion, the enhanced song managed to persuade them to
break their shells and come out anyway. Their exoskeletons hadn’t hardened
yet, so they were just floppy and slow-moving squiggles of molten metal, not
a direct threat, except as they came out of the furnace they fell to the floor,
melted through, and vanished away into the void below. By the time we
managed to smother the rest of them, the floor of the shop was looking like
one of those tin cans someone had punched full of holes with an awl for
decoration. We spent the rest of that day repairing it, very gingerly.

By the end of May, we were far enough along with all the pieces of the
project that when Liesel chivvied us all up to the library for a review of all the
various planning ventures, the one major practical issue left with Liu’s plan
was how to get the horde of mals up from the graduation hall and into the
main levels of the school.

Which was quite an issue, as the entire school was designed from the
beginning to make that journey as difficult as possible for even a single mal.
The maintenance shaft was going to be a tight fit for an entire horde, even if a
juvenile argonet had managed to squish itself up that way last year, and what
about when the first mals circled all the way around through the school and
then tried to come back down the maintenance shaft? As soon as a bottleneck



developed, a mass of them would build up in the hall and eventually they’d
start eating us after all.

No one had any good ideas, but we hauled out the big official school
blueprints and spread them out onto the table to try to find a solution, and
discovered to our confusion that there were two enormous shafts in the
blueprints, right there on opposite sides of the graduation hall, each one wide
enough for seven argonets to climb up and come down again on the other side
if they liked.

I assure you that there had absolutely never been two enormous shafts on
the blueprints before, or for that matter in the school.

But when we grabbed another set of blueprints off one of the walls, the
shafts were there, too, and after we got a third and still they were there, one
of the maintenance-track kids said suddenly, “There are pieces of machinery
that weren’t here when the school was built, but they’re too big to have come
up the maintenance shaft. The school must have bigger shafts that only get
opened for major installations.”

Chloe sat up. “Wait, that’s right, I remember this! All the new cafeteria
equipment—when they were ready to install it, New York built like a hundred
golems to deliver it. The golems opened the gates from outside, blasted the
whole hall with mortal flame from flamethrowers, and then charged in with
the new equipment. They shoved it into a shaft and closed it again before they
got ripped apart. And then the kids inside installed it.”

I didn’t ask how many of those kids had been slaughtered by the minor
horde of mals that would surely have got upstairs in the time it took for a
gang of golems to load equipment into a shaft. New York’s golems do have a
reputation for being quicker than usual, but that means they could go
thundering across the graduation hall in six minutes instead of twenty. I didn’t
ask if all the kids in the school had been warned to expect the sudden influx.
I’m sure Chloe wouldn’t have been told those parts of the story. You wouldn’t
trouble a nice, warmhearted girl with that kind of information.

I didn’t ask, I just seethed about it while stomping all the way downstairs
to the workshop level with a handful of volunteers—kids I didn’t know very
well who’d only been hanging round the library looking for work because



they hadn’t done very much that day and were anxious about getting into
dinner—to confirm that yes, these helpful shafts were in fact there, one
ending in the workshop and one in the gym, and both were wide open. They
looked a lot more impressive in person than on the blueprints. It’s hard to
remember just how bloody big this place is until you’re standing on the edge
of a shaft, easily big enough for a jet plane, that just goes plummeting down
for half a mile. An army of mals could sail up no bother.

“I don’t suppose it occurred to you to keep them shut until the enclavers
bothered to give everyone a warning?” I demanded of the nearest framed
blueprints—the shafts were showing on there now as well—while my
company all nervously took their own peeks down to help make sure that the
shafts were there. “Not very much for fairness, are you?”

The school didn’t answer me. But I already knew the answer. It didn’t
weigh people up one after another and even the score. It would do its best to
protect an enclaver kid as much as a loser, and it wouldn’t care that the
enclavers had come in with a basketful of advantages. They still hadn’t been
safe, after all. That was the only line it drew, the line between safe and not
safe, before it doled out its help with an implacable unjust evenhandedness.
And it expected me to do the same, and it made me angry even while I
couldn’t see any way to do it better.

I seethed all the way back upstairs to the library—my mood wasn’t
improved by having to climb back up all those stairs—and announced, “The
shafts are open,” before I threw myself sullenly into a chair.

After that, Liu’s plan was the plan, the only one we were working on, which
was just as well, since it took every last minute of the last weeks—of what
might be the last term ever—to get it into shape. Almost everything we’d
done already had to be done again. Half of the first round of hastily built
speakers broke and had to be replaced; we had to redo a quarter of the
cabling, and then we had to make nearly a hundred new coils just to go up



and down the shafts. We weren’t sure where to safely get the materials until
someone suggested the walls of the gigantic auditorium where we take
Maleficaria Studies, which are plastered all over with a horrible educational
mural of all the mals which are normally waiting below to eat us.

I hadn’t been inside since last year, and I hadn’t missed it, but I took a day
off from singing practice to join in for the festival of destruction. I wasn’t the
only one. Hundreds of kids showed up; the younger kids were actually still
going to lessons, but a lot of them skived off to join in and help as much as
they could. We tore the place completely apart. Alchemists were there
pouring precious etching fluids onto the bolts; incanters heated and cooled the
panels to warp them until they fell off. Kids were flying themselves to the
ceiling and prying panels off there, yelling out warnings below as they
dropped. Even the freshmen—dramatically more gangly than they’d been at
the start of the year—were there just whacking away at the seats with
ordinary hammers in a frenzy. By the time the lunch bell rang, the room was
gutted down to the girders and pipes.

Liu’s plan had that one significant advantage over any other: we all wanted
to destroy the Scholomance. I’m not even joking; the fact that we all loved the
idea on a deeply visceral level would almost certainly help carry it off. And it
wasn’t just resentment and spite working in us, although that would have been
enough: I think everyone else felt as I did, secretly and irrationally, that if we
could only succeed, if we could only destroy the whole place, we could save
ourselves from ever having been in here. And every last one of us, from the
most blithe freshman to the most crumpled senior, was longing more violently
with every passing day to get out, out, out.

Well, except for our one special loony. Orion got increasingly sullen as
July 2 crept closer. If he’d been resentful over the task he’d been assigned in
our delightful scheme—he was going to be guarding the shaft that came
down, facing the entire horde of mals at once—I would have considered it
entirely justified. Since he didn’t mind his assignment in the slightest and in
fact seemed to be looking forward to it in some weird demented anticipation,
I had no idea what was bothering him.



That wasn’t true, of course, but I wasn’t allowing myself to have an idea
what might be bothering him. He hadn’t asked me on another date since the
disastrous attempt in the gym, which might have been out of mortification or
because we hadn’t had a single day to ourselves since.

Either way, it was just as well. I came in here and I’ve survived in here
being sensible all the time, trying to always do the cleverest thing I could
manage, to see all the clear and sharp-edged dangers from every angle, so I
could just barely squeeze past them without losing too much blood. I could
never afford to look past survival, especially not for anything as insanely
expensive and useless as happiness, and I don’t believe in it anyway. I’m too
good at being hard, I’ve got so good at it, and I wasn’t going to go soft all of a
sudden now. I wasn’t going to make Mum’s choice, wasn’t going to do
something stupid because of a boy who’d come and sat shoulder-to-shoulder
with me in the library, the two of us alone in a pool of light in the reaching
dark all around—a boy who improbably thought I was just grand and who
made my stomach fold itself over into squares when he was near me.

Everyone else was doing stupid things all round me—that whole last week,
I was constantly stumbling over people making out in the library stacks, and
making mealtime trades for condoms or alchemical brews of dubious efficacy,
and even otherwise sensible people were giggling to each other in the girls’
about their plans for dramatic last-night hurrahs, which was stupider than
anything else; you weren’t going to catch me losing sleep the night before we
tried to carry out this insane scheme, even if Orion Lake turned up at my
door with tea and cake.

While I spent my days with Liu and Aadhya and Zixuan in the workshop,
tuning the lute and singing my lungs out, Orion was still doing runs in the
gym. He’d be spending most of graduation protecting the queue, unless the
horde of mals managed to circulate through the entire school and come back
down before we were all out, in which case—well, in which case he’d
presumably make a hopeless but nevertheless determined stand at the
barricades, trying to hold the mals off long enough for everyone else to make
their escape. And I’d have to go on standing there next to the gates, singing



the mals onwards, keeping them off everyone else, as he was inevitably
overrun and torn apart before my eyes by the monsters I’d lured in to kill him.

I couldn’t stop myself going by the gym to watch him, just to poke the
sore place. It didn’t make me feel any better to watch him thrashing scores of
fake mals and gym constructs. I knew he was good at killing mals, I knew he
was brilliant at it, but if this plan even worked, there wouldn’t be scores, there
would be hundreds, maybe thousands, all piling on him at once. But I
watched from the doors anyway, every day after I finished practicing, and
when he finished his last run we went up to dinner together without talking,
my teeth clenched round the words I wanted to say: You don’t have to do this
alone; you can ask for people to help you, at least to shield you; we’ll hold a
lottery, we’ll draw straws. I’d said them already and he’d just waved them
away with a shrug and “They’ll just get in the way,” and he might very well be
right, because no one would stick beside him with that horde coming. No one
except me, and I was meant to be saving everyone else, everyone else but
him.

But the last day before graduation, we decided it was best to rest my voice
instead of more practice, and after lunch, I didn’t go back to the workshop; I
marched down to the gym and told Orion I was going to do the last run with
him. He was just outside the doors getting ready, whistling cheerily as he
dusted his hands with casting powder—like gymnastics chalk, only with more
glitter—and he had the gall to object. “I thought you were supposed to get
some rest,” he said. “You don’t need to worry, I’m not going to let the mals
get to you…” at which point he caught my expression and hastily said, “Uh,
sure, let’s go.”

“Let’s,” I said.
The exercise did make me feel better, even if it shouldn’t have. As

patently stupid as that was, five minutes into the onrushing horde that the
Scholomance threw at us, I was as viscerally sure of invincibility as Orion: we
could do it, we could, nothing would stop us—and of course nothing would
until something did, at which point we’d be dead and past the bother of
learning our lesson. But I let myself have the luxury of insane confidence
while we mowed through maleficaria together, passing the work between us



with the easy grace of partners dancing, my vast killing spells clearing great
swaths around us and his shocking-quick attacks knocking down anything that
dared to survive or poke its nose in any closer.

He lunged to one side of me to take out a swinging rack of crystalline
blades and then instantly whirled to the other to vaporize the billowing violet-
pink cloud of a glinder, finishing the sweep in close to me, and when he
grinned down at me, breathing hard and sweaty and sparkling, I laughed back,
helplessly, and threw a wall of flame spiraling out round us both, a swarm of
treeks exploding like tiny fireworks as it caught them, half a dozen scuttling
constructs melting into glistening puddles of liquid metal, and the course was
done: we were alone in the hazy sunlit warmth beneath a stand of delicate
purple-red maples. A moment later, an unnaturally perfect rumble of thunder
sounded and a sudden torrent of warm summer rain came down to wash away
the detritus—which wouldn’t have been unpleasant, except the pipes for the
gym had evidently been infested, too, and quite a lot of amphisbaena came
with the downpour, thrashing and hissing as they tumbled. Orion grabbed my
hand and ran for the small pavilion, and he pulled me inside and kept pulling
me into his arms and kissed me.

I kissed him back, I couldn’t help it. The soft pattering rain wasn’t real,
except for the amphisbaena thumping down at intervals; the beautiful trees
and the garden weren’t real, the pavilion wasn’t real, they were all just awful
hollow lies, but he was real: his mouth and his arms round me and his body
overheated against me, trickles of rain and sweat trapped against my cheek
and his breath gasping out of the sides of his mouth even as he tried to keep
kissing me, wanting me, his heart pounding so hard I could feel it through my
chest, unless that was my own heart.

He’d buried his hands in my hair to kiss me more and I was clutching at
his back, and then his t-shirt came apart under my grip, all at once the way
clothes do when you’ve mended them with not enough raw material. He
flinched back as the scraps fell off him, my hands slipping off him, and we
were staring at each other across the opened space, both of us panting.

He jerked his head away first, his face wrenched and miserable, and he
was about to say he was sorry; I could tell. I should have been sorry, too,



because it was stupid and I knew better, even without Mum telling me keep
far away from Orion Lake, except standing there with only hours left ticking
down, it suddenly wasn’t stupid anymore. It was in fact the only sensible thing
to do, because he might be dead tomorrow or I might, and I’d never know
what it would be like to be with him; clumsy and awkward and terrible as it
was likely to be, I’d never know, and I said, “Don’t even, Lake,” before he
could open his mouth, and I stepped in close and grabbed him by the waist
and said fiercely, “I want to. I want to,” and kissed him.

He groaned and put his arms round me again and kissed me back, and
then he jerked away from me again, turning aside, and said cracking, “El, I do
too, I want to, so much, I just—”

“I know you’re a mad optimist who thinks he can kill all the mals in the
world, but I’m not,” I said. “And even if I were, if I knew for certain we’d
make it, I still don’t want to wait until we’re out of here, on opposite sides of
the ocean. I don’t want to wait!” I wanted his body back against me, the wave
of heat back and rising higher, and it was so amazingly clear and obvious to
me now that I couldn’t understand why he wouldn’t want to, which wasn’t
particularly fair of me, but I still couldn’t help taking a step towards him,
reaching out.

He wouldn’t look at me. “I’m just—I’m so low.”
“What?” I said, confused, because it didn’t make any sense.
“I’m really low. There’s almost no mals, and they’re all coming at seniors,

so everyone’s just taking them out for themselves. Magnus gave me some this
morning, but…”

He trailed off: I think my eyebrows had packed bags and migrated three
counties north. “If that’s dependent on mana, it’s news to me,” I said, with a
pointed look in the appropriate direction, and immediately cursed Aadhya’s
mum again in my head, because obviously I couldn’t help going straight to
secret pet mal and I wanted to start howling with laughter in Orion’s face,
which didn’t seem likely to advance my cause when he was squinched with
mortification already.

But in a moment I stopped caring, because he blurted out, “You said—
Luisa, you said Jack got at Luisa because—because she let—”



I gawked at him in outrage. “You think I’m going to drain you? Here’s
news for you, Lake, if I wanted to—”

“No!” he yelled. “I think I’m going to—”

I didn’t let him finish, rising to a proper howl. “What, like one of the
bloody mals?”

“No!” he said hurriedly, raising his hands as he backed away from me.
“That’s right, no,” I said—I don’t think I literally had steam coming off

me, but I certainly felt as though I did—“so get back over here and kiss me
again, and if you do try to drain my mana, I’ll tear off one of the doors and
beat you senseless.” Orion heaved an enormous gasp like I’d hit him in the
belly, and came across the pavilion in a rush towards me.

I’d grown two inches this year, but he’d grown six, and when he gripped
my arms and pulled me in, with all his strength and power, I had a dizzy top-
of-the-roller-coaster moment of wait I’m not ready—of course I’d managed
to completely avoid that while I’d been busy talking him into it—but then he
was kissing me, and the roller coaster went and I was gone along with it,
flying between terror and delight. We got my t-shirt awkwardly pulled over
my head, each of us with one hand involved in the project, and he squeezed
his eyes shut and pulled me in closer to kiss me, I think so he didn’t
embarrass himself by gaping at my breasts. But the shock of being up against
him like that, all of our naked skin pressed so close, ran through me, and I
stopped kissing him and started fighting with my old knotted string belt,
because I wanted more, more, more of that, yes, so desperately.

He backed up a step to undo his own belt and wrestle himself out of his
trousers—along with his secret pet mal, and I did start laughing helplessly,
possibly in hysterics, but thankfully he thought I was just laughing about how
my stupid belt wouldn’t come undone, and he grabbed it on either side of the
knot and said, “Now untie, open by,” which had no business working, but did.
My combats fell straight down and puddled round my ankles, since I’d bought
them two years ago off the biggest senior boy who hadn’t anyone else willing
to buy them, and I tripped over them while I was heeling my Velcro sandals
off.



We tumbled together down onto our heap of clothing. Orion was panting
as he carefully lay down on me full-length, bracing himself up on his
forearms. I was deeply preoccupied with having him between my legs, the
feeling inside my own body, a drumbeat pulsing sensation already going, and
then the bastard looked down at me with his entire heart crammed into his
eyes and his face and said, barely a whisper, “Galadriel.”

I hate my name, I’ve hated my name my whole life; everyone who ever
said it and looked at me and smiled, it’s packed full of their smiles. Mum was
the only one who didn’t think it was a good joke. Even she wouldn’t have
saddled me with it if she hadn’t been a shattered child herself at the time,
clinging to a scrap of dreaming that had helped her make it out of the dark,
without thinking about what it would mean to make me carry that name
around. But Orion said it like he’d been holding it in his mouth for a year, an
unreal vision he hardly believed he’d found, and I wanted to cry and also
thump him at the same time, because I didn’t want to like it.

“Don’t get soppy on me, Lake,” I said, trying not to let it wobble.
He paused and then gave me a wide, obnoxious smirk, settling himself

down on his forearms as if he meant to make himself comfortable. “We
might not make it tomorrow, right? So if this is my only chance—”

“Your chances are rapidly diminishing,” I said, and then I locked my leg
over his and twisted him over with me on top, and he let out something
between a laugh and a desperate gasp for air, and caught my hips, and after
that we were just gone, an endless lush wonderful grappling as we arranged
ourselves—the slide of his thigh against the inner skin of my own, the urgent
sensation of his hardened muscled body working so perfectly with mine. We
hadn’t very much idea of what we were doing—I’d got all sorts of detailed
and educational materials from Mum obviously, but the pictures and diagrams
and descriptions didn’t really convey anything of what it was actually like
trying to fit two bodies together. I don’t think Orion had even as much of an
idea as I did; I’m sure there was a sensible amount of sex ed in his past, and
equally sure he’d ignored it entirely.

But we didn’t need any real idea—there wasn’t any goal in mind, I was so
preoccupied with the dizzy glee of having dived in that I didn’t care about



getting anywhere. Which was just as well, because he came less than five
minutes into the festivities, and then went into a spiral of writhing and
apologies until I punched him in the shoulder and said, “Come on, Lake, if
that’s the best you’ve got, I’m leaving you and going to lunch,” and he laughed
again and kissed me some more and then followed my pointed hints until I’d
had an equally good time, and then he moved back up on top of me and we
moved together and it was—too many things to name all of them, with the
sticky physical pleasure the least of them, far behind the sheer relief of walls
tumbling down, giving in to my own hunger, the joy of feeding his, and if
that hadn’t been enough, the unbelievable bliss of not thinking, of not
worrying, for at least one glorious stretch of mindlessness.

Which worked really effectively until afterwards, when we were lying
together sweaty and, at least in my case, incredibly pleased with myself: I felt
I’d accomplished something unique and magical, that, unlike all the other
actually unique and magical things I can do, wasn’t horrifying or monstrous in
the least. I was draped over his chest and he had his arms round me, which
would become intolerably uncomfortable at some point that wasn’t now, and
then he sucked in a deep gasping breath and said, “El, I know you don’t want
to talk about—if we make it out of here, but I can’t—” and his voice was
cracking on the edge of tears, not just leaky sentiment but like he was barely
holding on to keep from bursting into sobs, so I couldn’t stop him, and
because I didn’t, he said, “You’re the only right thing I’ve ever wanted.”

I had my cheek pillowed on him, and you couldn’t have paid me to look
him in the face at that moment. I stared hard at the drain instead, from which
any number of helpful maleficaria could have burst and didn’t. “If no one’s
mentioned this to you before, you’ve got really odd taste,” I said, and wished I
didn’t mean it quite as much as I did.

“They have,” he said, so flatly I did have to look at him. He was staring up
into the dark recesses of the pavilion ceiling with a muscle jumping along the
side of his jaw, a blind look in his face. “Everyone has. Even my mom and
dad…They always thought something was wrong with me. Everyone was
always nice to me, they were grateful, but—they still thought I was weird. My
mom was always trying to get me to be friends with the other kids, telling me



I had to control myself. And then when they gave me the power-sharer and I
drained the whole enclave…”

Every word out of his mouth was stoking my already substantial desire to
show up on his enclave’s doorstep and set the entire place on fire. “They made
it feel as though it were all your fault, and that as a result you owed it to all
the rest of them to dump the mana you get, all on your own, into their bank,
and accept whatever bits they like to dribble back out to you in exchange,” I
said through my teeth. “Which, by the way, is the only reason you’re low on
mana in the first place. You’d still be aglow—”

“I don’t care about the mana!” He shifted and I got myself out of the way
to let him get up; he went and sat on the steps, looking out into the still-falling
amphisbaena rain. I grabbed my t-shirt—the New York one he’d given me,
which came down to mid-thigh on me—and put it on and went and sat next to
him. He had his elbows on his knees and was hunched over as if he couldn’t
bear watching my face, whatever he’d see on it when he told me about his
horrible evil self who’d swallowed this swill from everyone round him so long
that he couldn’t even tell the taste was rotten. “I like the hunting. I like going
after the mals, and—” He swallowed. “—and taking them apart and pulling
the mana out of them. And I know that’s creepy—”

“Shut your bloody mouth,” I said. “I’ve seen creepy, Lake; I’ve been inside
creepy, and you’re nothing like.”

He said softly, “That’s not true. You know it’s not. In the gym, when those
kids tried to kill you—”

“Us,” I said pointedly.
“—you wouldn’t have hurt them,” he went on, without a pause. “And I—I

wanted to kill them. I wanted to. And it did freak you out. I’m sorry,” he
added, low.

I said in measured tones, “Lake, I’m useless at this nonsense, but as my
mum’s not here at the moment, I’m just going to feed you her lines. Did you
kill them?”

He gave me an annoyed look that no one ever gives Mum when she’s
gently leading them along, so I don’t think I’d got the tone quite right, but that
was his own fault picking me for an agony aunt. “That’s not the point.”



“I think they’d agree with me that it is. I’ve wanted to kill loads of people.
But wanting can’t do harm without a pair of hands behind it.”

He gave a shrugging heave of shoulders and arms. “The point is, I never
wanted normal things. And that’s not my parents’ fault, okay? You can be
mad at them if you want to be, but—”

“Thanks, I will.”
He snorted. “Yeah. I know you think they’re jerks for letting me hunt

when I was little. They aren’t. That’s why they’re not jerks. Because that’s all I
ever wanted to do. They tried to stop me. I’m not just saying that. You think
Magnus is spoiled? They gave me anything I looked at for more than three
seconds. Toys or books or games…I didn’t want any of it. When I was ten, I
started sneaking out of school to hunt. So my dad—my dad, who’s one of the
top five artificers in New York—literally quit working and hung out with me
all day, trying to teach me himself, doing stupid kid projects with me in his
home workshop. And I was mad at him for it. After a couple of months, I
threw a gigantic freakish tantrum because he wasn’t letting me hunt. I
wrecked the whole shop, part of our apartment, chunks of major artifice
projects…and then I ran away and hid down in the enclave sewage pipes.
When my mom found me, she made me a deal: if I stayed in school all day
and did all my homework and did a playdate every Saturday, on Sundays
they’d let me take a gate shift and fight real mals. I cried I was so happy.”

I scowled over this confessional torrent. I was really disinclined to be
sympathetic to his parents, for what I had to acknowledge were many
grotesquely selfish reasons, which was making it hard for me to winkle out
the other reasons I still didn’t like it. I did have to admit they had a right to
struggle with a ten-year-old whose only idea of a good time was taking the
guard duty shifts that otherwise would go to the best fighters that New York’s
mana could hire. Their gates would attract at least as many mals as the school
on a daily basis, if not more. The Scholomance isn’t in a major metropolitan
area with five or six entrances, wizards coming and going the entire day. Ten
years on a guard shift is enough to earn you an enclave spot; the only problem
is very few people survive to claim it.



But Orion was saying, with perfect sincerity, “It made everything so much
better. Then at least people liked me for wanting it, even if they still thought I
was weird. And then here—”

“And why did they even send you?” I interrupted, still looking for
something to be angry about. “Just to look out for the other kids? You didn’t
need protecting.”

“They weren’t going to,” Orion said. “I wanted to come. I know everyone
else hates school. But I don’t. The Scholomance—the Scholomance is the best
place I’ve ever been.”

I emitted an involuntary gargled noise of outrage.
He huffed a little. “Yeah, see, even you think I’m weird. But it is. I could

do the one thing I wanted and also be doing something right, all the time. I
wasn’t just weird and creepy. I got to be—a hero.” I grimaced; that wasn’t on
the nose or anything. “Except whenever people tried to say thanks, or
anything, I always felt like it was a giant lie. Because they thought I was being
brave, and if they knew I liked it, they’d be weirded out, just like everyone
from home. And yeah, I thought something was probably going to get me at
graduation, because I wasn’t going to go until after everyone else was out—”

He delivered this statement with all the agonized soul-searching and
drama of someone announcing he’d go for a nice walk; I suffered a burst of
private irritation that died very abruptly when he said, “—but I didn’t really
care.”

I stared at him stricken.
“I didn’t want to die,” he hastened to tell me, as if that was an enormous

improvement. “I just wasn’t scared of it, either. I didn’t have a plan except to
kill mals until one of them got me, so why not in here? I’d get to help so
many kids, not just my own enclave. I didn’t really know about that stuff, you
know,” he added abruptly. “Not until I met you. I sort of assumed everyone
lived someplace like New York. Even after I met Luisa, I thought she had it
really bad, not that we had it so much better. But it made sense to me anyway.
Why should I run out on everyone just to go home and hang out on New
York’s gate until something got me there? I didn’t want anything else. Not
like normal people—”



I grabbed his near hand, gripping tight. “Stop it!” I said, on the verge of
shrieking incoherently. I knew that wouldn’t be helpful, but helpful felt so far
beyond my reach, it might as well have been on the moon, so I was tempted
to go the other way instead.

My whole childhood, everyone always wanted me to be more like Mum,
told me I ought to be; the only person who didn’t was Mum herself. But that
insidious message didn’t manage to get too deeply into my head, because I
was always wanting her to be more like me. Less generous, less patient, less
kind—and I don’t even mean I wanted her to be those things to other people;
I’d have been wildly glad if she’d ever have stooped to have a screaming
match with me. But right now, with every fiber of my being, I wanted to have
all her answers inside me: her clear understanding, what she would have said,
the light she’d have shone for Orion onto the despair twisted like dark vines
through his head, so he could see it and cut it out of himself and open up the
room to grow. The only answer I had to give him was setting New York on
fire, and much as I wished otherwise, I could tell that really wasn’t an answer
to his problem.

“There’s no such thing as normal people,” I said, a desperate flailing.
“There’s just people, and some of them are miserable, and some of them are
happy, and you’ve the same right to be happy as any of them—no more and
no less.”

“El, come on,” Orion said, with a weary air of being much put upon. I
could have frothed in his face. “You know it’s not true. There are normal
people, and we’re not. I’m not.”

“Yes, we are!” I said. “And you do want things other than hunting. You’re
sorry enough if you miss a meal, and you minded when I was mean to you,
and you certainly seemed reasonably interested in the events of the past hour
—”

He huffed a short laugh. “That’s what I’m trying to tell you!”
“The only thing you’ve tried to tell me so far is that you’re a hollowed-out

suit of armor marching steadily onward through the ranks of mals whilst
insensible to all human emotion, so I’m not keen on listening to anything else
you’ve got to say!” I said.



“I’m trying to tell you that I was,” he said. “I didn’t want anything else. I
didn’t know how to want anything else. Until—”

“Lake, don’t you even dare,” I said, appalled as the full horror dawned on
me, but it was too late.

He still had my hand entwined with his; he brought it to his mouth and
kissed the side of it softly, without looking at me. “I’m sorry,” he said. “I
know it’s not fair, El. But I just need to know. I never had a plan except to go
home and kill mals. I never wanted anything else. But now I do. I want you. I
want to be with you. I don’t care if it’s in New York or Wales or anywhere
else. And I just need to know if that’s okay. If I can—if I can have that. If
you want that, too.

“And you don’t need to lie to me,” he added. “I’m not going to do
anything different tomorrow, no matter what you tell me. I don’t think I
could. Once I’m fighting, I just go flat-out and keep going; you know that’s
how it works. I’m not going to play it safe if you say yes, and I’m not going to
do anything dumb if you say no.”

“What you mean is, you’ll do an enormous number of truly stupid things
no matter what!” I said, mostly on reflex; the rest of my brain was running
around in circles making noises like Precious in a rage.

“Sure, whatever,” Orion said. “This isn’t about graduation. It’s about after.
After I’m home, and I know—Chloe told me you won’t come to New York.
So I need to know if I can get on a plane and come to you. Because that’s
what I want to do. I can deal with graduation, I can deal with the mals. I just
can’t deal with being out, trying to reach you when you don’t even have a
freaking cellphone, and not knowing if it’s okay for me to—”

“Yes!” I said, in a despairing howl. “Yes, fine, you utter wanker, you can
come to Wales and meet my mum,” and then, I didn’t add, he could also be
shut up in the yurt for a year until she had cleared the rubbish out of his skull,
and if this was what Mum had been warning me about, if she didn’t want me
bringing her a shedload of work to do, it was just too bad.

I told myself that mostly because I had a dreadful feeling that this was
what Mum had been warning me about. I couldn’t help knowing she would
have told me off for giving him the least encouragement, in the strongest



terms possible for her, and also that she’d be absolutely right: I hadn’t any
business agreeing to be with someone who told me in all sincerity that I was
his only hope of happiness in the world, at least not until he’d sorted his own
head out and diversified.

But I’d told him the truth. I did want that, too: I wanted him to get on a
plane and come to me, and I wanted to live happily ever after with him in a
clean and shining world we’d purge of maleficaria and misery, and apparently
I wasn’t a sensible realist after all, since I was leaping after that outrageous
fantasy with both hands, straight into the chasm I could see perfectly well
open before me.

“I do have plans, though,” I added, to distract myself from my own
stupidity. “You might be perfectly satisfied to roam the wilds hunting and
then come home to the little woman at night, Lake; it won’t do for me,” and I
told him half defiantly about my enclave-building project, except it only made
matters worse. He kept that horrible shining look on me the entire time; not
even smiling, just holding my hand in his and listening to me go on and on
getting progressively more fanciful, littering the whole world with tiny
enclaves, sheltering every wizard child born, until finally I burst out, “Well?
Haven’t you anything to say about it? Go on and tell me I’m mad; I don’t want
humoring.”

“Are you kidding me?” he said, his voice cracking. “El, this school was
the best thing I could imagine. But now when I hunt, I’ll be helping you do
this,” as if I’d laid a gift in his hands.

I let out a strangled sob and said, “Lake, I hate you so much,” and put my
head down against his shoulder with my eyes shut. I’d been ready to go down
to the graduation hall and fight for my life; I’d been ready to fight for the lives
of everyone I knew, for the chance of a future. I didn’t need this much more
to lose.

OceanofPDF.com



W e couldn’t afford to miss dinner, which thankfully gave me an
excuse to put a stop to the sentimentality and horrific confessions. I

gave Orion a slap on the shoulder and told him to get his clothes mended and
back on. It had stopped pissing down snake-things, and the ones that had
fallen were mostly dead—amphisbaena aren’t very sturdy, and the gym
ceiling is a long way—although we did have to pick our way gingerly past the
ones that were still writhing a bit.

Orion clearly wasn’t satisfied to put his emotions away where they
belonged: he tried to hold my hand on the way up the stairs, and I had to
scowl him off and put my hands firmly in my pockets. At least we caught up
with Aadhya and Liu on the stairs, and they let me fall in between them to



provide an additional bulwark, although they charged me in eyebrow-wagging
and insinuating looks—Liu was clearly pleased to get some of her own back.
It wasn’t any great act of telepathy on their part: there were sparkly-dust
handprints all over my clothes and even my skin. Orion all but bounced along
behind us, despite having offered to carry the lute for Liu, and even hummed
on the stairs, as if he’d been wafted ethereally far above minor mortal
concerns such as our impending doom. Liu covered her mouth with both
hands to stifle giggles and Aad smirked at me. I couldn’t complain at them for
enjoying the distraction—I’d have liked one myself—but I put on my dignity
and refused to acknowledge it.

He did manage to get hold of my hand under the table at dinnertime,
rubbing his thumb over my knuckles, and I’d already finished eating, so I
didn’t immediately yank it away and shove his chair over or anything.
Although I should have, because after dinner, he trailed me down the stairs,
and when we reached our res hall, he tried hopefully, “Want to…come to my
room?”

“The night before?” I said repressively. “Go and get some sleep, Lake.
You’ve had yours; if you want more, you’ll just have to graduate.”

And he sighed but went, and I went to Aadhya’s room with her and Liu
instead. The lute was there waiting, but we didn’t have any work to do on it,
we just sat crammed in there together, piled on the bed. They both teased me
for a bit more, but I didn’t actually mind, and then obviously we moved on to
the serious business of my giving them a detailed report, and I confess that by
the time I finished going over it, I was privately thinking to myself maybe I
might after all stop by Orion’s room before bed for just a little bit, and
Aadhya sighed and said, “I’m almost sorry I turned down that junior.”

Liu and I both demanded more information—turned out this junior
artificer named Milosz had been helping her make some precision-enchanted
strips of gold to go on the lute tuning pegs, and he’d suggested one of those
last-night hurrahs to her, which idea she, being the sensible girl I knew and
loved, had firmly quashed.

“What about you?” she said to Liu, nudging. “I saw Zixuan going
downstairs just before us. He should be in his room around now…”



Only Liu didn’t go red. Instead, she took a deep breath and said, “I kissed
Yuyan last night instead.”

We obviously immediately set up a howl for more details, and she was
giggling and she did turn red again, admitting that there had been somewhat
less deadly serious practicing of music going on in the evenings in her room
than perhaps we might have thought. “Also excuse you,” Aadhya said. “What
was up with letting us hassle you about Zixuan all this time! Or were you
trying to decide?”

She only meant it in fun, but Liu swallowed, visibly, and then she said, a
bit wavering, “It would…it would have been smart of me.”

We both understood right away, and it stopped the teasing cold: she
meant, she had been trying to decide, but not because she’d wanted to do
something stupid; she hadn’t wanted to sneak over to Zixuan’s room for one
last night, hadn’t wanted to rip his shirt into shreds in the middle of the gym
pavilion with a mass of amphisbaena romantically hissing and thrashing down
at the base of the steps. She’d had that insidious whispering in her ear, the
calculations that never stopped running inside our heads: it would be smart—
to hook a cute, talented, enclaver boy from Shanghai, when he let it be known
he was there to be hooked.

Just like it had been smart to bring in a dozen mice, small helpless lives
you could hold in the cup of your hand, and kill them instead, one at a time,
so you could suck enough mana out of them to keep yourself alive.

There were a few tears welling up over her lashes and dripping off. She
put the heels of her hands to her eyes and pressed to stop them. She said
rawly, “I wanted to want…the right things. The things I was supposed to
want. But I don’t. Even the ones that are good.” She gave a small choked
sniffle. “And Zixuan is. He’s nice, and cute, and I like him, and it would make
it okay that I didn’t do what they wanted. I didn’t have mana to give to Zheng
and Min, but I did this instead, this other right thing. And Ma would be so
happy. I’d be her smart girl. I’d be her smart girl again. Like when I said I
would do it to the mice, for me and Zheng and Min.”

I hadn’t realized before, but it made perfect sense: that was why the
cleansing had worked so well on her. Because she’d said yes, not so much for



her own sake, but for the boys, and so she’d taken almost no malia from the
mice, our first three years. Just barely enough to survive on.

“And that’s what Zixuan would like, too,” she said. “A smart girl who
wants the right things. He wants the right things himself. He wanted to meet
my parents and help build the enclave. He’s excited about it. Dominus Li is
his great-uncle. He thinks he can persuade him to help us. And I want to help
my family, I want to take care of them, but…I can’t be that girl. I can’t be the
smart girl. I can only be me.”

Aadhya reached out to her, and I did, too; we put our hands on her, and
Liu reached out her own slightly damp hands and gripped ours, one in each,
tight. “We’re going home tomorrow,” she said, and kept hold of us
determinedly: we’d both flinched. We hadn’t broken that rule. You didn’t say
out loud, I’m going to graduate. But Liu held on and said it again. “We’re
going home tomorrow. I’m going home. And my mother is going to be so
happy, and for a long time, she won’t care about anything, except that I’m
back. But then she’s going to want me to want the right things again. The
things that the family think are the right things.” She stopped, and took a
deep breath and let it out. “But I’m not going to. I’m going to want the things
I want, and help them the way I can help them. And those are going to be the
right things, too.”

I reached out to Aadhya, and the three of us made a circle together: not
anything formal, but still a circle, still the three of us together, holding each
other up. Liu squeezed our hands again, smiling at us, her eyes bright but not
dripping tears anymore, and we smiled back.

We couldn’t keep sitting there smiling like muppets the whole night, so
eventually…I went back to my room—without any side trips; I did manage to
resist temptation—only to find Precious sitting in a pile of stuffing in the
middle of my bed, sulking ferociously, with a substantial hole dug straight
through my already thin pillow. I glared at her and said, “Oh, don’t be a sore
loser.” She gave me a narrow look out of her beady eyes and then turned her
back and burrowed herself into the comfortable little nest of fluff.

We still weren’t talking the next morning, although with frigid courtesy
she allowed me to put her in the bandolier cup to go upstairs to breakfast. She



emitted a continuous stream of what I’m fairly certain were rude remarks
from the moment Orion joined me, but they didn’t dampen his spirits; he
beamed at me with delight and tried to take my hand again. I might have
relented and let him have it for a dim stretch of the stairs going up, before we
ran into other kids, all streaming up to the cafeteria.

Breakfast wasn’t stuffed crêpes or anything, but there was unburnt French
toast and griddled sardines and pickled vegetables and enough of it for
everyone: the school giving us all one nice final meal. The freshmen were still
wolfing down theirs when Liesel got up and climbed onto her table with the
large mindphone she’d talked some artificer into making for her—the school
had apparently counted that as helping, too, although I questioned its value.
“It is time now to review the final order of departure,” she announced—the
message reached my head mostly in English, with a few scattered words of
German sneaking in and a whispery echo underneath in Marathi flavored with
bits of Sanskrit and Hindi—and began to read off numbers and names as if
everyone in the room wasn’t already carrying the information inscribed on
their brains in letters of flame.

I wasn’t paying attention, as I really didn’t need to: I knew when my turn
was. After everyone else had gone, and I’d pitched Orion through, and I’d
ripped up the school’s foundations and it was teetering away into the void like
a sequoia getting ready to come down. Then I’d—hopefully—have just
enough time to jump before the tidal wave of mals reached me. On paper I
would, assuming Orion hadn’t been overwhelmed some time before then—
not a remotely safe assumption—and also assuming that Liesel hadn’t fudged
the numbers or, less likely, made a mistake.

So I didn’t notice Myrthe Christopher getting up on her own table until
she cast her own more straightforward amplification spell and said, “Excuse
me!” so loudly she managed to drown out the mindphone even inside my
head. “I’m so sorry, excuse me!” I knew her only by osmosis: she’d always
ranked as one of the more important enclavers, since her parents were
something high up in one of the American enclaves, but it was Santa Barbara,
one of the California enclaves that aren’t quite satisfied having New York rule



the roost. My uncomfortably acquired circle of enclavers didn’t overlap much
with hers, and she’d never stopped by the planning sessions, either.

She waited smilingly until Liesel had lowered her clipboard, then said,
“I’m so sorry, I don’t want to be rude,” in a syrupy way that suggested she’d
been studying to be rude for weeks. “But, like—we’re not actually doing
this?”

“Excuse me?” Liesel said, with a razor-sharp edge that translated into a
prickling sensation along the bottom of my skull. It landed into total silence;
even the freshmen with any breakfast left on their trays had stopped eating.
My own had turned into a strange cold lump in my stomach.

Myrthe cast a wincing smile around, showing how pained she was to have
this awkward yet necessary conversation. “I know it’s been really weird this
whole year, and we’ve all been freaking out, but, reality check—this plan is
literally insane?” She pointed down at the floor. “The graduation hall is empty
right now. Empty. And you want us to go wait in line behind all the other
kids, the freshmen, everybody,” hilarious, nonsense, “and hand over all our
mana, so Queen Galadriel here can summon a billion mals to fill it back up
and eat us?” She gave a gurgle of laughter out loud at the absurdity. “No? Just
—no? I get it, we had to work on something and make it look good, or else
the school was going to screw us, but it’s half an hour to graduation, so I
think we’re good at this point. Please don’t get me wrong, I wish we could
keep it this good for everybody. We should totally give the other kids all the
stuff we can spare, extra mana,” the depths of her generosity, really, “but
come on.”

She wasn’t using a mindphone, but she didn’t really need to. If there was
anyone who hadn’t followed, they were getting a translation right now, and
after all, surely most of them had thought of it. Surely most of them hadn’t
been stupid enough to take the idea seriously, had at some point thought to
themselves, We’re just killing time until we can leave, aren’t we? I was
surprised Liesel hadn’t announced it herself, really; she wasn’t stupid.
Seduced by her own spreadsheets, probably.

And I couldn’t even blame them, because the first thing that came into my
head was, I couldn’t do it alone. Without all the seniors helping, actively



channeling me their mana, I wouldn’t be able to keep the summoning spell
running the whole time and break the school away at the end. That was why
the seniors had to wait until last to go. So if they quit, if only all the seniors
quit, if they refused to help and headed downstairs and out—there wouldn’t
be anything for me to do, after all. I’d just have to walk out of the empty hall,
and Orion would, too. In half an hour, I’d be hugging Mum, and this time
tomorrow he’d be on a plane coming to Wales, and I’d have the whole rest of
my life ahead of me, full of good work, and I wouldn’t even have to feel
guilty.

I couldn’t help that greedy selfish desperate thought, and it stoppered up
all the furious words I wanted to stand up and yell at her. I could feel Orion
gone rigid next to me, but I didn’t look at him. I didn’t want to see him
outraged, and I didn’t want to see him looking hopefully at me, and I didn’t
want to see my own choked feelings in his face. The silence was stretching
out into eternities as if Chloe had just sprayed me with the quickening spell
again, except some of the younger kids had started to cry, muffled into their
hands or buried facedown onto the tables. Everyone was starting to turn their
heads, to look at me and Orion, at Aadhya and Liu and Chloe; others were
looking at Liesel still up on her own table, all of us bloody fools who had
taken the insane absurd plan seriously, much too seriously. The kids in the
mezzanine were crowding the railings, peering down anxiously. They were
waiting for one of us to say something, and I had to say something, I had to
try, but I didn’t have any words, and I knew anyway that it wasn’t going to do
any good. Myrthe would just keep smiling, and what was I going to do,
threaten to kill her if she wouldn’t risk her life to help me save people from
being killed? Was I going to kill everyone who said no? I certainly wouldn’t
have enough mana then.

Then the next table over, Cora put her chair back, legs scraping over the
floor, and stood up and just said flatly, “I’m still in.”

It was loud in the room, hanging there. For a moment, nobody else said
anything, and then abruptly a boy also from Santa Barbara at the other end of
Myrthe’s table stood up and said, “Yeah. Fuck off, Myrthe. I’m in, too. Come
on, guys,” and as soon as he’d prodded them, the other kids at the table were



all moving, shoving back their chairs and getting up, too, until Myrthe was
standing red-faced with a growing ring around her, and people all round the
room were yelling that they were in, they were still in, and I could have cried
—for either reason or both.

People kept piling on until Liesel put the mindphone back up and yelled
painfully, “Quiet!” and everyone winced and shut up. “Enough interruptions.
There is no more time to review. Everyone find your partners and go down to
the senior dormitories right away.”

The whole incident had probably taken less time than Liesel had been
about to spend on reading her announcements, but she’d clearly decided to get
us into motion before anyone else could throw out a clever idea. It was just as
well, because the Scholomance evidently agreed with her. The grinding of the
gears that rotate the dormitories down—and send the senior level to the
graduation hall—was picking up even as we left the cafeteria, and kids were
still pouring down the stairwells when the warning bell for the cleansing
started to go, at least half an hour early. The last few came flying in panicked
from the landing on the hissing crackle of the mortal flames going, with their
shadows huge in front of them in the brilliant blue-white light.

I ran to my room and reached it with the floor beneath me thrumming.
Sudarat and three of the Bangkok sophomores were already waiting inside for
me, piled onto the bed clinging to one another: we’d divvied the younger kids
up among all the seniors for the trip downstairs. I slammed the door shut just
in time as a xylophone chorus of pinging started up outside, metal shards and
bits scraped off the walls flying through the corridor as we started our violent
rattling progress downwards.

We hit some kind of blockage maybe halfway down that made the whole
level lock up and start shaking wildly, and the younger kids all shrieked when
the gears finally forced us through the obstruction and we lurched several
meters onwards in a single violent jerk. My entire desk fell off into the void;
thankfully I already had the sutras in their case strapped safely onto my back,
and Precious tucked inside her cage inside her cup, also strapped down.

Another roaring started to go, of monstrous fans somewhere, and a
hurricane-violent air current began to tear away the outer edges of the room



into jagged puzzle pieces, sending them flying upwards where they’d be
reassembled into a new, hopefully never-to-be-used freshman dormitory. The
floor was crumbling away at an alarming clip, actually, and we still hadn’t
reached the bottom. “Get off the bed!” I yelled, but Sudarat and the others
hadn’t waited for me to tell them the obvious and were already scrambling
off; fortunately, since a moment later my bed tipped off, too. I had to yank
the door open again and we all spilled out into the corridor even as it came to
a thumping, jaw-rattling halt.

Kids were pouring out of rooms all over, running towards the landing as
the rooms kept breaking up around us. The bathrooms were already gaping
holes of void, and the tops of the corridor walls were starting to go as well.
“Keep together!” I yelled at Sudarat and the other Bangkok kids, and then
they were swept away by the current, and a moment later so was I. The
corridor floors got in on it and began sliding us all along towards the landing
like moving walkways gone mad, dumping us all efficiently into the still-
steaming and freshly cleansed graduation hall, all of us in our thousands still
dwarfed inside the cavernous space.

Actually this was a sedate graduation by Scholomance standards: normally
we’d all have been fighting our way through the first wave of maleficaria to get
to our allies by now. And I’d known, I’d literally seen it for myself, but I
hadn’t quite believed my own memory until I got my feet under me and was
standing there in the empty hall, not a single mal in sight.

The doors weren’t even open yet, so we really were early. It was just as
well, since several hundred people would probably have instinctively made a
run for it even if they hadn’t intended to. We were all milling round in
confusion; people were vomiting—efficiently, we were practiced at that—and
sobbing and yelling out names all over, trying to find their friends, and then
Liesel was bellowing through the mindphone, “Back! Everyone back! Clear
space in front of the doors!”

A gaggle of artificers emerged from the general mass, lugging several big
square contraptions I hadn’t even seen before, which fired out a volley of thin
colorful streamers that fell to the ground and then attached themselves there
and lit up like runways. The artificers kept firing them off over and over,



crisscrossing one another to create small sections covering the floor, all color-
coded and marked with the numbers Liesel had assigned the teams; everyone
started running to their places and lining up.

Alchemists were painting wider stripes on the outside of the queue area,
imbued with spells of protection and warding that threw up hazy shimmery
walls. Zixuan already had a team helping him check over the speaker cables
that had been rigged from the ceiling, doing tests from the mouthpiece and
making sure the sound was coming out again from the massive first speaker
dangling down in front of the doors. Another large group were going over the
massive barricades that they’d built around the second shaft, the one coming
down, and Orion was there near them just tossing his whip-sword in his hand
lightly.

He looked over and caught me watching him and smiled so blithely that I
immediately wanted to run over just to punch him in the mouth, or just
possibly kiss him one last time, but before I could put either plan into action,
Precious knocked open the top of her protective egg and gave an urgent
squeak. I jumped and looked round to see Aadhya and Liu beckoning to me
wildly from the raised platform set up to one side of the doors, where the
wide mouthpiece of the speaker system had been mounted onto a stand. Liu
was saying something to her own familiar Xiao Xing in his cup on her chest,
presumably Tell Precious to get her stupid mistress over here.

I ran over, dodging the other kids racing to their places in all directions,
and as soon as I reached them, training took over, and we were just working,
the same routine we’d practiced for weeks. Aadhya quickly tuned up the lute,
and Liu and I ran through a few scales together. Chloe joined us with three
prepared dropper vials nestled in a small velvet-lined case: I sang warm-ups
while she mixed them carefully together into a small silver cup, stirring with a
narrow stick of diamond glowing with mana, and gave the shimmering pink
liquid to me. I gargled with it twice and then swallowed it, and all the raspy
adrenaline tightness in my throat smoothed away, my lungs swelling with air
as if someone had put a bellows into my mouth. I sang out a few more
practice notes and they echoed around the room in an ominous ringing way,
like the tolling of a bell, and everyone in their places shuffled back from the



platform a bit. Probably just as well, in case anyone had thought of having a
dash at the gates in the last minute.

“Ready?” I said to Liu. She nodded, and we stepped up to the mouthpiece
together. Aadhya and Chloe had already run to their own places in the queue;
everyone else was there, too. I took a deep breath, and Liu picked out the
opening line, and then I started singing.

I was immediately glad for every last second we’d spent practicing,
because I hadn’t quite realized until that very moment that we wouldn’t be
able to hear ourselves. The speaker system grabbed the sound and sucked it
completely in, and then carried it off through the miles and miles of speaker
cable wound through the school.

Which obviously was what we wanted, of course—if the song was audibly
coming from me, the mals would just stay right here and come at me; we
needed the sound to come out of that last speaker right in front of the gates,
and from there lead the mals to chase it down that long, long line, so they’d
fill the school up before they ended up back down at the gates Orion was
guarding. But it was just as well that I had every word and phrase deeply
embedded in my brain and my throat and lungs, as otherwise I would have
bungled the incantation completely a minute later when the first notes I’d
made finally boomed out of the speaker in front of the actual doors.

The younger kids all set up a chorus of yelps and small shrieks as larval
mals started to drop from the ceiling and pop out of cracks in the floor and
from under bits of rubble to chase the alluring call. Real screams started a
moment later as a panel of the floor popped off and a really decrepit-looking
voracitor crawled out. The thing was so antique it must have been at least two
centuries old, all creaking wood and antique bloodstained cast-iron machinery
held together with bundles of intestine-like flesh, with long spindly arms and
fingers; it had probably been hiding down there snatching students and other
mals almost since the school had opened.

It was near the front of the queue, amid a crowd of freshmen. The
panicking and running didn’t have a chance to get under way properly,
however, because it ignored them all, fixed its dozen eyes on the line of
speakers hanging from the ceiling, and set off crawling along their direction at



a good healthy clip. It would presumably have kept going on into the shaft
and into the school, only it didn’t have the chance, as Orion dashed over from
his station and pounced on it before it got halfway.

There was some more yelling after that, too, but just a few kids who’d
been splattered with the gore, and then they were drowned out by loads of
people yelling and pointing and gasping: behind me, the doors had cracked.
The first coruscating glimmer of the gateway spell spilled out over the steps
like the light on the bottom of a swimming pool, a faint staticky crackle going
and thin tendrils of the maelstrom wisping out over the floor like a hungry
eldritch mal. I couldn’t be angry at Myrthe, I couldn’t; I wanted to turn and
jump through more than anything in the world. I pressed my hands hard over
my ears and kept singing my silent song, concentrating on the familiar feeling
in my throat.

Liesel was booming out, “Group one!” before the doors had even opened
fully, and the first three kids ran up the stairs holding hands, a cluster of
freshmen from Paris, and vanished out of my peripheral vision. Everyone
sighed a little and leaned in, and then recoiled again as a kerberoi bounded in
through the gates—what one of those was doing in Paris, I’d like to know—
with its heads snapping wildly. The ones on either side had a go at biting, but
their teeth skidded off the protective spells the alchemists had put up, and the
middle head and the body weren’t paying any mind to anything except bolting
along the cable after the speakers. It was running so fast that Orion didn’t
manage to get it in time; it galloped into the shaft and was gone.

But it didn’t matter, because more mals were coming, bucketloads of
them, mostly dripping wet and trailing stinking sewer water. You can’t have
an induction point anywhere that mundanes might see it; if you get spotted,
you don’t get inducted, because the amount of mana the school would have to
spend to force a portal open for you in the face of a disbelieving mundane
would be absolutely insane. Which leads to having induction points in
awkward out-of-the-way places, which in turn as you might imagine get
ringed round by hungry mals that don’t dare attack a prepared group of grown
wizards, but very much want to get into the school.



That had all been part of the plan, of course, only I hadn’t realized how
sure I’d been that the plan somehow wasn’t going to work, until apparently it
was working. What looked like a hundred mals had already come through
even by the time Liesel yelled, “Group two!” and the second group—actually
just a single freshman from the far outback of Australia—went for the gate.
He had to literally leap into the gate over a river of animated bones that
hadn’t stopped long enough to assemble themselves back into skeletons and
were just clattering along.

The second he’d gone through, a huge eldritch-infested dingo came
through, so fast that it had to have been literally standing at his induction
point—presumably guarding it, since it had a binding collar round its throat.
A rather dangerous strategy for protection against mals: so much of its fur
had fallen off to expose the glowing vapors inside that his family couldn’t
possibly have kept it under control for more than another three years at most.
But they clearly had needed the help: a horde of red speckled grelspiders
came pouring through almost right behind it, their talons clattering over the
marble floor as they skittered alongside the line of speakers. They overtook
one of the Parisian preycats along the way, and managed to devour it without
actually stopping, leaving a hollowed-out furry bag of bones behind them to
be crushed flat a few moments later when the radriga came stomping through
after the two kids going home to Panama City had jumped.

A team of the best maths students had laid out the order of departure to
maximize the flow of mals into the school. A pile of incomprehensible graphs
and charts had appeared thirty seconds after the one and only time I’d asked
to have the details explained to me, but I did know the general idea was to
keep the open portals as far apart from one another as possible, so the turns
were deliberately hopscotching round the world. Whatever the artificers had
done to keep the portals open was working, too; the distinctly Australian ones
kept coming for nearly two minutes.

Everything was working. The whole plan. I felt I could keep singing
without a pause for weeks. I couldn’t hear even the delayed music anymore
over the roaring tide of maleficaria streaming in, but the mana was flowing
into me and out again into the spell. The song was meant to be a beckoning,



Come, please come, a banquet waits for you, an alluring invitation, but I didn’t
want to just hold open a hospitable door. I wanted to suck in every last mal of
the world, and I didn’t deliberately start singing something else, but as I got
properly stuck in, the spell I couldn’t hear seemed to become something
harder in my mouth, a ruthless demand: Come now, come all of you. I don’t
know if I’d changed the words, or if I’d just gone wordless entirely, but the
maleficaria were answering: more and more of them were coming, a solid
wave of bodies streaming in. Orion wasn’t even fighting any of them anymore,
he was just randomly sticking his sword or firing attacks off into the mass,
and some of them were falling down dead. The rest kept running along the
line of speakers and going headlong up into the school.

I did start to worry that with so many mals coming in, they’d get in the
way of the kids trying to get out. I couldn’t do anything about it, the only
thing I could do was the calling spell, but I didn’t need to: someone else was
doing something about it. Alfie had got all the London seniors to come out of
their place in queue with him. They joined hands and made a circle for him,
and with them at his back helping, pouring mana into him, he raised up his
evocation of refusal and shaped it into a narrow corridor between the front of
the queue and the gates, so it let kids go running through and shunted the
mals off to the side instead.

Other kids started jumping out of the queue to freshen up the protection
spells, or to help the kids on the edges when one of the mals tried to snatch
themselves a bite for the road. We hadn’t planned on that, hadn’t practiced it.
We hadn’t realized it would be a problem. But there were so many mals that
some of them were being pushed to the edges of the widening current and
bumping up against the queue area, close enough that the tasty young
freshman in the hand was able to overcome the tantalizing lie of the infinite
banquet in the bush. But seniors were jumping out of the queue to help,
fighting the mals off and pushing them back into the torrent; the younger kids
were healing scratches for one another, giving sips of potions to anyone
injured.

Liesel started picking up the pace, too: I think she realized that getting
enough mals wasn’t going to be a problem. She began firing off the freshmen



at a much more rapid clip, waving them through almost without a pause, just
yelling, “Go! Go!” The tide of incoming mals didn’t slow any, but the queue
began to melt away. Zheng and Min waved to Liu and me before they
jumped; maybe two minutes later, Sudarat called, “El, El, thank you!” and
ran through with the Bangkok sophomores.

I really hoped they had got clear of their induction point in a hurry,
because not a minute later, a truly gigantic naga squeezed its widemouthed
hissing head in—or rather its first head, which was followed by two others,
before the rest of it muscled in. The heads nearly stretched the entire length
from floor to ceiling, endangering the speaker cable. There were lots of yells:
it might well have been what had taken out Bangkok. Naga that size are
definitely potential enclave-killers, because if you don’t stop them before they
get inside your wards, then once they’re in they’ll start thrashing wildly to rip
the place apart.

Which it would certainly have done here if given half a chance. I was
about to frantically wave Liu in for an instrumental section, which had been
our plan if I needed to stop long enough to kill anything especially gruesome,
but before I could, Orion took a flying leap from the floor and straight into the
middle head’s mouth. It paused and then a moment later he shredded his way
out of the base of the neck in a whirlwind, hailing unpleasantly fishy bits and
bones and ichor in all directions. All three heads toppled into the still-flowing
tide of other maleficaria, and sank beneath it, devoured in less than a minute.

Orion landed in the full churning current still whirling off the detritus, and
the mals actually split to go around him as he just stood there, bright-eyed and
not breathing particularly hard, and cracked his neck to one side like he’d just
got warmed up properly. He even gave me a quick infuriating grin before he
plunged back into the fray.

Five minutes later, the very last of the freshmen were gone, and we were
well into the sophomores. The mals had squeezed Alfie’s tunnel of access
until it was barely big enough to go one across, and we only had fifteen
minutes left, so the pacing had been thrown to the winds and everyone was
just running at the gates as soon as they came to the head of the queue. I
didn’t know any of the kids going now: they were a river of faces that I’d



never talked to, never shared a classroom with. Even if I’d sat with them at
table in the years before this one, taking a desperation seat with younger kids,
I would have kept my head down; I didn’t remember them.

Some of them looked at me as they came up close to the head of the
queue, and I saw my reflection in their faces: the ocean-green light flickering
round me, the mana shining out from beneath my skin, tinted golden-bronze
except where it escaped around my eyes and fingernails and mouth, turning
me into a glowing lamp upon my pedestal. They ducked their heads and
hurried by, and I thought of Orion saying There are normal people and we’re
not, and maybe he was right, but I didn’t mind. I didn’t know those normal
kids and maybe I’d never know them, but each one of them was a story whose
unhappy ending hadn’t been written yet, and in its place I’d inscribed one line
with my own hand: And then they graduated from the Scholomance.

They were out, so many kids were safely out, and so many mals were still
pouring in—mals that wouldn’t be out there to kill anyone else. I wanted
them ferociously, wanted them beneath my command, and my desire fueled
the spell even more. The mana should have been running low by then: the
juniors were more than half gone, and taking their mana with them. But even
as I felt the flow waver a little, the first sense of the tide beginning to ebb
away, a fresh wave overflowed the banks. I didn’t know what it was at first,
and then through my muffled ears I heard people yelling in dismay, and I
looked up: the tide of mals had made it through the school, and the first ones
had come crashing into the barricade.

I had to keep singing, but I watched them hit, clenched with fear: it was
too soon, ten minutes too soon. First there were two or three, and then there
were ten, and then almost instantly there was a solid thrashing wall of malice
backed up, roaring and hissing and clawing each other in their hunger to get
to Orion, and through him to us. Everyone still in the room tensed, and if
they hadn’t been packed into the queue by then, with a torrent of mals going
by on the other side, people would have broken; I’m sure of it. We’d hoped,
we’d planned, for Orion to hold the barricade for just a minute or two, no
longer, but we still had more than a quarter of the queue waiting, and it wasn’t
possible for anyone to hold off that mass. It wasn’t the graduation horde, it



was orders of magnitude built upon it, unstoppable, and he’d simply be
smothered and overrun.

Except he wasn’t.
The first wave of mals came at him and died so fast that I didn’t even see

how he killed them, and I was watching with unblinking desperation, already
tensing in agony, getting ready to do—something, anything, as wild as I’d
been watching Nkoyo from the other side of the gymnasium doors. The next
wave swept over him, and a handful of them made it past, but only a few
steps past; he broke out of the mass of already collapsing corpses, still alight
with stupid grinning satisfaction, and caught the last running sherve by its
skinny rat tail and dragged it still flailing wildly along behind him as he
plunged without a pause back into the fight.

Mana was surging into me; more than a wave, an ocean. “Oh my God,” I
heard Chloe say, sounding choked, and when I darted a glance over, I saw she
and Magnus and the other New York seniors were all staggering, all their
allies too. The power-sharer on my wrist was glowing vividly, like all of
theirs, and they were all clutching at any kids round them who would take a
handout, literally flinging mana at them—the mana that Orion was suddenly
pouring into the shared power supply. The mals were still dying so fast it
didn’t seem real, as if they were coming apart even as they got to him.

I hadn’t quite believed, even after Chloe had told me, that literally all the
kids from New York had just coasted along for three solid years on the mana
Orion had supplied them; I hadn’t understood his whinging about how low he
was. But now he was finally being filled up again, enough to share, and it was
coming in what felt like a limitless flood. He hadn’t let on how bad it really
was, I realized belatedly; he’d only taken the bare minimum. Everything he’d
done this year, he’d done starved as low as ever I’d been, in the days before
I’d put Chloe’s sharer on my wrist. He’d spent his senior year, the year when
our powers really bloom, without enough mana to do what he could do.

And now that he finally had it, I thought I might understand better what
he’d told me, because it was so effortless for him. He wasn’t locked in a grim,
desperate struggle for his life, counting every drop of mana like a tumbling
grain of sand in an hourglass. His every movement, each graceful killing



sweep of his sword-whip, every spell he cast, every effort he put forth, they all
fed him back, and you couldn’t help but feel, watching it, that he was doing
what he was meant for—something so perfectly aligned with his nature that it
was as easy as breathing. It made sense suddenly that you’d like it, that it
would be everything you wanted to do, if there were something you were this
good at, and it rewarded you with endless buckets of mana on top. Your own
body would teach you to want it more than anything—want it so much you’d
have to learn to want anything else.

Orion didn’t look over at me again, even when he surfaced in between the
killing waves; he was too busy. It was just as well, because if he’d looked over
at me, I’d have smiled stupidly back at him. I was glad, so glad, even pinned
down in this room with all the monsters in the world trying to come at me, at
Orion, because it wasn’t despair in his way after all; it was just the clumsiness
of learning. He could want other things. I wasn’t the only thing he’d ever
want; I was just the first other thing he’d wanted.

The mals were still pouring in, a sea of horrors, and as the seniors started
to go, even bigger ones started to come as well: these were the mals who’d
been further away from the portals, who’d caught the song calling them in
when freshmen or sophomores had first gone through, and now had reached
the same induction point and were making it through. Some of them were so
monstrous you could barely stand to look at them: zjevarras and eidolons,
pharmeths and kaidens, deep nightmare creatures that lurked beneath
enclaves waiting for a chance to devour. But even when the worst twisted
unreal things came in, there wasn’t any screaming or panic anymore. It was
only seniors left now, and we were the survivors of a nightmare ourselves, the
ones who’d endured the Scholomance—the last ones who would ever endure
it. That wasn’t just a dream anymore; I could see that hope being made real in
the sheer number of mals coming through, and Orion was making room for
more almost as fast as I could bring them in.

I was starting to believe that it was going to work. I didn’t want to; I was
fighting hope away as fiercely as Orion was fighting mals. But I couldn’t help
it. The golden seconds were counting away—Liesel had inscribed the timing
midair in letters of fire so we could all watch them going. When they reached



the two minute mark, that was when I’d stop singing and strike the final blow
instead. Only seven and a half minutes left, only seven minutes left, and then
Aadhya was calling, “El!” and I looked over and found her: she was almost at
the front of the swiftly moving queue. She was smiling at me, her face wet
with tears, and in their shine I wasn’t a glowing marvel after all, I was just me,
just El, and I wanted to climb down and run to hug her, but all I could do was
smile back from up on the platform, and as she took the last few steps
forward, she pointed at me and then held her palm against her face: Call me!
Her phone number, and Liu’s and Chloe’s and Orion’s, were all inscribed on
the thin bookmark that held my place inside the sutras. I didn’t have a phone,
and neither did Mum, but I’d promised I’d find a way to call her, if we made
it—

And then, the promise was different. It was only if I made it: Aadhya took
the last few steps up the dais, and she went through the doors, and she was—
out. She was out, she was safe, she had made it.

I knew all the faces going out now. Some of them didn’t like me; Myrthe
stalked past without looking towards me, chin up and mouth tight, except as
the last kid in front of her went, and she saw the gateway seething right in
front of her, her whole face crumpled into sobs and she was fighting to keep
her eyes open even while she ran headlong out, and I was glad, I was glad for
her, glad that she’d made it, too; I wanted them all to make it. I’d missed
Khamis going, and Jowani and Cora; they were already gone. Nkoyo blew me
a kiss with both hands before she ran up the steps and out. I didn’t spot
Ibrahim, I’d missed him going out, but I saw Yaakov go past with his head
bowed and rocking slightly, wearing a beautiful worn prayer shawl whose
fringe was shining with light, his lips still moving even as he walked, and
when he passed me, he looked up and I felt a warmth like the feeling of
Mum’s hand stroking over my hair, calming and steadying.

The New York seniors were coming up: Chloe waved wildly to catch my
eye and put up heart-hands in the air before she went through, and right
behind her, Magnus gave me a thumbs-up, condescending to the last, and I
didn’t even mind. I’d got them out. I was going to get everyone out. There
were only maybe a hundred kids left in the queue—ninety—eighty—no one



left I knew, except Liesel going hoarse and Liu beside me playing steadily on,
the guiding notes I couldn’t hear but felt in my feet, and Alfie and Sarah and
the rest of the London seniors—who should have gone by now; I knew they’d
got a higher number than New York in the lottery. But they’d all stayed back,
to help Alfie hold the aisle for everyone else.

I wouldn’t have expected it of them, of enclave kids; they’d been raised to
do the opposite, to get themselves the hell out. But they’d also been raised on
the party line, hadn’t they: they’d been told, just like the school itself, that
Manchester and London and their heroic allies had built the Scholomance out
of generosity and care, trying to save the wizard children of the world; and
maybe just like the school, it had sunk in more than their parents might have
wanted. Or maybe if you only gave someone a reasonable chance of doing
some good, even an enclave kid might take it.

I didn’t know anyone else, but we were coming to the very end of the line,
and the last group of enclavers, going to Argentina; they’d drawn one of the
lowest numbers of the lottery, but they hadn’t kicked up a fuss and demanded
to be jumped ahead, or else; and because they hadn’t, none of the other
unlucky enclavers had been able to complain. There were four of them, and
they went through single-file and fast, one after another, except the last one
recoiled screaming—the first screaming I’d heard for a while—as a maw-
mouth came rolling in through the gates.

There wasn’t any question about where it had come from, horribly. The
boy from Argentina who’d just gone out of the portal was caught, struggling
and screaming, begging for help, for mercy, to be let out, in absolute and
familiar terror, as the maw-mouth went on gulping up his body, even as it
came through.

I must have stopped singing. I don’t think I could’ve kept singing. It wasn’t
a very big maw-mouth. It might even have been smaller than the last one, the
first one, the only one I’d ever seen or touched before—the one that would
keep living in me for every last minute of the rest of my life. It only had a
cluster of eyes, almost all of them brown and black, fringed with dark lashes,
horribly like the eyes of the boy being swallowed, and some of them were still



conscious enough to be full of horror. Some of its mouths were still
whimpering faintly, and others sobbing or gagging.

But it was going to get bigger. It caught three other mals even before it
was all the way inside, and reeled them in and swallowed them—even before
it had finished engulfing the boy, despite their own thrashing; they didn’t have
enclaver-quality shields to hold it off. And the boy would go too, soon
enough; as soon as the last of his mana ran out.

“Tomas, Tomas!” the Argentine girl was sobbing, but she wasn’t trying to
reach out to him. No one tried to touch a maw-mouth. Not even other mals,
not even the mindless most-hungry ones, as if even they could sense what
would happen to them if they did.

There was bile climbing up my throat. Liu was still playing; she’d thrown a
quick horrified look up at me, but she’d kept going. Alfie was still holding the
aisle, with all the London kids behind him, even though surely all they wanted
was to flee out the gates, to run for more than their lives, because the worst
thing a maw-mouth did was never kill you.

I’d asked them all to help me, and they had; I’d asked them to be brave, to
do the good thing that they had a chance of doing, and I hadn’t the right to
ask them to do it if I wasn’t going to do it myself. So I had to go down to the
maw-mouth. I had to, but I couldn’t, except past it, far down the hall, at the
barricade, I could see Orion’s head turn round. If I didn’t go down, he’d
come. He’d leave the barricade, let the tidal wave of mals come in behind
him, and come for the maw-mouth, because Tomas was screaming,
screaming in rising desperation, as the maw-mouth’s tendrils began to creep
inquisitively up his chest, towards his mouth and eyes.

I stepped down from the platform and crossed the dais. The last kids in
the queue parted to let me through, staring at me as I went, and the shimmer
of the alchemical wards ran like water over my skin as I went through it. The
mals were still coming through the portal, but they were parting in a wide
circle around the maw-mouth, which had paused perhaps for a little digesting,
and to feel around inside the scorched outline that Patience had left behind, as
if it was considering where to make itself at home. It was like a tiny little
inkblot inside that monstrous outline. It couldn’t have had that many lives



inside it yet. And I had my own shield up, Mum’s simple brilliant shielding
spell that she’d given away to everyone in the world who wanted it, and all it
took was mana that you’d built yourself, or that a loving friend had freely
given, and Orion was still pouring power into me like a waterfall.

I had to shut my eyes so I wasn’t looking at it, and then I pretended that
the gates were in front of me, the gates with Mum on the other side, Mum
and my whole future, and that was true, because I couldn’t get there until I’d
gone through this, because the bloody horrible universe wanted me to suffer,
and I jumped forward into the maw-mouth. Even as the horrible surface of it
closed over me, I cast La Main de la Mort with all my rage and the mana of a
thousand mals behind it, and I cast it again, and again, and again, my whole
face and body clenched tight, and I don’t know how long it was, it was
forever, it was three seconds, it was my entire life stretched out to infinity,
and then it was over and Liu was yelling at me, “El! El, look out!”

I opened my eyes, kneeling in wet, and turned just in time to cast my
killing spell one more time, automatically, right at the slavering horka that
had just erupted in through the portal. It tumbled instantly dead, and its
corpse went sliding past me down the steps, riding the horrible putrescent
gush still draining out of the translucent skin of the maw-mouth, and three
other kids were—they were yanking Tomas up, out of the puddle of its
remains. His legs where the maw-mouth had enveloped him and started
trying to unspool him were raw and bloody in patches, and the power-sharer
still on his wrist was crackling; he’d probably overloaded it, pulling enough
mana to shield himself. Sarah pulled it off his wrist and flung it away from
him; it vanished into the streaming mals and the minor explosion was muffled
by their bodies.

I knelt there staring at them, shaking. I didn’t quite believe I’d done it, and
I didn’t quite believe it was over, the whole world gone unreal and blurry for
me: the streaming mals still going by, Liu’s music still carrying our song.

“Get up!” Liesel was yelling at me. “Get up, you stupid girl! It is time!
There are only two minutes left!”

It worked, and I managed to get my feet back under me roughly at the
same time poor Tomas did. One of the others had given him a drink of



potion, and he was looking very calm and glazed; the last girl from Argentina
had got his arm over her shoulders and was helping him balance. Then I
realized why Liesel had been yelling so vigorously: Alfie had moved the
evocation to cover us, to save us from simply being overrun, but that meant
no one else could go. He was trying to force it back into place, against the
pressure of the mals still pouring in, and the clock was almost down to the
final minute.

But there were only twenty kids left. I didn’t go back into the honeypot
calling spell with Liu. Instead I went to Alfie and put my hand on his
shoulder, then put my hands beneath his, to take the evocation over from him;
he slowly and carefully eased his hands out, and gasped and nearly fell over
with release as it came off him. I got a secure grip on it, and then I pushed
mana into it, the mana that was roaring endlessly into me, and widened the
evocation, shoving mals aside, to make an archway to the gates.

“Go!” I said, and the London kids were gone, and the rest of the line
behind them; Liesel jumped down from the platform herself, shoved the
mindphone into my hand—I resisted it for a moment, what was the point with
everyone gone, but she so determinedly wrapped my hand around it that I
gave up and took it, and then she was gone.

The queue was empty. Liu picked the last few notes, letting them fade
away so the song-spell would end gracefully, and then she jumped down from
the platform with the lute and ran past me through the gateway without
wasting a moment on goodbye: the gift of leaving me every last second of the
one precious minute we had left, with the music still winding its way through
the speakers, before the mals all broke loose from the honeypot enchantment;
she only reached out a hand and brushed her fingertips against my arm as she
flew by.

And then it was the end. It was just me and Orion—Orion who was still
fighting in the mouth of the barricade. The mals were trying and trying to get
inside, to get past him, but he’d held them back. The endless tide of them
would overwhelm and smother him eventually, even him. There were hours of
them—days and weeks of them—already built up; sooner or later he’d fall
down for sheer exhaustion, for thirst and hunger and lack of sleep, and they’d



have him. But he didn’t need to hold them off for hours, for days, for weeks.
He only needed one minute and twenty-six seconds.

“Orion!” I called to him—of course he didn’t do anything as sensible as
look over, much less come running—and then, with a half-annoyed, half-
grateful thought to Liesel, I yanked up the mindphone and yelled into it.
“Orion!” Even though he was fighting, he jerked and looked back at me, and
then he killed six more mals and threw a sprinting spell on his feet and put on
a flaming burst of speed and skidded to a stop beside me.

“Go through!” I said, but he didn’t even bother to say no, just swung
round and put himself between me and the mals now pouring into the hall
through the barricade. They weren’t even coming for us right away. I doubt
any of them wanted to come at Orion after the last fifteen minutes of
slaughter, and the music had already stopped for them, the promised banquet
vanished before they’d even reached it. They were only spilling in now
because they hadn’t anywhere else to go, with all the pressure pent up behind
them.

I planted my feet on the dais and started in on the supervolcano
incantation. The first ley lines spiked out from under my feet, running to all
the walls like the coronal lines of a sunburst, and then long curving lines went
swinging back and forth over the floor after them. When the whole floor was
covered, all of them shot together up the walls and through the ceiling, and
for a moment I could feel the whole building in my hands, yielding to me—

Yielding the same way the gym floor had yielded to me, that day with all
the enclavers ready to fight each other. Yielding—to give me a chance to stop
the killing. To save more children.

I hadn’t expected to feel sorry. I hadn’t allowed myself to expect that I’d
even make it to this moment, so I hadn’t imagined what it would be like if I
did, but even if I had, I don’t think I could have imagined that. But for a
moment, I was sorry: the Scholomance had done everything it could for us,
given us ungrateful sods everything it had, like that awful story about the
giving tree, and here I was about to chop it down. I paused, in that moment
between the two parts of the incantation, and though I had to clench every
hardened muscle in my gut to keep from flying apart with the potential of the



spell gathered in me, I managed to say, softly, “Thank you.” Then I plunged
over the line.

I’d never completely cast the spell before, for obvious reasons. I don’t
think I’ll ever cast it again. As soon as I was inside it, I knew it wasn’t really a
spell for a supervolcano: that was just an example. It was for devastation, for
the shattering of a world. I’d felt instinctively that it would work to take the
school down; now I knew that it would.

And the mals knew, too. They did come at us, then—not to kill us but to
escape. The honeypot spell had died out, and the last portals had closed; no
more of them were coming through the gates. But the whole school was
crammed full of them, every last nook and cranny jam-packed, and all of
them could feel the end coming: the warning pillar of ash and fire going up
into their sky, the spreading grey cloud.

But Orion had flipped his sword-wand-thing open into a long, whiplike
length, and he was keeping the whole dais clear; any mal that tried to set so
much as a toe on the steps, he killed, and none of them wanted to come up.
Little ones tried to dart out through the sides; he killed them with rapid flicks
that my eyes couldn’t even follow. I was chanting the final verses of the
incantation, and the floor was beginning to heave beneath us. I could feel
walls parting, pipes bursting, all through the school, and the low groaning of
the floor as it began to separate from the dais. The seam all round was
opening up, and a thin black line of empty void was beginning to show
through.

The mals were going into a frenzy: they stopped being reluctant, and
Orion was fighting furiously, killing them in every direction: nightflyers and
shrikes diving at us, ghauls howling in the air, eldritch horrors whispering
frantically. There was a squealing of metal behind me, too: the doors were
starting to swing shut again. The fiery letters in the air were counting down:
forty-one seconds left, and time to go. If a few mals did escape now, after we
were gone, it didn’t matter. The job was done; we’d done it. I deliberately
stopped on the last syllable but one, and let the spell go. The air around me
rippled with the shudder of the spell traveling out—not quite finished, but so
close that it would tip over to completion on its own in another moment. I



laughed in sheer triumph and cast the evocation of refusal round us and
shoved it outward, tumbling the mals away from me and Orion down the
steps.

Orion wobbled himself, on the lowest step, and looked round wildly at the
mals that had just been pushed out of his reach. “Let’s go!” I shouted to him,
and he turned and stared up at me, blankly.

And then the whole floor shook beneath us, and it wasn’t because of my
spell. The ocean of mals surrounding us parted like the Red Sea, frantically
frothing away to either side as a titanic shape bigger than the doors
themselves erupted out of the shaft and came surging towards us, so
enormous I couldn’t even recognize it as a maw-mouth at first: the endless
eyes and mouths so tiny they were only speckles scattered like stars over its
bulk. Any mal that couldn’t get out of its way was consumed without a pause;
it just rolled over them and they were gone.

It wasn’t Patience; it wasn’t just Patience. It was Patience and Fortitude.
Scorched and starved, their graduation hall picked completely clean, they’d
finally turned on each other. They’d chased each other through the dark
underbelly of the school—the school had surely opened spaces up for them
deliberately, luring them away from the gates to clear the hall for our escape
—until one of them had devoured the other and settled in to quietly digest its
enormous meal in peace, a century of feeding in a single go, only to be stirred
up into a panic when it had felt the school beginning to topple.

All my triumph fell away from me like a long tail of ashes crumbling off
the end of a stick of incense. I’d been getting ready to be proud of myself,
self-satisfied: I’d done it, I’d saved everyone, I’d purged the world of
maleficaria, I’d faced my greatest fear and I’d come through it. I’d been ready
to go through the door and boast to Mum of what I’d done, to wait with
queenly grace for my knight in shining armor to come and receive my hand,
his reward and mine, and set out on our crusade to save any tarnished bits of
the world that still needed to be polished up.

I actually laughed out loud, I think, I’m not sure; I couldn’t hear myself,
but it felt like a mad frightened giggle in my throat. It was just so utterly
hilarious that I’d ever imagined I could face this. I couldn’t form any words,



any coherent plan. Patience slammed into the evocation of refusal like a tidal
wave hitting a seawall, sloshing fully over it like a dome encasing us; eyes
smushed up against the surface and staring down at us blankly. It slid back
down and came at us again: mana roared through me with the impact,
blinding. I couldn’t have cast a killing spell even if I could have done anything
whatsoever: it was taking everything I had to keep the evocation up, against a
monstrosity that wouldn’t ever take no for an answer.

Then Precious put her head out and gave a shrill squeak, and I realized—I
didn’t have to. “Orion!” I screamed. “Orion, come on!” He was standing there
staring up at Patience through the shimmery dome evocation. I didn’t actually
wait for him to respond; even while I was screaming I had already grabbed
him by the arm. I pulled him back with me up the stairs, towards the doors.
They were grinding a bit; they had just started to swing slowly shut. The
crack around the base of the dais was widening.

Patience slammed into the evocation again, and I nearly fell over,
prickling starbursts filling my eyes. I was hanging on Orion’s arm when my
vision cleared; he hadn’t moved. I didn’t speak again, just yanked on him,
dragging him one more step back.

But he wasn’t taking his eyes off Patience. There was a fierce terrible light
in his face, that hunger I’d seen in him before, wanting a thing dead. And I
couldn’t blame him: if anything in the universe wanted killing, it was that
thing, that horrible monstrous thing; it needed to die. And the crack around
the base of the dais was still widening, but it was going just a little bit more
slowly than the doors were closing.

It wouldn’t have mattered in the grand scheme of things if ten or twenty
other mals made it out, but it would matter if Patience made it out, if that
sack of endless death escaped, to keep gnawing eternally on its victims’ bones
and gobble up who knew how many countless others, unstoppable and
forever.

But our time was running out: the hanging numbers of flame were
counting down the last seconds. “We can’t!” I yelled at him, and turning
braced my whole body and flung one hand out, at the end of a stiff arm, to
hold Patience off again through one more thundering blow. I gulped air and



turned back to haul Orion up one more step, to the very edge of the gateway,
and then I let go of his arm and caught his face in both hands and pulled him
round to look at me. “Orion! We’re going!”

He stared down at me. The seething colors of the gateway were shining in
his eyes, mottling his skin, and he leaned in towards me, like he wanted to
kiss me. “Do you want to get kneed again? Because I will!” I snarled at him,
in outrage.

He jerked back from me, more ordinary color flushing into his cheeks.
His eyes cleared for a moment; he looked back at Patience, and then he
laughed once—he laughed, a short laugh, and it was awful. He turned to me
and said, “El, I love you so much.”

And then he shoved me through the gate.

OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com



BY NAOMI NOVIK

The Scholomance

A Deadly Education
The Last Graduate

Uprooted
Spinning Silver

Temeraire

His Majesty’s Dragon
Throne of Jade

Black Powder War
Empire of Ivory

Victory of Eagles
Tongues of Serpents

Crucible of Gold
Blood of Tyrants

League of Dragons

OceanofPDF.com



About the Author

Naomi Novik is the acclaimed author of the Temeraire series and the
award-winning novels Uprooted and Spinning Silver. She is a founder
of the Organization for Transformative Works and the Archive of Our
Own. She lives in New York City with her family and six computers.

naominovik.com
TheScholomance.com

Facebook.com/​naominovik
Twitter: @naominovik

Instagram: @naominovik

OceanofPDF.com



What’s next on

your reading list?

Discover your next

great read!

 
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this

author.

Sign up now.

OceanofPDF.com