Praise for the novels of Avalon
The Forest House
The setting evokes a fascinating time of change…. The mythic elements grow to hint satisfactorily at
the Arthurian wonder to come…. The stuff of legend.”
—Locus
"A historical novel with a mythic undertone…distinctive enough to achieve success in its own right
[and] likely to appeal to a wide audience.”
—Chronicle
"A seamless weave of history and myth.”
—Library Journal
"The sure touch of one at ease in sketching out mystic travels.”
—Kirkus Reviews

Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Ancestors of Avalon
"Magical….[The Mists of Avalon] devotees won’t feellet down by Ancestors…. Provides plenty of
pleasurable reading hours.”
—Fort Worth Star-Telegram
"An elegant stylist, Paxson captures the awe, tragedy, and resounding mystery of ancient Britain and
mist-enshrouded Atlantis.”
—Publishers Weekly
"Paxson fashions an entirely new entry in the Avalon saga…. [Her] storytelling features the requisite
veins of mysticism, but, like Bradley, she excels at bringing the vast sweep of imagined history to an
accessible level…. A rich and respectful homage that will dazzle readers longing to revisit Bradley’s
sacred, storied isle.”
—Booklist
"Once again, Diana L. Paxson has beautifully elaborated on Marion Zimmer Bradley’s beloved Avalon
saga with this dramatic new installment…. [An] extraordinary journey.”
—SFRevu
"Paxson is an excellent choice as successor to Bradley for this series. Her style and the details of the
plot retain the sense of the mysterious past and the feminist awareness that was an underlying theme in
the originals.”
—Chronicle
"Ancestors of Avalon may be the best of the Avalon tales. The story line stands alone due to the strength
of the characterizations…yet also interconnects the myriad plots from the previously published books.”
—Midwest Book Review

Priestess of Avalon
"The message that all religions call on the same higher power should go over well with fans ofMists [of

Avalon]. Paxson’s own skill at bringing historical characters and places to vivid life enriches Helena’s
story.”
—Publishers Weekly
"Stunning…this rich and moving novel merits its place beside Bradley’s fantasy classic.”
—Booklist
"A guilty pleasure for history buffs, and a sure hit for the goddess crowd.”
—Kirkus Reviews
"Bradley creates a powerful tale of magic and faith that enlarges upon pagan and Christian traditions to
express a deeper truth.”
—Library Journal

Lady of Avalon
The National Bestseller
"Combines romance, rich historical detail, magical dazzlements, grand adventure, and feminist
sentiments into the kind of novel her fans have been yearning for.”
—Publishers Weekly (starred review)
"The prose is as smooth as those sacred stones on which so many interesting things take place.”
—Kirkus Reviews
"Bradley’s women are, as usual, strong and vibrant, but never before has she so effectively depicted the
heroic male…. An immensely popular saga.”
—Booklist

OTHER BOOKS IN THIS SERIES
The Mists of Avalon
Lady of Avalon
Priestess of Avalon
Ancestors of Avalon

MARION ZIMMER BRADLEY
the forest house

ROC

Published by New American Library, a division of
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street,
New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto,
Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2,
Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124,
Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.)
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park,
New Delhi-110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore,
Auckland 1311, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Published by Roc, an imprint of New American Library, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Previously published in Viking hardcover and Roc trade paperback editions.
Copyright © Marion Zimmer Bradley, 1993
All rights reserved
ISBN: 978-1-1012-1272-1
REGISTERED TRADEMARK—MARCA REGISTRADA

Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of
both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s
imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, business
establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
The publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or thirdparty Web sites or their content.

For my mother, Evelyn Conklin Zimmer, who
has borne with my working on the book for
most of my adult life
To Diana Paxson, my sister and friend, who anchored
this book firmly in time and space and added Tacitus
to the cast of characters

AUTHOR’S NOTE
Those who are familiar with Bellini’s opera Norma will recognize
the origins of this story. In homage to Bellini, the hymns in chapters
five and twenty-two are adapted from the libretto of act I, scene i,
and those in chapter thirty from act II, scene ii. The hymns to the
moon in chapters seventeen and twenty-four are taken from
the Carmina Gadelica, a collection of traditional Highland prayers
collected in the late nineteenth century by the Reverend Alexander
Carmichael.

PEOPLE IN THE STORY
* = historical figure
( )= dead before story begins
ROMANS
Gaius Macellius Severus Siluricus (called Gaius, native name
Gawen), a young officer, born of a British mother
Gaius Macellius Severus, senior (called Macellius), father of
Gaius, Prefectus Castrorum of the II Adiutrix Legion at Deva,
Equestrian rank
(Moruadh, Royal Woman of the Silures, mother of Gaius)
Manlius, physician at Deva
Capellus, Macellius’s orderly
Philo, Gaius’s Greek slave
Valerius, secretary to Macellius
Valeria (later called Senara), half-Briton niece of Valerius
Martius Julius Licinius, Procurator (financial officer) of
Britannia
Julia Licinia, his daughter
Charis, her Greek maid
Lydia, nurse to her children
Licinius Corax, the Procurator’s cousin in Rome
Marcellus Clodius Malleus, senator, Gaius’s patron
Lucius Domitius Brutus, Commander of the XX Valeria
Victrix Legion after its move to Deva
Father Petros, a Christian hermit
* (Gaius Julius Caesar, "the deified Julius,” who began the
conquest of Britannia)
* (Suetonius Paulinus, Governor of Britain during Boudicca’s
rebellion)
* (Vespasian, Emperor AD 69–79)
* (Quintus Petilius Cerealis, Governor of Britain AD 71–4)
* (Sextus Julius Frontinus, Governor of Britain AD 74–7)
* Gnaeus Julius Agricola, Governor of Britain AD 78–84

* Gaius Cornelius Tacitus, his son-in-law and aide, a historian
Sallustius Lucullus, Governor of Britain after Agricola
* Titus Flavius Vespasianus, Emperor Titus AD 79–81
* Titus Flavius Domitianus, Emperor Domitian AD 81–96
* Herennius Senecio, a senator
* Flavius Clemens, a cousin of Domitian
BRITONS
Bendeigid, a Druid living near Vernemeton
Rheis, a daughter of Ardanos and wife of Bendeigid
Mairi, their eldest daughter, wife of Rhodri
Vran, her young son
Eilan, their middle daughter
Senara, their youngest daughter
Gawen, Eilan’s son by Gaius
Cynric, foster son of Bendeigid
Ardanos, Arch-Druid of Britannia
Dieda, his younger daughter
Clotinus Albus (Caradac), a Romanized Briton Gwenna, his
daughter
Red Rian, an Irish raider
Hadron, one of the Ravens, father of Valeria (later called Senara)
* (Boudicca, "The Killer Queen,” queen of the Iceni, leader of
the revolt in AD 61)
* (Caractacus, a leader of the rebellion)
* (Cartimandua, queen of the Brigantes, who betrayed
Caractacus to Rome)
* Calgacus, Caledonian chieftain, who led the tribes at Mons
Graupius
PEOPLE OF THE FOREST HOUSE
Lhiannon, Priestess of the Oracle, High Priestess of
Vernemeton (the Forest House)
Huw, her bodyguard
(Helve, High Priestess before Lhiannon)
Caillean, a senior priestess assisting Lhiannon
Latis, the herb mistress
Celimon, instructor in ritual

Annis, an old deaf woman who serves Eilan during her
pregnancy
Lia, nurse to Eilan’s son Gawen
DEITIES
Tanarus, British thunder god, equated with Jupiter
The Horned (or Antlered) One, archetypal god of beasts and
woodlands with many local variations
Don, mythic mother of the gods, and by extension, the British
people
Cathubodva, Lady of Ravens, a war goddess similar to the
Morrigan
Arianhrod, Lady of the Silver Wheel, maiden goddess
associated with magic, the sea, and the moon
Ceres, Roman goddess of grain, agriculture
Venus, Roman goddess of love
Mars, Roman war god
Bona Dea, the Good Goddess
Vesta, goddess of the sacred hearthfire of Rome, served by
virgins
Mithras, a Persian hero-god worshipped by soldiers
Jupiter, king of the gods
Juno, queen of the gods, his wife, patroness of marriage
Isis, an Egyptian goddess worshipped in Rome as protectress
of commerce on the sea
PLACES
Britannia Superior—southern England
Mona—the island of Anglesey
Segontium—a fort near Caernarvon
Vernemeton (most holy grove)—the Forest House
Hill of the Maidens—Maiden Castle, Bickerton
Deva—Chester
Glevum—Gloucester
Viroconium Cornoviiarum—Wroxeter
Venta Silurum—Caerwent

Isca Silurum—Caerleon
Aquae Sulis—Bath
The Tor—Glastonbury
The Summer Country—Somerset
Isca Dumnoniorum—Exeter
Lindum—Lincoln
Londinium—London
Britannia Inferior—northern England
Eburacum—York
Luguvalium—Carlisle
Caledonia—Scotland
Bodotria estuary—Firth of Forth
Firth of the Tava—River Tay
Sabrina Firth—Solway
Trimontium—Newstead
Pinnata Castra—Inchtuthil
Mons Graupius—location uncertain, perhaps near Inverness
Hibernia—Ireland
Temair—Tara
Druim Cliadh—Kildare
Germania Inferior—upper western Germany
Colonia Agrippensis—Cologne
the Rhenus—the Rhine

Prologue
A cold wind was whipping the torches into fiery tails. Angry light glittered
on the dark waters of the strait and the shields of the legionaries waiting on
the other side. The priestess coughed at the reek of smoke and sea fog and
listened to the clangor of camp Latin echoing across the waters as the Roman
commander harangued his men. The Druids sang out in answer, calling down
the wrath of the skies, and thunder shook the air.
Women's voices rose in a shrill ululation that sent a chill through her
body, or perhaps it was fear. She swayed with the other priestesses, arms
raised in imprecation; their dark cloaks flaring out like raven wings.
But the Romans were howling too, and now the first rank surged into the
water. The Druid war harp throbbed with a dreadful music, and her throat
was scraped raw with shrieking, but still the enemy came on.
The first red-cloaked soldier set foot on the shore of the Holy Isle and the
gods did not strike him. Now the singing faltered. A priest pushed the
priestess behind him as Roman steel caught the torchlight; the sword fell and
blood sprayed across her dark robe.
The rhythm of the chant was lost. Now there was only screaming and she
ran for the trees. Behind her the Romans were scything the Druids down like
grain. Too quickly, they finished, and the red tide swept inland.
The priestess stumbled through the trees, seeking the sacred circles. An
orange glow filled the sky above the House of Women. The stones loomed up
ahead, but from behind her came shouting. She turned at bay, clinging to the
central altar stone. Now, surely, they would kill her . .. She called out to the
Goddess and straightened, waiting for the blow.
But it was not weapons of steel they meant to use against her. She
struggled as hard hands grabbed at her body, tearing off her robes. They
forced her down upon the stone, and then the first man battered against her.
There was no escape; she could only use the sacred disciplines to withdraw

her mind from this body until they were done. But as awareness winged away,
she cried out: "Lady of Ravens, avenge me! Avenge!"

"Avenge . . ." My own shout woke me, and I sat up, staring. As always, it
took a few moments for me to realize that it was only a dream, and not even
my own, for I was still a child in the year when the Legions murdered the
priests and raped the women of the Holy Isle; an unwanted girl-child called
Caillean, safe in Hibernia across the sea. But since first I heard the story, soon
after the Priestess of the Oracle brought me to this land, the spirits of those
women have haunted me.
The curtain at my door fluttered and one of the maidens who served me
looked in. "My Lady, are you well? May I help you to robe? It is almost time
to greet the dawn."
I nodded, feeling the cold sweat dry on my brow, and allowed her to help
me into a clean gown and arrange the ornaments of a High Priestess on my
breast and brow. Then I followed her out on to the summit of another isle, a
green Tor that rose from the mingling of marsh and meadow that men call the
Summer Sea. From below came the singing of the maidens who watch over
the sacred well, and from the vale beyond it the bell that calls the hermits to
prayer in the little beehive church beside the white thorn tree.
They were not the first folk to seek sanctuary on this island at the end of
the world beyond the narrow seas, nor do I suppose they will be the last. So
many years have passed since the death of the Holy Isle, and though in my
dreams ancient voices still cry out for revenge, a hard-won wisdom tells me
that the mixing of blood strengthens a breed, so long as the ancient
knowledge is not lost.
But to this day I have never found any good in the Romans or their ways.
This is why even for Eilan, who was dearer than a daughter to me, I could
never trust in any Roman, not even Gaius, whom she loved.
But no tramping of iron-shod legionary sandals on stone-paved roads
disturbs us here, for I have cast a veil of mist and mystery to keep out the

straight-edged Roman world.
Today, perhaps, I will tell the maidens the story of how we came here, for
between the destruction of the House of Women on the Isle of Mona and the
return of the priestesses to the Isle of Apples, the women of the Druids dwelt
at Vernemeton, the Forest House, and that story must not be forgotten.
It was there that I learned the Mysteries of the Goddess and taught them in
turn to Eilan daughter of Rheis, who became the greatest High Priestess and,
some would say, the greatest traitor to her people of all. But through Eilan the
blood of the Dragon and the Eagle have mingled with the blood of the Wise,
and in the hour of greatest need that line will always come to Britain's aid.
In the marketplace men say that Eilan was the Romans' victim, but I know
better. In its time the Forest House preserved the Mysteries, and the gods do
not require that we all be conquerors, or even that we all be wise, but only
that we serve the truth that we are given until we can pass it on.
My priestesses are gathering around me, singing. I lift my hands, and as
the sun strikes through the mists I bless the land.

One

Shafts of golden light shone through the trees as the setting sun dropped
below the clouds, outlining each new-washed leaf in gold. The hair of the two
girls who were making their way along the forest path glowed with the same
pale fire. Earlier in the day there had been rain. The thick, uncleared forest
that still covered much of the south of Britain lay damp and quiet, and a few
low boughs still shook scattered drops like a blessing across the path.
Eilan breathed deeply of the moist air, heavy with all the living scents of
the woods and sweet as incense after the smoky atmosphere of her father's
hall. In the Forest House, she had been told, they used sacred herbs to purify
the air. Instinctively she straightened, trying to walk like one of the priestesses
who dwelt there, lifting the basket of offerings in her best imitation of their
balanced grace. For a moment, then, her body moved with a rhythm both
unfamiliar and completely natural, as if she had been trained to do this in
some ancient past.
Only since her moonblood began had she been allowed to bring the
offerings to the spring. As her monthly cycle made her a woman, said her
mother, so the waters of the sacred spring were the fertility of the land. But
the rituals of the Forest House served its spirit, bringing down the Goddess
herself at the full of the moon. The moon had been full the night before and
before her mother called her in, Eilan had stood for a long time staring up at
it, filled with an expectancy she could not define.
Perhaps the Priestess of the Oracle will claim me for the Goddess at the

Beltane festival. Closing her eyes, Eilan tried to imagine the blue robes of a
priestess trailing behind her, and the veil shadowing her features with
mystery.
"Eilan, what are you doing?" Dieda's voice startled her back to awareness,
she stumbled over a tree root and nearly dropped the basket. "You are lagging
like a lame cow! It will be dark before we get back to the hall if we do not
finish soon."
Recovering, Eilan hurried after the other girl, blushing furiously. But
already she could hear the gentle murmur of the spring. In another moment
the path dropped downward, and she followed Dieda to the cleft where the
waters trickled out from between two rocks and fell into the pool. In some
time long past men had set stones around it; over the years the water had worn
their spiraled carvings smooth. But the hazel to whose branches folk tied their
wishing ribbons was young, the descendant of many trees that had grown
there.
They settled themselves beside the pool and spread a cloth for the
offerings, exquisitely prepared cakes, a flask of mead, and some silver coins.
It was only a small pool, after all, where the minor goddess of this forest had
her dwelling, not one of the holy lakes where whole armies sacrificed the
treasures they had won, but for many years the women of her line had brought
her their offerings every month after their moon-times, that their link to the
Goddess might be renewed.
Shivering a little in the cool air, they pulled off their gowns and bent over
the pool.
"Sacred spring, you are the womb of the Goddess. As your waters cradle
all life, may I bear new life into the world . . ." Eilan scooped up water and let
it trickle over her belly and between her thighs.
"Sacred spring, your waters are the milk of the Goddess. As you feed the
world, let me nourish those I love . . ." Her nipples tingled as the cool water
touched them.
"Sacred spring, you are the spirit of the Goddess. As your waters well for
ever from the depths, give me the power to renew the world . .." She trembled
as the water bathed her brow.

Eilan stared into the shadowed surface, seeing the pale glimmer of her
reflection take shape as the waters stilled once more. But as she stared into the
water, the face that stared back at her changed. She saw an older woman with
even paler skin, and dusky curls in which red highlights glinted like sparks of
flame, though the eyes were the same.
"Eilan!"
As Dieda spoke, Eilan blinked, and the face looking back at her from the
water was her own once more. Her kinswoman was
shivering, and suddenly Eilan felt cold as well. Hastily, they pulled on
their clothes. Then Dieda reached for the basket of cakes, and her voice
soared, rich and true, in the song.

"Lady of the sacred spring,
To thee these offerings I bring;
For life and luck and love I pray,
Goddess, accept these gifts today."

In the Forest House, thought Eilan, there would be a chorus &f priestesses
to sing the song. Her own voice, thin and a little wavering, blended with
Dieda's in an oddly pleasing harmony.

"Bless now the forest and the field,

That they their bounty to us yield;
May kin and kine be hale and whole,
Safeguard the body and the soul!"

Eilan poured mead from the flask into the water while Dieda crumbled the
cakes and cast them into the pool. The current swirled them away, and for a
moment it seemed to Eilan that its sound had grown louder. The two girls
leaned over the water, letting drop the coins they had brought.
As the ripples stilled, Eilan saw their two faces, so alike, mirrored
together. She stiffened, fearing to see the stranger there once more, but as her
sight darkened, this time there was only one face, with eyes that shone in the
water like stars in the dark sea of heaven.

"Lady, are you the spirit of the pool? What do you
want from me?" her heart asked. And it seemed to her
that words came in reply:

"My life flows through all waters, as it flows through
your veins. I am the River of Time and the Sea of Space.
Through many lives you have been mine. Adsartha, my
daughter, when will you fulfill your vows to Me?"

It seemed to her then that from the Lady's eyes flashed brightness that
illuminated her soul, or perhaps it was sunlight, for when she came to herself
she was blinking into the radiance that flared through the trees.
"Eilan!" Dieda said in the tone of one who is repeating a summons for the
second time. "What is wrong with you today?"
"Dieda!" Eilan exclaimed. "Didn't you see Her? Didn't you see the Lady
in the pool?"
Dieda shook her head. "You sound like one of those holy bitches at
Vernemeton, babbling of visions!"
"How can you say that? You're the Arch-Druid's daughter - at the Forest
House you could be trained as a bard!"
Dieda frowned. "A female bard? Ardanos would never allow it, nor would
I want to spend my life mewed up with a gaggle of women. I'd rather join the
Ravens with your foster brother Cynric and fight Rome!"
"Hush!" Eilan looked around her as if the trees had ears. "Don't you know
better than to speak of that, even here? Besides, it's not fighting you want to
do at Cynric's side, but to lie there - I've seen how you look at him!" She
grinned.
Now Dieda was blushing. "You know nothing about it!" she exclaimed.
"But your time will come, and when you grow foolish over some man it will
be my turn to laugh." She began to fold up the cloth.
"I never will," said Eilan. "I want to serve the Goddess!" And for a
moment then her sight darkened and the murmur of the water seemed to grow
louder, as if the Lady had heard. Then Dieda was thrusting the basket into her
hands.
"Let's go home." She started up the path. But Eilan hesitated, for it
seemed to her that she had heard something that was not the sound of the
spring.
"Wait! Do you hear that? From over by the old boar pit -"

Dieda stopped, her head turning, and they heard it again, fainter now, like
an animal in pain.
"We'd best go and see," she said finally, "though it will make us late
getting home. But if something has fallen in, the men will have to come and
put it out of its misery."
The boy lay shaken and bleeding at the bottom of the boar pit, his hopes
of rescue fading with the ebbing light.
The pit where he lay was dank and foul, smelling of the dung of animals
trapped there in the past. Sharp stakes were set into the bottom and sides of
the pit; one of these stakes had pierced his shoulder - not a dangerous wound,
he judged, nor even particularly painful as yet, for the arm was still numb
with the force of his fall. But still, slight though it was, it was likely to kill
him.
Not that he was afraid to die; Gaius Macellius Severus Siluricus was
nineteen years old and had sworn his oaths to the Emperor Titus as a Roman
officer. He had fought his first battle before the down was thick on his face.
But to die because he had blundered like a silly hare into a deadfall made him
angry. It was his own fault, Gaius thought bitterly. If he had listened to
Clotinus Albus, he would now be sitting by a warm fire, drinking the beer of
the South Country and flirting with his host's daughter, Gwenna — who had
put off the chaste ways of the up-country Britons and adopted the bolder
manners and bearing of girls in Roman towns like Londinium as easily as her
father had adopted the Latin tongue and toga.
And yet it was for his own knowledge of the British dialects that he had
been sent on this journey, Gaius remembered now, and his mouth curled
grimly. The elder Severus, his father, was Prefect of the Camp of the Second
Adiutrix Legion at Deva, and had married the dark-haired daughter of a
chieftain of the Silures in the early days of the conquest, when Rome still
hoped to win the tribes by alliance. Gaius had spoken their dialect before he
could lisp a word of nursery Latin.
There had been a time, of course, when an officer of an Imperial Legion,
stationed in the fort of Deva, would not have troubled himself to phrase his
demands in the language of a conquered country. Even now, Flavius Rufus,
tribune of the second cohort, cared nothing for such niceties. But Macellius

Severus senior, Prefectus Castrorum, was responsible only to Agricola,
Governor of the Province of Britain, and it was the responsibility of Macellius
Severus to keep peace and harmony between the people of the Province and
the Legion that occupied, guarded and governed them.
Still licking their wounds a generation after the Killer Queen Boudicca
had attempted her fruitless rebellion — and had been fiercely punished by the
Legions - the people of Britannia were peaceful enough beneath the heavy
impositions of tax and tribute. Levies of manpower they bore with less
meekness, and here, on the outskirts of the Empire, resentment still
smoldered, fostered adroitly by a few petty chiefs and malcontents. Into this
hotbed of trouble, Flavius Rufus was sending a party of legionaries to
supervise a levy of men being sent to work in the Imperial lead mines in the
hills.
Imperial policy did not admit of a young officer being stationed in the
Legion where his father held a post as important as Prefect. So Gaius now
held the post of a military tribune in the Valeria Victrix legion at Glevum,
and, despite his British half-blood, from his childhood he had undergone the
severe discipline of a Roman soldier's son.
The elder Macellius had sought no favors for his only son as yet. But
Gaius had taken a slight wound in the leg during a border skirmish; before he
had quite recovered, a fever had sent him home to Deva, with permission to
convalesce there before returning to his post. Recovered, he was restless in
his father's house; the chance to go with the levy to the mines had seemed
nothing but a pleasant holiday.
The trip had been largely uneventful; after the sullen levies had been
marched away, Gaius, with a fortnight of his leave yet to run, had accepted
the invitation of Clotinus Albus, seconded by the daughter's immodest
glances, to stay for a few days and enjoy some hunting. Clotinus was adept at
this too and - Gaius knew — had been pleased at the thought of offering
hospitality to the son of a Roman official. Gaius had shrugged, enjoyed the
hunting, which was excellent, and told Clotinus's daughter quite a number of
pleasant lies, which was excellent too. Just the day before, he had killed a
deer in these same woods, proving himself as adept with the light spear as
these Britons with their own weapons; but now . . .
Sprawled in the filth of the pit, Gaius had poured out despairing curses on

the timorous slave who had offered to show him a short cut from Clotinus's
home to the Roman road that led straight, or so he said, to Deva; on his own
folly in letting the simpleton drive the chariot; on the hare, or whatever it was
that had dashed in front of him and frightened the horses; on the ill-trained
animals themselves, and on the fool who had let them bolt; and on the offguard moment in which he had lost his balance and been thrown, halfstunned, to the ground.
Stunned, yes, but if he had not been half out of his mind from the fall, he'd
have had sense enough to stay where he'd fallen; even such a fool as the
driver must sooner or later have regained control of his horses and come back
for him. Even more than this he cursed his own folly in trying to find his own
way through the forest and for leaving the path. He must have wandered a
long way.
He must have been still dazed from the earlier fall, but he remembered
with sickening clarity the sudden slip, the slither of the leaves and branches as
the deadfall gave way, and then the fall, driving the stake through his arm
with a force that had deprived him of consciousness for some minutes. The
afternoon was getting on before he had recovered enough to take stock of his
injuries. A second stake had torn the calf of his leg, ripping open his old
wound; not a serious injury, but he had struck his ankle so hard that it had
swollen to the size of his thigh; it was broken - or felt like it at least. Gaius,
unwounded, was as agile as a cat and would have been out in moments; but
now he was too weak and dazed to move.
He knew that if he didn't bleed to death before nightfall, the smell of
blood would certainly attract wild beasts who would finish him off. He tried
to stave off memories of his nurse's tales of worse things that scent might
bring.
The damp chill was seeping through his whole body; he had shouted
himself hoarse. Now, if he had to die he'd do it with Roman dignity. He
huddled a fold of his blood-soaked cloak around his face, then, his heart
pounding wildly, dragged himself upright; for he had heard voices.
Gaius put all his failing strength into a cry - half shriek, half howl; he was
ashamed of the inhuman sound moments after it left his throat, and he
struggled to add some more human plea, but nothing would come. He
clutched at one of the stakes, but managed only to pull himself to his knee and

lean against the dirt wall.
For a moment a last ray of sunlight blinded him. He blinked, and saw a
girl's head framed in light above him.
"Great Mother!" she cried out in a clear voice. "How in the name of any
god did you manage to fall down there? Did you not see the warning marks
they put on the trees?"
Gaius could not manage a word; the young woman had addressed him in
an exceptionally pure dialect that was not altogether familiar. Of course, they
would be Ordovici tribesmen here. He had to think a moment to turn it into
the Silure patois of his mother.
Before he could answer, a second feminine voice, this one richer and
somehow stronger, exclaimed, "Lack-wit, we ought to leave him there for
wolf bait!" Another face appeared beside the first one, so like it that for a
moment he wondered if his vision was playing tricks on him.
"Here, grab my hand and I think, between the two of us, we can get you
out," she said. "Eilan, help me!" A woman's hand, slender and white; reached
down to him; Gaius put up his serviceable hand, but could not close it.
"What's the matter? Are you hurt?" the girl asked more gently.
Before Gaius could answer, the other - Gaius could see nothing about her
except that she was young - bent over to see for herself.
"Oh, I see now - Dieda, he is bleeding! Run and bring Cynric to pull him
out of there."
Relief washed over Gaius so powerfully that consciousness nearly left
him, and he slumped back down, whimpering as the movement jarred his
wounds.
"You must not faint," came the clear voice above him. "Let my words be a
rope to bind you to life, do you hear?"
"I hear you," he whispered. "Keep talking to me."
Perhaps it was because rescue was coming that he could allow himself to

feel, but his wounds were beginning to hurt very badly. Gaius could hear the
girl's voice above him, though the words no longer made sense to him. They
rippled like the murmur of a stream, bearing his mind beyond the pain. The
world darkened; Gaius realized that it was daylight and not his sight that had
failed him only when he saw the flicker of torchlight on the trees.
The girl's face disappeared and he heard her call, "Father, there's a man
caught in the old boar pit."
"We'll get him out then," a deeper voice replied. "Hmm . . ." Gaius sensed
movement above him. "This seems a job for a stretcher. Cynric, you had
better go down and see."
The next moment a young man had scrambled down the sides of the pit.
He looked Gaius over and asked pleasantly, "What were you thinking about?
It must take real wit to fall in there when everyone around knows it's been
there thirty years!"
Mustering the scraps of his pride, Gaius started to say that if the fellow
got him out he would be fitly rewarded, then was glad he had not spoken. As
his eyes gradually adjusted to the torchlight, the young Roman realized that
his rescuer was about his own age, not much over eighteen, but he was a
young giant of a man. His fair hair curled loosely about his shoulders, and his
face, still beardless, looked as gay and calm as if rescuing half-dead strangers
was all in a day's work. He wore a tunic of checked cloth and trews of finely
dyed leather; his embroidered wool cloak was fastened with a gold pin
bearing a stylized raven done in red enamel. These were the clothes of a man
of noble house, but not one of those who welcomed their conquerors and aped
the manners of Rome.
Gaius said simply, "I'm a stranger here; I don't know your markings," in
the language of the tribes.
"Well, don't worry about it; let's get you out and then we can talk about
how you came to fall in." The young man slid his arm beneath Gaius's waist,
supporting the young Roman as easily as if he were a child.
"We dug that pit for boars and bears and Romans," he remarked tranquilly.
"Just bad luck you got caught in it." He looked up at the pit top and said, "Let
down your mantle, Dieda; it will be easier than finding something for a

stretcher. His own cloak's all stiff with blood."
When the mantle had been let down, the boy knotted it around Gaius's
waist, then, fastening the other end about his own, he set his foot on the
lowest of the stakes, and said, "Yell if I hurt you; I've hauled out bears like
this, but they were dead and couldn't complain."
Gaius set his teeth and hung on, almost fainting with the pain when his
swollen ankle struck a projecting root. Someone at the top leaned over and
grabbed his hands and at last he struggled over the edge, then lay there just
breathing for a moment before he had strength to open his eyes.
An older man was leaning over him. Gently he pulled away Gaius's fouled
and blood-smeared cloak and whistled.
"Some god must love you, stranger; a few inches lower and that stake
would have gone into your lungs. Cynric, girls, look at that," he went on.
"Where the shoulder is still bleeding, the blood is dark and slow, so it is
returning to the heart; if it were coming from the heart it would be bright red
and spurting forth; and he would probably have bled to death before we found
him."
The blond boy and the two girls bent over, one after the other, to see.
Gaius lay silent. A dreadful suspicion had begun to steal over him. He had
already abandoned all thought of identifying himself and asking them to take
him to the house of Clotinus Albus in return for a substantial reward. Now he
knew that only the old British tunic he had put on that morning for traveling
had saved him. The offhand medical expertise of that speech told him that he
was in the presence of a Druid. Then someone lifted him, and the world
darkened and disappeared.
Gaius awakened to firelight and the face of a girl looking down at him.
For a moment her features seemed to swim in a fiery halo. She was young and
her face was fair, but the eyes were an odd shade between hazel and grey;
wide-spaced under pale lashes. Her mouth was dimpled, but so grave that it
looked older than the rest of her; her hair was as light as her lashes, almost
colorless except where the firelight lay red across it. One of her hands moved
across his face and he felt it cool; she had been bathing his face in water.
He looked for what seemed a long time, until her features were drawn

forever on his memory. Then someone said, "That's enough, Eilan, I think he's
awake," and the girl withdrew.
Eilan . . .He had heard the name before. Had it been in some dream? She
was lovely.
Gains struggled to see, and realized that he was lying in a bench bed built
into the wall. He looked about him, trying to understand where he was.
Cynric, the young man who had drawn him out of the pit, and the old Druid
whose name he did not know, were standing beside him. He was lying in a
wood-framed roundhouse built in the old Celtic style, with smoothed logs
radiating out from the high peak of the roof to the low wall. He had not been
in such a house since he was a little child, when his mother had taken him to
visit her kin.
The floor was thickly strewn with rushes; the wall of woven hazel withies
was chinked and plastered with whitewashed clay, and the partitions between
the bed boxes were made of wicker as well. A great flap of leather curtained
the entrance instead of a door. To lie in this place made him feel very young,
as if all the intervening years of Roman training had been stripped away.
His gaze moved slowly around the house and back to the girl. Her dress
was of red-brown linen and she held a copper basin in her hand; she was tall,
but younger than he had thought, her body still straight as a child's beneath
the folds of her gown. Light from the central hearth behind her glowed in her
fair hair.
The firelight also showed him the older man, the Druid. Gaius shifted his
head a little and looked at him from beneath his lashes. The Druids were
learned men among the Britons, but he had been told all his life that they were
fanatics. To find himself in a Druid's house was like waking up in a wolf's
lair, and Gaius did not mind admitting that he was afraid.
At least when he had heard the old man calmly discoursing on the
circulation of the blood, a thing he had heard from his father's Greek
physician was a teaching of the healer-priests of the highest rank, he had the
sense to conceal his Roman identity.
Not that these folk made any secret of who they were. "We dug that pit for
boars and bears and Romans," the young man had said quite casually. This

should have told him at once that he was a good long way outside the little
protected circle of Roman domination. Yet he was no more than a day's ride
from the Legion post at Deva!
But if he was in the hands of the enemy, at least they were treating him
well. The clothes the girl wore were well made; the copper basin she carried
was beautifully worked — no doubt it had come from one of the southern
markets.
Rushlights of reed dipped in tallow burned in hanging bowls; the couch
where he lay was covered with linen, the straw mattress smelled of sweet
herbs. It was heavenly warm after the chill of the pit. Then the old man who
had directed his rescue came and sat down beside him, and for the first time
Gaius got a good look at his rescuer.
He was a big and powerful man, with shoulders strong enough to throw
down a bull. His face was rough-cast on his skull, as if carelessly chiseled out
of stone, and his eyes were light grey and cold. His hair was liberally
sprinkled with grey; Gaius thought he was around the age of his own father,
about fifty.
"You had a remarkably narrow escape, young man," the Druid said. Gaius
had the impression that lecturing came very naturally to him. "Next time keep
your eyes open. I'll have a look at that shoulder in a minute. Eilan —" He
beckoned to the girl and gave her instructions in a low voice.
She went away and Gaius asked, "To whom do I owe my life, Honored
One?" He had never thought to show respect to a Druid. Gaius, like everyone
else, had been brought up on Caesar's old horror stories of human sacrifice,
and tales of the wars which had been fought to subdue the Druidic cult in
Britain and in Gaul. Nowadays those who remained were pretty well
controlled by Roman edicts, but they could be as much trouble as the
Christians. The difference was that while the Christians spread dissension in
the cities and refused to worship the Emperor, the Druids could incite even
conquered peoples to bloody war.
Still, there was something about this man that commanded respect.
"My name is Bendeigid," the Druid said, but he did not question Gaius,
and the young Roman remembered hearing his mother's people say that

among the Celts a guest was still sacred, at least outside Roman lands. A
man's worst enemy might claim food and shelter and depart unquestioned if
he chose. Gaius breathed a little freer at the reprieve; this was one place it
might be safer - and wiser — to claim hospitality as a guest than to exact it as
the right of a conqueror.
The girl Eilan came into the alcove again, carrying a small chest of
oakwood bound with iron, and a drinking horn. She said timidly, "I hope this
is the right one."
Her father nodded to her brusquely, took the chest, and gestured to her to
give the horn to Gaius. He reached for it and found to his surprise that his
fingers had not the strength to close.
The Druid said, "Drink that," with the unmistakable manner of a man who
is accustomed to giving orders and to having them obeyed. He added after a
minute, "You'll need it by the time we get through with you." He sounded
pleasant enough; but Gaius had begun to be frightened.
Bendeigid gestured to the girl and she came back to Gaius's bedside.
She smiled, tasted a few drops in the traditional gesture of hospitality,
then held the horn to his lips. Gaius tried to raise himself a little but his
muscles would not obey him. With a compassionate cry, Eilan lifted his head
in the curve of her arm so that he could drink.
The young Roman sipped at the cup; it was strong mead, to which some
bitter, obviously medicinal spice had been added.
"You had almost won through to the Land of Youth, stranger, but you will
not die," she murmured. "I saw you in a dream, but you were older - and with
a little boy by your side."
He looked up at her, already too deliciously drowsy to find that disturbing.
Young as she was, lying against her breast was like being back in his mother's
arms. Now, when he was in pain, he could almost remember her, and his eyes
stung with tears. He was vaguely aware when the old Druid cut away his tunic
and the old Druid and the young man Cynric washed his wounds with
something that stung - but not any worse than the stuff old Manlius had put on
his leg when he hurt it before. They smeared his leg with something sticky

and stinging, and bound it tightly with strips of linen. Then they moved the
swollen ankle, and he watched without much interest as somebody said,
"Nothing much wrong here — not even broken."
But he snapped out of the dreamy daze when Cynric said, "Brace yourself,
youngster; that stake was filthy, but I think we can save the arm, if we burn it
out."
"Eilan," the old man commanded curtly, "get out of here; this is nothing
for a young girl to see."
"I'll hold him, Eilan," Cynric said. "You can go."
"I will stay, Father. Maybe I can help." Her hand closed over Gaius's, and
the old man growled, "Do as you like, then, but don't scream or faint."
The next minute Gaius felt strong hands - Cynric's? — holding him flat
and hard. Eilan's hand was still twined in his, but he felt it quiver a little; he
turned his head away, closing his eyes and grinding his teeth lest some
shameful cry should escape him. He smelled the approach of the heated iron,
and then a frightful agony ripped through his whole body.
A scream contorted his lips, he felt it escape as a gagging grunt; then the
rough touch released him and he felt only the girl's soft hands. When he could
open his eyes, he saw the Druid looking down at him, a bleak smile tight
around the greying beard. Cynric, who was still bent over him, was very
white; Gaius had seen that look on youngsters in his own command after their
first battle.
"Well, you're certainly no coward, lad," the youth said in a choked voice.
"Thanks," Gaius said absurdly. And fainted.

Two

When Gaius came to himself again, feeling as if he had been unconscious
for a long time, the rushlights had burned down. Only a little light came from
the coals on the hearth, and by it he could just make out the girl Eilan seated
beside him nearly asleep. He felt tired, and his arm throbbed and he was
thirsty. He could hear women's voices not far away. His shoulder was done up
in thick wrappings of linen — he felt as if he had been swaddled like a
newborn babe. The injured shoulder was slick with some greasy salve and the
linen smelled of fat and balsam.
The girl sat silent beside him on a little three-legged stool, as pale and
slender as a young birch, her hair combed away from her temples, waving a
little; it was too fine in texture to lie perfectly flat. She had a gilt chain around
her neck with some sort of amulet. These Briton girls matured late, Gaius
knew; she might be as old as fifteen. She was hardly a woman, but just as
certainly not a child.
There was a clatter as if someone had dropped a pail and a young voice
yelled, "Then you can go and milk them yourself if you've a mind!"
"And what's to do with the byre-woman?" a woman's voice asked sharply.
"Oh, wailing and weeping like the banshee because those Roman butchers
came and marched her man off with the levies, and she left with three babes,"
said the first voice, "and now my Rhodri has gone off after them."
"The curse of Tanarus on all Romans —" began a voice Gaius recognized
as Cynric's, but the older woman's voice cut him short.

"Hush now. Mairi, put the dishes on the table, don't stand here shouting at
the boys. I'll go and speak with the poor woman - tell her she can bring the
little ones here to the house - but someone must milk the cows this night, even
if the Romans carry off every man in Britain."
"You are good, Foster Mother," Cynric said, and the voices subsided into
a hum again. The girl looked toward Gaius and rose from her stool.
"Oh, you are awake," she said. "Are you hungry?"
"I could devour a horse and chariot and chase the driver halfway to
Venta," Gaius said gravely, and she stared a moment before her eyes widened
and she giggled.
"I'll go and see if there is a horse and chariot in the cookhouse," she said,
laughing, and then the light behind her broadened and a lady stood in the
doorway. For a moment he was astonished at the brightness; for there was
sunlight in the room.
"What is it, the next day?" he blurted without thinking, and the lady
laughed, turned aside and drew the horsehide curtain wide, catching it on a
hook and extinguishing the guttering rushlight in one easy motion.
"Eilan would not let us disturb you even to eat," she said. "She insisted
that rest would do you more good than food. I suppose she was right; but you
must be very hungry now. I am sorry I was not here to welcome you to our
house; I was out attending to a sick woman in one of our clanholds. I hope
Eilan has been looking after you properly."
"Oh, very," said Gaius. He blinked, for something in her manner had
reminded him painfully of his mother.
The lady looked down at him. She was beautiful, this Briton woman, and
so like the girl that the relationship was obvious, even before the girl said,
"Mother -" and stopped, too shy to continue. The woman, like the girl, had
fair hair and dark, hazel-grey eyes. She looked as if she had been working
with her maids, for there was a smear of flour on her fine woolen tunic, but
the shift that showed beneath it was white, finer linen than he had yet seen in
Britain, edged with embroidery. Her shoes were a good dyed leather, and fine

fibulae of spiraled gold fastened the gown.
"I hope that you are feeling better," she said graciously.
Gaius raised himself on his good arm. "Much better, lady," he said, "and
eternally grateful to you and yours."
She made a little gesture of dismissal. "Do you come from Deva?"
"I have been visiting near there," he answered. The Latin flavor of his
speech would be explained if she thought he came from a Roman town.
"Since you are awake, I'll send Cynric to help you bathe and dress."
"It will be good to wash," said Gaius, pulling up the blanket as he realized
that he was naked except for his bandaging.
The woman followed his gaze and said, "He'll find you some clothes; they
may be too large for you, but they'll do for the moment. If you'd rather lie
here and rest, you can; but you're welcome to join us if you feel able."
Gaius thought for a moment. Every muscle in his body felt as if he had
been beaten with cudgels; on the other hand, he could not help feeling curious
about this household, and he must not appear to scorn their society. He had
believed that the Britons who had not allied with Rome were mostly savages,
but there was nothing primitive about this establishment.
"I will join you with pleasure," he said, and rubbed a hand across his face,
dismayed at the untidy stubble. "But I would like to wash - and perhaps
shave."
"I don't think you should put yourself to the trouble of shaving —
certainly not for us," she said, "But Cynric will help you to wash. Eilan, find
your brother and tell him he's needed."
The girl slipped away. The lady turned to follow, then looked at him,
seeing him more clearly in the light of the recessed cubicle. Her eyes softened
from a smile of courtesy to one that reminded him of the way his own mother
had looked at him, long ago. "Why," she said, "you're nothing but a boy."

For a moment Gaius felt stung by the words — he had done a
" man's work for three years - but before he could frame any
courteous answer, a mocking young voice said, "Yes, and if he is a
boy, Stepmother, I am a babe in long clothes. Well, stumble-foot,
are you ready to go tumbling in some more bear pits?"
Cynric came through the door. Once more Gaius was struck by how tall
he was, but except for his great height he too was still a youth; though he
would have made two of Gaius. He laughed. "Well," he said, "you look a little
less ready to be carted away by the old man who kills off fools and drunks.
Let me look at your leg and we'll see if you're fit to set your foot to the
ground." For all his size, his hands were gentle as he examined the hurt leg,
and when he was finished he laughed again.
"We should all have legs so fit to walk! It's mostly a bad bump; what did
you do, knock it on a stake? I thought so. Anyone less lucky would have
broken it in three places and gone limping for life; but I think you'll be all
right. The shoulder's another thing; you won't be fit to travel for seven days or
so."
Gaius struggled upright. "I must," he said. "I must be in Deva in four
days." His leave would be ended . . .
"I tell you, if you're in Deva in four days, your friends will bury you
there," said Cynric. "Even I know that much. Oh, by the way" - he took on a
deliberate stance and repeated as if reciting a lesson - "Bendeigid sends his
greetings to the guest in his house, and bids him recover as best he may; he
regrets that necessity keeps him absent this day and night, but he will rejoice
to see you on his return." He added, "It would take a braver man than I am to
face him and tell him you wouldn't accept his hospitality."
"Your father is most kind," Gaius replied.
He might as well rest. There was nothing he could do. He could hardly
mention Clotinus. What happened next all depended on that fool who drove
the chariot; if he went back and dutifully reported that the Prefect's son had

been thrown and maybe killed, they'd already be combing the woods for his
body. On the other hand, if the halfwit lied, or took this opportunity to run
away to some village not under Roman rule — and there were plenty of them,
even this close to Deva — well, it was anyone's guess. He might not be
missed until Macellius Severus began asking questions about his son.
Cynric was bending over a chest at the foot of the bed; he drew out a shirt
and surveyed it with a mixture of amusement and dismay. "Those rags you
were wearing are only fit to scare crows," he said. "I'll set the girls to clean
and mend them, if it can be done; they haven't much else to do in this weather.
But you'd look like a maid in a long gown in this." He flung it down. "I'll go
and borrow something nearer your size."
He went away, and Gaius fumbled in the remnants of clothing that lay
folded beside the bed for the purse on the leather belt they had cut off him.
Everything was untouched as far as he could make out. A few of the tin
squares that still passed current for coin outside the Roman towns, a clasp, a
folding knife, one or two small rings and a few other trinkets he had not
wanted to wear hunting — ah yes, here it was. Much good it had done him!
He glanced briefly at the scrap of parchment with the Prefect's seal; his safeconduct would be no good to him here, if it did not in fact endanger him; but
when he left here, he would need it to travel.
Swiftly he fumbled it back into the pouch. Had they seen the signet ring?
He started to slip it off his finger and put it into the purse; but then Cynric,
some clothes over his arm, came back into the room. Gaius felt almost guilty;
it looked as if he was examining his possessions to see if anything had been
stolen.
He said, "I think the seal of the ring became loosened when I fell," and
worked the green stone back and forth a little. "I was afraid it might come out
if I wore it."
"Roman work," said Cynric, looking at it. "What does it say?"
It bore only his initials and the arms of the Legion but he was proud of the
ring, for Macellius had sent to Londinium and ordered it from a seal-cutter
when he took up his commission; but Gaius said, "I don't know; it was a gift."
"The design is Roman," said Cynric, scowling. "The Romans have strewn

their rubbish from here to Caledonia." He added scornfully, "There's no
telling whence it came."
Something in Cynric's manner told Gaius he stood in more deadly danger
now than in the pit. The Druid himself, Bendeigid, would never violate
hospitality; he knew that from tales his mother and his nurse had told him.
But there was no telling what this young hothead would do.
On an impulse, he took one of the smaller rings from his pouch.
"My life I owe to you and to your father," he said. "Will you accept this as
a gift from me? It is not costly, but it may serve to remind you of a good deed
done."
Cynric took the ring from his hand; it was too small for any but his
smallest finger. "Cynric, son of Bendeigid the Druid, thanks you, stranger," he
said. "I know no name by which I may return thanks . . ."
It was about as broad a hint as good manners permitted, and Gaius could
not in courtesy ignore it. He would have given the name of his mother's
brother; but the name of the Silure chieftain who had given his sister to a
Roman might have made its way into even this corner of Britain. A small
breach of truth was better than a major one of manners.
"My mother called me Gawen," he said finally. This much at least was
true, for Gaius, his Roman name, had been foreign to her tongue. "I was born
in Venta Silurum, to the south, of no lineage you would know."
Cynric thought about this for a moment, twisting the ring on his little
finger. Then a curious light of comprehension dawned in his face. He said,
gazing intently at Gaius, "Do ravens fly at midnight?"
Gaius was no less astonished by the question than by Cynric's manner. For
a moment he wondered if the young man were simple; then he answered
carelessly, "I'm afraid you have the better of me in woodcraft; I never knew
any that did."
He glanced down at Cynric's hands, saw the fingers were enlaced in a
peculiar manner, and began to understand. This must be the sign of one of the
many secret societies, mostly religious like the cults of Mithras or the

Nazarene. Were these people Christians? No, their sign was a fish or some
such, not a raven.
Well, nothing could interest him less, and his expression must have
showed it. The young Briton's face changed slightly, and he said hastily, "I see
I have made a mistake —" and turned away. "Here, I think these will fit you; I
borrowed them from my sister Mairi, they're her husband's. Come, I'll help
you to the bathhouse and get father's razor for you if you want to shave though you're old enough, I would think, to grow a beard. Careful - don't put
all your weight on that foot or you'll fall on the floor."
Bathed, shaved and, with Cynric's help, dressed in a clean tunic and the
loose breeches the Britons wore, Gaius felt able to get up and hobble. His arm
throbbed and burned, and his leg ached in several places, but he could have
been much worse, and he knew that his muscles would stiffen if he remained
in bed. Even so, he leaned gratefully on Cynric's arm as the taller boy guided
his steps across the yard to the long feasting hall.
A table of hewn boards ran down the center, with heavy benches to either
side. Warmth was provided by a hearth at either end of the hall. Near these a
mixed number of men and women and even a few children were assembling.
Heavily bearded men in roughly woven smocks talked to one another in a
dialect so crude Gaius could not understand a word.
Although his tutor had taught him that the Latin familia originally meant
all who shared living quarters: master, children, freedmen, and slaves, the
Romans now kept their serving folk apart from the family. Cynric mistook his
look of mild distaste for weakness, and hastened to lead him to a cushioned
seat at the upper end of the long room.
Here, a little apart from the mixed crew at the lower end of the table, the
lady of the house was seated on a wide chair. Near by, another seat, covered
with a bearskin, was evidently reserved for the master. Other wide settles and
benches were occupied by several young men and women whose finer
garments and well-bred manners proclaimed them children or fosterlings of
the household, or perhaps upper servants. The lady of the house nodded at the
boys but did not interrupt her conversation with an old man seated near the
hearth, tall and gaunt as an elderly ghost, with grey hair curled and cut in
almost foppish fashion. His beard was grey, too, and elaborately curled. Green
eyes twinkled in the old man's face; his long tunic was of snowy white,

embroidered lavishly, and the small wire-strung harp by his side was trimmed
and ornamented with gold.
A bard! But that was not so surprising in a Druid's hall. It needed only a
soothsayer to have all of the three classes of Druid that Caesar had described
represented here. But a diviner might have seen through the young Roman's
disguise. As it was, the old bard favored Gaius with a long glance that made
the skin prickle along his backbone before the old man turned to his hostess
again.
Cynric said in an undertone, "You know my stepmother Rheis; this is the
bard Ardanos, I call him grandfather, for he is my foster mother's father; I am
an orphan."
This silenced Gaius completely, for he had heard of Ardanos in the
headquarters of the Legion. He was believed to be a powerful Druid, perhaps
the chief of those who remained in the British Isles. Although at first glance
Ardanos looked like any other harper about to play, his every gesture
compelled the eye. Not for the first time, Gaius wondered how he would
escape with a whole skin.
He was glad to drop on to a bench near the hearth and be ignored.
Although it was still bright outside, he felt a chill, and welcomed the heat of
the fire. It had been a long time since he had needed to remember the ways of
his mother's kin. He hoped he would not make a mistake that would betray
him.
Cynric went on, "My sister Eilan you know; beside her is my mother's
sister Dieda." Eilan was sitting near Rheis. Cynric laughed at Gaius's
astonishment as next to Eilan he saw another girl in green linen, leaning
against the back of her chair and listening to the old bard. For just a moment
she seemed as like to Eilan as one oak leaf to another; then he saw that the
girl Cynric had named Dieda was a little older, and that she had blue eyes,
where Eilan's were almost grey. Vaguely he remembered seeing two faces
looking down at him from the edge of the boar pit, but he had thought that
delirium.
"There are really two of them; they are more alike than twins, are they
not?"

It was true, but Gaius was suddenly certain that the sureness with which
he had recognized Eilan would always remain with him. All his life he would
be one of the few who could tell the two women apart as if by instinct. A
fragment of memory bound up with pain and fire came to him - Eilan had
dreamed about him.
And now that he considered them, he could see that they were unlike in
many small ways too; Dieda was a little taller, and her hair lay flat and
smooth against her forehead while Eilan's escaped from its binding in a tiny
halo of curls. Dieda's face was smooth and pale and perfect, she looked
solemn; Eilan looked rosy, as if her face had caught the sunlight and held it
there.
They seemed very different to him, and their voices were altogether so.
Dieda said something carelessly courteous; her voice was rich and musical,
without Eilan's shyness or her laughter.
"So you are the simpleton who goes about tumbling into boar pits?" Dieda
said, gravely. "From what Cynric told me I expected to see some moon-struck
lout, but you seem reasonably civilized."
Gaius nodded noncommittally; it was strange to see so young a girl with
so much cool reserve. He had warmed at once to Eilan, but somehow, though
there seemed no reason she should care, he fancied that this one did not like
him.
Cynric nodded and turned to a young woman who had passed by with a
jug of milk. "Mairi, our guest is named Gawen, if you have not turned dairy
woman in such earnest that you cannot even greet him." The older woman
bowed her head in polite acknowledgment, but did not reply. As she turned he
could see that she was not plump, but exceedingly pregnant. She looked as if
she had been crying.
"And that's all of us, except for my baby sister Senara," Cynric said. This
was a little girl of six or seven, with fair hair like Eilan's. She looked out
shyly from behind Mairi's skirt and then grew bolder, saying, "Eilan did not
come to bed with me at all; Mother said she sat by you all night long."
"Then I am honored by her kindness," Gaius said, laughing, "but I have
little success with women if the prettiest of them pays me no heed. Why were

you not anxious to watch by me, little one?"
She was a round-faced, rosy little thing, and reminded him of his own
sister, who had not long survived his mother's death three years ago. He drew
the child to him with his good arm and she crept up on the seat beside him
where she rested contentedly. Later she insisted on sharing his plate when the
older girls, Mairi and Dieda, brought them food, and Gaius laughed and
humored her.
Cynric and Dieda were talking together in low tones. Gaius tried to deal
with his food, but his bandaged arm made it difficult. Eilan saw the trouble he
was having and came and sat on his other side. With a little sharp knife she
wore at her belt, she unobtrusively cut up his food into morsels that he could
manage, and told the child, in a quiet voice that did not carry beyond their
own ears, not to bother their guest. That done, Eilan's shyness returned. She
went to the fireplace without speaking, and Gaius was content to watch her.
One of the servants brought a child about a year old to Mairi, and the
young woman, without the slightest self-consciousness, unfastened her dress
and sat nursing it, chatting with Cynric. She glanced at Gaius with innocent
curiosity, saying, "Now I can see why you sent to borrow my husband's other
tunic and breeches. He has gone off to —" She broke off, frowning. "I did not
think he would mind loaning his gear to a guest, though he may have a word
to say to me if he finds I gave his dry clothes away while he was shivering in
the forest. Tell me, Gawen, are all the Silures as short as you, like one of the
little people, or did some Roman creep into your grandmother's bed one
night?"
Any answer Gaius might have made was drowned in laughter all along the
table. Gaius remembered that the Britons were given to grosser jesting than a
Roman of good breeding would think tasteful. It was true that the Silures
were small for Britons, dark and fine-boned compared to the big, fair-skinned
men of the Belgic tribes. Cynric and Eilan and Dieda and Rheis were of that
type. But Gaius's few memories of his uncle who ruled the Silures were of a
man of power despite his lack of height, a man quick to fury or laughter, with
tattooed dragons coiling up his arms.
An answer came to him which he would not have dared to make in
Roman company, but which might serve here. "As to that, I cannot say,
Mistress Mairi, but they fit me well enough — and you were not unwilling I

should fill them."
Cynric threw back his head with a great bass roar of laughter, taken up by
all the others. Even the quiet Rheis smiled a little, but quickly sobered, as if
she knew something Mairi did not. For a moment it seemed as if she were
forcing herself to congeniality. She turned to Ardanos.
"Father, shall we have some music?"
Ardanos picked up the harp and looked sharply at Gaius. The younger
man had a sudden conviction that the old Druid knew perfectly well what and perhaps who - he was. But how could he? Gaius was dark-haired like his
father, but the Silures, like some of the other races of the West and South,
were also known for their dark and curly hair. He was almost sure he had
never set eyes on the old man before. He told himself he was imagining things
-probably that stare of supposed recognition had been only shortsightedness.
The old Druid picked up the harp, struck a chord or two, then put it aside.
"I'm in no mood for singing," he said, looking at one of the fair-haired girls.
"Dieda, my child, will you sing for us?"
Eilan dimpled and said, "I am always at your service, Grandfather, but
you don't really want to hear me sing, do you?"
Ardanos laughed in chagrin. "Ah, I've done it again, Eilan, it is you? I
swear you and Dieda always try to confuse me. As if anyone could tell you
apart until you open your mouths!"
Rheis said gently, "I cannot see they are as much alike as that, Father. Of
course, one is my sister and one my daughter, but to me they seem hardly
alike at all. Are you sure it is not the failing of your eyesight?"
"No, I always confuse them until one of them begins to sing," protested
the Druid. "No one could mistake one for the other then."
Eilan said, "You need not make a face like a sour crab apple, Grandfather,
I have not been apprenticed as a bard!" Then they fell silent as,
unaccompanied, Dieda began to sing:

"A bird in the air told a riddle to me;
A fish is a bird that swims in the sea,
A bird is a fish that swims in the air."

Under cover of the song, Rheis beckoned Mairi to her, and said, "Have the
Romans taken anyone but the byre-woman's man?"
"Not that I know of, Mother, but Rhodri went off after them before I could
ask." Mairi said, shaking her head. "He said that most of the other levies were
made to the north."
"That fat hog Caradac! Or I should say Clotinus, as the Romans call him!"
Cynric burst out. "If Old Bedbugs would stand with us the Romans would
never dare send their Legions into this part of the country - but as long as
everyone goes either over to the Romans or to the Caledonians —"
"Be still!" Dieda said sharply, breaking off her song. "You'll wind up
having to go north yourself—"
Rheis said gently, "Hush, children, these family matters will not interest
our guest." But Gaius could tell that what she meant was, "It isn't safe to talk
like this with a stranger in the house."
Ardanos said calmly, "This part of the country is quieter than it has been
for years. The Romans think us tamed, fit only to be milked for taxes. But the
best of their troops are off trying to conquer the Novantae - and as a result
there is less order here."
"Such order as that we could well spare," Cynric said sharply, but Ardanos
glared at him and he subsided.
Gaius leaned a little forward into the firelight. He suspected that he would

almost certainly do better to remain silent, but he was curious.
"I was in Deva lately," he said slowly. "There was talk there that the
Emperor may call Agricola back from Alba despite his victories. They say
there is no profit in spending men and supplies to hold such a barren land."
"We could hardly be so lucky," Dieda said, and laughed in contempt. "The
Romans may indeed vomit up what they have eaten to make room in their
bellies for more; but no Roman ever ceded an inch of conquered land!"
Gaius opened his mouth; then thought better of it. Rheis said, "Is Agricola
so formidable? Could he really conquer Britannia all the way to the northern
sea?"
Ardanos grimaced. "The gossip in Deva may have some truth in it;
between the wolves and the wild men I doubt that even Roman tax farmers
could squeeze out much profit there."
Dieda looked at Gaius with a sudden malice. "You who have lived among
Romans," she said, "perhaps you can tell us why they are carrying off our
men and what will happen to them?"
"The provincial senators pay their taxes with the men of the levy. I
suppose they will take them to the lead mines in the Mendip hills," he said
reluctantly, "and I know not what will befall them there."
But he did know. The whip and poor feeding would be used to break their
spirit, and the gelder's knife to unman any who continued to resist. Those who
survived the march would be set to work in the mines as long as they lived. A
flicker of triumph in Dieda's eyes told him she had guessed he knew more
than he would say. He winced as Mairi began to weep. He had never met - or
ever thought he would — anyone who could be subject to the levies.
"Can't something be done?" she cried.
"Not this year," the old man answered.
"Not much anyone can do about it," Gaius said defensively, "but you can't
deny that the mines have enriched all Britain —"

"We can live without such enrichment," Cynric said wrathfully. "Rome
enriches at the top, and enslaves at the bottom."
"It is not only Romans who have become wealthy —" Gaius began.
"You mean traitors like Clotinus?"
Rheis leaned forward as if to terminate a conversation that had become
awkward, but Cynric would not be stopped.
"You who have lived among Romans," Cynric said angrily, "do you know
how Clotinus the White-Washed made his fortune? He guided the Legions to
Mona, or are you too much a Roman to remember that once there was a holy
place there - the Isle of Women - the holiest place in Britain perhaps before
Paulinus came?"
"I knew only that there was a sanctuary," Gaius said neutrally, his neck
prickling again with that sense of danger. For the Romans, the destruction of
Mona had been overshadowed by the catastrophe of the Iceni rebellion, but he
knew better than to discuss Mona in the house of a Druid, especially since
Agricola had mopped up whatever resistance might have been left there only
last year.
"Here sits a bard at our own fireside," said Cynric, "who can sing of the
women of Mona so that your heart will crack!"
Almost simultaneously the Druid said, "Not tonight, lad," and the lady of
the house leaned forward. "Not at my table; it is not a story to be told while
guests are trying to eat their dinner," she said emphatically.
The suggestion, thought Gaius, was unpopular - or sufficiently political to
make unsafe conversation. But he agreed with the bard's sentiments; he had
no wish to hear any story of Roman atrocities right now.
Cynric looked sullen for a moment, then said to Gaius in an undertone, "I
will tell you later then. My foster mother may well be right; it is not a tale to
be told at the dinner table, nor before children."
"We would do better," said Rheis, "to talk about our preparations for the
feast of Beltane," and Mairi and the girls, as if at a signal, rose from the table.

Cynric offered his arm to Gaius, and helped him back to his bed. The young
Roman was a good deal
more weary than he had realized; every muscle in his body ached, and
though he was resolved not to sleep before he had thoroughly thought all this
through, he soon found himself drifting off.
In the next few days, Gaius's injured shoulder swelled, which kept him
abed in considerable pain - but Eilan, who nursed him devotedly, said that this
discomfort was nothing to the illness that could have come from such a dirty
stake.
The only part of the day that was tolerable was when, two or three times a
day, Eilan - who seemed to have appointed herself his nurse - brought him his
meals and fed him, since he could hardly hold a spoon, let alone cut up meat.
He had not been so close to any woman since his mother had died, and had
never quite realized how much he had missed that closeness. Whether it was
because she was female or because she was of his mother's people, or perhaps
from some sympathy of spirit that went beyond either, he found himself truly
able to relax with her. In the long hours between her appearances, he had
nothing else to think about, and each day, it seemed, he looked forward to
seeing her more.
One morning Cynric and Rheis suggested that it would do him good to get
out into the sunshine for a little and try to walk. He hobbled painfully out into
the courtyard, where little Senara found him, prattling that she and Eilan were
going to the meadow to pick flowers and make garlands for the Beltane
festival the next day.
Under normal circumstances the idea of going along with a couple of girls
would not have attracted Gaius very much; but after his last few days in bed,
he would have welcomed a trip to the cowshed to watch Mairi - or even the
byre-woman - milk the cows. In fact it seemed more like a picnic; for Cynric
and Dieda joined them. The younger girls bullied Cynric as if he were truly
their brother, and gave him their shawls and the lunch basket to carry.
Senara escorted Gaius; he leaned harder on her than he really wanted to,
and told himself that he was humoring the child. Cynric seemed to hover over
Dieda in something other than a brotherly way, talking in low tones. Watching
them, Gaius wondered if they were pledged to each other; he did not know

enough of this tribe's customs to tell, but he knew better than to bother them.
They laid the contents of the lunch basket out on the grass; there was fresh
baked bread and cold sliced roast meat, and apples —rather withered and
brown - the last, the girls said, of the winter store.
"Let me go find some berries." Senara jumped to her feet, looking around
her, and Eilan laughed.
"Silly, it's springtime. Do you think our guest is a goat you can feed on
flowers?"
Gaius did not care what they ate; he was exhausted.
There was a flask of pressed fruit juice and another of fresh brewed
country beer. The younger girls would not drink it, saying it was too sour; but
Gaius found it refreshing. There were sweet cakes too, which Dieda had made
herself. She and Cynric shared a drinking horn and left Gaius to the company
of the other girls.
When they had all eaten as much as they could hold, Senara filled a bowl
with clear water from a spring in the corner of the meadow and told Eilan to
see if she could see the face of her sweetheart in it.
"That is an old superstition," Eilan said, "and I have no sweetheart."
"I have," Cynric said, seizing the bowl and staring into it. "Will the water
show me your face, Dieda?" She came and looked over his shoulder. "It is all
nonsense," she said. Gaius thought she looked prettier when she blushed.
"Did you look in the water, Eilan?" asked Senara, tugging at her sleeve.
Eilan said, "I think it is blasphemous to try to compel the Goddess to
speak that way! What would Lhiannon say?"
"Does anyone here care?" Dieda asked with a strange hard little smile.
"We all know she says nothing unless it is given her by the priests."
"Your father cares," Cynric said soberly.

"True, he does," Dieda said, "and so I suppose you must care too."
Senara turned to her. "Tell me what you saw in the water, Dieda," she
demanded shrilly.
"Me," said Cynric, "or at least I hope so."
"You would really be our brother, then," Senara smiled at him.
"Why do you think I want to marry her?" Cynric grinned. "But we have
yet to speak to your father."
"Do you think he will oppose it?" Dieda seemed suddenly anxious, and it
occurred to Gaius that being the Arch-Druid's daughter might be even more
constricting than being a Prefect's son. "Surely if he had pledged me
elsewhere, he would have told me of it before now!"
"And who will you marry, Eilan?" Senara asked. Gaius leaned forward,
his attention abruptly focusing.
"I had not thought of it," Eilan said, coloring. "Sometimes it seems to me
that I hear the Goddess - perhaps I should enter the Forest House as one of the
maidens of the Oracle."
"Rather you than me," Dieda said. "I would never grudge you that life."
"Ugh!" Senara shook her head. "Would you really want to live all alone?"
"That would be a shameful waste." Gaius said. "Is there no man you wish
to marry?"
Eilan looked up at him and was silent a moment before speaking, then she
said slowly, "None to whom my parents would be likely to give me. And life
in the Forest House can be very rewarding. The holy women learn all manner
of wisdom and the healing arts."
So, Gaius thought, she would like to be a healer-priestess. As he had said
to Senara, he thought that would be a great waste of one who brought such
beauty to the world. Eilan was quite different from everything he had heard of
British girls, whom he had thought were like Clotinus's daughter. His father

had sometimes spoken of pledging him in marriage to the daughter of an old
friend, a high official in Londinium, but he had never seen the girl.
Now it occurred to him that it might be more useful for him to marry
someone like Eilan. After all, his own mother had been a British
tribeswoman. He looked at Eilan so long that she grew uneasy.
"Is there a spot on my face?" she asked. "We should get started on our
festival garlands." Suddenly she jumped up and started across the meadow,
which was liberally starred with blue, purple and yellow flowers. "No, not the
bluebells," she said to Senara, who had followed her. "They will fade far too
soon."
"Show me which ones I should use, then," Senara demanded. "I like these
purple orchids - last year I saw the priestesses wearing them."
"I think their stems are too stiff to braid, but I will try," Eilan said, taking
the handful of flowers from Senara. "No. I cannot do it; no doubt Lhiannon's
maidens know some skill I do not," Eilan declared. "Let's try the primroses."
"They are as common as weeds," Senara complained, and Eilan frowned.
"What happens at the festival?" Gaius asked to distract her.
"They drive the cattle between the fires, and Lhiannon calls down the
Goddess to deliver the Oracles," Eilan declared, her hands full of flowers.
"And lovers meet at the fires," said Cynric, looking at Dieda, "And
pledged couples make known their vows. Here, Senara, try these."
"They are the ones I was trying to weave," Eilan complained, "but their
stems are too stiff. Dieda, will those blossoms work?"
The older girl was kneeling before a hawthorn bush in full, starry bloom.
At the question she turned and pricked her finger on a thorn. Cynric came
over to her and kissed it, and she blushed and asked quickly, "Shall I make
you a wreath, Cynric?"
"As you wish." Then a raven cawed from somewhere in the trees and his
face changed. "What am I saying? I should not be thinking of garlands now."

Gaius saw her open her mouth as if to ask Cynric why not, then stop, and
wondered if it was because he was a stranger. She cast the blossoms away,
and began to pick up the platters from which they had eaten. Eilan and Senara
had finished their garlands.
"Rheis will be very cross if we forget to carry back any of these plates,"
Dieda pointed out. "And you girls had better finish these cakes."
Senara took one of the cakes and broke it in half, handing the remainder to
Gaius.
"Now we have shared a single cake, you are my hearth-guest," she said.
"Almost my brother."
"Don't be so silly, Senara," Eilan said reprovingly. "Gawen, don't let her
pester you."
"Oh, let her alone," Gaius said, "she isn't bothering me." He thought again
of his own dead sister, and wondered what his life would have been like had
she lived. As he rose to his feet, he stumbled a little and Eilan came to take
his arm, handing her garlands to Dieda.
"I'm afraid we have tired you, Gawen," she said. "Here, lean on me.
Careful, don't knock your arm on anything," she warned, guiding him away
from a tree.
"Why, Eilan, you are a healer-priestess already," Cynric said. "Gawen,
you can lean on me if you like. Of course, Eilan's much prettier than I am, so
perhaps I should help Dieda," he said, his face brightening, and he took
Dieda's arm as they started back
along the path. "I think you had better go straight back to bed instead of
getting up for supper, Gawen. Eilan will bring it to you. I worked too hard on
that arm to have you undo all my labor."

Three

The dwelling of the Priestess of the Oracle was square, like a shrine,
surrounded by a roofed portico and set a little apart from the other buildings
within Vernemeton's walls. Although folk referred to the whole enclosure as
the Forest House, in truth it was an entire community whose clustered
buildings were connected by covered walkways. Gardens and courtyards lay
between them so that the whole was like a maze. Only the dwelling of the
High Priestess was set apart from the others, just as only she was surrounded
by the kind of absolute simplicity that is harder to maintain than the most
rigid ritual.
When the Arch-Druid Ardanos arrived, he was ushered into her presence
at once by her attendant priestess, a tall dark-haired women called Caillean.
She was clothed much like the High Priestess in a robe of dark blue linen, but
Lhiannon's arm rings and the' torque at her throat were of pure gold, while
those of her attendant were of silver.
"You may go, child," Lhiannon told Caillean.
Ardanos waited until the striped door-curtain had closed behind her, then
smiled. "She is no longer a child, Lhiannon. Many winters have passed since
you came here with her to the Forest House."
"True, I lose track of the years," Lhiannon replied.
She was, the Druid Ardanos reflected dispassionately, an exceptionally
beautiful woman still. He had known her for many years and was probably
the nearest thing to a friend of her own generation yet living. When he had

been younger, this had cost him many sleepless nights; he was now elderly
and seldom even remembered how she had disturbed his peace.
All the priestesses of the Forest House at Vernemeton, the Most Sacred
Grove, were chosen as much for their beauty as for any
other attribute. It always surprised him. He could understand that a god
might wish to be served by beautiful women, especially if he were some
worthless Roman deity, but it did not accord with what he knew of women
that a goddess should wish her servitors to be too beautiful.
His silence was not in the least constrained by the presence of the great
churl Huw, who bore a cudgel and was stationed at the door, and who would
immediately dash out the brains of any man -even the Arch-Druid himself who made an offensive move or spoke a disrespectful word to the Priestess.
Ardanos, of course, had no such intention; Huw's presence simply assured
Lhiannon's safety and allowed her a freedom in entertaining visitors not
permitted to others.
Ardanos knew that he did not look sufficiently venerable to grace the
office of Arch-Druid, nor was he the Merlin of Britain reborn. But he
consoled himself with the thought that Lhiannon no longer looked much like
the living incarnation and prophetess of the Holy Goddess of Wisdom and
Inspiration either. She was gracious and gentle and her face was refined by
austerity, but for the rest she was just an aging woman, though her hair was so
fair it was all but impossible to detect the graying strands he knew must be
there. Her dark blue sacramental gown fell in stiff and unbecoming folds. The
straight shoulders had begun to droop a little with fatigue. Ardanos felt his
own age the more in beholding such clear signs of hers.
In recent years, in deference to her age, Lhiannon had begun to wear a
headcloth, as most matrons and older women did, except when her hair was
unbound for ritual. And yet, Ardanos reflected, for twenty years — and he
had known her for most of them - this woman's face and form had been
central to their faith, and through her lips had come, if not the literal word of
the gods, then that word as it was interpreted by the priests of the Oracle.
And so perhaps there was something of divinity in the aging woman's face
after all, a divinity that clung like a fragrance. Perhaps it was something
invested there by the multitudes for whom this woman appeared as the

Goddess herself; not, for them, a mere symbol of their faith, but in their literal
child-minds, the Goddess-self - the great Virgin Mother of the Tribes, Lady of
the Land in living form.
Lhiannon raised her head. "Ardanos, you have been staring at me for long
enough to milk a cow! Did you come here to tell me
something, or to ask? Out with it, man! The worst I can do is to refuse.
And when have I ever been able to say no to you?"
And these were the words of divinity, thought Ardanos, glad to pull a
mantle of cynicism over a mood that was becoming oppressive.
"Forgive me, Lady of Holiness," he said mildly. "My thoughts were
elsewhere."
He saw her surprise as he rose again, paced restlessly a few steps, then
said abruptly, "Lhiannon, I'm worried; I heard a rumor in Deva, and it was
repeated by no less a person than the son of the Prefect: Rome may withdraw
the Legions. It's the third time that I have heard it spoken, and granted there is
always a faction howling, 'Down with Rome', but —"
"And too many of those who pass rumors on and howl, are expecting - or
at least hoping — that we will get up and howl along with them. I do not
believe your rumor," said Lhiannon bluntly. "But if it should be so, I am sure
we could live without them. Is that not what we have been praying for since
Caractacus walked the streets of Rome in chains?"
"Have you any idea what chaos that would create?" Ardanos asked. "The
very same faction howling, 'Down with Rome' —" He was still pleased with
the metaphor . . .
"- certainly do not understand what will happen if they get their wish,"
said Lhiannon.
Ardanos thought, She knows me very well; even now, we finish"' one
another's thoughts. But he did not wish to finish that train of thought.
"Granted that there has been such a faction since Caesar won the fame he
needed to rule Rome by invading Britannia! Even now, they will expect those

of us from the Sacred Grove to join in their cries," Ardanos said, "and will not
understand when we are silent. Just now I am worried that it will erupt into
rioting at Beltane -"
"No, I think Beltane is safe enough," Lhiannon said. "People come for the
games, the fires and feasting, and all the rest. If it were Samaine, now —"
"These last levies have made things worse," said Ardanos. "They took
thirty of Bendeigid's men, all the slaves set free when he was proscribed, and
his own sworn man. Proscribed!" He laughed mirthlessly. "He doesn't know
how lucky he was; only forbidden to live within twenty miles of Deva! And
even so he hasn't found out about all the levies yet, but when he does - well,
he's called me worse things than traitor before; his name-calling doesn't
bother me.
"I have permission to hold the Beltane gathering — I went to Macellius
Severus himself and asked him for leave to hold a peaceful festival - as it's
been this last seven or eight years — in the name of Ceres, and it's because he
knows and trusts me that they didn't send along a few legionaries to make
sure they don't get out of order and - shall we say - decide to worship Mars
instead."
Lhiannon sighed, and he knew that she was remembering those days of
blood and fire when Boudicca had sacrificed men to the Goddess in return for
victory. They had all been so young in those days, so sure they could bring
back the days of glory with a little courage and a sharp sword.
"If there's any disturbance," said Ardanos, "any demonstration even, you
know as well as I do that this part of the country will be cut to pieces. But
how could I know their Legions had just marched through and levied thirty
good men to rot in those filthy Mendip mines?"
But he should have known; he was supposed to know what the Romans
were up to almost before they knew it themselves. He had to be ready for the
next outrage, whatever it might be.
She said, "Canceling the rites at this late date would probably create
unrest even where there was none. Do you want me to try it? Have there been
any incidents, reaction to the levies, perhaps?"

"I'm not sure," Ardanos said. "Someone seems to have tried to arrange for
the Prefect's son to . . . disappear -"
"The Prefect's son?" Lhiannon raised one thin eyebrow as if wondering
why anyone should care. "To protest, or to make trouble for our people?
Wouldn't it be more like Bendeigid to murder the men who came to take away
the levies?"
"He found the lad trapped in a boar pit and saved his life, and now the boy
is a guest in his home."
Lhiannon stared at him for a moment and began to laugh. "And your sonin-law Bendeigid does not know?"
"The lad looks enough like his Silure mother to pass for one of ours, and
he's self-possessed enough not to give himself away. But he'll need to do
some healing before he can be moved. If anything happens to the youngster,
who's never, as far as I know, done anything much either good or ill, you
know as well as I do that we'll be blamed for it. We get blamed for everything
else, all the way back to and including the sack of Troy, and the very fact that
the Legions are here and not back in Gaul where they belong. There are all
the old atrocity stories that go back to the deified Julius - may he rest in
peace," Ardanos added with a fierce grin that meant, she was certain, the
exact opposite.
"Still, there is an element of rebellion," he said. "You don't see it, placed
as you are; I don't see it much, living among Romans as I've done for so long.
But it's my business to watch the winds. To see signs and omens. For instance
- where ravens fly at midnight; I speak of the secret society that worships the
Lady of Battles."
This made her laugh. "Oh, Ardanos! Those half-crazy old men who
sacrifice to Cathubodva, telling fortunes and looking for omens in dead birds'
guts - as bad as the Legions with their sacred chicken-coops - no one has ever
paid the slightest attention to them -"
"That's what they were," Ardanos said. He told himself that he welcomed
being able to tell Lhiannon something she did not know. In the old days, the
priestesses had been equal with the Druids in their councils, but since the fall
of Mona they had learned to be secret in order to survive. On occasion, the

Arch-Druid even had to act on his own. Ardanos wondered sometimes if they
might not be carrying it too far - if the priestesses might carry out the
decisions of the Council better if they had a voice in making them. Then he
would not have felt so alone with the problem.
"That is surely what they were, not three years ago. Now suddenly,
instead of old priests and sacrificers, they're a group of young men, not one of
whom is over twenty-one and most of whom were born in the Holy Island,
who think they are reincarnations of the Sacred Band —"
"Those children! Born as they were, it would not surprise me." Her
smooth brow wrinkled as she began to understand.
"Exactly so," he continued. "That boy Cynric whom Bendeigid is
fostering is one of them, and my son-in-law, who always did have a touch of
the fanatic, has lost no opportunity to share his politics with the boy!"
Lhiannon turned white. "How, may I ask, did that happen?"
"I never knew it would make any difference; it was before my daughter
Rheis married Bendeigid, and I did not know him so well. By the time I
realized how much trouble either of them could make, it was too late. Cynric's
all set to begin where his foster father leaves off. He and Bendeigid between
them managed to find most of the other boys - and there were the Ravens,
with a name and an organization ready to hand . . .
"If anything should happen to me, or to you -" He shook his head,
grimacing. "Who could stop them from trying to avenge their mothers' shame
on Rome? Already folk from here to the lakes are going about telling one
another that these men are reincarnated heroes."
"And so they might be," Lhiannon said,
Ardanos grunted. "The worst of it is, they look it."
"I recommended that they should all be drowned, remember, not just the
girls," said Lhiannon, recovering her composure. "Cruel as it sounds, it would
have saved trouble now. But there were some who had other ideas; they were
tender-hearted or, like Bendeigid, they wanted to raise the boys to take
revenge for the priestesses. And so they are still alive and it is more than

twenty years too late to deny their existence. I cannot now say that they have
no right to avenge."
Never that, Ardanos thought. He must never suggest that the word of
Lhiannon was her own word, or the word of the priests, and not the word of
the Goddess. He must not remind her that the word of Lhiannon had never
differed in any essential way from the agreed will of the Council of Druids, or
that the Goddess - if she existed at all, he thought cynically, had long since
ceased to care or to intervene in what became of her worshipers, or of
anybody else, except - or maybe including - her priestess.
He said carefully, "I was implying nothing. I merely remind you — will
you not be seated? Your guard is eyeing me most disquietingly -I said only
that if the Goddess answers your prayers for peace, She also hears, and
ignores, the prayers of most of the population for open rebellion or war. How
long will She continue to hear your prayers and ignore theirs? Or to put it
even more bluntly" — but not bluntly enough, he thought - "forgive me for
this, but you are not a young woman — what of the day when you no longer
serve the shrine?"
If I could only speak the truth to her. A passion he thought he had
forgotten tightened his throat. She and I grow weak with the years, but Rome
is still strong. Who will teach the young ones how to preserve our ancient
ways until Rome in her turn grows old, and our land is our own once more?
After a moment she dropped into a chair and shielded her eyes with her
hands. She said, "Do you think I have not considered that?"
"I know you have thought of it," he said. "And I know the result of your
thoughts. Vernemeton might one day be served by one who, let us say,
answered the cries of the many for war, rather than the prayers of her
Priestess. And then there would be war. And you know what will become of
us then."
"I can only serve the shrine while I live," said Lhiannon bitterly. "Even
you cannot ask more of me than that."
"While you live," echoed the old Druid. "It is of that we must speak now."
Lhiannon passed her hand across her eyes. More gently, he asked, "Do you
not choose your own successor?"

"In a sense." She drew a deep breath. "They say I will know when I am to
die and thus pass on my powers and such wisdom as is mine. You know who
makes the real choice. I was not Helve's chosen. She loved me, yes, but I was
not her choice. That one - her name does not matter; she was but nineteen,
and disturbed in her wits. It was she on whom Helve's choice fell; she gave
that girl the kiss of farewell, and yet she was not even considered nor given
any trial at the hands of the gods. Why not? No doubt you know better than I.
The priests make the final choice. What I say about my successor will have
little weight — unless I am careful to name someone acceptable to them."
"Yet," said Ardanos, "It could be arranged - that your choice would be
theirs."
She said, "Your choice, you mean."
"If you will." He sighed. She was simply too quick to see through him, he
could hardly resent that — certainly not now. '^
"I tried that once," said Lhiannon wearily, "with Caillean; and you know
how that experiment turned out."
"Do I?" he asked.
Lhiannon looked at him oddly. "You should pay more attention to what is
happening in the Forest House. I suspect you would find it hard to trust her;
she has the extremely awkward habit of thinking, usually at precisely the
wrong time."
"But she is the senior priestess. If you were to die tomorrow you know
Caillean would be chosen - unless," he added with emphasis, "she were to die
in the hour of trial." Lhiannon paled, and he went on, "You know best if she
would be acceptable to the gods . . ."
She was silent this time, and he added persuasively, "But if there were
someone else, less well known, whom you could train. If the Council. . .never
suspected prearrangement —"
"If the girl was suitable and intelligent I cannot see why it should be
thought a crime or a blasphemy to prepare her for the choice of the gods . . .

or even for the ordeal at their hands," the old High Priestess said thoughtfully.
Ardanos was silent; he knew he could drive her only so far. Outside he
could hear wind soughing in the trees, but there was no sound but their
breathing within the room.
"Whom have you chosen for me to choose?" Lhiannon asked.
For the three days preceding one of the festivals at which she was to serve
as the Voice of the Goddess, the High Priestess lived in seclusion, attended
only by her chosen priestess, resting, meditating, and purifying herself.
Caillean, who almost always stayed with her, welcomed this time of
separation. The shelter of the Forest House could be constricting, and
whenever so many women, however holy, lived together, there were bound to
be conflicts from time to time.
But now she found it hard to put memories of the outside world behind
her. She spooned oat porridge - made more nourishing by the addition of
nutmeats, since the High Priestess might have no animal flesh during her time
of purification — into a carved wooden bowl and offered it to Lhiannon.
"What did Ardanos want of you?" Caillean heard the bitterness in her own
voice, but could not stop the words. "I did not expect to see him here until the
day of the festival."
"You must not speak so of the Arch-Druid, child," Lhiannon shook her
head, frowning. "He has a heavy load to bear."
"So have you," Caillean said tartly. "And he makes it no lighter with his
demands on you."
Lhiannon shrugged, and Caillean thought once more how fragile those
shoulders were to bear the weight of so many hopes and fears.
"He does the best he can," the High Priestess said as if she had not heard.
"He worries about what will happen when I am gone."
Caillean looked at her in alarm. It was said that a priestess, especially one
of high degree, would know her time. "Have you seen some omen - has he?"

Lhiannon shook her head fretfully. "He spoke in general, but someone
must take thought for these things. No one is immortal, and whoever is to
succeed me will have to begin her training soon."
For a moment Caillean looked at her. Then she laughed.
"By that am I to understand that none of us who are already trained is
acceptable - especially me? Do not bother to answer,"
she said then. "I know that you will only defend him, and in truth I do not
mind. The title of High Priestess is not enough to justify what I have seen you
suffer all these years." Especially, she thought,-since the honor of it was
empty so long as Lhiannon did not choose to exercise her power.
Lhiannon made a movement of discomfort, and Caillean realized that she
was treading too near forbidden ground. She had been closer to the older
woman than a daughter since before her moonblood began to flow, and that
was more than twenty years ago, so she knew how Lhiannon depended on the
illusions that cushioned her reality.
Another woman might have asked Caillean what she wanted instead.
Caillean's lips twisted wryly as she cleared away the half-eaten porridge for,
indeed, she herself did not know. But her heart told her that there must be
more to serving the Goddess than these formal rituals with their tantalizing
hints of power.
The secret teachings of the Druids included tales of a time long ago when
priests from a lost land now sunk beneath the sea had come to Britannia. They
had been masters of magic, and as they married into the ruling lines of the
people they found here and later into the families of each new group of
conquerors, the old blood, and the old knowledge had been preserved. But
those most learned in that lore had died on Mona, and their knowledge with
them.
Sometimes it seemed to Caillean that what they retained at the Forest
House was only the dregs of greatness. Most of the other women were content
with their small magic, but from time to time Caillean would feel an odd
conviction that there must be more. She had spoken truth to Lhiannon - she
did not want to be Priestess of the Oracle. And yet if not that, what was it that
she wanted to do?

"It is time for our morning devotions," Lhiannon's voice pierced her
distraction. The older woman gripped the table and pushed herself upright.
And Goddess forbid that we should fail to perform even the slightest step
in the ritual! thought Caillean as she helped the High Priestess to move out to
the garden and settle herself before the plain stone altar there. But as Caillean
lit the lamp set on its top and brought the flowers to lay before it, she found a
measure of peace returning to her soul.
"Behold, Thou art come with the dawning adorned with flowers,"
Lhiannon said softly, lifting her hands in salutation.
"Thy radiance blazes in the strengthening sun and in the holy fire,"
Caillean replied.
"In the east arising, Thou art come to bring new life to the world." The
voice of the High Priestess seemed to grow younger, purer, and Caillean knew
that if she looked, she would have seen the lines of age fading from
Lhiannon's face, until the beauty of the Maiden Goddess shone from her eyes.
But by then, the same power was filling her own heart.
"The flowers spring up in Thy footsteps; the earth grows green where
Thou dost pass . . ." As she had so many times before, she allowed the rhythm
of the rite to carry her to a place where there was only the Lady's harmony.
On the morning of the Beltane festival, Eilan woke before dawn in the
women's house where she slept with her sisters. Eilan's bed, a wooden frame
strung with rawhide and covered with skins and fine woolen blankets, was
built up against the sloping thatched roof, so close that she could reach up and
touch it. Over the years she had widened a crack in the mud plastering to a
chink through which she could peer. Outside, the light of an early summer
dawn was just beginning to break.
With a sigh she lay back again, trying to remember her dreams. There had
been something about the festival, and then the scene had changed. There had
been an eagle there, she knew, and she had been a swan, and then, it seemed
to her, the eagle had become a swan as well, and they had both flown away.

Little Senara still slumbered; she slept closest to the wall for she was still
small enough to fall out of bed. Her sharp bent knees poked into Eilan's side.
Across the room Mairi, who had temporarily moved back in with her sisters
until they learned what had happened to Rhodri, slept with her child; and on
the outside Dieda, her loose pale hair scattered across her face, and her shift
undone so that Eilan could see about her neck the chain that held Cynric's
ring.
Rheis and Bendeigid did not know yet that the two had plighted
themselves to one another. The secrecy made Eilan uneasy. But they meant to
announce it at this festival, and ask the family to begin the complex
negotiations regarding dowry and settlements so that they could be wed. At
least Cynric had no living kin, which would make it simpler.
The only other furniture in the room was a bench fixed against the wall
and the oaken chest in which the girls kept their extra shifts and holiday
garments. It had belonged to Rheis before she married, and she had always
said that when Dieda was wed it would be a part of her dower. Eilan did not
grudge her this, for another, equally fine one intended for Eilan was already
taking shape at the hands of old Vab the joiner. And in due time there would
be one for Senara. She had seen the oak planks rubbed until they shone, and
the wooden pegs stained till they did not show.
The baby whimpered sleepily and then began to squall, and Mairi sat up
with a sigh, her curly hair an aureole around her face. She got up to change
his breech-clout, then came back and laid him across the bed. He gurgled and
she patted him.
Eilan put her feet into clogs and said, "Listen; I hear Mother outside. I
suppose we had better get up." She pulled on her gown, and Dieda opened her
eyes and said, "I'll be dressed in a minute."
Mairi laughed. "I'll help Rheis as soon as I've fed the babe. You and Eilan
can stay here and make yourselves beautiful for the festival. If any of the
young men have caught your fancy, you'd best be prepared to shine." She
smiled kindly at her young kinswoman. Dieda, with two younger brothers at
home, was not accustomed to being pampered, and they all connived to spoil
her a little whenever she was here.
When Mairi and her child had gone, Dieda smiled and said sleepily, "Is it

truly festival day? I thought that was tomorrow."
"It is today," teased Eilan, "when you and Cynric will plight your troth."
"Will Bendeigid approve, do you think?" Dieda asked. "He is" Cynric's
foster father after all."
"Oh, if your father gives his consent, it does not much matter what mine
thinks," observed Eilan shrewdly. "And if he did disapprove of the two of you
being together, I suppose he would have said so before now. Besides, I
dreamed last night about you and Cynric at the festival."
"Did you? Tell me!" Dieda sat up, wrapping the bedclothes around her, for
the air was still cool.
"I don't remember much about it. But your father was happy. Are you sure
you want to marry that brother of mine?"
"I do, indeed," said Dieda with a small smile, and Eilan knew she would
say no more.
Eilan said, "Maybe I should ask Cynric — he might have more to say!"
and laughed.
"And maybe he would not," said Dieda. "He does not talk that much
either. You do not want to marry him yourself, do you?"
Eilan shook her head emphatically. "He is my brother!" If she had to
marry, surely the great hulking lout who used to put frogs in her bed and pull
her hair was the last boy she would choose!
"That's not really so, you know," Dieda said.
"He is my foster brother, and that is like kin," Eilan corrected. "If Father
wished us to marry, he would not have fostered him." She reached for a comb
of carved horn and began to unbraid the glistening strands of her hair.
Dieda lay back with a sigh. I suppose Lhiannon will be at the festival. . ."
she said after a time.

"Of course she will. The Forest House lies by the spring at the foot of the
hillfort after all. Why?"
"Oh, I don't know. Now that I'm thinking about getting married it makes
me shiver to imagine spending one's life that way," said Dieda.
"No one has asked it of you," said Eilan.
"Not in so many words," said Dieda. "But Father did ask me once if I had
ever thought of giving myself to the gods."
"He asked you that?" Eilan's eyes grew wide.
"I said I had not," said Dieda, "but for weeks after I had nightmares that
we had quarreled and he had imprisoned me in a hollow tree. And I do love
Cynric. Anyway, I could not bear to live my whole life within the Forest
House - or confined in any other house whatever. Would you?"
"I do not know - Eilan said. "Perhaps if I were asked I would agree —"
She remembered how the priestesses moved through the festival, so serene in
their dark blue gowns. They were honored like queens. Wouldn't that be a
better life than being at some man's beck and call? And the priestesses were
taught all the hidden lore.
"And yet I saw you looking at the young stranger," Dieda teased; "the one
Cynric rescued. I think you would make a worse priestess than I!"
"Maybe you are right," Eilan turned away so that the other girl would not
see the color that was heating her brow. She was concerned about Gawen
because she had spent so much time tending him, that was all. "I have never
thought much about it. But now I remember," she said thoughtfully,
"Lhiannon was also in my dream."

Four

Later that morning the family set out for the festival. It was a fair May
day, with a freshness in the air from the rain the night before, but the wind
had driven the last of the clouds eastward and overhead the sky was clear. On
such a morning, all the world's colors seemed newly created to honor the day.
Gaius was still limping, but Cynric had taken the bandage from his ankle,
saying it would do him good to walk on it. He walked carefully, breathing
deeply of the cool air, doubly inebriating after so long spent lying down
indoors. Two weeks ago it had seemed he would never walk under the open
sky again. For the moment it was enough to be alive, watching the sunlight on
the green leaves and the spring flowers and the bright clothing of the folk
around him.
Eilan had put on a long loose gown woven in crossed squares of pale
golds and browns and a color like budding leaves over an undertunic of pale
green. Her hair lay in a shining cape across her shoulders, brighter than the
gold of her brooches and bracelets. It seemed to him that in all that glowing
world she was the fairest thing of all.
He paid little attention to their chatter about the festival. He had seen a
few celebrations among his mother's people when he was a child, and he
supposed this one would be much the same. He heard the noise of the festival
before they got there, for the great Celtic festivals were generally combined
with a market fair. The festivities had actually begun some days before, and
would go on for some time after, but this - the eve of Beltane — was the focus
of the festival. It was at dusk that the Priestess of the Oracle would appear.
The woods had blossomed with tents and bothies of woven branches, for
the festival had attracted folk from many days' journey away. Most of the
people here were Cornovii, but Gaius recognized the tribal tattooing of
Dobunni and Ordovices and even some Deceangli from up near Deva. After

two weeks in the house of Bendeigid, the British speech of his birth came
easily to his tongue, and Deva and the Legion were beginning to seem dim
and far away.
Around the base of the old hillfort were clustered stalls selling dishes and
small wares, some looking as if they had been made by local peasantry, and
some which could have been sold in Rome itself. Perhaps they were of
Roman make, for there was a growing trade between Britain and Rome, and
the Greek and Gaulish traders went everywhere. There were stalls of apples
and sweets, markets where people were trading horses, and a hiring fair where
you could find anything, so Cynric said, from a swineherd to a wet nurse.
But when Gaius reached the flattened top of the hill that lifted like an
island above the sea of forest, his eyes widened. The fair occupied the
grounds of a great cleared earthwork, too full of booths and folk for the
perimeter to be visible. But at the far end of the main aisle rose a great earthen
barrow, whose entrance was of stone. Cynric made a sign of reverence as they
crossed the road.
Gaius asked, "Is that your temple, then?"
Cynric gave him a curious look, but said only, "It is the burial place of a
great chief among our forefathers. Unless some of the older bards know who
he was, his name is lost, and if there was ever a song about him I have
forgotten it, or never learned."
Another, longer avenue led to a building like a small square tower
surrounded by a thatched portico, and Gaius gave it a curious glance. Eilan
whispered, "That is the shrine where they keep the holy things."
"It looks like a temple," he said in a low voice, and she stared at him.
"Surely you know that the gods cannot be worshiped in any house made
with human hands, but only under the open sky?" She added after a moment,
"On some of the western islands, where no trees grow, they hold the rites in
forests of stone; but my father says that the secrets of the great ancient rings
of stone here in the South were lost with the senior Druids who were killed
when the Romans came."
A booth where they were selling bangles of Greek glass caught her eye
and she stopped talking. Gaius sighed. Better not ask anymore questions, he
thought, lest he betray himself further. There were some things they would
certainly expect even a Silure tribesman to know.
There were stalls of brooms and mops, and pretty girls selling garlands —
almost everyone wore a garland - flowers and a good many other things, some
too alien for Gaius to recognize. The young people wandered among the
booths, casually looking at their wares. Cynric inquired for a swineherd but
said that they all demanded too much for their labor.

"The accursed Romans have taken so many men in their levies that we
must hire men to tend our beasts and till our fields," he said. "But so many
folk have been driven from their lands that we can sometimes find men who
will come for shelter and food alone. I suppose if I were a farmer I would be
glad of that. But may the gods save me from tilling the land!"
At noon Rheis gathered her family together beneath a spreading oak tree
at the base of the hill for some cold meat and bread. The old hillfort was the
focus for many pathways. From here they could see a broad and well-tended
way that ran westward, lined with stately oak trees. At its very end the
thatched roofs of the Forest House and its outbuildings showed pale against
the deep green of the Sacred Grove.
Cynric and Gaius had gone off to look at horses, and Rheis had drifted
away to speak to an acquaintance. The girls were packing up the food, when
Eilan froze and whispered, "Look, there is Lhiannon."
The High Priestess, with a few of her attendants, was coming along the
Sacred Way between the long line of trees. Her slight figure glimmered in the
dappling of sunlight that sifted through the branches, and she moved with the
gliding pace of a trained priestess, so that she did not seem quite like a human
being at all as she drew near. Lhiannon stopped as if to wish them a joyous
festival, and her eyes fell on the girls. "You are the kinswomen of Bendeigid,"
she said. Her gaze fixed on Dieda. "How old are you, my child?"
"Fifteen," whispered the girl.
"Are you yet married?" Lhiannon asked. Eilan felt her heart begin to thud
heavily in her breast. This was the face of the High Priestess as she had seen it
in her dream.
"I am not," Dieda said in a still voice. She was staring at the Priestess as if
entranced by that clear gaze.
"Nor pledged in marriage?"
"Not. . .yet, although I have thought. . ." her voice faltered.
Tell her, thought Eilan. You are pledged to Cynric! You have to tell her
now! But though her lips worked, Dieda stood frozen, like a young hare when
the falcon's shadow falls.
Lhiannon unfastened the heavy blue cloak that hung from her shoulders.
"Then I claim you for the Goddess; henceforth you shall serve Her whom I
serve and no other . . ." The cloak opened like a dark wing as the priestess
swung it round, and light flared as the branches moved in a sudden wind.
Eilan blinked. Surely it was only sunlight - but in the dazzle, for a
moment she thought that the opening of the cloak had revealed a radiant
figure. She closed her eyes, but imprinted upon her inner sight she saw still a
Face with a mother's tender smile and a bird of prey's fierce eyes, and it

seemed to her that it was she, not Dieda, who was fixed by that gaze. But
Lhiannon had not spoken to her, nor seemed to see her at all.
"From henceforward, you shall dwell with us in the Forest House, my
child. Come to us there - well, tomorrow will be time enough." Lhiannon's
voice seemed to come from a great distance. "So be it."
Eilan opened her eyes once more and saw the shadow fall as the cloak
settled across Dieda's slim shoulders.
The women who followed Lhiannon intoned, "She is the beloved of the
Goddess; Her choice has fallen. So be it."
Lhiannon took the cloak from the girl's shoulders and her attendants
helped her to fasten it again. Then she moved away from them, towards the
festival.
Eilan's eyes were still fixed on her. "The choice of the Goddess . . .you are
to be one of them . . .What is the matter with you?" She came back to herself
and saw that Dieda's face was deathly white, her hands locked together.
Dieda shook her head, shivering, "Why couldn't I speak? Why couldn't I
tell her? I cannot go to the Forest House - I am pledged to Cynric!"
"But you aren't not yet, not formally," said Eilan, still dazzled by what she
had seen. "Private promises aren't binding, and nothing has gone so far that it
cannot be undone. I should think that anyone would rather be a priestess than
marry my brother —"
"You should think-" said Dieda furiously. "Yes, you really should think,
sometime - it would be a new experience for you, I dare say —" She broke off
in something like despair. "You're such a child, Eilan!"
Eilan stared at her, realizing that the other girl did not share her
excitement. "Dieda, are you saying that you don't want to be a priestess?"
"What a pity her choice did not fall upon you," said Dieda helplessly.
"Maybe we should say it was you. Maybe, like Father, she mistook us. Maybe
it was really you she meant —"
"But that would be impiety, if the Goddess has chosen you," Eilan
protested.
"What am I going to say to Cynric? What is there that I can say to him?"
Her control broke and she began to laugh helplessly.
"Dieda," Eilan put her arm around the other girl, "can't you speak to your
father? Tell him that you don't want this? If it were me, I should be happy, but
if you hate the idea —"
Numbly, choked with misery, Dieda said, "I dare not. Father would never
understand, nor cross the High Priestess. There is something —" In a voice
which hardly reached her kinswoman's ears, she said, "Father is so much
Lhiannon's friend - it's almost as if he were her lover —"

Scandalized, Eilan turned her eyes upon the other girl. "How can you say
that? She is a priestess!"
"I don't mean they've done anything wrong, but he has known her so long.
He seems at times to care more about her than anyone alive — surely more
than any of us girls!"
"Take care how you say such things," Eilan warned, her face flushing.
"Someone else might hear who would understand you no better than I did."
Dieda said dismally, "Oh, what does it matter? I wish I were dead!"
Eilan did not know what to say to comfort her. She was silent, clinging to
the other girl's hand. She could not understand how Dieda might wish to
refuse this honor. And how happy it would make Rheis, that her youngest
sister should be chosen.
Bendeigid too would be pleased; Dieda was like another daughter to him
and he had always been fond of his wife's little sister. Eilan tried to forget her
own disappointment.
Gaius and Cynric moved through the holiday crowd, pausing from time to
time to comment on the points of some pony, then moving on. After a time
Cynric asked, "Is it true then, friend, that you know nothing of what befell on
the Isle of Mona? I had thought -if you lived near Deva —"
"I have never heard the story," Gaius said. "I'm from the country of the
Silures, remember, away to the south." And knowing that my mother was
married to a Roman officer, he thought then, it would have taken a braver
man than most to tell me. "Is it some well-known tale?" he said aloud. "You
said that the Druid Ardanos could sing it."
"Hear it then, and wonder no more why I have little that is good to say of
the Romans," said Cynric angrily. "There was - in the days before the Romans
came - a sacred enclosure of women where now is nothing but a polluted
pool. One day the Legions came - and did what they always do; cut down the
grove and plundered its treasures, murdered such Druids as contested with
them, and raped all the women - from the oldest priestess to the youngest
novice. Some were near to grandmothers in age, some no more than little girls
of nine or ten, but that did not matter to them!"
Gaius gasped. He had never heard that part of the story. The Romans
spoke only of the Druids with their tossing torches and the dark-clad women
who had shrieked imprecations, and said that the legionaries had been afraid
to cross the boiling waters of the Menai strait until their commander shamed
them into attacking. Mona had been the final stronghold of the Druid
priesthood. Until meeting Bendeigid and Ardanos, he had thought most of
them had been wiped out. Military logic made it obvious that Mona must be
destroyed. But a good commander, he thought angrily, kept his men in line.

Had the soldiers reacted so violently because the women made them afraid?
"What happened to the women? You may well ask," said Cynric. As a
matter of fact, Gaius had not asked; but he knew that Cynric was telling the
tale as he had been taught, and would sooner or later get around to that.
"The Romans left most of the women pregnant," Cynric went on. "When
the babies were born, the girls were drowned in the sacred pool the Romans
had already desecrated, and the boys were fostered with the families of
Druids. When they came to manhood they were told of their background, and
they were given training at arms. And one day they are to avenge their
mothers and their gods; and, believe me, they will! They will swear it by the
Lady of Ravens who hears me!" he added vehemently. He fell silent, and
Gaius waited uneasily for him to go on. Cynric had spoken of an underground
movement called the Ravens. Was the other boy, then, one of them?
After a moment Cynric continued, "That was when all the women of the
Druids on this isle were brought here to the Forest House where they could be
guarded."
Gaius listened, wondering if the tale had been told him for a reason. But
Cynric did not know he was Roman, and Gaius was very glad. At the moment
he was not sure he wanted to be a Roman himself, although it had been the
wellspring of his pride.
As dusk began to fall young men in white robes with golden torques about
their necks began piling up two great heaps of wood in the open space before
the barrow, making sure - as Cynric informed him in a whisper - that each
included the wood of the nine sacred trees. Gaius had no idea what those
were, but was afraid to admit it, so he simply nodded. Between them a plank
of oak had been placed with a piece set upright like an axle. Nine Druids, old,
imposing men in spotless white robes, took turns to spin the axle to the beat
of a drum. As the sky darkened, people gathered around them, watching, and
silence spread through the crowd.
And then, just as the sun slipped beyond the trees, Gaius glimpsed a spark
of red. Others had seen it as well. A murmur rippled through the crowd, and
in the same moment one of the Druids cast something powdery at the base of
the axle and it seemed to explode into flame.
"The fires will burn till dawning, while folk dance around them," said
Cynric. "And some of the lads will keep watch over the Beltane tree." He
gestured towards a tall pole that stood at the other end of the hilltop. "The rest
will be out until dawn with their sweethearts gathering greenery, or at least
that is what they say" — he grinned suggestively - "and will bring it back in
the morning to crown the pole and dance in the day."
The need-fire had been carried to the woodpiles, which were now

beginning to crackle merrily. It was growing dark; Gaius stepped back as the
first blast of heat tingled on his skin.
A line of dancers formed and began to circle the bonfires. Someone set a
wine flask to Gaius's lips. Already the crowd was getting rowdier, dipping
freely into the vats of ale and mead. He had seen rites like this before and
knew what to expect. He noticed now that the smaller children had been taken
away; the young priestesses in the blue robes and fillets and veils of the
Forest House were no longer among the crowd.
Gaius and Cynric wandered together through the laughing throng until,
near the fires, they encountered Eilan and Dieda.
"There you are!" exclaimed Cynric, hurrying forward. "Dieda, come
dance with me."
All the color left Dieda's face and she held on to Eilan's hand.
"You have not heard?" asked Eilan brightly.
"Heard what, Sister?" Cynric began to frown.
"She has been chosen for the Forest House — by Lhiannon herself, this
very afternoon!"
Cynric reached out to Dieda, and then, slowly, let his hands fall. "The
Goddess has spoken?"
"How can you accept this?" Dieda's spirit seemed to come back to her.
"You know I cannot marry you if I must take vows."
"And you know what vows already bind me," he said somberly. "I have
been torn to pieces trying to decide. I love you but I cannot encumber myself
with a wife and children for years, if ever. Perhaps the gods have chosen this
way for us."
He drew a shaken breath and this time when he reached out she came to
him. Dieda was a tall girl, but she seemed fragile, encircled by his strong
arms.
"Listen, beloved, there is still a way," he said softly, taking her aside.
"Three years you can give the Goddess — you need not pledge yourself
lifelong. There is a battle college in the northern islands, and it is there that I
am bound to go. But you are no battle-maiden; even if we were publicly
pledged you could not come to me there. Perhaps it is as well you are to serve
in the sanctuary for a time - you will be safer there. And if war should come .
. ."
Dieda gave a little sob and buried her face against his shoulder. Gaius saw
Cynric's big hands close on her arms.
"For three years other vows will bind us," he whispered, "but tonight is
ours. Eilan, stay here with Gawen," he added, his voice muffled by Dieda's
hair.

Eilan hesitated. "Mother said that Dieda and I were to stay together - it is
Beltane —"
Dieda lifted her head, and her eyes were wild. "Have some pity! Rheis
dares not cross your father - and my father —" She swallowed. "If they knew,
they would not let us have even this little time!"
Her eyes wide and grave, Eilan nodded.
"Was I wrong to leave Eilan alone with the stranger?" Dieda whispered as
Cynric led her away. "After all, he has lived among the Romans and may have
their ways with women."
"He is a guest in our house; even if he were the son of the Procurator
himself . . ."
"He can't be," Dieda giggled suddenly. "My father says that the Procurator
has only a single daughter."
"— if he were, surely, he would respect the daughter of his host. And
Eilan is only a child," Cynric replied.
"She and I were born in the same year," Dieda said. "You think her a child
because she is your sister."
"What were you expecting?" Cynric asked irritably. "That I should tell
you how much I love you before them both?"
"What is there left to say? Certainly not enough -" And she stopped, for
his arms were around her, and he stooped to cut off her words with a kiss.
She clung to him for a moment, then broke uneasily away. "That doesn't
help," she said. "And if we should be seen . . ."
He laughed mirthlessly. "They haven't put you under vows yet, have they?
And I could always say it was Eilan I kissed." He put his hands under her
elbows, lifting her on tiptoe, and bent to kiss her once more. After a moment
all her resistance melted, and she let him mold her against him, kissing her
again and again. When he broke away, his voice cracked, "How sane I
sounded, a few moments ago! But I was wrong. I can't let you do this thing!"
"What do you mean?"
"I can't let you be walled up with all those women."
"What else can I do?" Now she had to be the sensible one. "Cynric, you're
Druid-bred, you know the laws as well as I. Lhiannon has chosen. Where the
hand of the Goddess has fallen . . ."
"You are right, I know it, but still . . ." He pulled her to him roughly, but
his voice was very gentle as he said, "It's Beltane. Lie with me tonight, and
your family will be glad enough to let us marry."
Her mouth was too young to be so bitter. "Perhaps you would like to
explain nicely to my father how it happened? Or to yours."
He said, "Bendeigid is not my father."

"Yes, I know," she said. "Not that it makes any difference. But whether he
is your father or not, Ardanos is mine, and he would strangle me and take a
bullwhip to you. It is done, whether I like it or not. I am now a pledged virgin
of the Sacred Grove and you are a Druid's son - well, at least you have been
raised as one - and you are the son of a priestess in any case," she added
quickly. "Cynric, you said it yourself. I can ask to be released at the end of
three years. And then —"
"And then," he promised, "I will take you away to the other end of the
earth if that is what I have to do."
"But you said you ought not to encumber yourself with wife or children,"
she protested, for the sake of hearing him say, "I don't care what I said; I want
you."
Then he added, "Sit here beside me, then; let us watch the fires. It may be
for the last time. Or for three years, which," he added despondently, "is almost
the same thing."
The Arch-Druid of Britain stood at the gateway to the Forest House,
watching the last light fade from the sky. From the hilltop he could hear the
sounds of many voices, their clamor faded by distance to a music like a lake
full of migrating birds, and beneath the other sounds, the deep heartbeat of the
drums. Soon they would be lighting the Beltane fires.
Though time was passing, Ardanos felt curiously unwilling to move. That
morning he had been in Deva, listening to the Roman Prefect. Tonight he
would have to hear the complaints of the people the Romans ruled. There was
no way he could satisfy all of them. The best he could hope for was to
maintain an uneasy balance until - what, really, was he waiting for? — for all
the old wounds to heal?
You will be dead before that happens, old man! he told himself. And
Lhiannon too. He sighed, and saw that the first star had pricked through the
darkening sky.
"The Lady is ready," said a soft voice behind him. Ardanos turned and
saw one of the maidens, Miellyn, he thought, holding open the door.
Lhiannon's chamber was lit by hanging lamps of bronze. In their
flickering light he saw her already slumped in her chair, Caillean standing
watchfully by her side. For a moment the younger priestess met his gaze
defiantly, then she stepped aside.
"She has taken the sacred herbs," Caillean said in a neutral tone.
Ardanos nodded. He was well aware of the girl's hostility, but as long as
Caillean observed the forms of respect, he cared little what she thought of
him. It was enough that she was devoted to Lhiannon.
Still frowning, Caillean left them alone. At such a time, when the High

Priestess was already beneath the shadow of the Goddess she served, even her
bodyguard might not be present here.
"Lhiannon," he said softly, and saw a tremor run through her thin frame.
"Can you hear me?" There was a long silence.
"I always hear you . . ." the High Priestess said at last.
"You know that I would not be doing this, my dear," he said, almost to
himself, "if there were any other way. But I have learned that there is more
trouble over the levies. Bendeigid's son-in-law Rhodri went after the men they
took from the Druid's clan and attacked the soldiers who were guarding them.
There was a fight and Rhodri was captured.
"Macellius has managed to keep his identity a secret, but there is no way
he can save him. The fool was taken in arms against Rome. If that word gets
out there surely will be a rebellion. You must counsel peace, my dear." His
voice dropped to a croon. "Let there be peace in the land — the Goddess wills
it. Rome's time will come, but not yet, and not through war. The people must
help one another and be patient - tell them, Lady. Let them pray for peace to
the gods."
As he spoke, he saw her begin to sway, and knew that his words were
reaching that deep place beyond conscious memory through which the words
of the Oracle came. Despite what Caillean might believe, Ardanos had never
doubted that something spoke through the High Priestess when she was thus
tranced. But the Druids knew well that the ability of a spirit to speak through
a human oracle was directly related to the content and sophistication of the
mind that was its vehicle. An ignorant girl, no matter how sensitive, could
only speak in simple, homely, terms. It was one reason why the Druid
priestesses were so carefully selected and trained.
Some might have accused him of manipulation, but to the Arch-Druid it
seemed that he was only adding his own particular knowledge of the country's
needs to the resources at the Oracle's command. Though he did his best to
impress certain information on the Oracle's memory, the Goddess, if it were
truly She who was speaking, was surely at liberty to decide what to say.
"Peace and patience . . ." he repeated slowly. "Rome will fall when the
gods will it, but not by our hands . . ."

Five

Gaius watched Dieda and Cynric disappear into the crowd, fighting a
desire to call them back again. Eilan, grown suddenly shy, was staring at her
feet. He wondered what he could say to her. Hearing the story of the
priestesses of Mona had left him feeling oddly diffident, not at all the lord of
the world, as a Roman ought to be. Thank the gods Cynric did not suspect his
real identity. He had the uneasy feeling that old Ardanos had guessed, but if
so, the Druid had kept his secret, which in its way was even more disturbing.
He cast about for some harmless topic of conversation, and said at last,
"Tell me more about how your tribe keeps this festival. The Silure customs
are somewhat different, and I do not wish to offend against your ways." A
safe way, he thought, of covering the fact that he had only been to one native
Beltane celebration, when he was six years old.
She colored. "Are they?" Now she was genuinely embarrassed. "It is a
very ancient festival. Perhaps once all the tribes kept it the same way.
Ardanos says our people brought it with them when they came to these
islands. And he should know."
"Yes indeed," Gaius said. "He is so old - your grandfather - do you
suppose he came over with those first ships from Gaul?" She giggled, and
Gaius sighed with relief, feeling the tension between them ease.
"You have seen how they made the sacred flame," she said then. "Tonight
when the Priestess comes out to bless the fires we will hail her as the
Goddess. I do not know how it is with the southern tribes, but in the North, in
the olden times, women were more free than now. Before the Romans came,

the Queen sometimes ruled the tribe in her own right. Now it is the Priestess
and the Druids. That is why Cartimandua could command the Brigantes, and
the Iceni followed Boudicca."
Gaius stiffened. Among the Romans, Boudicca, the Killer Queen, was still
a name to frighten children. In Londinium you could see the marks where the
basilica had burned, and workmen digging foundations as the city grew
sometimes found the bones of those who had tried to flee the bloodlust of the
Iceni hordes. Eilan, oblivious, was still talking.
"Only in wartime did she appoint a duke of war to lead the armies;
sometimes he was her brother, and sometimes her consort, but whatever he
was, it gave him small power in the tribe. The Queen ruled of her own right,
and whatever you may say, women know more of ruling, because each
woman runs her own household. Isn't she better qualified to rule over a tribe
than a man who can only do what his war chief says?"
"Over a tribe, perhaps," said Gaius. "Absurd it would be indeed, for a
woman to command a Legion - or to rule a great empire like that of the
Caesars."
"I cannot see why that should be so," Eilan said. "Surely a woman who
can govern a large household is as fit to rule an empire as any man. Have
there been no mighty queens among the Romans?"
Gaius grimaced, remembering the history that his Greek tutor had insisted
he learn. "In the days of the Claudian Emperors," he said carefully, "I have
heard there was an evil old woman named Livia, the mother of the deified
Tiberius. She poisoned all her kinfolk. Perhaps that is why the Romans are
not fond of female rulers."
Their walking had brought them to the far side of the fires, where the
barrow mound sloped down to the festival ground.
"Gawen, do you think women are evil?" Eilan asked.
"You are not evil, certainly," he said, meeting her clear gaze. Her eyes
were like a well of pure water into which he could sink for ever. A well of
truth — at that moment it seemed to him monstrous that he should have to
live this lie. Though it made no sense, he felt that he could trust her with his

life; and if he entrusted her with his true identity, he might be doing just that.
There was a stir behind them. The shouts and singing grew closer. Gaius
turned, and saw men bringing up images made out of wicker or straw. Some
were human in shape, some, figures out of nightmare. One was even clad in a
recognizable simulation of a legionary's helm.
The hair lifted on his neck. Earlier he had told Eilan he remembered
nothing of the Beltane rites, but now, whether because of the drumming or the
flickering light or the scent of sweet herbs they had cast on the fire, he
suddenly knew that he had seen something like this before. He closed his
eyes, seeing in memory tattooed dragons coiling up strong arms, hearing a
young man's laughter. For a moment the drumming deafened him; blood filled
his vision, and a grief so long suppressed that even now he could not give it a
name.
His grip tightened on Eilan's arm.
"Silly!" Eilan laughed at his expression. "They are only effigies. Even in
the old days it was only every seven years that the Summer King or his
substitute was offered to renew the land."
"You are a Druid's daughter," he said, easing down upon the grass. "I
suppose that you would know."
She smiled and sat down beside him at the edge of the circle. "I have not
the lore they teach them in the Forest House, but I have heard that tale. They
say that the Chosen One would be treated like a king for the year before his
doom. It was a great honor for his family. His every wish was fulfilled, he had
the best of food and wine, and the most beautiful young women were brought
to him. It was an honor to bear a child to the god; even the women of the
sanctuary were not forbidden to him; though it is death for any other to lie
with one of the priestesses. And at the end of his time . . ." She hesitated. "He
was given to the fire."
Eilan was sitting very close to him. He could smell the fresh, wild-flower
scent of her hair.
"I have heard that there is a new cult in Rome called the followers of the
Nazarene who believe that their prophet was the son of their god and died for

their sins," said Gaius. Personally, he favored Mithras, the soldiers' god.
"They are not only in Rome," she said. "My father says that some of them
fled to Britannia when the Emperor was killing them. And the Druids allowed
them to build a sanctuary at the Isle of Apples far to the south in the Summer
Country. But here we have only the consort of the Goddess - or his substitute,
who gives his blood to the land."
Shouting, teams of young men swung the effigies on to the bonfires,
cheering as the flames surged against the sky. Eilan flinched as another group
ran past, and Gaius put his arm around her protectively.
"Now they are burning all the evil spirits, and presently they will drive the
cattle between the fires to keep them safe throughout the summer when they
pasture them in the hills. The fires are very powerful . . ." She went red
suddenly with something more than the heat of the flames.
"What else happens around the fires?" he asked gently, trembling a little
with the effort it took not to draw her closer. Even through the gown he could
feel the slender softness of her body. When he first met Eilan, he had thought
her a child, but now, slender though she was, he realized that she was a
woman, and knew that he wanted her.
"Well," she began hesitantly, looking fixedly into the flames, "on this
night, while the fires of the Goddess burn, couples who are pledged leap over
them, hand in hand, to honor the Goddess and to plead with her for children.
And then they go into the forest together. Perhaps in the old days it was not
known how children were made; but Ardanos says that they observed that
children were born after they so honored the Lady - and folk still honor her by
following that old custom . . ."
"I see," said Gaius gently, and felt his pulsebeat quickening.
"Of course," Eilan went on quickly, "it is not a thing that the daughters of
chieftains or Druids do —"
"Of course not," said Gaius, very softly. His body was telling him that this
was something the son of a Prefect could do very well, but he hoped he could
keep it from Eilan. As the daughter of his host she should be as sacred to him
as his own sister. "And yet, it would be lovely if . . ." he took a deep breath,

"if we might honor the Goddess thus together . . ."
He could sense the heat and color in her cheeks, though it was now almost
too dark to see. She stilled within the circle of his arm.
"I never thought . . ." She said softly, and stopped, beginning to tremble a
little in turn. But she did not pull away.
"That is how I would show you what I feel for you," he said even more
softly, as if he feared to frighten a wild bird that had alighted on his hand. She
had told her tale with such innocence! Clotinus's daughter had made it clear
that she would welcome his advances; and Gaius had only been disgusted by
her boldness, but it seemed to him that he had never before felt for any
maiden what he now felt for Eilan, sitting so trustingly by his side. She was so
close to him that he could feel the warmth of her body. And every breath
filled him with the flower scent of her fair hair.
As the shouting died down he heard the faint small sounds of the night:
small animals rustling in the grass where the hill fell away behind the barrow;
the rustle and snap of the fires, the cry somewhere of a bird. And now, excited
by her story, he could hear other sounds in the spring night. On the slope
behind them, men and women were making love.
He touched Eilan's cheek, and it was like the petal of a flower. Gently he
turned her face towards him. Her eyes were wide and wondering, her lips a
little parted. He felt her start of surprise as he kissed her, but she did not pull
away. Her lips were sweet, so sweet that he held her against him and kissed
her again, and after a moment of resistance felt her mouth opening beneath
his like a flower.
Gaius fell into her sweetness. Dazed, every pulse pounding, it took him a
moment to understand what had happened when she pushed him away.
"We must not!" she whispered. "My father would kill us both!"
Gaius forced his hands to open, to let her go. To lay hands on the daughter
of his host was an impiety of the worst kind. Eilan should be as sacred to him
as his own sister. Sacred . . . he understood abruptly that what he felt for her
was a holy thing. He realized that when he let her go he had plunged his
fingers instead into the grass, and sat up, wiping his hands.

"It is true." He was surprised that he could speak so steadily. His senses
were still awhirl, but he felt the warmth of certainty within him. Since that
first moment when he saw her looking down into the pit where he had fallen,
haloed in light, it seemed to him that this moment had been preordained.
"It would shame us both, and there is no dishonor at all in what I feel for
you. I love you, Eilan, as a man loves the woman he would make his wife."
"How can you?" she whispered, staring at the fire. "You are a stranger.
You never even saw me until two weeks ago. Have you dreamed of me, too?"
"I am more of a stranger than you know," he said grimly. "But I will prove
my love to you -" He gathered his courage. "Now I will put my life in your
hands. I am a Roman, Eilan. I did not entirely lie," he added quickly as she
pulled away. "Gawen was the name by which my mother called me; but my
true name is Gaius Macellius Severus Siluricus, and I am not ashamed of my
lineage. My mother was a royal daughter of the Silures, and my father is
Camp Prefect of the Second Adiutrix Legion. If that makes you hate me,
summon the guards and let them take my life."
She flushed and then went pale again. "I would never betray you."
He stared at her. My mother did . . .Suddenly he realized what an odd
thought that was, for surely his mother had not wanted to die and leave him
alone. Only now, back in her warm and colorful world, was he realizing how
painful the shock of being wrenched away from it to the chill discipline of an
army camp had been. Was that why he had never been able to reveal himself
to any Roman girl as he was doing with Eilan now?
"Tomorrow I must go back to my people, but I give you my pledge that if
I leave here unscathed, and if it does not displease you, I shall ask your father
honorably for your hand!"
He could feel his heartbeat shaking his chest, but he could think of
nothing else to say.
"It would not be displeasing to me, Gawen - Gaius," she said at last. Her
voice was very soft, but her gaze never flinched from his own. "But I do not
think my father would consent to give me to a Roman, especially to one born

of the Legions. And even if he should agree, my grandsire would not; and
Cynric —" The words came in a rush. "Cynric would kill you if he knew!"
"That might not be so easy," Gaius said, his pride wakening, though the
same thought had occurred to him. "But is it really so impossible? Since we
came to this island, a number of our officers have married British women of
good family to cement alliances. I am half a Briton myself, after all."
"Perhaps," she said doubtfully, "but not in our family!"
"Well, my blood on both sides is surely as good as yours!"
She gave him an odd look, and he realized that his Roman pride was
speaking. She did not seem to dislike it, but she was not convinced, either,
and her stern father would be even harder to persuade.
"I have never met anyone I liked so well as you," she said helplessly, "and
in so little time. I do not understand it, either," she admitted, "but somehow it
seems as if I had known you from the beginning of the world."
"Maybe you have," Gaius said, almost in a whisper. For a moment he felt
as innocent as the girl in his arms.
He said, "Some of the Greek philosophers believe that each soul comes
back again and again to complete its mission on earth, and knows again those
it has loved and hated in other lives. It may be that some fate from another life
has guided us together, Eilan."
Even as he said it, he wondered at himself. How could he, Gaius
Macellius Severus, speak so to any woman? But Eilan, he defended himself,
was not "any woman"; never in his life had he felt so close to anyone. For the
first time in his life, his feeling for a girl was almost mystical, something he
did not know how to explain.
"The Druids teach this also," she said quietly. "The greatest of our priests
have been many lifetimes upon this earth, living as stags and salmon and
boars so that they may understand all that lives; and heroes whose lives are
cut short are often born again. But as for me and you . . ." She frowned, and
he found it hard to meet her clear gaze.

"I looked in a pool once and saw myself with a different face, and yet it
was me. I think that then I was a priestess. Now I look at you, and I do not see
a Roman or a Briton either. My heart tells me that you were a great man
among your people - like a king."
Gaius flushed. This kind of talk always made him uncomfortable. "I am
not a king now," he said gruffly, "and you are not a priestess. I want you in
this life, Eilan!" He took her hand. "I want to see you in the morning when I
wake and sleep with you in my arms. I feel as if all my life something has
been missing and you make me whole! Can you understand?" It seemed
impossible that tomorrow he would be going back to the Legions, impossible
that he might not see her again.
For a time she gazed into the fire, then she turned back to him. "Before I
met you I dreamed of you," she said softly. "Many of my family are secondsighted, and I see true things sometimes in my dreams. But this I have told no
one. You are in the center of my heart already. I do not know what power is
drawing us together, but I think that I have loved you before."
He bent to kiss the palm of her hand and she gave a tremulous sigh.
"I love you, Gaius. There is a bond between us. But how we can be
together, that I cannot see . . ."
I should take her now, thought Gaius, then they would have to let us
marry! He was about to pull her closer when a shape passed between them
and the light. The space around the bonfires was filling with people. A glance
at the stars told him that it was near midnight, and the moon was high. Where
had the hours gone? Eilan exclaimed softly and started to get to her feet.
"What is it?" he asked. "What is going on?" In the distance he could hear
rowdy shouts and laughter, but the mood of the people here was both subdued
and joyous. The sense of expectation around him set his skin prickling.
"Hush!" Eilan whispered as he stood up beside her. "The Goddess comes .
. ."
Somewhere beyond the circle of firelight flutes twittered, and Eilan went
still. In the sudden silence, the hiss of the fire came clearly. The flames had
burned down to brands that lit the space with a steady glow, cooled by the

moonlight to a pale golden radiance like no light he had ever known.
Something glimmered beyond the circle of light. Druids in white robes
were coming; men with flowing beards crowned with oak leaves, and with
golden torques about their throats. Sunwise they circled the fires and halted,
waiting. Their circle was as evenly spaced as guards around a camp perimeter,
but their movement had none of the military precision which Gaius had
learned. They simply came to rest where they ought to be, like the stars.
Silver bells shivered sweetly and the tension in the circle grew. Gaius
blinked, but he could see nothing, and yet there was something moving, a
mass of shadow that swept towards them. Abruptly he realized that he was
seeing women's shapes swathed in draperies of a blue like midnight. They
flowed into the circle and around it, silver ornaments jingling faintly, faces a
pale blur beneath the veils.
Suddenly he understood. These were the priestesses of the Forest House,
the sacred women who had escaped the rape of Mona. To see so many Druids
together raised his hackles, and when he looked upon the shadow shapes of
the priestesses he felt terror, and a sudden sense of destiny. Was his fate
somehow entangled with that of the priestesses of the Forest House? The
thought made his blood run cold and his grip tightened on Eilan's hand.
The last three priestesses moved towards the long-legged stool that had
been set between the fires. The foremost was slender, a little bowed beneath
her robes, flanked by a tall woman and another who was sturdier. Both had
dark hair and silver ornaments. Both were unveiled, and he could see the
woad-blue crescents tattooed between their brows. Gaius's first thought was
that the tall girl would be a worthy opponent in a fight, while he sensed
discontent in her companion's eyes.
The group paused, and there was some ritual with a golden basin that he
could not understand. Then they helped the priestess to sit down on the threelegged stool and carried it to the top of the mound between the fires. The
shimmer of sound from the bells reached a climax, then stopped.
"Children of Don, why have you come here?" The tall woman asked,
calling them by the name of the mythic ancestress of the tribes.
"We seek the blessing of the Goddess," one of the Druids replied.

"Then call Her!"
Two of the women cast handfuls of herbs on the coals. Gaius's nostrils
flared as the sweet-smelling smoke puffed and swirled outward, filling the
space with a glowing haze. He was accustomed to incense, but he had never
felt this odd sense of pressure before. He would have said the weather was
changing, but the sky was clear.
Around him the whisper was becoming a murmur of many voices, a soft
mutter of invocation and appeal. Beneath it all he heard the Druids humming,
and it seemed to him that the earth beneath his feet throbbed in answer. Once
more he was afraid. He glanced over at Eilan and saw her gaze, rapt and
exalted, fixed upon the three figures between the fires.
From the veiled woman came a little whimper and he saw her sway.
She is like the Sibyl, thought Gaius, or the Pythia of Delphi that my tutor
told me about. But he had never expected to see such a thing himself. The
humming grew in intensity, and suddenly the veiled woman stilled and the
other two backed away. He caught his breath, for somehow she seemed to
have grown taller. She straightened, turning as if she was looking around her.
Then she laughed softly and put back her veil.
Gaius had heard that the High Priestess of Vernemeton was old, but this
woman blazed with beauty, and she gestured with a restless energy that had
nothing to do with age. His Roman cynicism fled and his mother's blood rose
up in him. It is true — all the tales are true — the Goddess is here . . .
"I am the green earth that cradles you and the womb of the waters . . ." she
said in a voice whose soft resonance made it seem as if she spoke in his ear. "I
am the white moon and the sea of stars. I am the night from which the first
light was born. I am the mother of the gods; I am the virgin; I am the dark
serpent that swallows all. Do you see me? Do you desire me? Do you accept
me now?
"We see …" came the murmured answer. "We see you and adore . . ."
"Rejoice then, that life may continue. Sing, dance, feast and make love
and you will have my blessing; the cattle will bear and the corn will grow."

"Lady!" a woman's voice rang out suddenly. "They have taken my man to
the mines and my children are hungry. What will I do?"
"They took my son!" a man cried, and others echoed him. "When will you
deliver us from the Romans? When will the war arrow fly?" A babble of
protest rose and Gaius tensed, feeling the tension in the air. Eilan had only to
say the word and they would tear him in pieces. But when he looked at her he
saw her eyes bright with tears.
"Are you my children, that hear your sister's cry and do not provide for
her?" Dark draperies swirled as the Goddess turned. "Care for one another! In
the arcane volumes of the heavens, I have read the name of Rome, and on that
scroll I say their name reads Death! Indeed, Rome will fall, but her fate is not
yours to declare! So I have said, heed now my word!
"Remember the circle of life. All that you lose you will one day find, and
that which has been taken from you will be restored. Behold, I bring down the
power of heaven, that the world may be renewed!"
She lifted her hands to the moonlight, and it seemed to Gaius that the
radiance grew brighter, so that her figure was obscured. The priestesses
grouped around her began to sing:
"Upon these holy ancient trees, Now cast your lovely silver light; Uncloud
your face that we may see Unveiled its shining in the night —"
Gaius shivered. He had never known that women's voices could be so
beautiful. For a moment the whole world seemed spelled to silence; then the
arms of the High Priestess swept outward. Her two priestesses whirled to
either side, and in the same moment the bonfires blazed up furiously. Had
they cast something on to the flames? He could not see - he could hardly
think, for everyone was shouting.
"Dance!" The voice of the Goddess rose above them all. "Rejoice, receive
my ecstasy!" For a moment she arched upward, arms extending as if to
embrace the world. Then she slumped into the arms of the tall priestess.
But Gaius could not see what happened afterwards, for someone bumped
into him. His grip tightened on Eilan's hand and he felt his other hand seized

by a stranger. Drums sounded and suddenly they were moving, the whole
circle was moving, and there was nothing in the world but the beat of the
drum. As the beat whirled him outward, he glimpsed Cynric and Dieda across
the circle, and it seemed to him that Dieda's face shone with tears.
A long time later, it seemed, the dance came to an end and Cynric and
Dieda found them, but once the ecstasy had faded, their own despair kept
them from wondering what Gaius and Eilan had found to talk about on that
Beltane Eve. It was very late by the time they reached the home of Bendeigid,
and no one appeared to suspect that the two couples had not spent the whole
time together. Gaius was happy to have it so - far better to seek Eilan's hand
from Deva with his father's force behind him than to let the Druid suspect that
his guest had compromised his child while Gaius was in the older man's
power.
But if he had been Eilan's acknowledged suitor, they might at least have
allowed him to see her to say goodbye. Rheis had decreed a cleaning day, and
all the women were hard at work. As it was, he had only Rheis's promise to
convey his carefully edited farewell and a glimpse of Eilan's bright hair to
sustain him as he took the road for Deva and the world of Rome.

Six

Macellius Severus senior, Prefectus Castrorum of the Second Adiutrix
Legion at Deva, was a man just entering middle age, of a tall and
commanding presence, who could conceal a formidable anger beneath an
outward surface of calm. His mildness was deceptive. Big as he was, he never
blustered or bellowed; he was soft-spoken, almost scholarly, and from time to
time those who did not know him well were deceived into thinking him
ineffectual.
This apparent mildness was a valuable asset in the position he now held:
Camp Prefect, Prefectus Castrorum of Deva. In addition to remaining
permanently in charge of the camp, he served as a sort of liaison between
Legion and populace; he was not responsible to the Commander of the
Legion, but only to the Governor of the Province, and the newly instituted
Legatus Juridicus; but since the Governor was in the field in Caledonia, and
the Juridicus was stationed in Londinium, that meant, in this distant outpost,
that his word was effective civilian law. Fortunately he worked well with the
legionary Commander, under whom he had served in several campaigns long
ago, and who had encouraged his efforts to fulfill the financial requirements
necessary to rise to the rank of equestrian, the middle classes who were the
backbone of the Roman government.
Macellius Severus secured supplies and rations for the entire Legion,
directed quartering, and acted as general liaison officer between the populace
— both Briton and Roman - and the army. In theory, he also represented the
interests of the civilian population. In requisitioning supplies for the Legions,

he was required to see that the people who provided them were left with
adequate food and manpower to avoid driving them to revolt. Hence the
actual management of the Ordovia lands around Deva lay more in his hands,
except in time of war, than in those of the legionary Commander.
His office, small and austere, and constructed with a rigid economy of
space, somehow accommodated a daily overflow of civilians and military
personnel, with a long string of complaints, requests and petitions. Sometimes
Macellius, who was not a small man, seemed as if physically forced into a
corner.
He had almost finished with this morning's accumulation. Seated on a
kind of folding chair and frowning at a roll of parchment in his lap, he was
pretending to listen patiently to a plump and effeminate townsman in the toga
of a Roman citizen who had been talking uninterruptedly for about twelve
minutes. Macellius could have stopped him at any time, but as a matter of fact
he had not heard one word in twenty; he was reading the supply list. It would
have been rude to turn away a petitioner simply to study a list; it cost nothing
to let the man talk while he read it. In any case, he had heard enough to know
that Lucius Varullus was simply saying one thing over and over with a
number of oratorical variations.
"Surely you don't wish me to go to the Legate, Macellius," the falsetto
voice continued querulously. Macellius rolled up the list and put it aside,
deciding he had listened long enough.
"You can if you like, of course," he protested mildly, "but I doubt if he'd
give you even this much of a hearing, if he had time for you at all." He knew
his Commander well. "You must remember that these are restless times. A
certain amount of sacrifice . . ."
The plump underlip of the man across the table went out in protest. "No,
no, of course not," he said, waving his hand in a delicate gesture. "My dear
fellow, no one, absolutely no one is readier than I to realize that, but how can
I work my farms and my gardens if all the men in the area have been levied?
Surely the peace and comfort of Roman citizens must be the first
consideration? Why, I've had to put my landscape gardeners to work in the
turnip patches! You should see my flower gardens!" he concluded mournfully.
"Now really," Macellius said offhandedly. "I'm not responsible for

arranging native conscriptions." Silently, he cursed the shade of the Emperor
who had extended Roman citizenship to fools like this. "I'm sorry, Lucius," he
said — he was lying, and wasn't sorry at all - "I can't do anything for you
now."
"Oh, but my dear fellow, you simply must."
"Look," said Macellius briefly, "you're chasing the wrong horse.
Go to the Legate if you like, and see what kind of answer he gives you; I
doubt he'll be anywhere near as patient as I have been. Bring over slaves from
Gaul, or offer better wages." Or, he added silently, get out there with a
pitchfork yourself and work off some of that fat. "Now, if you please, I'm very
busy this morning." He let his gaze fall on the scroll again and coughed
discreetly
Varullus started to protest, but Severus had already turned to his secretary,
a skinny sad-looking youngster. "Who's next, Valerius?"
After Varullus had grumbled his way out, the secretary showed in a drover
who had sold cattle to the Legions. Bonnet in hand, he begged the
Excellency's pardon in stumbling market-Latin for troubling him, but the
roads were so beset with bandits . . .
Macellius addressed the man fluently in his own Silurian dialect. "Speak
up, man. What's troubling you?"
When the countryman poured out his story, it appeared that he had been
hired to drive his cattle overland to the coast, and there were thieves and
robbers, and the cattle already belonged to the Legion, and he was a poor man
who could not support the loss of them to outlaws . . .
Macellius held up a hand. "All right," he said, not unkindly, "you want a
military escort. I'll give you a note to one of the centurions. Take care of it,
Valerius." He nodded to the secretary, "Give him a note to Paulus Appius and
tell him to take care of escorting this army beef. No, man, don't apologize,
that's what I'm here for."
When the drover had gone out, he added testily, "What's Paulus thinking
of? Why in heaven's name did this come all the way up to me? Any decurion

down the line could have handled it!" He drew breath, striving for his
customary calm. "Well, send in the next one."
Next was a Briton named Tascio who had come about selling some rye.
Macellius scowled. "I won't see him; that last lot he sold us was rotten. But
we need it; grain's in short supply. Listen. Offer this gouger half of what he
asks; and before you sign for the treasurer to give him his pay, get half a
dozen of the cooks from the messes to come and look it over. If it's rotten or
moldy, dump and burn it; rotten rye will give the men the burning sickness. If
it's good, pay him the half agreed on, and if he gives you any trouble, threaten
to have him flogged for cheating the Legion. Sextillus told me five men were
poisoned by the damned stuff last time. If he still kicks up a fuss, turn him
over to Appius," he went on, "and I'll put in a complaint to the Druid Curia,
and what they'll do to him won't be half so kind. And by the way, if this lot is
rotten put him on the blacklist and tell him not to come around here again. Is
that clear?"
Valerius, looking sadder than ever, complied. For all his skinny poverty of
appearance, he was extremely efficient at this sort of thing. As he started to
leave, Macellius heard his incongruously husky bass rise in surprise.
"Hullo, young Severus. You're back again?" Macellius heard a familiar
voice reply, "Salve, Valerius. Hey, take it easy, that arm's still sore! Is my
father in?"
Macellius arose so precipitately that he upset his chair. "Gaius! My dear
boy, I was beginning to worry about you!" He came round the desk and
briefly clasped his son in his arms. "What kept you so long?"
"I came as soon as I could," Gaius apologized.
He felt the boy flinch as his grip tightened and abruptly let go. "What's
wrong? Are you hurt?"
"Not really, it's nearly healed. Are you busy, Father?"
Macellius looked around the small office. "Nothing here that Valerius
can't handle perfectly well." He regarded his son's dusty garments with
disapproval, and said with some sternness, "Must you go about the camp
dressed like a freedman or a native?"

Gaius's lips tightened briefly, as if "native" had stung. But his voice was
matter of fact and without apology when he replied. "It's safer to travel this
way."
"Humph!" But Macellius knew it was true. "Well then, couldn't you at
least bathe and dress decently before coming into my presence?"
"I thought you might be anxious about me, Father," Gaius said "seeing
that I'd overstayed my leave by a couple of days. With your permission I will
go and bathe and dress. The only bath I've had this week was in the river."
"Don't be in a hurry.," Macellius said grumpily. "I'll come with you." He
let his hand rest on the younger man's forearm, gripping it without words. For
some absurd reason he always worried whenever Gaius was away that the boy
would not return; he did not know why, for the youngster had always been
very self-sufficient. Seeing the bandaged arm had frightened him. "Tell me
what happened now; why the bandages?"
"I fell in a trap dug for boars," Gaius said. "One of the stakes
went through my shoulder." His father paled, and Gaius added
reassuringly, "It's all but healed now; doesn't even hurt unless I knock it
against something. I'll be carrying a sword again in six weeks."
"How?"
"How did I get out?" The boy grimaced. "Some Britons found me and
doctored me till I was on my feet again."
Macellius's face betrayed what he could not express. "I hope you
rewarded them suitably." But Gaius appeared to understand the solicitude
hidden behind the indirection.
"On the contrary, Father, hospitality was offered in a noble manner and I
accepted it in kind."
"I see." Macellius did not press the matter. Gaius tended to be touchy
about his British blood.

At the military baths just outside the stockade, Macellius chose a low
chair while Gaius was stripped and scrubbed by the army attendants. Once his
personal slave had been despatched to their house for clean garments,
Macellius lay back in his chair wondering what the boy had been up to now.
There was a difference in him, something more than could be explained by
the injury. For a moment he wished himself back in his office dealing with
questions that could be quickly dismissed.
Presently Gaius emerged from the bath looking young and very clean in
his short wool tunic, his damp hair curling down his back. He sent for a
barber-slave and as the man clipped the unruly hair to proper military
shortness and scraped away the nascent beard, he recounted his adventure.
Clearly he was leaving some things out, thought Macellius. Why had Clotinus
Albinus not reported the accident? He felt a moment of gratitude at being
spared the kind of unpleasantness any irregularity would involve.
"You should have a regular army doctor look at that arm," he said simply
when the tale was done.
Gaius protested irritably, "It's doing well enough." But Macellius insisted,
and after a certain amount of delay old Manlius came and unbound Cynric's
careful bandages, and probed and poked and pressed until Gaius was whitefaced and sweating. Then he solemnly pronounced that the arm was healed as
well as if he had had the care of it from the beginning.
"I could have told you that —" muttered the boy, refusing to meet his
father's eyes. Good, thought the older man, he knows better than to argue with
me . . .
Gaius lay back limply, his good hand falling away from a fumbling
attempt to repin his tunic, yet he grinned as Macellius reached out and
refastened it, reaching up to take his father's hand in his own.
"I told you I was all right, Dad, you old Stoic," he said roughly. Macellius
thought again, He's a handsome boy; I wonder what sort of devilry he's been
up to? Well, he has a right to a certain amount of folly. Better not let him
know that, though . . ." He cleared his throat, glad that no one else was using
the bathhouse at this time of day.
"So, what excuse can you offer for overstaying your leave, Son?"

Gaius nodded at his arm.
"I understand; of course you couldn't travel with that injury, and I'll speak
to Sextillus. Another time, allow for accidents. But you're not some patrician
puppy who can slack. Your grandfather was a farmer outside Tarentum, and
I've had to work hard to get this far. Gaius, what would you say to not going
back to Glevum?"
"Do you mean they would courtmartial me for overstaying leave because
of an accident -?" He looked so upset that Macellius hastened to reassure him.
"No, no, I didn't mean it that way. I mean, would you care to be
transferred to my staff? I need someone to help me here, and when I spoke to
the Governor on his way north he agreed to make an exception and let you
serve with me. It's time I started introducing you to my connections here. The
Province is growing, Gaius. Intelligence and energy will carry a man far. If I
could rise to the rank of Equestrian, only one rung below the nobility, who
knows how far you might go?"
He saw the trouble in Gaius's eyes, and wondered if his son was in pain. It
seemed a long time before the boy replied. "I've never understood why you
stayed here in Britain, Father. Couldn't you have risen more quickly if you
had been willing to go elsewhere? It's a big empire."
"Britain isn't the whole world," said Macellius, "but I like it." His face
grew grave. "They offered me a Juridicus post once in Hispania. I should have
taken it, if only for your sake."
"Why Hispania, Father? Why not of Britain?" As soon as the question left
his lips, Gaius seemed aware that it had been a mistake. Macellius felt his
own face stiffening.
"The Emperor Claudius was so busy trying to reform things at home, from
the Senate and the coinage to the state religion, that he never got around to
reforming the military laws," Macellius explained, "and the emperors who
came after him seemed to think that he, as the official conqueror of Britain,
knew what he was doing."
"I don't understand what you mean, Father."

"I visited Rome just once," Macellius said. "And Londinium is more like
the Rome I was brought up to honor than Rome is now. The Empire is in the
devil of a mess, Gaius; that shouldn't come as any surprise to you." He
frowned, then with sudden irritability turned on the slave who stood by their
chairs and demanded, "Get us something to eat, don't stand there gawking."
When they were alone he turned back to Gaius, "What I'm going to say
now comes under the official heading of treason; when I finish speaking,
forget you heard it won't you? But as an officer of the Legion I have a certain
responsibility. If there's ever going to be any reform, it may have to come
from the Provinces, like Britain. Titus . . .this is dangerous talk . . .Titus is
well meaning, but he seems to care more about increasing his popularity than
governing the Empire. Domitian, his brother, is at least efficient, but I've
heard rumors that his ambition may outrun his patience. If he falls heir to the
purple and becomes Emperor, then what little power is left to the Senate and
People of Rome may disappear.
"I would advance my family in the old way, by service and solid
achievement, one generation following another," Macellius continued very
deliberately. "You asked me why I stayed in Britain. Julius Classicus tried to
create a Gallic empire not ten years ago. After Vespasian crushed him, he
decreed that auxiliaries could not be used in the country of their birth, and the
Legions must be drawn from a mix of men from all over the Empire. That's
why I had such a hard time gaining permission for you to serve in Britain, and
why, it might have been wiser for us to seek our fortunes in Hispania, or
somewhere like that. Rome's deepest fear is that the subject nations may rise
again . . ."
"But you raised me to revere the old virtues of Rome. What do you want,
Father - since we are speaking frankly - and what do you fear?"
Macellius looked at the smooth face of the boy before him, searching for
some trace of his own father's rugged strength. There was a resemblance,
perhaps, in the strong line of the jaw, but the boy's nose was Celtic, short,
almost snubbed, like his mother's. No wonder he had looked like a Briton
when he walked through the door, Is he weak, he wondered, or only young?
And then, "Where do his loyalties really lie?
"Chaos . . ." he said soberly. "The world upside down. The time of the

four Emperors, or the Killer Queen again. You wouldn't remember, but it
seemed to us that the world was ending the year that you were born . . ."
"You think Roman and British rebellion are equally dangerous?" Gaius
asked curiously.
"Have you read Valerius Maximus?" his father said suddenly. "If not, read
him sometime; there used to be a couple of copies in the legionary library
here. It's a scandalous book; he never should have written it. He damn near
lost his head in Nero's day, and I'm not surprised. He started writing in the
days of the deified Tiberius, but he makes some good points about some of
the Emperors that followed him - to say some of them were as fallible as G—,
well, as gods always are, isn't treason - not now, anyway. The point is, even a
bad Emperor is better than civil war."
"But you said that reform might have to come from the Provinces—"
Macellius grimaced. At least there was nothing wrong with the boy's
memory.
"Reform, not rebellion . . .You may remember that I also said that these
days Londinium is like Rome used to be. The old Roman virtues can survive
in the Provinces, away from the corruption that surrounds the Emperor. In a
lot of ways, the tribes here are like the country people where I was born. Give
them the best of Roman culture, and maybe Britain can become what Rome
was supposed to be."
"Is that why you married my mother?" Gaius said into the silence.
Macellius looked at him and blinked, seeing once more a girl's fine-boned
face and dusky hair, remembering how she used to sing as she pulled the horn
comb through her heavy curls, sparkling with red glints as they caught the
light of the fire. Moruadh . . .Moruadh . . .why did you leave me alone?
"Perhaps it was one reason," he replied at last. "But perhaps it justifies it.
We had hopes then of joining our two peoples. But that was before Classicus .
. .and Boudicca. Perhaps it can still happen, but it will take longer, and you
will have to be more Roman than the Romans to survive."
"What have you heard?" asked Gaius, frowning.

"The Emperor, Titus, has been ill. I don't like it. He's still a young man.
He might die in bed, but after him, who knows? I don't trust Domitian. A
piece of advice, Son: try to live without ever coming to the attention of a
prince. Are you ambitious?"
"All gods forbid," said Gaius.
But Macellius had seen the flash of pride in his eyes. Well, ambition was
no bad thing in a young man, if well directed. He gave a short laugh. "In any
case, it's time we took the next step to advance the family. Nothing that will
upset the Emperor . . .but you are, what, nineteen now? It's time you were
married."
"I'll be twenty in a few weeks, Father," said Gaius suspiciously. "Do you
have someone in mind for me?"
"I suppose you know that Clotinus - yes, old Bedbugs - has a daughter . .
." Macellius began, and stopped when his son started laughing.
"All gods forbid. I practically had to kick her out of my bed when I
guested there."
"Clotinus is going to be one of the big men in the Province, even if he is
British. If you'd set your heart on his daughter, I would be willing enough to
go along, but not if she is so immodest. My father may have been only a
plebeian, but he could name all his ancestors. The honor of the family
requires that your sons be of your own fathering."
He looked up as the slave appeared in the doorway with a tray of hard
biscuits and some wine. He poured, handed a goblet to Gaius, and drank
deeply before speaking again.
"Here's an idea you may like better. You may not remember this, but when
you were a child a tentative betrothal was arranged between you and the
daughter of an old friend. He's now the Procurator, Licinius."
"Father," Gaius said quickly, "have you spoken to him lately? — I hope
you haven't settled things too far -"

Macellius stared at him narrowly. "Why? Is there some other young girl
you're lusting after? It won't do, you know. A marriage is a social and
economic alliance. Be guided by me, Son; these romantic attractions don't
last." He could see the dull flush that darkened his son's fair skin.
Very carefully, Gaius took another sip of wine. "There is a girl, but it is
not lust I feel for her. I have offered her marriage," he said evenly.
"What? Who is she?" Macellius barked, turning to stare at his son.
"The daughter of Bendeigid."
The wine cup clicked loudly as Macellius set it down.
"Impossible. He's a proscribed man, and, if I mistake not, a Druid. Of
good family, so I'll say nothing against the girl if she's his kin, but that only
makes it worse. Those sorts of marriages —"
"You made one," Gaius interrupted.
"And it nearly destroyed my career! Your girl may be as fine a woman as
your mother, but one misalliance of that kind is enough for any family,"
Macellius exclaimed. Moruadh, forgive me, his heart cried. I loved you, but I
have to save our boy.
"Things were different then," he continued more temperately. "Since
Boudicca's rebellion, a connection with any but the most loyal of British
families would be a disaster. And you especially must be careful, because you
are your mother's son. Do you think I have endured thirty years in the Legions
just to see you throw it all away?" He splashed more wine into his cup and
drank it down.
"There's no limit to what you could do if you have the right connections,
and the Procurator's daughter is a prize. The family is related to the Julians
after all. Meanwhile, if you have a taste for romantic adventure, there are
plenty of slaves and freedwomen; keep your thoughts off these British girls."
He glared at his son.
"Eilan is different - I love her."

"Your Eilan is the daughter of a Druid!" Macellius replied. "He was
charged once with inciting the Auxilia to revolt. They couldn't prove it, so
they banished him; he was lucky not to have been hanged or crucified. But for
all that you don't want to get yourself entangled in any way with his family.
She's not pregnant or anything?"
"Eilan is as innocent as any Vestal," Gaius said stiffly.
"Humph; I wouldn't bet on it; they don't view these things as we should,"
Macellius observed. Seeing Gaius's gaze darken, he added, "Don't look at me
so - I'm not doubting you. But if the girl is virtuous, it is all the more ruinous
for you to set your heart on her. Accept it, lad, she's not for you."
"That's for her father to decide," Gaius said hotly, "not you!"
Macellius grunted. "Mark me, her father will view such an alliance much
as I do, as a major catastrophe for both of you. Forget her, and turn your
thoughts to some good Roman girl. I've won enough status here to ally you to
whomever you choose."
"So long as she's named Julia Licinia . . ." Gaius answered bitterly. "What
if Licinius's daughter doesn't want a husband with British blood?"
Macellius shrugged. "I'll write to Licinius tomorrow. If she's a proper
Roman girl, she'll think of her marriage as part of her duty to her family and
to the State. But married you shall be, before you disgrace us all."
Gaius shook his head stubbornly. "We shall see. If Bendeigid is willing to
give me his daughter, I will marry Eilan. My honor is pledged to her."
"No; impossible," Macellius said. "And what's more, if I know anything
about Bendeigid, he'll react pretty much the same way." Damn it, he thought,
the problem is that he's too much like me. Does he think I'll let it drop? The
boy might believe his father did not understand - young people always
thought that they were the only ones who had ever loved — but the truth was
that Macellius understood only too well. Moruadh had been fire in his blood,
but she had never been happy, prisoned by square stone walls. The Roman
women had laughed at her and her own people had cursed her. He would not
let his son live with the pain of knowing that he, too, had brought only sorrow
to the woman he adored.

Macellius's campaign bonuses had been well invested, and he had enough
wealth to be comfortable when he retired, but not enough for his son unless
Gaius also had a career. He would do Moruadh no honor by allowing her son
to throw his future away.
"Father," Gaius continued, in a tone his father had never heard before, "I
love Eilan; she is the only woman I will ever marry. And if her father will not
give her to me, Rome is not the whole world, you know."
Macellius glared. "You had no right to make such a commitment.
Marriage is a matter for families; if I send to request her hand for you, it will
be against my own better judgment."
"But you will do it?" Gaius persisted, and against his will Macellius
softened.
"There is no parting a fool and his folly; I can send to Bendeigid. But
when he refuses you we will hear no more of this. I will write to Licinius
then, and have you married before the new year."
There was something to be said, he thought, for the old days when fathers
had held the power of life and death even over grown sons. The law was still
on the books — for all the good it did anyone; no father in hundreds of years
had formally invoked it, and he knew himself too well to think he would be
the first. But he would not have to. Eilan's father could deliver that blow far
more effectively than he.

Seven

In the days following Gaius's departure the bright sun of Beltane hid
behind weeping skies, as if the season had decided not to turn into summer
after all. Eilan crept around the house like a ghost. Days passed and Gaius
sent no word. Just before leaving for the Forest House Dieda had said that she
should have given herself to Gaius. Would he be more or less likely to forget
her if she had done so?
After all, the high festivals existed in a time of their own. That night when
they sat together watching the fires was like some dream of the Otherworld.
In that time when the doors opened between the worlds, anything seemed
possible - even the marriage of the daughter of a Druid to a Roman officer.
But now, surrounded by the familiar sights and sounds of her home, she began
to doubt herself, her love, and Gawen - or Gaius, as she supposed she ought to
call him - most of all.
And the worst of it was that no one seemed to notice her pain. Mairi had
insisted on returning to her own dwelling to await the return of her husband,
and Rheis was busy with all the tasks that summer brought. She might have
confided in Dieda, but her kinswoman was in the Forest House, where she
must be dealing with her own heartaches and regrets. The skies wept, Eilan's
heart wept with them, and no one seemed to care at all.
At last a day came when her father sent for her. He was sitting beside the
hearth in the feasting hall — only ashes now, for though the sky was grey and
clouded, it was warm enough not to need a fire. An odd mix of anger and

amusement softened his usual sternness. "Eilan," he said gently, "I feel I
should let you know this; an offer has been made for your hand."
Gaius, she thought. My doubts wronged him!
"But of course it was one I could not entertain. How much do you know
about the young man who called himself Gawen?"
"What do you mean?" Surely he could hear the rapid beating of her heart.
"Did he tell you his true name? Did he tell you that his father is Macellius
Severus, Prefect of the camp at Deva?"
She saw the anger now beneath Bendeigid's gentleness, and fought to still
her trembling; but she nodded.
"Then at least he did not deceive you." Her father sighed, "But you must
put him far from your thoughts, Daughter. You are not yet of full age to marry
-"
She raised her head to protest. Why had she not considered that her own
father was far more likely to refuse permission than Gaius to deny his love?
"I can wait," she whispered, not daring to raise her eyes.
Her father went on, "I am not used to being a tyrant to my children, Eilan;
if the truth be told I have been all too gentle with you. If you feared me, you
would not speak this way. But this thing cannot be, Daughter - no, hold you
still," he commanded, "I still have something to say to you."
"What else is there?" Eilan exclaimed, flinching at his grip on her wrist.
"You have refused him, haven't you?"
"I want you to understand why." His tone softened. "I bear no grudge
against the lad, and if he were one of our own, I would gladly give you to
him. But oil mixes not with water, nor lead with silver, nor Roman with
Briton."
"He is only half Roman," she protested. "His mother was a tribeswoman
of the Silures. He seemed Briton enough when he guested here."

Her father shook his head. "That makes it all the worse. He is the bastard
son of a marriage - an unlawful marriage I call it - into a race of traitors, for
traitors were the Silures before ever the Romans came over the sea, stealing
our cattle and poaching in our hunting runs. It would be to compound folly
upon folly to marry ^f you to a child of our ancient enemies. I have even
spoken to Ardanos of this and though he talks of peace to come of it, as if you
were child to one of our queens and he son to a Caesar, I know it cannot be."
Her eyes widened at the thought that the Arch-Druid, of all people, might
stand her friend. But her father was still talking.
"From the tone of the letter, my guess is that Macellius Severus likes it no
better than I. Nothing could come of such a marriage but torn loyalties for you
both. If Gaius is willing to forsake Rome for you, then I want him not among
our kin. And if he cleaves to his own, then would you be outcast among our
people, and I would not have that for you."
Eilan did not look up. "For him I would bear it," she said, her voice just
audible.
"Yes, in your madness, I believe you would," her father said harshly.
"Youth is ever ready to defy the world. But our blood is not traitor blood,
Eilan. For every moment you betrayed your kin with him, the ravens would
peck at your heart in secret. His voice softened, "What is more, it is not you
alone but all our kindred who would be forced to break one bond after
another.
"Eilan, this you must understand; I bear no grudge against Gawen; he was
a guest in my house, and it were to chop logic to say he lied to me when none
had asked his true name. If grudge there might be, it would only be that he
worked in secret to set you against your kin."
Eilan's words were all but inaudible. "He dealt honorably and uprightly
with both me and you."
"Have I questioned that?" responded Bendeigid. "But he who asks pledges
himself to abide the answer. They asked me fairly and honorably for your
hand; fairly and straightforwardly I answered. And there's an end of it."

She said in a strangled voice, "Another man less honorable might have so
dealt with me that you would have been grateful to be rid of me."
Black anger suffused her father's face and for the first time in memory she
feared him. He jerked her towards him, and struck her - though not hard across the mouth.
"No more —" he said. "No more! Had I slapped you more often when you
were a child, I should not now need to strike you for that shameless speech."
Eilan sank down on the bench as he released her; ten days ago she would
have wept if her father spoke so to her; now she felt that nothing would ever
make her shed another tear.
He said emphatically, "You will marry no Roman while I am above
ground; no, nor after it either if I have my way. And if you should tell me that
things had so gone with you that you must marry this son of half-Roman
traitors, or give me a bastard to call me grandsire, no man in all the length and
breadth of Britain would blame me if I drowned you with my own hands.
Spare me that blush of modesty, Daughter, you had none a moment ago!"
Eilan would have preferred to face her father on her feet, but her knees
were trembling so that she could not rise. "Can you really think such shame of
me?"
"It was not I who first named it," her father retorted. Then his voice
softened. "Child, child," he admitted, "I spoke in anger. You are a good girl,
and my true daughter, I ask your forgiveness. Now, enough of this kind of
talk. You ride north tomorrow; your sister Mairi will have need of a
kinswoman, for her child will be born soon, and at this season your mother
cannot be spared. It seems all too likely now that her husband, Rhodri, was
captured by Romans when he went off after the levies. So even if all had gone
otherwise, this would be no season to be offering me a Roman son-in-law."
Eilan nodded dumbly. Bendeigid put his arm around her, and said gently,
"Wiser I am and older than you, Eilan. The young see for themselves alone.
Do you think I have not seen you pining? I thought it was only that you
missed Dieda, but my main anger at this half-Roman bastard is that he has
given you such pain."

She nodded, standing stiffly in his embrace, feeling a world away. He had
said that a raven would peck at her heart if she married Gaius, and she had
thought it only a poetic way of speaking. But now she realized that he had
spoken sober truth, for the pain in her heart was as sharp, as if indeed a
raven's beak were stabbing her.
Feeling her resistance, her father said irritably, "Your mother spoke truth
when she said you were too long unmarried. This winter I will seek out a
husband for you, one of our own."
Eilan tore herself from his arms, her eyes blazing. "I have no choice but to
obey you," she said bitterly, "but if I am not to marry at my own will, I will
marry no man upon the face of this earth."
"As you will," he said bitterly. "I will never seek to force you. But Senara
I will pledge before she binds on her maiden's girdle. I will not have this sort
of struggle with a daughter again!"
The rain continued to fall for many days, swelling rivers and streams and
drowning fields, roads and paths. It was very near the time when Mairi should
be delivered, and still her husband's fate was unknown. She had admitted that
she would perhaps have done better to remain under her father's roof until her
child was delivered, but in such weather it would have been more risky for
her to travel than to stay at home. It was Eilan, therefore, who traveled to her
sister's steading, escorted by two of her father's men.
Although she still wept at night when she thought of Gaius, Eilan found
herself glad that she had come. She was useful here; her sister needed
someone to talk to, and her little nephew was fretful and confused because his
mother had ceased to suckle him and his father had disappeared. Mairi was
too clumsy now to pay him much heed; but Eilan had the patience to sit for
hours feeding him with a horn spoon, and he recovered some of his laughter
when she played with him.
As the rain continued to fall, there were times when Eilan wondered if she
would be left alone to deliver her sister's second child. But Mairi had arranged
for a priestess to come. "All the women of the Forest House are trained in
such matters, Sister," Mairi told her, rubbing her back which ached constantly
now. "You've no need to fear." It was the evening of her fourth day with her
sister, and Eilan was beginning to feel at home.

"Wouldn't it be wonderful if they were to send Dieda to us?"
"She is new come to the Forest House and may not go outside during her
first year. They have promised to send one of Lhiannon's attendants, a woman
of Hibernia called Caillean." She spoke so dryly that Eilan wondered if Mairi
disliked the woman, but thought it better not to ask.
Three days later, Caillean herself arrived: a tall woman, bundled in shawls
and scarves that left only her eyes and heavy dark hair visible. Against the
blackness of her hair and brows her skin looked milk-pale, but her eyes were
blue. As she unwrapped herself, a shift in the wind brought gusts of smoke
from the hearth, and the priestess began to cough. Eilan hurried to fill a mug
of ale and offered it to her silently.
The priestess said in a low voice, "I thank you, child, but I am not
allowed; if I might have some water . . ."
"Of course," Eilan murmured, blushing, and hastened to fill a drinking
cup at the cask by the door. "Or I could draw it freshly from the well —"
"No, this will do very well," the priestess said, taking the cup from her
hand and draining it. "I thank you. But who is the woman with child? You are
not much more than a child yourself."
"It is Mairi who is having the baby," Eilan murmured. "I am Eilan,
Bendeigid's middle daughter. And there is another, Senara, who is only nine."
"My name is Caillean."
"I saw you at Beltane, but I did not know your name. I thought surely that
Lhiannon's assistant would be —" She stopped bashfully.
Caillean completed the sentence. "Older? More dignified? I have been
with Lhiannon since she brought me from the western shores of Eriu. I was
four-and-ten or thereabouts when we came to the Forest House, and I have
been there now for sixteen years."
"Do you know my kinswoman Dieda?"

"Certainly I do, but she dwells with the maidens; there are many of us,
and we are not all of one order. Now that I see you, I understand - but that is
for later. Let me speak now to your sister."
Eilan led her to Mairi, now so pregnant that she moved with difficulty,
and withdrew a little to give them some privacy. She could hardly hear the
low murmur as Caillean questioned Mairi at length. There was something
soothing in the quiet lilt of the priestess's voice.
Eilan could see the tension leaving Main's face, and realized for the first
time that her sister had been afraid. She did not flinch as Caillean pressed her
belly with her long hands. When she had done, Mairi lay back with a sigh.
"I think the babe will not be born today, and perhaps not tomorrow. Rest
now, lass, for you will need all your strength when the time comes," Caillean
said soothingly.
When Mairi was settled again, Caillean rejoined Eilan near the fire. "Is it
true that her husband has disappeared?" she asked in an undertone.
"We fear he was taken by the Romans," Eilan replied. "My father warned
me not to mention it to Mairi."
For a moment Caillean's gaze went inward. "Do not, for I fear she will not
see him again."
Eilan looked at her in horror. "You have heard something?"
"I have seen the omens, and they bode not well."
"Poor Mairi, poor love. How shall we tell her?"
"Say nothing now," Caillean counseled. "I will tell her myself after the
birthing, when she will have reason to live for her child."
Eilan shuddered, for she was fond of Mairi and it seemed to her that the
priestess had spoken of death just as she spoke of life, without feeling or
regret for either. But she supposed that to a priestess, life and death must
mean something quite other than what they meant to Eilan.

"I hope she has menfolk to care for her children's inheritance," Caillean
went on.
"My father has no sons," Eilan said. "But Cynric will do a brother's duty
to Main if there is need."
"Is he not the son of Bendeigid?"
"A foster son only; we were brought up together; he has always been very
fond of Mairi. He is away in the North now."
"I have heard of this Cynric," Caillean said, and Eilan wondered just how
much the priestess did know. "And indeed your sister will be in need of kin."
That night a new storm came whirling in from the west, and Eilan, waking
in the night, heard it beating around the house like a wild thing; when
morning came, the trees were still blowing and tossing before the blast. But
though a few handfuls of thatch were plucked from the roof, the roundhouse
only groaned and shuddered before each new gust of wind, where a more
rigid structure might have given way. The rain still fell relentlessly, but
Caillean, staring out into the downpour, looked pleased.
"There are rumors of raiders from the coast," she said when Eilan
questioned her. "If all the ways are flooded, they will not come this far
inland."
"Raiders?" Mairi echoed, looking frightened. But Caillean would not
repeat herself, saying only that to name an evil was often to draw it near. By
early evening the worst of the wind had blown itself out, and the weather
settled to hard, insistent rain, leaving all the world awash with the sound of
water, and of springs and cisterns overflowing. Fortunately there was a good
supply of wood cut and stacked in a shed near the main house, so they built
up a cheery blaze and Caillean unwrapped the small musical instrument she
carried swaddled like a child. Eilan had never known a woman to play a harp;
she herself had been beaten as a child for touching her grandfather's.
"Oh, it's true, there are woman bards among us," Caillean said, "though I
play only for my own pleasure. I think that Dieda will become one."
"I am not surprised," said Eilan a little wistfully. "She sings beautifully."

"Are you envious, child? There are other gifts than music, you know." The
priestess frowned at Eilan thoughtfully, then appeared to come to a decision.
"Did you not know she was chosen by mistake for you?"
Eilan stared, remembering all those times during her childhood when she
had played at priestess, and the vision that had come to her when Lhiannon's
cloak enfolded the other girl.
"Have you never thought of it, little one?"
Eilan did not reply. Of course, she had dreamed of such a thing for a long
time, but then she had met Gaius. How could she be meant for a priestess if
she was capable of such love for a man?
"Well, there is no need to make a decision now," Caillean said, smiling.
"We will talk of this another time."
Eilan stared at her, and suddenly with doubled vision she saw the two of
them together, lifting their arms in homage to the moon. But though
recognition was total, she realized in surprise that Caillean's hair was not
dark, but red, their features alike as those of sisters, and her own face was the
one she had seen once before in the forest pool. Sisters . . .and more than
sisters. Women, and more than women . . .The words came to her from some
place beyond memory.
Then, with a little shock she remembered that she had never spoken with
Caillean until yesterday. But as it had been with Gaius, it suddenly seemed to
her that she had known the priestess from the beginning of the world.
Caillean had been playing for a long time when Mairi stood up suddenly
and cried out, staring down at the dark stain that was spreading across her
gown. The other two looked up in surprise.
"Have your waters broken already?" the priestess asked. "Well, love,
babes come when they wish and not at our convenience; we'd better have you
to bed. Eilan, go find the shepherd and have him bring in more wood for the
fire. Then build up the fire and fill the cauldron and bring water to a boil.
Mairi will be wanting hot tea before this is over, and so will we."

As Caillean had no doubt expected, having something to do calmed the
younger girl. "Are you better now?" the priestess asked when Eilan returned.
"I have often found it a mistake to allow any woman who has not herself
borne a child to be in the room at a birth; it only frightens. But if you are to
join us in the Forest House, sooner or later you will have to learn."
Eilan swallowed and nodded, determined to justify the older woman's
faith in her. For the first hour or two Mairi dozed between pains, rousing only
a few times an hour to cry out, almost as if in her sleep. Eilan dozed on the
bench near the fire; it was the darkest part of the night and the rain had settled
down to a soft insistent pounding when Caillean bent and wakened her.
"Come, now, I shall need you; stir up the fire, and make Mairi a cup of
berry-leaf tea. I don't know how long this will take, and I will want your
help."
When the tea was ready, Caillean bent over Mairi, who was moving
restlessly, and held the cup to her lips. "There, sip this now. It will make you
feel stronger."
But in a few moments Mairi shook her head, her face growing red and
contorted.
"It will not be long, my dear," said Caillean encouragingly. "Do not try to
sit upright now."
As Mairi slumped, gasping, after the contraction, Caillean said, low and
quick, "Eilan, sponge her face, while I make all ready." She moved to the fire,
and spoke to Mairi once more. "See, I have a fine swaddling ready for the
little one, and it will not be long now till you hold her. Or do you think it will
be another fine son like the one you have already?"
"I do not care," Mairi groaned, breathing hard. "I only want — it over ahh - will it be long now - ?"
"Of course not. Just a little while, Mairi, and you will have your child in
your arms . . .ah, that's right, just a little more . . .One begins just as another
ends; I know it's hard, but it means your babe will be here all the sooner —"
Eilan felt almost rigid with fright. Mairi did not even look like herself any

more. Her face was red and swollen, she cried out and seemed not even to
know she was doing it. Then she gasped, arching her back and bracing her
feet against the end of the bed.
"I can't — oh, I can't," came the hoarse cry, but Caillean was still crooning
encouragement. It seemed to Eilan that the birthing had lasted a lifetime, but
the sun was barely set.
Then Caillean's voice changed. "Now I think we are ready. Let her hold
your hands, Eilan; no, not like that - at the wrists. Now, Mairi, push just once
more. I know you are tired, child, but this will soon be over. Breathe — that's
right, breathe hard, just let it come. There, there, now look!" Mairi's body
heaved, and the priestess straightened, holding something, unbelievably red
and tiny, that jerked in her hands with a thin cry. "Look, Mairi, you have a
fine little daughter."
Mairi's red face relaxed in a blissful smile as Caillean laid the newborn
child upon her belly.
"Ah, Lady," breathed the priestess, looking down at them. "More times
than I can remember I have seen this, and always it is a miracle!" The thin
mewing became a shrill and demanding cry, and Mairi laughed.
"Oh, Caillean, she's so beautiful, so beautiful. . ."
With swift efficiency the priestess tied off the birthcord and cleansed the
child. When Mairi began to deliver the afterbirth, Caillean handed the baby to
Eilan.
It seemed impossible that anything so fragile should be a human child; its
fingers and feet were thin and spidery, its head covered with a downy dark
fuzz. As Mairi fell into an exhausted sleep, Caillean hung a small metal
amulet around the infant's neck, and began to cocoon it in swaddling bands.
"Now she cannot be stolen by the elf-kind, and we have watched her
every moment since she was born, so we know she is no changeling,"
Caillean said. "But not even the Good Folk would be likely to come out into
this rain. So you see, even from such a flood some good can come."
Caillean straightened her weary back, realizing that a red watery sun was

beginning to peer through the heavy low-lying clouds for the first time in
many days.
The baby was long and frail. Her hair turned to a downy reddish fuzz as it
dried.
"She looks so delicate- will she live?" Eilan asked.
"I see no reason she should not," Caillean replied. "It is a mercy of the
gods we did not leave here last night. I thought it might be safer to take refuge
in the Forest House after all; and then this babe would have been born
beneath some tree or in an open field, and we might well have lost both
mother and child. My foresight is not always true."
The priestess sat down heavily on a bench before the fire. "Why, it is day
again; no wonder I am weary. And no doubt before long, the boy will wake
and we can show him his little sister."
Eilan was still holding the baby, but as Caillean looked up at her a veil
seemed to fall between them, like a breath of cold mist from the Otherworld.
As it swirled, a dreadful sorrow chilled Caillean's bones; suddenly she was
seeing an Eilan who was older, in the blue robe of the Forest House, with the
blue tattooed crescent of a sworn priestess between her brows. In her arms she
held a young child; and in her eyes Caillean saw a grief so great it tore her
heart.
Caillean shuddered, shaken by that flood of sorrow, and tried to blink the
tears away. When she looked again, the young girl was staring at her in
amazement. Involuntarily the priestess took a step forward and snatched
Mairi's child, who mewed softly and fell asleep again.
"What is the matter?" Eilan asked. "Why were you looking at me like
that?"
"A draught," Caillean murmured. "It chilled us both." But they could both
see that the rushlights burned unstirringly. My foresight is not always true, she
told herself. Not always . . .
She shook her head. "Let us hope the streams are still impassable," she
said. Even the thought of raiders was a welcome distraction after that vision.

"Why do you say that, Caillean? My father will certainly want to come as
soon as he can, and my mother too, to see their new grandchild. And all the
more so if, as you say, Mairi is widowed —"
Caillean started. "Did I say that? Well, surely the weather will do as it
will; never did I hear that even for the will of the High Druid we had more
either of sun or rain. But I cannot help thinking that your kinsmen are not the
only ones who can ride the roads. Come," she added, "The babe must go back
to her mother's breast. She moved toward the box bed, the swaddled child in
her arms.

Eight

Over the Roman camp at Deva rain continued to fall with maddening
insistence. The men stayed in their barracks, dicing or repairing worn gear, or
made their way to the wine shop to drink the afternoon away. In the midst of
the all-encompassing wetness, Macellius Severus sent for his son.
"You are familiar with the country to the west," he began. "Do you think
you could guide a party along the roads to Bendeigid Vran's household?"
Gaius stiffened, letting his oiled leather cape drip on to the tiled floor.
"Yes, but, Father —"
Macellius guessed his meaning. "I am not suggesting that you should spy
on a friend's household, my boy, but Hibernian raiders have been sighted off
Segontium. Every British housestead in the region will be at risk if they slip
by. It's for their own good, though I don't suppose they will see it that way.
But if I must send a troop in to see what's happening, is it not better that it be
led by a friend than by a Celt-hater, or some idiot fresh from Rome who
thinks the Britons still go about painted blue?"
Gaius felt himself coloring. He hated the way his father could suddenly
make him feel like a child.
"I am at your service, Father - and at Rome's," he added stiffly after a
moment, feeling so cynical about the polite formula that he half-expected a
sneer in response. How corrupt I am becoming, but at least I know when I am
being a hypocrite. Will I be so accustomed to putting on that air of benign
superiority by the time I am my father's age that I believe it?

"Or do you fear that your temper will run away with you because
Bendeigid refused you his daughter's hand?" his father went on. "I told you
how it would be."
Gaius felt his fists clench and bit his lip hard. He had never bested his
father in a confrontation and knew he would have no chance now. Still, those
words had been like salt on a raw wound.
"You told me, and you were right," Gaius said through his teeth. "Trot out
whatever heifer you will - any girl with broad hips and good bloodlines, this
Julia if you like - and I will do my duty."
"You are a Roman and I expect you to behave like one," Macellius said
more gently. "You acted honorably, and you will continue to do so. In Juno's
name, boy, the girl you loved may be in danger. Even though you can't marry
her, don't you want to make sure she is safe and well?"
And to that, of course, he could make no answer at all, but he felt his
stomach curdling with a dread that owed nothing to physical fear as he saluted
and went out of the door.
Perhaps I am simply afraid to face them all, Gaius thought as his little
troop of horsemen detached from the Auxilia trotted through the gate of the
fortress and splashed down the hill. In a way I did betray their trust, and they
were all kind to me. During the confusion of detailing the men and packing he
had been able to suppress his feelings, but now the sick apprehension washed
over him once more.
He had only seen Cynric once after leaving the house of Bendeigid . .
.One day in the market town of Deva he had turned and recognized the blond
young giant bartering for a sword at a smith's stall. Cynric was so deeply
engaged in conversation with the weapons seller that he had not seen Gaius,
and, in spite of his upbringing, Gaius had turned on his heel and fled. It was
just after he had received his reply from Bendeigid. If the household knew of
the offer Gaius would be shamed, and if not, what could Cynric, seeing the
lad he had befriended wearing the uniform of a Roman tribune, presume but
that they had been betrayed?
He wondered who had written the Druid's Latin response for him. Gaius

had burned the wax tablets on which they were written, but the words
remained engraved on his memory. They were simple enough. The Druid did
not feel he could give his daughter in marriage, because of her youth and
Gaius's Roman heritage.
Gaius had resolved to put the whole thing completely out of mind. After
all, he was a Roman, trained to discipline both mind and body. But it was
proving harder than he had expected. He could control his thoughts during the
daytime, but last night he had dreamed once more that he and Eilan were
sailing westward together on a white ship. Yet even if there were any land to
the west where they might flee, he did not have the faintest idea how one
would go about abducting even a willing girl, nor whether Eilan would be
willing to run away. He had no intention of facing down all his kinsmen, to
say nothing of hers. Nothing could come of that except misery for them both.
Perhaps Eilan was betrothed to somebody else by now, despite what her
father had said about her youth. Certainly most Roman girls were married by
that age. His father could go ahead, if he wished, and pledge him to
whomever he willed. Licinius's daughter was young too, so perhaps he need
not face it for a while. Better, Gaius thought, to stop thinking about women
entirely. The gods knew he had tried. But now and again, seeing - perhaps in
some Gaulish slave - a flash of fair hair and grey eyes, her image would
return to him so vividly he wanted to cry.
He would have liked to learn from Cynric how the family fared. But by
the time he had got up his courage again the young giant had vanished. And
all things considered, it was probably just as well.
Eilan woke suddenly, blinking as she tried to remember where she was.
Had the baby cried? Had she dreamed? But Mairi and the babe lay quiet in the
bed box on the other side of the fire. As she moved, her nephew, Vran, turned
in his sleep and nestled closer against her. The priestess, Caillean, lay still
against the wall. Eilan, at the edge of the bed nearest the fire, had slept badly,
restless. If she had been dreaming, she could not remember it; she knew only
that she was awake and staring at the red coals where the fire had burned to
embers.
In the dark Caillean said softly, "I heard it too. There is someone outside
the house."

"At this hour?" She listened, but there was only the dripping of water
from the eaves and the hiss of the fire.
But Caillean said with peremptory haste, "Be still." She slipped from the
bed and silently tested the bar across the door. It was secure in its slot, but
after a moment Eilan heard again the sound that had wakened her and saw it
bow slightly as the door was pressed inward.
Eilan shivered. She had been weaned on tales of raiders, but had always
lived in the great house of Bendeigid, protected by her father's armed men.
The two serving men who helped with the farm work slept in the other
roundhouse, and the homes of the other men oathed to Rhodri were scattered
through the hills.
"Get up - quietly - and dress as swiftly as you can," whispered Caillean.
The door shook again, and Eilan obeyed, trembling.
"My father always said to hide in the woods if raiders came —"
"That is no good to us now, with this rain, and Mairi still weak from
childbirth," Caillean murmured. "Wait."
The door groaned as someone thrust more strongly, and Mairi woke,
muttering. But Caillean, fully dressed now, had her hand over her lips. "Be
silent, as you value your life and your child's," she whispered. Mairi subsided
with a gasp, and the baby, luckily, slept on.
"Shall we hide in the storage pit?" Eilan whispered as the door shook
again. Whoever was outside was determined to force his way in.
Caillean said softly, "Stay here, and whatever happens do not scream,"
and went to the door. Mairi cried out as Caillean began to lift the bar. The
priestess said fiercely, "Do you want to put this door back together after they
break it down? I do not."
As she drew back the bar, the door banged open. A dozen men burst
through it as if blown by the wind and stopped short as Caillean cried out a
single word that sounded like a command. They were big men with wild and
untrimmed hair streaming over their shoulders, swathed in skins and hairy
cloaks of heavy wool over tunics even more brightly checked than those the

Britons wore. Caillean seemed slender as a willow wand before them. Her
dark hair flowed to her waist over her ungirt blue robe, lifting a little as the
wind blew through the door. It was the only thing about her that moved.
Mairi dived beneath the covers, clutching her child. One of the men
laughed and said something just audible, and Eilan shuddered. She felt like
following Mairi, but was too paralyzed to move.
Caillean cried out again in a ringing voice and took a step backwards to
the hearth. The men seemed mesmerized by her gaze. They stood, staring, as
she knelt and plunged her hands into the embers. Then suddenly she was
rising, casting the coals at the intruders with both hands. She shouted again
and the strange warriors gasped and recoiled; then they were gone, surging
back over the doorsill, cursing in an odd sort of British and another tongue
she did not know, knocking each other off their feet as they struggled to get
away.
The priestess followed them to the door, laughing, and cried out
something in a high voice, like the cry of a falcon. Then she slammed out the
surging wind and all was still once more.
When they had gone, Caillean sank down on the settle by the hearth and
Eilan, who was shaking to her very toenails, went to her. "Who were they?"
"Raiders, a mixed band, I think, from the North and from my country,"
Caillean said. "More shame to me, for I am a woman of Eriu, brought here by
Lhiannon." She stood up and began to mop up the rain water that had come
in.
Eilan quavered, "And what did you say?"
"I told them I was a bean-drui, a she-Druid, and if they laid a hand on me
or on either of my sisters I would curse them by fire and water; and I showed
them that I had that power." Caillean stretched out her hands. The slim fingers
that Eilan had seen her thrust into the coals were white and unharmed. Was
this all a dream?
Eilan, remembering what Caillean had cried out after them, said
hesitatingly, "Sisters?"

"By the vows I have taken, all women are my sisters." Her lips twisted.
"And I said if they went away and left us in peace I would lay a blessing on
them —"
"And did you bless them then?"
"I did not; they are wild wolves of the forest, or worse," Caillean said
defiantly. "Bless them? As soon bless a wolf and his teeth in my throat."
Eilan's gaze returned to Caillean's fingers. "How did you do that? Was that
a Druid's illusion, or did you really take fire in your hands." Already she was
beginning to wonder if her eyes had deceived her.
"Oh, that was real enough." Caillean gave a short laugh. "Anyone with my
training could have done it."
Eilan stared at her. "Could I?"
"If you were taught, certainly," said Caillean with a trace of impatience.
"If you had the trust, and the will. But I cannot show you now. Perhaps in the
Forest House, if you come there."
The reality of what they had escaped burst over Eilan then and she
dropped down upon the seat next to the priestess, shuddering. "They would . .
.they would have -" Eilan swallowed. "We all owe you our lives."
"Oh, I think not," said Caillean. "A woman in childbed is small temptation
even to such as these. And I might well have been able to frighten them from
me; but you, yes; rape is the least you could have expected from them. They
do not kill fair young girls; but you might well have ended a captive wife, if
you so call it, on the shores of wild Eriu. If that is a fate that would have
pleased you, I am sorry to have interfered."
Eilan shuddered, remembering the feral faces of the men. "I think not. Are
the men all like that in your land?"
"I do not know. When I left it I was still very young." After a moment's
silence Caillean went on. "I do not remember either my mother or my father,
only that in the hut where we lived - all of us - there were seven children
smaller than I. One day we went to the market and Lhiannon was there. I had

never seen anyone so beautiful.
"And something - I know not what - reached out to her, for she cast her
cloak over me, thus claiming me in the oldest of rites for the gods. Years later,
I asked her why she had chosen me from all the others there. She said that she
had seen that the others there were cleanly dressed and that their parents clung
to them. There was no one to cling to me," she added somewhat bitterly. "In
the home of my parents I was only another mouth to feed. Nor was my name
Caillean; my mother — I do not really remember her — she called me Londubh, Blackbird."
"Is Caillean a priestess name then?"
Caillean smiled. "It is not," she said. "Caillean, in our tongue, means only
'my child, my girl'. So Lhiannon called me whenever she spoke to me; I think
of myself now by no other name."
"Should I call you that then?"
"You should, though I do have another name given me by the priestesses.
I am sworn never to speak it aloud or even whisper it, save to another
priestess."
"I see." Eilan stared at her, then blinked, because for a moment a name
had echoed in her awareness as loudly as if it had been spoken. Isarma . .
.when you were my sister, Isarma was your name . . .
Caillean sighed, "Well, dawn is still far off. See, your sister has already
fallen back into slumber. Poor lass, the birth exhausted her. You should sleep
as well —"
Eilan shook her head, trying to bring the world back into focus. "After
such a disturbance, I do not think I could sleep even if I tried."
Caillean looked at her and suddenly laughed. "Well, to be truthful, neither
can I! Those men terrified me so that I could scarce speak. I thought I had
forgotten their dialect - the last time I heard it was so long ago."
"You did not look terrified," said Eilan. "You looked like a goddess
standing there." She heard once more the other woman's bitter laugh.

"Things are not always as they seem, my little one. You must learn not to
put all your trust in how folk look, or in what they say."
Eilan stared into the fire, whose embers, stirred back to life by Caillean's
raking, snapped and sparkled on the hearth. The man she had learned to care
for as Gawen had been an illusion, but even as Gaius the Roman, the thing
that made her love him was the same. And he had spoken truth to her. I would
know him, she thought then, if he came to me as a leper or a wild man. For a
moment she grasped at something that lay beyond face or form or name. Then
a coal snapped, and it was gone.
"Tell me what is true, then," Eilan said to fill the silence. "How did that
cotter's child you say you were become a priestess who could hold fire in her
hands?"
Tell me what is true . . .Caillean stared at the girl, who had lowered her
fair lashes over those changeable eyes as if frightened by her own boldness.
What other truths might come back to haunt her, as her mother tongue had
returned on the lips of those monstrous men? She was twice Eilan's age — old
enough to be her mother if she had married young, and yet at this moment the
younger woman was like a sister, a twin soul.
"Did you come at once then to the Forest House with Lhiannon?"
persisted Eilan.
"I did not; I think that Vernemeton was not yet built then," Caillean pulled
herself together enough to answer her. "Lhiannon had come to Eriu to study
with the bean-drui, the priestesses at the shrine of Brigid at Druim Cliadh.
When she returned to Britain, we dwelt at first in a round tower on the shore
far, far to the north of here. I remember that there was a ring of white stones
laid around the tower, and it was death for any man, save only the Arch-Druid
-not Ardanos, but the one who was before — to come within this ring of
stones. Always, she treated me as her foster daughter; once she said, when
someone asked, that she had found me abandoned on the seashore. It might as
well have been true; I never saw any member of my family again."
"Didn't you miss your mother?"
Caillean hesitated, shaken by the flood of memories. "I suppose you had a

good and a loving mother. Mine was otherwise. It is not that she was evil, but
I cared little for her nor she for me." She stopped herself, eyeing the younger
woman warily. What power is in you, girl, she thought, that you can conjure
such memories from met She sighed, trying to find the right words.
"For her, I was only an extra mouth to feed. Once, years later in the
market at Deva, I saw an old woman who reminded me of my mother. She
was not, of course, but I did not even feel regret when I realized it. It was then
that I knew I had no kinfolk but Lhiannon and, later, the other priestesses of
the Forest House . . ."
There was a long silence. She could see Eilan trying to imagine what it
would be like to grow up without a family. Caillean could see that Mairi's
bossiness had held affection, and, from what Dieda had told her, she had been
like Eilan's twin. And yet, she realized suddenly, just as she herself had never
unburdened her heart to her fellow priestesses, never could Eilan have talked
to any of her family as she was speaking with Caillean now.
It is like talking to myself, to say these things to her, Caillean thought
ruefully, or perhaps it is like talking to the self I should have been, forever
innocent and pure.
"The darkness and the fire glow here remind me of my earliest years," the
priestess said at last, and as she spoke the dull light captured her vision and
she was falling down the tunnel of the years, the words pouring out of her as
if she were under some spell.
"All I truly recall of the hut is that it was dark and always smoky. It hurt
my throat, so I was always running alone down to the seashore. Mostly I
remember the crying of the seagulls; they were about the tower too, so that
when I came here to the Forest House many seasons ago, for more than a year
I could hardly sleep for being out of the sound of the sea. I loved the ocean.
My memories of my . . .home . . ." she continued hesitantly, "are all of
children, always a baby at my mother's breast, always the whimpering and
squalling, and tugging at her skirts and at mine when I could not escape them.
But even beatings could not keep me within the house to pound barley, or to
be pulled around by the whimpering naked brats. It is surprising I can endure
babes," she added, "but I have no dislike for such as Mairi's who come where
they are much longed for and are well cared for once they are born.

"I must have had a father, but even when I was very small, I knew he did
nothing for my mother except to make sure that there was always a new baby
at the breast." She hesitated. "I dare say Lhiannon pitied me as a starveling."
Caillean heard her own words, surprised that they held no bitterness; as if
she had accepted all this too long ago.
"So I do not even know how old I am, not really. It was about a year or so
after Lhiannon took me away before my body showed the first signs of
womanhood. I think I was about twelve then." She broke off suddenly, and
Eilan looked at her in amazement.
I am a woman, a priestess, Caillean told herself, a sorceress who can
frighten armed men! But the fire trance had taken her too far into memory,
and she felt like a terrified child. Which was the truth? Or was the deception
only in the flickering of the fire?
"I must be more shaken than I knew," she said in a stifled voice, "or
perhaps it is the hour, and the darkness, as if we had stepped outside time."
She looked at Eilan, forcing herself to honesty, "Or it may be because I am
talking to you . . ."
Eilan swallowed, and steeled herself to meet the other woman's gaze.
Truth . . .tell me the truth - Caillean heard the thought as if it had been her
own, and could not tell which of them had a greater need for it.
"I never told Lhiannon, and the Goddess has not struck me down . . ." She
felt the words dragged out of her. "But after all these years it seems to me that
perhaps someone should know."
Eilan reached out to her, and Caillean's fingers closed hard on her hand.
"It was the sight and sound of those raiders that made me remember. In
my old home there was a man I sometimes saw on the shore. He was, I
suspect, one who lived there apart from other men, an outlaw driven from his
clan. I would not wonder at that," she added bitterly. "At first I trusted him; he
gave me small gifts, pretty things he had found on the shore, shells, bright
feathers." She hesitated. "More fool I for thinking him harmless; but how
would I have known better? Who had there ever been to teach me?"

She stared blindly towards the fire, but there had been no light in the hut,
and no light could reach her now in this place of memory. "I suspected
nothing, I never knew what he wanted when he dragged me into his hut one
day —" She shuddered, racked by memories for which, even now, she had no
words.
"What did you do?" Eilan's voice came from a great way off, like a distant
star.
"What could I do?" Caillean said harshly, clinging to that little light. "I - I
ran away, crying - crying till I thought I would melt, and filled with such
horror and disgust - I can't speak of that. It seemed there was no one I could
tell, no one who would have cared." She was silent for a long time. "To this
day I remember the smell in his hut - filth, bracken, seaweed, and being
pushed down on it while I whimpered — I was too young to imagine what he
wanted. The smell of the sea and of bracken still makes me ill," she added.
"Didn't anyone ever know? Didn't they do anything?" asked Eilan. "I think
my father would kill anyone who had touched me so."
Caillean had said it at last, and breathing was a little easier now. She let
out some of the pain in a long, shuddering, sigh. "Wild as our tribe was,
women could not be molested, nor a child so young. Had I accused my
attacker, he would have come to the wicker cage and roasted in a slow fire.
He knew it, when he threatened me. But I did not know it then." She spoke
with a strange detachment now, as if it had all happened to someone else.
"It was about a year afterward that Lhiannon came. She would never have
suspected that a girl so young could already be impure -and by the time I
came to trust her and believe in her goodness, it was too late; I feared I should
be sent away. So, after all, that divinity you thought you saw in me is all a
lie," she said harshly. "If Lhiannon had known, I should never have been
made priestess -but I made sure she never knew." She turned her face away.
For a moment that seemed far too long, there was silence.
"Look at me -"
Caillean found her gaze drawn back to the child and saw Eilan's face, one
side Goddess-bright and the other in shadow.

"I believe in you," said the girl gravely.
Caillean drew a shaken breath and Eilan's image was blurred by her tears.
"I live only because I believe that the Goddess forgives me as well," the
priestess said. "I had already received my first initiation before I understood
the enormity of my deception. But there were no evil omens. When they made
me priestess I waited for a thunderbolt, but none came. I wondered then if
perhaps there are no gods, or if there are, they care nothing for the doings of
humankind."
"Or perhaps they are more merciful than men," said Eilan, then blinked as
if amazed at her own temerity. It had never occurred to her to question the
wisdom of men like her father and grandfather before. "Why did you leave
your tower by the sea?" Eilan prompted after a time.
Caillean, lost in memory, started and said, "Because of the destruction of
the shrine on Mona — you know that story?"
"My grandfather — he is a bard - has sung it. But surely that was before
you were born —"
"Not quite," Caillean laughed. "But I was still a child. If Lhiannon had not
been in Eriu, which you call Hibernia, at the time, she too would have died.
For some years after that disaster the remaining Druids of Britain were too
busy licking their wounds to take much thought for their priestesses. Then the
Arch-Druid made some kind of treaty with the Romans that ensured sanctuary
for the surviving sacred women within Roman lands."
"With the Romans!" Eilan exclaimed. "But it was the Romans who killed
the others!"
"No, they only despoiled them," said Caillean bitterly. "The priestesses of
Mona lived long enough to bear the bastards the Romans had begotten on
them, then killed themselves. The children were fostered out to loyal families
like your own."
"Cynric!" exclaimed Eilan with a look of sudden comprehension. "That is
why he is so bitter about the Romans, and always wants to hear the story of
Mona, though it happened so long ago. They always hushed me when I asked

about it before!"
"Your Cynric the Roman-hater has exactly as much Roman blood as that
boy your father refused to let you marry," said Caillean, laughing. But Eilan
hugged her arms and stared into the fire.
"Don't you believe me?" asked the priestess. "It is all too true. Well,
perhaps the Romans feel some guilt for what was done, but your grandfather
is as wily a political animal as any Roman senator, and he bargained with
Cerealis, who was Governor before Frontinus. At any rate the Forest House
was built at Vernemeton to shelter women and priestesses from the whole of
Britain. And at last Lhiannon became High Priestess and a place was made
for me among them, mostly because they did not know what else to do with
me. I have attended Lhiannon since I was a little child, but I am not to
succeed her. That has been made clear to me."
"Why not?"
"At first I thought it was the will of the Goddess . . .because of what I told
you. But now I believe that it is because the priests cannot trust me to obey. I
love Lhiannon, but I see her clearly, and I know that she will bend with the
wind. Perhaps the only time she ever defied the Council was when she
insisted on keeping me. But I see through their plots and speak my mind,
though not," she shook her head ruefully, "as I have spoken to you!"
Eilan returned her smile. "That must be true, for I cannot imagine saying
even half the things I have heard this night in my father's hall."
"They would not dare let me speak with the voice of the Goddess - they
would always be wondering what I was going to say!" Caillean found herself
laughing again. "They will want someone more loyal. I thought for a time it
was to be Dieda; but I overheard a bit of what Ardanos said when she was
chosen. I believe that they had planned it should be you."
"You said something like this before, but I think my father means to
arrange a marriage for me."
"Truly?" Caillean raised one eyebrow. "Well, perhaps I am wrong. I knew
only that the son of the Prefect of the camp at Deva had asked for you."

"My father was so angry . . ." Eilan blushed, remembering the things he
had said to her. "He said he would have Senara married off before she could
cause him any trouble. I thought he meant the same for me. But he said
nothing of sending me to Vernemeton. If I cannot be with Gaius," she added
dully, "I do not suppose it matters what I do."
Caillean looked at her thoughtfully. "I have never been tempted to marry;
I have been pledged to the Goddess for so long. Perhaps because of what
happened to me when I was a child I never felt I wished to belong to any man.
I suppose if I had been unhappy in the temple, Lhiannon would have tried to
find a way to give me in marriage; she has always wanted to make me happy.
I do love her," she added. "She has been more to me than a mother."
She hesitated. "It galls me to think of giving way to Ardanos's plans, but
the Goddess may have had a hand in this as well. Would you like to come
with me to Vernemeton when I return?"
"I believe that I would," Eilan replied, and a flicker of interest leaped in
those odd, changeable eyes that sometimes looked dark hazel, and sometimes
gray replacing the pain. "I cannot think anything else would please me so
well. I never really believed they
would let me and Gaius be together. Long ago, before I met Gaius, I used
to dream of being a priestess. This way, at least, I will have an honorable life
and interesting things to learn."
"I think that could be arranged," Caillean said dryly. "No doubt Bendeigid
will be delighted, and Ardanos as well. But Lhiannon is the one who must
agree to it. Shall I speak to her?"
Eilan nodded, and this time it was the older woman who took her hand. At
the touch of the girl's smooth skin Caillean felt the familiar dizziness of
shifting vision, and saw Eilan grown older and even more beautiful, swathed
in the Oracle's veils. "Sisters, and more than sisters . . ." Like an echo she
heard the words.
"Don't be afraid, child. I think it may be . . ." she paused and finally said,
"fated that you come among us." Her heart lifted suddenly. "And I need
hardly say that I would welcome you there." She sighed as the vision left her,
and heard, like an echo, a lark outside, giving greeting to the dawn. "Dawn is

breaking." With an effort, Caillean made stiff muscles obey her and stumbled
towards the door. "We have been talking all the night. I have not done that
since I was younger than you." She opened the door, letting the rising sun
flood into the room. "Well, at least the rain has stopped; we had better go and
see if the byre survived the night - at least those wretches could hardly burn it
in this rain - and if they have left us any cows, and anyone to milk them."
For the next four days Gaius slogged along at the head of the troop of
Dacian auxiliaries whose sick decurion he was replacing, with Priscus, their
optio, all of them cursing the mud and the damp that seemed to creep through
every opening despite the capes of oiled leather, rusting armor and chafing
wherever wet leather touched skin. The woodlands dripped steadily and the
fields lay sodden to either side, pools of standing water rotting the roots of the
young corn. Summer's end would bring a poor harvest, he thought grimly.
They would need to bring in grain from parts of the Empire where the gods
had been kinder. It was no wonder the raiders were roaming if the weather
had been the same in Hibernia.
Despite the slow going, by the middle of the fifth day they were well into
the country of his adventure. They spent that night at the home of Clotinus.
The next day they passed the very boar pit into which he had fallen and turned
down the track that led to the household of Bendeigid. The rain was letting up
at last, and westward between the banks of breaking clouds the sky glowed
gold.
Gaius felt his pulse quicken as he recognized the home pasture and the
wood in which he had hunted for primroses with Eilan. Soon she would see
him, clothed in the majesty, however mud-spattered, of Rome. He would say
nothing; she could judge the depth of his suffering from his silence. And then,
perhaps, she would seek him out, and "Gods below! Are those more stormclouds?" It was the optio, Priscus,
behind him. "I hoped we'd have a day at least to get dry!"
Gaius focused on the outside world and saw that though the sky to the
south was clearing, the clouds ahead were an ominous dark gray. His horse
tossed its head nervously and a little prickle of apprehension roughened his
skin.
"Not ramclouds," said one of the Dacians. "Smoke . . ."

At that moment the rising wind brought him the reek of smoldering
timbers. All the horses were snorting now, but they had smelled fire before,
and the men kept them under control.
"Priscus, dismount and take two scouts through the woods to see," said
Gaius, a little amazed at the cold precision of his tone. Was it training that
kept him from spurring his horse forward, or was he simply numbed into
inaction by the thought of what he might see? It seemed only a few moments
before the scouts returned.
"Raiders, sir," said the optio, his seamed face set like stone. "The
Hibernians we heard about, I would guess. But they're gone now."
"Any survivors?"
Priscus shrugged and Gaius felt his throat close.
"Warm welcome here, but no place to sleep, eh? Guess we ride on," said
one of the men, and the others laughed. Then Gaius turned, and his face
silenced them. He dug his heels into his mount's sides and in silence the troop
followed him.
It was true. Even as they came around the edge of the wood to the rise on
which Bendeigid's steading had been, Gaius had been hoping that Priscus was
mistaken somehow. But it was all gone -only a few blackened timbers at the
ends of what had been the feasting hall still stood in mute memorial. No sign
of the building where he had convalesced, and no sign of life. Thatched
buildings burned fast.
"Fierce indeed must have been the fire, to burn when the straw was wet
with rain," said Priscus.
"No doubt," Gaius numbly agreed, picturing little Senara, Eilan, all the
family, prisoners in the hands of the wild raiders from the coasts of Hibernia,
or worse still, heaps of charred bones among the tangle of burnt timbers that
had once been a home. He must not let the men see how much this was
affecting him; he pulled his hood over his face, coughing as if from the smoke
that still drifted from the outbuildings. Priscus had been right. Nothing could
have survived this blaze.

He said fiercely, "Let's get the men going then. We've no time to stand
about staring at foundation stones if we're to have shelter before night falls!"
His voice cracked and he turned it to another cough, wondering what, if
anything, Priscus had deduced from his tone. But the optio, an old soldier,
was familiar enough with the effects on the young of seeing pillage and
slaughter.
Priscus gave him a kindly glance and looked away. "We promised these
people peace when we conquered them - least we could do, you'd think,
would be to protect them. But we'll catch up with the bastards that did it,
never fear, and teach them not to meddle with Rome. What a pity the gods
never invented any other way to civilize the world. Oh well, we could have
been turnip farmers; but one way or the other, we picked soldiering for our
job, and that's part of it. Friends of yours, were they?"
"I guested here," Gaius replied stiffly. "Last spring." At least his voice was
back under control.
"Well, that's the way the world goes," Priscus replied. "Here one day and
gone the next. But I reckon the gods must have known what they were doing."
"Yes," Gaius replied, as much to cut off the man's homely philosophy as
anything else. "Give the order to march; let's get the men out of the rain as
soon as we can reach the next town."
"Right, sir. Column, form up!" he bawled. "Who knows, maybe the family
were all away visiting friends. That's the way it goes sometimes."
As they moved on through a gathering mist that was once more turning to
rain, Gaius recalled seeing Cynric in the marketplace shortly before leaving
Deva; there had been some talk of sending the young man to some college of
weapons in the North, so he might very well have survived. The death of a
Druid as important as Bendeigid would make some stir. Gaius suspected that
his father had sources of information he kept secret. Surely he would know.
He had only to wait and see.
Gaius tried to summon up some hope. Priscus was right. The burning of
the house did not necessarily mean the death or imprisonment of the people
who had lived there. Mairi might well have returned to her home; Dieda was

not even a member of Bendeigid's household, at least not any more. But Eilan
. . .probably it was too much to hope that Eilan, or little Senara, or the gentle
Rheis, had survived. At that moment he would not have given the smallest of
copper coins for his own career or for the whole of the empire.
He thought, If I had taken Eilan away she would still be living -if I had
stood up to my father, even stolen her away . . .
A sudden memory made his throat ache - the vision of his mother lying
cold and white in her sleeping place, and the women wailing over her body.
He had wailed with them, but then his father had taken him away and taught
him that a Roman does not cry. But he wept for her now, as he wept for these
women who had for a little while, made him feel part of a family.
He could not let the soldiers see him cry. He put his cloak over his head
and tried to pretend that the tears that rolled down his cheeks were rain.

Nine

"I want my husband." At mid-morning, the day after the birth of her child,
Mairi had awakened, fretful and demanding. "Where is Rhodri? He would
have protected us from those men —"
The roundhouse was warm after the cold outside. Eilan, who was
beginning to feel the effects of her own interrupted night, looked at her sister
in exasperation and sat down by the fire. It was bad enough that the raiders
had driven off all their milk cows, and she had had to slog several miles
through the wet woods to borrow a beast so that Mairi, whose own milk had
not yet come in, could feed the child. At least the main herds were off in the
summer pastures, so her sister was not without dowry if she married again,
although Eilan was not heartless enough to speak of that yet.
"The cows would not have been taken if Rhodri had been here!"
"More likely he would have tried to fight the raiders, and you would still
—" Eilan bit her lip, appalled at what she had been saying. She had forgotten
that Mairi did not know. "Caillean —" She looked at the priestess in appeal.
"You would still be a widow —" Caillean said brutally, bringing the
pannikin of warm milk from the hearth and setting it down.
Mairi's eyes widened. "What are you saying —" She looked up into the
face of the priestess and her own grew pale at what she read there.

"I would have waited, but we no longer have that luxury. Rhodri was
caught by the Romans when he tried to rescue the levies. They executed him,
Mairi."
"It is not true . . .you are lying to me. He could not be dead and I not
know! Better that the raiders had killed me — why didn't you let them,
Caillean? Oh, I ought to be dead - I wish I were!" Mairi sank back into the
feather bed, sobbing, and the baby began to cry.
Caillean handed the child to Eilan, bent over the other woman, murmuring
softly.
"There, now, it's no use weeping. You have two fine children with their
lives ahead of them. You must gather your strength, Mairi, to get them to
safety before the Scotti come again!"
Main's eyes flew open and she reached out wildly. Eilan, shaken between
tears and laughter, set the baby in her arms. Caillean had been right. Once
Mairi was done weeping, she would go on living for her children. Caillean
had experience of women's hearts.
A little while later, while Mairi still slept, exhausted with weeping, Eilan
heard a horse's hoofs sloshing in the mud left by the storm. They came to a
halt outside. The raiders! Eilan thought wildly. But no attacker would strike
so slowly and heavily upon the door. Her heart beating like a war drum, Eilan
drew the bar. When she peered out, she saw her father there.
At the moment she could think only of Rhodri. Had her father come to
bring Mairi the news? The young man had been one of their best warriors,
living like a son of the house and treating her like a sister even before she was
one. Now that Mairi knew about her loss, Eilan too could grieve.
She pulled open the door. Bendeigid stumbled as he entered, as if the ride
had wearied him or he had suddenly become old. Then she felt the hardness
of his hands closing on her shoulders. For a long moment he stood looking at
her.
"Caillean has just told Mairi about Rhodri," she said in a low voice. "Did
you know?"

"I knew," her father said with great bitterness. "I hoped that the word that
had come to me was not true. A curse will certainly light on all Romans for
that deed. Now do you see, Eilan, why I would not allow you to marry into
that accursed people?" He let go of her and dropped down upon the settle by
the fire.
Gaius's people might be guilty of such evil, but she did not believe that
Gaius himself would have done it. But looking into her father's harsh face,
she held her tongue.
"But that is not the worst evil we have to mourn." Bendeigid's face
contorted suddenly, and Eilan felt the first twinge of real fear. "I do not know
how to say it, Eilan."
"It may be that I already know," Caillean spoke behind them. "I am
sometimes foresighted, and the night before I left the Forest House I dreamed
I saw a house lying in ashes, and knew it for yours. But then I found Eilan
here and thought I must have been
mistaken. Last night we had a visit from a band of raiders. I know the size
of pack such wolves run in - and I feared. Did the main body turn south, then,
to you?"
"A band came here?" he croaked, turning to stare at her.
"Only a few of them, and I managed to frighten them off."
"Then I have you to thank that I have children yet alive!"
Eilan needed no foresight to understand his words, but what she was
hearing was too horrible to believe. She felt the color draining from her face.
"Father —"
"Child, child, how can I tell you? Word came that a mixed band of raiders
were attacking Conmor's steading. I took my men to go to his aid. But there
were more of them than we dreamed could come in such weather. While we
were gone —"
"Are Mother and Senara dead then?" Her voice cracked, and Mairi,

rousing, pushed back the bedcurtains and stood unsteadily, staring. Caillean
went to her and the Druid continued.
"I dare to hope so." His face contorted with pain. "For the alternative, to
be carried off as slaves beyond the sea, is worse still. To think that either
might live in such dishonor —"
"Would you rather see them dead than alive in slavery?" Caillean asked in
a low, tense voice.
"I would that," Bendeigid exclaimed fiercely. "Better a quick death, even
in the flames, and a welcome in the Otherworld, than life with the memory of
all our people's deaths to haunt them, as I must live now. The gods know
those monsters would have paid in blood for their deaths, and mine, if I had
only been there!"
He broke off and stared fiercely from Eilan to Mairi, who took a tottering
step towards him. Groaning, he gathered both of his daughters into his arms.
Sobbing, Eilan held on to her sister. Once she would have found comfort in
her father's arms, but these were griefs from which he could not protect her.
"Senara's body was not found in the ashes," he said brokenly, "and she
was not yet ten years old . . ."
Eilan thought, Then it may well be that she still lives . . .but she did not
say it aloud.
"I had meant to bring Mairi home when the news about Rhodri was
confirmed, but now I have no home to offer her. I can give no protection to
anyone now . . ."
"Lord Druid, perhaps you cannot," said Caillean quietly, "but your Order
can. The Forest House will shelter Mairi and the little
ones for as long as they have need. And I want to ask if you would permit
Eilan to enter as a novice priestess of the shrine."
Bendeigid sat up and looked sharply at Eilan. "Is that what you want,
child?"

"It is," she said simply. "If I may not marry where I love, then let me give
my love to the Lady. It would please me indeed, for I used to dream about
such a life before I was old enough to think of marriage at all."
For the first time, her father smiled, albeit shakily. "It will please your
grandsire, at any rate. I had not intended this life for you, Eilan, but if it is
truly what you want, then I am pleased too."
"But what —" Eilan bit back the words. How could she have forgotten?
Her mother would never say anything more to her at all. But her father
seemed to have sensed what she could not say. He sank down again by the
hearth, his face buried in his hands. She had never guessed that her father
could weep. But when he looked up again she saw his cheeks streaked with
tears.
Eilan was likewise bereft, but she had no tears. Will Gaius think me dead
when he hears? Will he weep for me? Better, perhaps, that he should think her
dead than faithless to his memory. But it did not matter; she would be a
priestess of the Forest House. Beyond that she could not make her mind go.
"They shall be avenged!" exclaimed the Druid, gazing into the flames. "In
all of Britain shall those wild devils find no lives so costly as these! Even the
Romans have never dared so far, and I tell you I would accept help even from
them to get revenge! This will mean war! For it is not only rapine and murder,
Eilan; it is sacrilege. To attack the home of a Druid, kill the wife and daughter
and granddaughter of Druids; and destroy the sacred things - how could they
do it? The Northerners are our kinsfolk, and I have studied with the Druids of
Eriu."
"It has ever been the way of our people to fight each other when there was
no common enemy," Caillean quietly observed.
"But we do have such an enemy," exclaimed Bendeigid. "Do not we all
hate Rome?"
"Perhaps the wild tribes think of us as Romans now . . ."
The Druid shook his head. "The gods will surely punish them; and if they
do not, our people will. Cynric has been as a son to me, and I tell you, he will
curse when he hears of this day! But he is away in the islands to the north.

You and Mairi are all that are left to me, Eilan."
Indeed, she thought, remembering. I have so few kin left and Dieda too
has lost a sister. Will she welcome me to the Forest House?
Well, whatever came of it, a priestess she would be. Of her father's blood
remained Mairi, and her newborn daughter, and her son; she wished that these
children might be a comfort to her father. He was not yet old; he might marry
again and have others of his own or, more likely, Mairi would find a new
husband and have more. But if Eilan went to the Forest House, he would get
no grandchildren from her.
Bendeigid rose, looking at Caillean beneath bent brows. "I am in need
now of your skills, priestess; Cynric must be recalled. Can you summon him
for me? And will you do so?"
"With Lhiannon's help, I can," Caillean replied. "In any case she would
need to know —"
"I also need your skills to seek out these men," Bendeigid interrupted.
"That is easily done; I saw them when they burst in here, and if they were
not among those who burned your home yet they must be under the same
command. Some of them were Caledonians, and the others Scotti from Eriu."
"If they came here last night, the Scotti would have been on their way
back to the coast and the Caledonians on their way north again." Bendeigid
had risen to pace restlessly; now he resumed his seat by the fire. Caillean
brought him a mug of ale and he sank his beard in it for a long draught, then
repeated, "We need Cynric home, faster than even a mounted man can ride.
Send the message, Caillean, with your magic —"
"I will," said the priestess. "I will stay here with your daughters while you
ride to tell Lhiannon. Then go to Deva, for the Arch-Druid must know as
well."
"You are right; my wife Rheis was his daughter," Bendeigid said, rubbing
his brow distractedly. "Perhaps he will have some counsel for us as well."
News of the raid spread quickly through the countryside. On the lips of

wandering peddlers it travelled, and with couriers of the Legions; it seemed
that the birds of the air themselves bore the news on their wings.
Three days after the raid, Ardanos, the Arch-Druid, coming out of his
house in Deva in the morning, heard a raven croak on his left and recognized
an omen of disaster. But he had earned his rank by the kind of worldly
wisdom that enabled him to out-think the Romans and undermine opposition
among his own people. Not for the first time he regretted the worldly limit of
his powers. Then he saw the mud-spattered man coming up the street and
knew that he would not have to wait for the raven to tell him, for grief was
written plainly in his son-in-law's burning eyes.
When Ardanos had recovered a little from the shock of Bendeigid's news,
he went to Macellius Severus, who demanded a hearing from the Commander
of the Adiutrix Legion.
"These raiders from over the sea grow too bold," Macellius said angrily.
"These Britons too are our people, wards of Rome. No one shall oppress them
while I live. The family of one of the Druids who lives near by, Bendeigid —"
"A proscribed man," interrupted the Commander of the Legion, frowning.
"He should not be here at all!"
"That makes no difference! Do you not understand that Rome is here to
protect all the men of this country — our citizens and the natives as well,"
Macellius insisted, still haunted by the memory of Ardanos's grief. Over the
years he had come to respect the old man, and he had never known the ArchDruid to be other than perfectly collected before. "How can we persuade them
to lay down their arms if we cannot then protect them? With two Legions we
could conquer Hibernia —"
"You may well be right, but it will have to wait until Agricola is finished
with the Novantae. It has always been that way - with each province we settle
we must pacify a new frontier. In the days of the Governor Paulinus, the
Druids of Mona were broken so that they could not set the West Country
afire. Now it is the Caledonians who must be taught they cannot raid the
Brigantae. I suppose that when the Empire stretches to Ultima Thule we will
have a peaceful border, but I doubt it will happen before.
"In the meantime all we can do is to hurry the construction of the new

coastal fortresses," said the Legion's commander cynically, "and ready a troop
or two of cavalry to go out if they should be sighted again. Your son is out
there now with some troops, isn't he? Detail him to this duty when he reports
in." The Commander grunted. "The people of Britannia are ours to oppress,
and no one else shall do it."
But building fortresses and planning campaigns took time. Long before
the log walls were finished or the grain that had survived the rains had been
harvested, Bendeigid returned to escort his daughters to the Forest House. He
brought gently paced mules for Mairi and the children to ride. Eilan rode with
Mairi's older child before her, warmly wrapped against the light rain. She was
not used to riding and it took all her concentration to balance behind the
excited child. The distance was not great, but the unaccustomed journey
seemed long.
Darkness was just falling as they came within the palisaded walls. Within
the compound were half a dozen large buildings; Caillean took Mairi and her
children to a guest house, lifting the little boy down from his perch before
Eilan, and pointed out a large building of stout timbers, thatched almost down
to the ground.
"There is the House of Maidens," she said. "The chief of the younger
priestesses, Eilidh, has been told of your coming, and she will welcome you
there. I will come later when I can; but first I must go and see if Lhiannon
needs me."
The new moon - the first of Mairi's newborn's life — rode low on the
western horizon. As the serving woman led her into the building and across
an inner enclosure, Eilan was surprised to, find that already she missed her
sister.
Then a gate opened and the woman led her into the inner court. Ahead of
her was a long building something like her father's feasting hall. As she
passed through the door a sea of strange faces surrounded her. She looked
around, feeling abandoned. The serving woman had left her alone at the door.
The hall seemed very large and there was a faint scent of sweet herbs in the
air. Then one of the priestesses came forward.
"I am Eilidh," she said.

"Where is my kinswoman, Dieda?" asked Eilan nervously. "I had hoped to
see her here —"
"Dieda attends on Lhiannon and is secluded with her in preparation for the
rites of Lughnasad," said the priestess. "She is your cousin? I would have
thought you even more closely akin; even twins.
"Caillean has asked me to take you in charge, for now that she is back she
will have to attend Lhiannon. You are almost as beautiful as she told me."
Eilan colored shyly and lowered her eyes. The priestess was herself quite
beautiful; fair-haired, with curly short hair that circled her face in the
lamplight, like a delicate halo. She was dressed like the other junior
priestesses, not in the dark robes they wore outside the walls but in a dress of
undyed linen of an extremely old-fashioned cut, girdled with a woven belt of
green.
"You must be half dead with fatigue," Eilidh said kindly. "Come to the
fire, child, and get warm."
Eilan obeyed, feeling a little stunned by all the strange faces. She had not
thought what might confront her here. Now she wondered what she would
find, and whether she had made a decision she would regret all her life.
"Don't be afraid of us," said a grave voice behind her. The new speaker
was tall and sturdy, with reddish hair. "There aren't half as many of us as there
seem to be. You should have seen me when I first came here, staring about me
and sobbing like a wild thing. My name is Miellyn. I have been here five or
six years, and now I cannot imagine any other life. All my friends are here,
and one day you will have friends here too. For all that we must seem so
strange to you now." She took Eilan's cloak from her, and laid it aside.
"I think Lhiannon wishes to speak with you before anything else," said
Eilidh, "so come with me." So saying, she led Eilan across a blustery
courtyard to a separate dwelling and rapped on the door. After a moment they
heard footsteps and Caillean peered out.
"Eilan? Come in, child," she said, gesturing to someone behind her.
"Dieda, you see, I have brought Eilan to you at last."

"So you have," said Dieda, emerging from the shadows behind her. "My
father, the Arch-Druid, is here too; and Bendeigid, so we shall be a regular
family party, I suppose." She laughed, and Eilan thought she had never heard
so cynical a sound. "And if he has his way Cynric will be brought here as
well. I have heard they want to use your Sight, Caillean."
"Or yours, perhaps," said Caillean, and Dieda laughed a little. Eilan
sensed hostility between the two and wondered why.
"I think they know what I would say to that," Dieda said. "If it is to seek
out Cynric, yes; but to make an oracle for Lhiannon to deliver obediently as if
she were no more than a puppet for the will of Rome —"
"In the name of the Goddess, any goddess, be silent, child," Caillean
ordered, listening to a gate slamming somewhere near by. "What is it? Who is
here?"
"Only his holiness, my father," Dieda muttered, "and the greatest priestess
of all the Forest House, who will obediently deliver such oracles as he shall
desire."
"Be silent, you wretched creature," hissed Caillean. "You well know that
what you say is sacrilege."
"Or perhaps there is a greater sacrilege here, in which I have no part,"
Dieda replied. "Perhaps, with Sight, they want to make certain they send the
Romans against the right party. If so, what will you do, Caillean?"
"I will do whatever Lhiannon commands," said Caillean, her voice
sharpening. "As we all do."
Caillean was trying to speak reasonably to soften Dieda's wrath; but the
other girl seemed angrier than ever. Dieda had always been sharp-tongued,
but Eilan had never heard her so bitter before.
"I know what you would have us think —" Dieda began, but Caillean's
face flushed with anger. Still she spoke calmly.
"You know perfectly well that it is not what you think, or what I think,
that matters," she began, "but what the High Priestess wills; and that is what I

will do."
"If it is her will," Dieda answered more quietly, "but under present
conditions, how can Lhiannon's will be done - even if her will could somehow
be determined or if she even has one any more." ,
"Dieda, I have heard this all before," Caillean said wearily. "But is it such
an evil thing to summon our kinsman Cynric so that he may fittingly mourn
his foster mother?"
"We could have done that weeks ago," Dieda began.
"Perhaps, but that is all that you - or I - are being asked to do," Caillean
repeated. "Why have you set yourself so stubbornly against it now?"
"Because I know, if you do not," Dieda said, "that this use of power is to
trick Cynric into doing what his whole life has been spent in learning to
oppose; what Bendeigid himself would rather die than do, and that is to clasp
hands with Rome. Know you not that for his sake it was that Bendeigid
allowed himself to be proscribed?"
"Oh, in the name of the Goddess, girl! I know something of Cynric too,
and of Bendeigid," said Caillean crossly. "And, believe it or not, even
something of the Romans; at least I have lived under their rule longer than
you. And I say that there shall be no violence done to your precious ethical
precepts, nor to Cynric's. Do you think, perhaps, that you are the only person
in all of Britannia who knows what Cynric wishes to do?"
"I know enough —" Dieda began, but Caillean said harshly "Hush; they
will hear us. And Eilan must be thoroughly confused by now -"
Dieda's face softened. "I suppose so, and it is an ill welcome for her to
hear us disputing so." She came and embraced Eilan, who knew enough not to
protest lest she start the argument again.
At this moment the inner door opened and Lhiannon stood before them.
"Children, are you quarreling?"
"Of course not, my mother," said Caillean quickly. And after a moment

Dieda added, "No, certainly not, Holy Mother; we were only welcoming the
new novice."
"Ah, yes; I heard that Eilan was to come," said Lhiannon, and turned her
gaze on the young girl who stood quietly between them. Eilan felt her heart
thump loudly as she looked at the woman she had last seen standing like a
goddess beside the Beltane fire.
"So you are Eilan?" Lhiannon's voice was sweet but a little thin, as if
being the mouthpiece of the Goddess for so many years had worn its strength
away. "It is true; you are very like Dieda; I suppose you are weary of being
told that. But we must devise some way to tell you apart here at the shrine."
She smiled, and Eilan felt an odd surge of protectiveness.
Lhiannon reached out one hand to Eilan, who was still standing nervously
by the door. "Come in, child. Your father and grandfather are here with us,
you know." Eilan wondered why she should be surprised, since her father had
escorted her here. Was he then living among the priests?
Lhiannon took Eilan's arm gently and drew the girl into the inner room,
adding to the two older priestesses, in her sweet voice, "Come in too. Both of
you will be needed here."
The inner room seemed small, or perhaps it was only that too many
people had crowded into it. Smoke curled thickly from herbs burning in a
brazier in the center of the room; their smell made Eilan's head swim.
Between the smoke and the crowd, for a moment she found it hard to breathe.
After a moment her focus steadied and she saw her father, his face made
gaunt by the past moon's grief until he looked almost as old as Ardanos.
Her grandfather, who was adding something to the fire, looked up at the
women and said, "So we are all here. And once again I am confused; which of
you is which?"
Eilan stood silent, waiting for someone older to answer, but Dieda said
boldly, "It is easy to tell, Father. Eilan has not yet been given the dress of a
priestess."
"So that is how you expect me to tell my daughter from my

granddaughter! Well, perhaps it is only the smoke in here. But I still find them
too much alike for my comfort," said the older Druid briskly. "So, Eilan, you
have arrived here at a sad time; we must summon Cynric to our Councils, and
as he has been brought up with you as a foster brother your assistance will be
helpful. Are you ready, Caillean?"
Caillean said quietly "If Lhiannon wills it."
"I do," Lhiannon answered. "Whatever comes of this, Cynric must know
of the death of his foster mother and of these new outrages. The Romans are
not our only enemies -"
Dieda said quietly through her teeth, "How would you like to say that to
Mairi at this moment, Father?"
"Peace, child," Ardanos said. "Whatever you may think, Macellius
Severus is a good man; he was as angry when I told him as if his own house
had been burnt."
"I doubt that," Dieda murmured, but low enough so that only Caillean and
Eilan could hear. ,
The old Druid frowned at her; then he said, "Caillean, my child -"
Caillean, with a glance at Lhiannon, went to a cupboard and took out a
small silver bowl, simple but for an elaborate chasing of patterns on the
outside. She filled it with water from a ewer and set it on the table. Ardanos
pulled up a three-legged stool so that she could sit down before it, while
Lhiannon took her place in a carved chair near by.
Ardanos waved Caillean aside. "Wait," he said; "Dieda, it was you who
were closest to him; it is you who must look into the water and summon him."
Dieda flushed and for a moment Eilan wondered if she would refuse
outright. Dieda had always had more courage than she - or had her
grandfather mistaken them again? He was looking at her; then he turned aside
and his eyes sought out Dieda. "You were pledged," he said. "I ask it of you,
child —" and his voice was more tender than Eilan had ever heard it. "For
your sister's sake I ask it; she was his foster mother before you were born."

Eilan thought, He plays on us all as if we were his harps. But Dieda could
not ignore the tenderness in his voice either. She murmured, "As you will,
Father," and took her place before the bowl.
Ardanos began, "So then, we are gathered here in this place that is already
protected and purified to summon Cynric, the foster son of Bendeigid. All of
you, who are of all the living the nearest he has to kindred, must hold his
image in memory, and add the calling of your hearts to mine." He struck the
floor with his staff, and Eilan heard the sweet jangle of silver bells.
"Cynric, Cynric, now do we call you!" his strong, bard-trained voice rang
out suddenly, and Eilan blinked, for suddenly the room seemed to have
become darker, and Ardanos — his whole body, not just his white robes seemed to glow. "Strong son, beloved boy, your kindred call you . . .Warrior,
Raven-son, we summon you by the powers of earth and oak and fire!"
As the echoes of his calling faded, Dieda's breathing, growing harsher as
she drew in great lungfuls of scented smoke, was the only sound in the room.
Eilan stifled a cough. Even the small amount of the smoke she had breathed in
had made her dizzy; she could imagine what it was doing to Dieda, who
gazed into the water unmoving.
Only now did Eilan notice Dieda's long hair hanging loosely to either side
so that it framed the bowl. They had all moved into a loose circle. From
where she stood Eilan could see the surface of the water. Her skin prickled a
little as Dieda swayed, or was it she herself? Perhaps it was the world that
was moving; she blinked as the shapes around her dimmed and flowed until
the only thing on which she could focus was the surface of the bowl.
As she stared, it slowly clouded over, and after a moment there was a gray
swirling that first darkened; then cleared. Eilan gasped; a face, a well-known
face — that face of her foster brother Cynric -peered from the water.
Dieda stifled a cry; then said quietly but clearly, as if she spoke to
someone a long way off, "Cynric, you must come. This time it is not a Roman
outrage but the people of the North who have burned your house and have
killed your mother and sister. Return to the Ordovici lands. Your foster father
is alive and has need of you."
After a time the face disappeared, the water swirled darkly in the bowl,

and Dieda stood up, clutching a little dizzily at the edge of the table. "He will
come," she said. "The keeper of the college of priestesses there will give him
supplies. With good roads and good weather he should be here in a few days."
Bendeigid said, "But what of the barbarians who burnt our house? If you
are not too wearied, child, we must see them and know whence we go to
punish them —"
"I will not," said Dieda. Her hair was still hanging about her face.
"Always you can bend me to your will, but let Caillean do this; it is her will
that we work with the Romans in this, not mine. I will find it hard to forgive
you."
"My child —"
"Oh, I well know the necessity; but to use me to draw Cynric here, how
could you?"
Caillean took the bowl and flung the water out through the door, letting in
a welcome blast of fresh air. Yet in spite of the warmth of the summer night
after a few moments Eilan began to feel cold. Caillean refilled the bowl and
bent over it, motionless.
This time it seemed that the picture took longer to form, and the swirling
clouds in the water lasted longer. Caillean's intent face grew paler, pale as
death; then she spoke, softly still, and with a deathly weariness in her voice:
"Behold, if you will."
Eilan never knew what the others saw, but as the surface of the water
cleared, before her eyes a small picture formed: the raiders as they had been
when they burst into Mairi's house, arrested, frozen on the doorstep; men clad
in multicolored and ragged fabric. Some bore swords, which she had not seen
at the time, and some bore spears. The picture was so clear that she could see
the raindrops glittering on their ragged blond or reddish beards and long
streaming hair. The men crowded around the bowl, blocking the image that
Eilan saw still in memory and knew she would be able to call up at will until
the day she died.
In her memory she saw Caillean rush forward, scooping up handfuls of
live coals and scattering them towards the strange men. She supposed that her

father and grandfather must have seen something like this, for her father's
face was clenched and drawn tight. "Red Rian," he said between his teeth. "A
curse on his sword and his shadow! And they are on the seashore still —"
"So be it, and I add my curse to yours for what that is worth," Lhiannon
said, stirring in her chair." I declare to you that your people and the Romans
together shall work to punish them."
Bendeigid began to speak but Lhiannon silenced him with a gesture.
"Enough; I have said it. Now go; let it be as Caillean has seen and I have
declared. You can take Red Rian on the seashore."
"Lady, how know you this?"
"Have you forgotten that I and mine can rule the winds when we choose?"
Lhiannon said. "He will not find a breeze to bear him hence till you have
caught up with him. Will all this content you?"
"For the sake of vengeance against those devils - if it must be so,"
Bendeigid declared. "But I swore to ally even with Romans if they would help
me to vengeance, though it goes against the grain -and we will need their help
to drive these raiders and murderers forever from our shores!"
Dieda drew a long breath. "Will you await the coming of Cynric?"
"That will be at least partly for Macellius to say," Bendeigid said
grudgingly after a moment. Lhiannon's gaze fell on Eilan.
"But look you, our newest novice is quite perished with cold," she said.
"Where is your cloak, child?"
"I left it in the other hall with the priestesses," Eilan murmured,
unsuccessfully trying to control her shivering.
"You must go to bed soon. But the herbs have burned off now, come to the
brazier and warm yourself, child. In a little, Caillean shall see to taking you to
the novices' dormitory and give you nightclothes and the dress of a priestess."
"Well said," put in Ardanos, "and it is time we were going as well."

Lhiannon drew Eilan to the fire, and gradually the girl's shivering
subsided. But still she trembled within. Caillean put an arm around her.
"It will pass, child, I know . . . It can be very cold between the worlds; I
felt you riding with me, though it was not intended. We shall have to guard
against that another time."
Bendeigid wrapped his cloak around him, but before he followed Ardanos
out he paused before Eilan. "Daughter." He coughed as Eilan looked up to
meet his gaze. "I do not know when we will meet again. But I leave you in
safety, and that is a comfort to me. May the Goddess bless you here." He
embraced her.
"I will pray to Her for your safety, Father," she said softly, her throat
tightening.
Bendeigid reached out and touched the tendrils that had escaped from the
braid coiled upon her brow. "Your mother's hair grew just this way," he
whispered, and quickly, then, kissed her on the brow. She was blinking back
tears when the door closed behind him.
"Well, that is done, and it is late indeed," Caillean said with a touch of
relief. "Eilan, is there anything you want to ask me?" She came and took the
girl into a hearty embrace. "If you are warm now, come along and I will get
you settled into the novices' dormitory."
This time with Caillean at her side, Eilan crossed the windy courtyard
which separated Lhiannon's dwelling from the hall where she had first been
welcomed among the priestesses. Years later, when she knew every inch of
these dwellings as well as the house in which she had been born, she was to
remember her first sight of the Forest House and wonder that on this night it
had seemed so enormous.
Eilidh and some of the other women were still gathered in the hall where
Eilan had been first welcomed. They all looked at Eilan with curiosity, but a
gesture from Caillean kept them still.
"We cannot ask you yet to take vows," Caillean said to Eilan, "But for
your first year among us you must make promises." She stood upright and her
face changed. Eilan watched her warily, wondering what was coming now.

"First of all — you have come among us of your free will? You have not
been forced or threatened into seeking admission here?"
Eilan looked at her, astonished. "You know I have not been."
"Hush — it is routine. You must answer in your own words."
"Very well," Eilan said. "I came here at my own wish." This seemed very
silly to her. She wondered if they had asked Dieda this, and what the other girl
had answered.
"Do you promise that you will treat every woman in this dwelling as your
sister, mother and daughter, as your own kin?"
"I will." She now had no mother living, and if she took permanent vows,
she would have no daughter either.
"Do you promise that you will obey every lawful command given you by
an older priestess here, and that you will lie with no man —" Caillean stopped
and made a face, amending, "Saving only that you may lie with the Summer
King, if his choice should fall on you."
Eilan smiled. "I will obey, and it is no hardship to promise to give myself
to no man." Since the one man I could have loved is forbidden to me.
Caillean nodded. "So be it," she said. "In the name of the Goddess, who,
though She has many names, is one, I accept you."
She embraced Eilan, and, one by one, the other priestesses did the same.
By the time they were done, Eilan found herself weeping, as if in some odd
way she had regained the kindred she had lost.
The older priestess put Eilan's cloak over her shoulders and led her
through a thatched passageway to a roundhouse with about a dozen beds - not
box beds such as she was accustomed to, but narrow cots - set round the wall.
Some of them were already occupied. One or two girls sat up, blinking
sleepily, as Caillean pulled back the curtain of the bed nearest the door, then
lay back again.

"A place has been made for you here," whispered Caillean. She put Eilan
into a coarse white shift which seemed a little too big. "Someone will wake
you for the sunrise services in the grove. Do not expect to see me - I will be
attending upon Lhiannon in preparation for the ceremonies of the full moon.
Here is the dress you are to wear tomorrow." She took from a nearby chest a
bundle of clothing.
Eilan got into the narrow bed and Caillean tucked her under the thick
blanket. Then she bent down to embrace her, and Eilan sat up to hug her back.
"Whatever you may think, remember that you are welcome among us,"
Caillean said. "Even to Dieda; she is very unhappy now, but a day will come
when she is glad you are here too."
She kissed Eilan on the forehead. "Tomorrow one of the girls will help
you to dress in the robes of a priestess; most likely Eilidh. And for a day or
two she will go everywhere with you and show you what to do."
Eilan lay back. The sheets were rough against her skin, and smelled of
scented herbs. She asked, wanting to prolong the moment, "What scent is that
on the sheet?"
"Lavender; we lay it among our linens when we wash them."
Eilan told herself not to be surprised. The priestesses were women, if not
exactly like any others she had known; of course they took thought to the
plucking of herbs and the washing of linens like anyone else. She too would
learn all these things.
Caillean said quietly, "Sleep now, and don't worry. It is well that you have
come here. I think you have a very special destiny among us."
Neither of them could have guessed how that prophecy was to be fulfilled.

Ten

Why do we keep secret from the common folk the names of those herbs
that are most powerful for healing?" Old Lads, the most senior of their
herbalists, turned to the girls who were sitting beneath the oak tree, holding a
stalk of foxglove bells in her hand.
"So they will have to come to us and respect the priestesses?" asked one
of the younger girls.
"Their respect must be earned, child," Lads said sternly. "Unlearned they
may be, but they are not stupid. The reason for secrecy lies deeper - that
which is most powerful for good is also powerful for evil, handled wrongly.
Foxglove can stimulate an ailing heart, but give too much and it will gallop
like a frightened horse until it breaks down. For the healer, judgment is all."
Eilan frowned, for she had never thought of it quite that way. Later,
looking back on her years in the Forest House, she wondered what she had
expected. Peace, perhaps, or mystery, and even a little boredom. She had not
expected that days spent studying with a group of other women would be
simply so interesting.
Her nights were harder, for in the first months she often dreamed of
Gaius. At times she saw him riding with his men, or practicing with the
sword. He swore sometimes as the blade bit into the man-shaped wooden post
— This for Senara, arid this for Rheis. This, for Eilan! When he finished his
brow would be damp with sweat, but the moisture on his cheeks was tears.
Eilan would wake, then, weeping for his sorrow. She understood now how

the grief of the living could torment the departed. She thought of sending a
message to let him know she still lived, but there was no way to do it, and
presently she began to realize that she was indeed dead to him, and the sooner
he accepted that, the better for both of them.
In these early months, she was only one of a group of potential
priestesses. She spent much of her time beginning to memorize the whole
body of Druidic lore. Just as the gods might not be worshipped in a temple
made with human hands, none of the divine lore might be entrusted to
writing. Sometimes she thought this strange, for the human memory was itself
so fragile. But she had seen her teachers perform amazing feats of
memorization. Much of the old knowledge had been lost when Mona was
destroyed, but much remained. Ardanos, for instance, could recite the whole
of the Law from memory.
She was happy enough with her fellow priestesses. The ones she knew
best were the two who had welcomed her to the House of Maidens that first
night: Eilidh and Miellyn.
Eilidh was older than she looked and had been in the Forest House since
early childhood. Miellyn was closer to her own age. Apart from these two,
she best knew a woman named Celimon who was about forty, whose major
task was to instruct the youngest priestesses and officiate at some of the less
important rituals.
Her first task was to memorize every detail of those rites in which the
maidens assisted, for if a mistake were made, a ceremony would have to be
begun again. Two or three times Eilan had caused such an interruption. She
felt foolish, but Miellyn assured her that they had all been through it.
Eilan was also instructed in the motions of moon and stars. She spent
many night hours lying between Miellyn and Eilidh in a secluded part of the
enclosure, watching the Great Wain swinging endlessly about the North Star,
and the solemn march of the planets as they rose and fell and the Northern
Lights flashed and circled in the summer sky. She learned that the earth went
round the sun — of all the wonders, the hardest to believe. From all her early
years in the Forest House these nights best captured her imagination; lying
warmly cloaked on the damp grass with Caillean's voice floating above them
in the darkness, intoning long stories of the stars.

She wished sometimes to learn to accompany the singing, but on one of
the few occasions when she was allowed to spend some time with Caillean,
she was told that women did not play the harp in the ceremonies.
"But why? Women can be bards now, can't they, like Dieda? And you play
a harp, do you not?"
It was warm, and in the grove outside the walls one of the younger priests
from the Druidic college across the fields was practicing. He was not very
good at it, but it was very hard to play a harp so badly that listening would be
painful. Even though the melody halted, each note was pure and clear.
"My instrument is a lyre, Lhiannon's first gift to me, and I have played it
for years, so no one dares object. And talent like Dieda's cannot be denied."
Caillean's dark eyes flashed.
"It does not make sense. Why is it I cannot learn?" asked Eilan. However
badly she might play, she could surely do better than that fellow outside, who
did not seem to have noticed that as the day grew warmer his upper strings
were going out of tune.
"Of course it does not make sense," Caillean replied. "A great deal that the
priests do makes no sense; and they know it. That is one reason why I will not
be allowed to succeed Lhiannon. Ardanos is aware that I know it too."
"Do you want to be High Priestess?" asked Eilan, her eyes rounding.
"Heaven forbid," said Caillean fervently. "I would be running head-on
against the will of the priesthood - which is like a stone wall - every day of
my life. Leadership is another thing the men wish to keep for themselves. I
think it has got worse since they encountered the Romans. They wish to keep
the weapons, and the harps, and everything else save for the suffering of
childbirth and the toil of the cooking pot and the loom. I dare say they would
like to say women cannot serve the gods, but no one would be foolish enough
to believe that. But why do you want to learn to play a harp?"
Eilan said, "Because I love music, and I cannot sing."
"Your voice is soft but sweet, for I have heard it."

"Grandfather says that next to Dieda, I croak like a frog," Eilan said
bitterly. "In our house it was always left to her to sing."
"I think he is mistaken; but this time I will not argue, for even I must
admit that he is one of our greatest bards. Dieda has a very beautiful voice,
perhaps from him. Next to such a voice as your kinswoman's we are all frogs
croaking, child, so do not grieve. You can learn the stories of the gods, even if
you cannot sing them as well as she; I think you will have no trouble
becoming a spell singer anyway. We cannot all have the finest voices, even
among the bards."
And, indeed, Eilan was taught to sing many of the spells she had to
memorize, and a few of the simpler Words of Power were confided to her,
even that first year.
One day when she was being instructed in spells by Caillean, the older
woman asked, "Do you remember that night after Mairi's child was born,
when I frightened away the raiders by throwing fire at them?"
"I will never forget it," Eilan said.
"Remember I told you that you could learn to do it, if you had the proper
teaching?"
Eilan nodded, her heart beginning to pound, whether with excitement or
fear, she did not know.
"Well, I will teach you now. The important thing to remember is that the
fire cannot harm you; you have seen me handle it, and so you know within
yourself that it can be done." She picked up the girl's slender white fingers in
her own cool ones and breathed on the palm of Eilan's hand.
"Now," she said, "The important thing is to trust yourself. Reach quickly
into the fire, and pick up a handful of live coals; the fire can only harm you
because you believe it is in the nature of fire to burn; once you know its true
spiritual nature, you can handle it as you would a handful of dry leaves. Fire
burns within you as it burns on the hearth. How can one flame harm another?
Let the spark of life within you welcome fire!"
Eilan quailed, but it was true that she had seen Caillean do this trick; and

she trusted the older woman completely. She reached towards the brazier of
live coals; heat touched her face, but Caillean said firmly, "Do not hesitate —
do it quickly!" And Eilan thrust her hand into the flames.
On her cheeks she could still feel heat, but to her astonishment, the coals
felt like a handful of winter snow. Caillean, watching her wondering face,
said, "Drop it; quickly now." Eilan opened her fingers against a sudden blast
of heat and the coals rolled on to the hearthstone. She stared at her hands in
wonder.
"Did I really do that?"
"You did," Caillean said. The coal had reached a cloth lying in the hearth,
which began to smolder. A strong stink of burning cloth rose suddenly from
the singed edges as Caillean picked it up and blew it out.
Eilan stared at her in astonishment. "How did you know that in another
moment it was going to burn?"
Caillean said, "I could feel you beginning to think and wonder -and doubt.
Doubt is the enemy of magic. We are taught to do things like this to astonish
the common people with wonders and marvels, or to guard ourselves in
danger. But you must learn," she cautioned, "that it is not right to do miracles
for the sake of merely astonishing the once-born. Even to preserve yourself
against danger, you must be wary of doing what may seem miracles. It may
not have been altogether wise to use it that night in Main's house; but done is
done. Now that you know it is possible, you shall learn when it is right to use
such things, and when it is not."
As the year's passage was marked by the festivals, the girls received not
only the lore of the gods each festival honored but the meaning behind the
tales, many of which, true in symbol, were not true in fact. They argued about
the virginity of the goddess Arianrhod, and the fate of the bright son she so
unwillingly bore; they analyzed the transformations of Gwion who tasted the
brew in the cauldron of wisdom. They learned the secret lore of the Sacred
King and the Lady of Sovereignty. And in the darkest days of winter, they
contemplated the mysteries of the shadowy goddesses whose bloody faces
and withered flesh were the embodiment of men's fears.
"But why do men fear old women?" Eilidh asked. "They do not feel that

way about old men!"
"The old man becomes a sage, something for a man to aspire to," Caillean
told them. "They fear the hag because she is beyond their power. With the
coming of her moonblood a girl becomes a woman. She needs a man to
become a mother, and a mother needs a man to protect her children. But the
old woman knows all the secrets of birth and death; she has rebirthed herself
and needs nothing. So of course the man, who knows only the first change
that brings him to manhood, is afraid."
Lhiannon's name was sacred even when the younger girls giggled about
their elders late at night in the Hall of Maidens, but Eilan could not help
wondering if the High Priestess had gone through the rebirth Caillean had
described. Old as she was, one could not imagine that any human grief or
passion had ever touched her. She had lain with no man, borne no child; she
drifted through the Forest House in a cloud of lavender scent and trailing
draperies, her smile sweet and vague and distant as if she moved through her
own private reality.
And yet Caillean loved her. Eilan could not allow herself to forget that the
older priestess, with whom that night of Mairi's childbirth had given her so
deep a bond, saw something in the High Priestess that she herself had not
seen; but she would take it on faith that it was there.
When they began to teach the girls the disciplines that would give them
access to the inner planes, Eilan applied herself with diligence. Such things —
dreams and intuitions — had always come to her easily and without warning.
Now she learned to bring the visions at will, and when it was necessary, to
wall them away.
She learned the work of seeing visions in a bowl of water and the use of
spells for far-seeing. One of the first things she saw through her scrying was
the battle with the raiders who had destroyed her home.
"A blessing on the Lady of Vernemeton, if it is she who has sent this
wind!" said Cynric, sniffing the mist that was blowing past him, heavy with
the scent of the sea.
"She was as good as her word," answered Bendeigid beside him. "Since
the third day after they burned my hall this wind has blown. When the

scattered bands came back to load their curraghs with their spoils they found
the breeze dead against them." He grinned mirthlessly. "We shall pin them
between the strand and the sea!"
From near by came a hard-edged order, and the rhythmic tramp of
hobnailed sandals came to a halt. Cynric grimaced, glad the wind had not
carried the sound to the enemy. As well to go in with clarions shrilling than to
let the raiders hear that ominous tread. The Britons were not nearly so orderly,
but a great deal quieter.
He still found himself stiffening whenever the crest of a Roman helmet
appeared through the mist. He had never expected to be fighting side by side
with his enemy. But if, for the sake of a greater good, even Bendeigid could
suspend his hatred, he supposed he could do the same.
Then Bendeigid laid a hand on his sleeve and Cynric halted, peering
through the fringe of scrubby alders that stretched between them and the
shore. He could smell woodsmoke and the rank odor of the privy trench - not
very well tended. It was true, one could track vermin from the smell. He eased
his shield down from his shoulder and got a better grip on his spear.
Cynric's heart was pounding oddly and his mouth was dry. You longed for
real battle, how can you be afraid? he asked himself. Would you have hidden
behind Rheis's skirts if you had been there when they attacked the hall? At the
thought, his panic changed to fury.
Then the Roman trumpets blared. Bendeigid gave tongue with a guttural
roar and Cynric found his own throat opening. Howling,
the Britons ran forward. Cynric pushed through the trees, spear ready, and
heard the Roman charge beating out an accompaniment to the British cries.
As the Romans drove down upon the foe the Britons fell upon their rear. A
warrior turned, his form distorted by the mist to that of a monster. He was a
monster! Cynric's training took over and he jabbed upward; felt the shock and
heard the cry as the blade went in. But he had no time to react, for another
man was coming at him. A swordstroke clattered on his shield. Side-vision
showed him the Roman troopers, cutting through the foe with mechanical
efficiency. Cynric jerked the spear free and swung, seeing in each contorted
face his enemy.

Cynric could not tell if half a day or half a lifetime had passed when he
realized there was no one attacking him any more. All around him lay bodies,
and Bendeigid was methodically giving the mercy stroke to any that still
lived. He was covered with blood, but none of it seemed to be his own. Once
he had fallen and thought himself done for, but a legionary had stood above
him, covering him with that big oblong shield until he could rise.
He realized that you could hate someone and still admire .them. He would
never love Romans, but he could see now there might be something to be
learned from them. At this moment, even his own Roman blood did not seem
so evil a thing. He heard a crackle of flame and saw that Ardanos was
directing the burning of the enemy curraghs. The smoke stank of burnt meat,
but the round, leather-covered boats burned merrily. Cynric turned away,
wondering if he were going to be ill.
But one boat had been kept back, and one of the raiders had been saved
alive, though blinded, to man it.
Ardanos lifted his hands to the skies, shouting something in the old speech
that only the Druids used. For a moment the breeze died, then it backed and
began to blow from landward. Ardanos set his hand upon the rim of the
curragh, holding it.
"I have called the winds to speed you," he told the man inside. "If the gods
love you, you will come to Eriu once more. Be you our messenger, and take
them this word," Ardanos said fiercely, "that if you come again to these
shores, the same will be done to every one of you."
The vision faded, and Eilan sank back, shuddering. She had never seen
serious fighting, and it filled her with horror, yet she found herself rejoicing
fiercely as the raiders died. One of these men had certainly killed her mother
and probably her younger sister, and set aflame the house in which she had
been born.
She peered into the water, seeking the face of Gaius, but caught no sight
of him. Had he fallen in some earlier skirmish with the enemy, believing her
dead in the ruins of her home? Well, better that he should think her dead than
faithless, she told herself, but she was surprised at how much, even now, the
thought that he was the one who might have died brought her grief. The night

they sat beside the Beltane fires they had seemed one being. Surely if he were
killed, she could not help but know.
But presently the steady flow of her life in the Forest House washed the
pain even from the memory of Gaius and what might have been.
With the others, she took her turn at gathering the sacred plants and herbs,
learning which of them should be gathered by a particular light of sun or
moon.
"This lore is older than the Druids," Miellyn confided to her once when
they were paired. Miellyn, although she had come to the Forest House long
ago, was not many years older than Eilan and the two, as the two youngest in
the house, were often paired off in their work. Miellyn had chosen to become
a priestess of the healing arts, and had already had extensive training. "Some
of it comes down from the old days, even before our people came into this
land."
It had been a wet spring, and along the banks of the brook that wandered
through the fields behind the Forest House, the mugwort plants were waist
high. The sharp pungent scent of their leaves was almost dizzying as she
stripped them from their stalks. The priestesses used them to induce visions,
and in an infusion to ease sore muscles.
"Caillean told me something of this," Eilan answered. "There was a time,
she says, when there were no Druid priests in Britannia. When our people
came they killed the priests of the tribes they conquered, but they did not dare
to kill the priestesses of the Great Mother. Our own sacred women learned
from them, and added the ancient knowledge to their own."
"It is true," Miellyn said, moving along the riverbank. "Caillean has
studied these things more than I, and she is a priestess of the Oracle. They, at
least, go back to a time well before the Forest House was built and long
before the Order of Druids came to this island of Britain. They say that their
first priestesses came here from an island far out in the western ocean that
now is sunk beneath the waves. With them came the priest men called the
Merlin, who taught the lore of the stars and of the standing stones."
For a moment they contemplated an almost unimaginable antiquity. Then
a little breeze fluttered their skirts, and brought them back to the beauty of the

green world around them.
"Is that feverfew or chervil?" Eilan pointed at a mass of low-growing
bright green foliage with small jagged leaves.
"Chervil. See how tender the stems are? It has just sprung up here.
Feverfew lives through the winter, and its stem is woody. But it is true, the
leaves look much the same."
"There is so much to remember!" Eilan exclaimed. "If our people did not
always live here, how did we learn all this lore?"
"Men are by nature wanderers," said Miellyn, "though you may not think
it, rooted among us here. Every people has moved from somewhere, and had
to learn the ways of the land from the people who were there before. The last
of our own tribes came to this island only about a hundred years before the
Romans, and from much the same part of the world."
"You would think the Romans would know more about us, then, if we
were neighbors," said Eilan.
"They knew enough about our warriors to be afraid," Miellyn grinned
fiercely. "Maybe that is why they spread such scandals about us. Tell me,
Eilan, have you ever seen any man burnt on our altars? Or any woman
either?"
"No; nor anyone put to death except for criminals," replied Eilan. "How
can the Romans say such things about us?"
"Why should they not? They are ignorant men," said Miellyn scornfully.
"They set down all their knowledge on bits of leather or waxed wood or
tablets of stone and think that is wisdom. What good does it do a piece of
stone to have knowledge? Even I, a young priestess, know it is the
understanding graven in the heart that makes men wise. Can you learn the
ways of the herbs from a book? It is not enough even to be told. You must
seek out the plants yourself, handle them, love them, watch them grow. Then
you can use them for healing, for their spirits will speak to you."
"Perhaps their women know more," said Eilan. "For I have heard the
Romans do not teach the craft of letters to all their womenfolk. I wonder what

wisdom the mothers pass on to their daughters that the men do not know?"
Miellyn made a face. "Perhaps they are afraid that if women learned
bookcraft too there would not be enough work for scribes and the letter
writers of the marketplace."
"Caillean said something like that, soon after I came here," Eilan said and
shivered, though the day was warm, remembering the cold winds during the
scrying. "But I have not seen much of her since then. I wonder sometimes if I
have angered her."
"You must not pay too much attention to what Caillean says, or does not
say." Miellyn cautioned. "She has suffered a great deal, and she is . . .
immoderate in her opinions sometimes. But it is true the Romans do not think
much of what women can do."
"Then they are foolish."
"I know that. You know that," Miellyn said. "But there are some Romans
who do not yet know it. Let us hope that they learn it during our lifetime. Our
own priests can be foolish too. Someone told me you wished to learn to play
the harp. Have you heard Caillean play her lyre?"
Eilan shook her head. "Not often." Suddenly she remembered the
occasion where Caillean had taught her to handle fire, and shivered.
Miellyn said, "You really must not mind Caillean's strange ways; she is
very solitary. Sometimes for days she speaks to no one, except perhaps to
Lhiannon. I know Caillean likes you; I have heard her say so."
Eilan looked at her and then quickly away. It had certainly seemed so that
night at Mairi's, after Caillean had driven the raiders away. She realized now
how unusual it had been for the older woman to reveal herself that way.
Perhaps that was why she had avoided Eilan so much since then.
Miellyn had spotted a place where wild thyme grew beneath a tree and
was using her little curved knife to cut the stems. The scent came sweet and
sharp to Eilan's nostrils as she bent to gather it.
"Speak to her of her harp," Miellyn added then.

"I thought you said it was not a harp -"
"Indeed, Caillean went to considerable trouble to explain the difference
—" Miellyn grinned. "The strings go into a box at the base instead of the side,
but the sound is much the same. She knows many songs of Eriu. They are
very strange indeed; somehow they all sound like the sea. She knows all of
the old songs too, though because of our training we all remember more than
most people. If they had been willing to train women as bards before so many
of the priests had been killed, perhaps she would have been one." Irresistibly,
Miellyn began to giggle. "Or she might have been the High Druid - if it is not
blasphemy to say so - after your father."
"Ardanos is my mother's father, not mine. Dieda is his daughter," Eilan
told her, gathering up the last of the thyme.
"And your foster brother is one of the Sacred Band?" Miellyn asked.
"Truly you come from a priestly family. They will probably try to make you a
priestess of the Oracle one day."
"No one has said anything about it to me," Eilan answered her.
"Would you dislike it?" Miellyn laughed at her. "The rest of us have our
duties, and I, for one, am happy with my herbs. But the seeresses are the ones
the people worship. Would you not like to be the voice of the Goddess?"
"She has not said anything to me," the girl answered, a little sharply.
It was no business of Miellyn's what Eilan might secretly long for, or the
feelings that had stirred in her when she saw Lhiannon lift her arms in
invocation to the moon. The longer she stayed here, the more vividly she
remembered her childhood dreams, and every time she carried offerings to the
shrine at the spring she stared into the water, hoping to see the Lady once
more.
"I will be whatever my elders say. They know more about what the gods
want than I."
Miellyn laughed. "Oh, perhaps some of them may; but I am not sure," she
said. "Caillean would not say so. She told me once that the knowledge of the

Druids is that which was given to all people, both men and women alike in
the old days."
"And yet even the High Druid defers to Lhiannon," Eilan said, as she bent
to cut a few leaves from a bunch of stitchwort she had found growing on the
sunny side of a great rock.
"Or seems to," Miellyn said. "But Lhiannon is different, and of course we
all adore her —"
Eilan frowned. "I have heard some of the women say that even my
grandfather would not dare to cross her."
"Sometimes I wonder," Miellyn said as she sorted through the leaves
Eilan had cut. "Cut them closer to the branch; we cannot use the stems. Do
you know, I have heard that in the old days the laws required that any man
who cut a tree must plant another in its place so the woods would never be
less. That has not been done since the Romans came here; they cut trees and
plant nothing, so one day there will be no trees in all Britain —"
"There seem to be as many as ever," said Eilan.
"Some seed and grow of themselves." Miellyn turned and gathered up the
plants they had cut.
"What about the herbs?" asked Eilan.
"We have not cut enough to make any difference; enough shoots will grow
up in a day or two to replace what we have taken. That is enough. I think it
may rain; we should hurry back. The priestess who taught me herb lore used
to say that the wilderness is the garden of the Goddess, and men cannot gather
from it without replacing what they use!"
"I had not heard before, stated in just that way, but, but I think it is
beautiful," Eilan said. "I suppose, if you think in centuries, that to cut down a
tree is as foolish as slaughtering a breeding doe -"
"And yet some men believe - or seem to believe - that they have the right
to do what they will to anything weaker than they are," Miellyn said. "I do not
understand how the Romans can do what they do."

"The better ones among them would be as angry as you and I at some of
the outrages," Eilan ventured. She was thinking of Gaius. He had seemed
almost as angry as Cynric when he heard the story of the Romans on Mona.
She could not imagine him slaughtering the helpless; and yet he must know
perfectly well how short and dreadful a life could be expected by the Roman
levies in the mines, ill-fed, poorly clothed, and breathing the poisoned dust of
the ore they mined. If this punishment were limited to criminals and
murderers it would be bad enough, but the byre-woman's husband?
Yet Gaius believed that the Romans were making civilized people of
barbarians. Perhaps he had never really thought about the mines, because
being taken to them had never happened to anyone he knew. Even she had not
thought about it much until it happened to one of their own. But if she did not
know what was going on, surely her father and grandfather did, and they had
done nothing to stop it either.
The wind gusted round to the west and suddenly the clouds let loose their
burden of rain. Miellyn squealed and pulled her shawl up over her head.
"We'll be drowned if we stay here!" she exclaimed. "Pick up your basket and
come! If we run, we'll be indoors before we're wet through."
But the girls were soaked by the time they came into the central hall of the
priestesses. Eilan felt Miellyn had welcomed the opportunity to run.
"Get yourselves dry now, lasses, or you'll catch a rheum and I'll be using
up all my medicines nursing you!" Latis, who was so old now she could no
longer go into the forest to gather the herbs, cackled with laughter and shooed
them towards the door. "But mind you come back then to lay out the herbs
you've brought me, or they'll mildew and both the plants and your labor will
be wasted!"
Skin still glowing from brisk rubbing, Miellyn and Eilan returned to the
still-room. Built on behind the kitchen where heat from the ovens kept the air
warm and dry, the rafters were festooned with bunches of hanging herbs.
Woven trays upon which roots or leaves were spread to dry hung beneath
them, turning lazily. Shelves with earthenware crocks stood along one wall,
and bags and baskets of prepared herbs were stored along another, neatly
labeled with the sigils of the herbalists' craft. The air was pungent.

"You're Eilan, are you not?" Latis peered at her. She looked rather like a
dried root herself, thought Eilan, seamed and wrinkled with age. "Goddess
help us, they get younger every year!"
"Who does, Mother?" asked Miellyn, hiding her grin.
"The girls they send to serve the Priestess of the Oracle."
"I told her she would be sent for training to the Lady soon," Miellyn said.
"Well, Eilan, do you believe me now?"
"Oh, I believed you," Eilan said, "but I thought surely it would take
someone older and with more skills than me."
"Caillean would say that they do not want anyone too learned near
Lhiannon for fear she would ask too many questions. If the Priestess were
forced to think about what she was doing, the Oracles she gives might not
always serve the Druids' policies so conveniently."
"Miellyn, hush," Latis exclaimed. "You know you must not say such
things — not even in a whisper!"
"I will speak the truth and if the priests object, I will ask them by what
right they ask me to lie." But Miellyn lowered her voice. "Eilan, be careful;
you are holding that basket aslant. We took enough trouble to gather these
leaves, I do not want them dirtied by a fall to the floor."
Eilan readjusted the angle of the basket she was holding.
"There are some truths which should never be spoken aloud, not even in a
whisper," Latis went on soberly.
"Yes," Miellyn said, "so I am told; and usually they are the truths that
should be proclaimed from the rooftops."
"In the sight of the gods this may very well be true," replied the other.
"But you know very well we are not in the presence of the gods, but of men."
"Well, if the truth cannot be spoken in a house built by the Druids,"
Miellyn replied stoutly, "where in the name of the gods can it be?"

"The gods alone know!" said Latis. "I have survived so long by sticking to
my herbs, and you would do well to do the same. They, at least, speak true."
"Eilan doesn't have that choice," said Miellyn. "She'll be tied to the High
Priestess for the next six moons."
"Remain true to yourself, child." Old Latis touched her chin so that Eilan
could not look away. "If you know your own heart, you will always have one
friend who does not lie."
The priestess had spoken the truth. With the coming of the next moon,
Eilan was brought to Lhiannon and taught the ceremonious etiquette for
attending upon the High Priestess in public, which, in effect, meant every
time that Lhiannon went out of her own dwelling in the Forest House. She
learned the rituals of robing Lhiannon for the ceremonies, which was more
complicated than it looked; for from the beginning of the ritual, not even with
a fingertip's weight could any human being touch the Priestess. She shared
with Lhiannon the long ritual seclusion with which the Priestess prepared for
the rites, and helped her through the physical collapse that followed.
That was when she learned the price Lhiannon paid for the great
reverence in which she was held. For the delivery of the word of the gods
there was a heavy reckoning. Vague and forgetful as Lhiannon, in her own
person, might sometimes be, when she assumed the ornaments of the Oracle
another power came upon her. She had been chosen, Eilan realized, not so
much for force of will or wisdom, but because when it was needful, she was
able to let her own personality go.
It was then, when the human identity had been put off with her ordinary
clothes, that Lhiannon opened herself so that the Goddess might speak
through her. And in those moments, she was a great priestess indeed —
almost, Eilan thought, more than human. The price of becoming the vehicle
for so great a power was both physical and mental, and Eilan's respect for the
older priestess grew as she saw Lhiannon pay it without grudging the cost, or
at least without complaint.
When Eilan left the Forest House and the woods around for the first time
she was accompanying Lhiannon. It was then that she realized how the
preceding weeks had changed her. Even the House of Maidens seemed remote

and strange. When the newest novices scurried out of her way she scarcely
noticed, and only afterwards realized that they had seen in her the same
unearthly serenity she associated with Lhiannon.
It was, she supposed, a fairly ordinary Midsummer Festival. She had seen
the Games and the market and the lighting of the big sun-fire many times
before, but after her months of seclusion in the Forest House, the yammering
of so many people was painful, and she shrank from the strong scents of
humans and horses. Even the bright cloths the merchants had put up to shade
their wares assaulted her senses.
Midsummer was a time when men put forth their strength in competitions,
to entertain the gods and the people, and to strengthen the crops as they grew.
But as Eilan watched the footraces and the wrestling it was the sweating
bodies of the competitors that seemed the most gross and distorted of all. She
could not imagine why she had ever wanted to lie with a man.
The winner of the Games was garlanded with summer flowers and
escorted to preside over the ceremonies. Remembering what she had learned
of the Mysteries, Eilan watched with a new appreciation. In time of need, or
in some tribes every seven years, the new Year-King would have watched his
predecessor burn, and even now some of the old sacredness attached to him.
The Empire had killed or Romanized the heirs of the British princes, but so
long as men were willing to offer their lives for the people, they could not
eradicate the Sacred Kings, who each year stood surety for those who no
longer understood their role.
If there were some great disaster, and a sacrifice were needed during the
coming year, despite the Romans' prohibitions it was on this young man that
the blow would fall. And, in recognition of his risk, he alone of all men was
allowed to lie with whichever woman took his fancy - even a maiden from the
Forest House if it was there that his eye should fall.
Eilan kept close to Lhiannon, watching as the warriors snatched brands
from the great bonfire and vied to throw them high to make the crops grow.
The people had grown rowdy with drink and the release of the festival. But no
one would trouble her while she was with the High Priestess. Even the YearKing had never been known to push his rights that far.
She sat with Caillean and Dieda, glad of the protection of Lhiannon's

presence and the hulking strength of her bodyguard Huw behind them, and
hoped that the other priestesses who had come with them to the festival had
fared as well.
It was not until several weeks had passed that she learned why her friend
Miellyn had come away from the festivities so pale and thoughtful, and why
she was so often ill. It was Eilidh who told her, one day when Miellyn was
nowhere to be found, but by then everyone in the Forest House was buzzing
with the news.
"She is pregnant, Eilan," Eilidh murmured and shook her head as if she
still found it amazing. "By the winner of the games. Lhiannon was troubled
and very cross when she learned of it, and has sent Miellyn to the seclusion of
the hut by the white pool to meditate alone for a time."
"That is not fair!" exclaimed Eilan. "If he chose her, how could she deny
him? It would be an impiety." Had the priests forgotten their own theology?
"The older priestesses are saying she should have kept herself out of his
way. There is no shortage of women in this part of Britain, after all. I would
have found a way to evade him if he had started looking at me!"
Eilan had to admit that she too would have sought some way to avoid
being chosen. But when Miellyn reappeared among them, her loose robes no
longer able to hide her rounding body, she had the sense not to say so.
And so the summer rolled on, and time came round to the second
anniversary of her arrival at the Forest House.
By the time Eilan had assisted the High Priestess at half a dozen festivals,
she had lost all enthusiasm for becoming the Oracle herself, but she knew that
her desires would make no difference if she should be chosen by the Druids.
She could not help knowing that the priests came to Lhiannon before each
ritual, to help, they said, to prepare her. But once, when a half-closed door
swung open, she saw the older woman slumped in trance as Ardanos droned
into her ear.
She watched with extra interest that night when the Goddess was called
down upon Her Priestess, wincing as Lhiannon twitched and muttered,
garbling some answers while others came clear. It was like watching a horse

fighting a tight rein, as if something within the Priestess struggled against the
power that flowed through her.
They have bound her, she realized in horror as she sat by Lhiannon's
beside that night when all was done. They set spells upon her so that she
could say only those words that accorded with their will!
Perhaps that was why, despite the ritual, there were times when the
Goddess did not come, and Lhiannon's answers arose from her own wisdom,
or perhaps the words that the priests had taught her. It seemed to Eilan that
those times were the most exhausting of all. And even when the trance was a
true one, the Oracle could answer only those questions that were put to her; as
time passed, Eilan began to suspect that the Druids controlled who was
allowed to question her as well. A few genuine Oracles were indeed
delivered; but only, Eilan discovered, in matters of small moment. And these,
if they came from the Goddess, generally made little difference either to those
who asked or those who heard.
Eilan's first reaction had been to protest, but to whom? Caillean was away,
carrying a message from Lhiannon to the new queen of one of the tribes, and
Miellyn too concerned about the coming child for Eilan to trouble her. By the
time there was anyone she could have told, it had come to her that Caillean
and Dieda, at least, must know already. It would explain some of their
arguments, and the somewhat exasperated tenderness with which Caillean
cared for Lhiannon.
And the High Priestess, above all, must understand what was being done
to her. Lhiannon had chosen to come to the Forest House, and to remain in the
power of the priesthood. If they were making her their mouthpiece, surely it
was with her own consent and will.
It was in this state that matters stood when Eilan accompanied Lhiannon
to the Beltane festival almost three years after she had been given to the
temple.

Eleven

Gaius had not been in the Ordovici lands for almost two years when the
third Beltane since he lost Eilan arrived. His father had not spoken again of
the proposed marriage with the daughter of Licinius, but had seconded him to
the Governor's staff. He had spent the past two seasons marching across Alba
with Agricola, engaged in what they fondly hoped was a pacification of the
lowland tribes. Raiders like those who had killed Bendeigid's family were bad
enough but it was the still free tribes of the North who threatened the Empire's
hold on Britannia. For a serving officer of the Roman army, grief was an
indulgence. Gaius did his duty, and if the sight of some girl's bright hair and
grave eyes set his old wounds to aching he took care not to weep where
anyone could see.
He succeeded so well that when the campaign in Caledonia came to a
temporary halt he was rewarded by being sent to escort a party of wounded
men back to the Legion's permanent quarters in Deva while the remainder of
the Twentieth labored on a new fortress in the Caledonian highlands. So it
was that he found himself in the South again, trotting down the road to the
Hill of the Maidens with a centurion at his side and a detachment of regulars
tramping along behind.
"We need a man we can trust to keep an eye on the festival, and you're the
only one available just now who can speak the language well enough to pass.
You'll have to face it sometime, lad," his father had told him when he
protested. "Best get it over with." But not until Gaius saw the bare crown of
the hillfort rising from the sea of forest and heard the lowing of the assembled
cattle did he realize just how hard it would be. He reined in, staring, and the
centurion barked an order to halt the men.

"Looks peaceful enough," said the centurion. "Wherever you go, market
fairs are pretty much the same. They can get ugly, though, when you mix
religion in." The soldier laughed. Gaius had already found that the man was a
garrulous soul who required a minimum of response from his audience. "I
spent my first three years with the Legions in Egypt. A god for every day of
the week, they had, and each one with his own festival. Had some pretty
messy riots sometimes when two processions collided in the center of town."
"Oh?" Gaius asked politely, though he did not really care that much
whether the man had served in Egypt or at the end of the world. This was the
gate through which they had entered the festival grounds three years ago. He
remembered how little Senara had jigged down the road ahead of them,
laughing.
As before, he was wearing native clothing, for his assignment was to
watch out for sedition at the festival, but that happy family with whom he had
last come this way was no more. "What was Egypt like?" he said quickly,
trying to wall the memory away.
"Oh, like everywhere else," the centurion said and yawned. "Great
temples and dreadfully rich kings, and equally great poverty in the
marketplace. It was warm though," he added and shivered. "I wouldn't mind a
little of their sun right now; it's too cold and rainy here in Britannia."
Gaius looked up at the overcast sky. The man was right; he had not
noticed the weather before. That was one thing that was different anyway. He
did not think he could have borne to see this place again on a day of bright
sun.
"You don't seem to mind it much, though," the centurion added enviously.
"You were born here, weren't you? I'm from Etruria myself. Getting to be a
rarity, these days, to find another native-born Latin in the Legions. I've served
all over the Empire — Egypt, Hispania, Parthia. My cohort got cut to pieces
in Parthia, and when they promoted me to centurion - probably because I was
one of the few left alive — they sent me out here. If Apollo really discovered
this country, I don't admire his taste."
"We'll dismount here," Gaius nerved himself up to it suddenly. "And leave
a man with the horses. No room for them inside."

They heard lowing behind them as another contingent of cattle was driven
in. The centurion bawled a command to the soldiers to move aside, and he
and Gaius stepped back.
"No sense in getting under their hoofs," he added lazily. "I don't know
about you, but I've better uses for my feet than having 'em stepped on by these
cows. You ready to go in now?"
Gaius sighed. He would never be ready, but he was a Roman, and he
could no longer run from his memories. He shivered and drew a fold of his
mantle over his head.
"What's going on here anyway?" asked the centurion as they passed
through the gateway in the wake of the cattle. "Is it some kind of festival for
the farmers? They did that in Egypt - had a big white bull they called a god.
Paraded him through the streets with garlands around his neck, and fanned
incense over the cattle till you could hardly breathe. Trying to make them
healthy, they said."
"Here, they throw herbs on the flames and drive the cows between the
fires to bless them." Gaius answered him.
"Funny thing, how people keep fighting about religion, when really it's all
the same. Seems to me it's the priests who make all the problems; most folks
just want good harvests and healthy babies, just trying to get along. If it's not
the cattle stampeding, it's the priests haranguing the crowds. Do the Druids
run this festival?"
"Not exactly," said Gaius. "There's a priestess, something like a Vestal,
who calls down blessings from their gods." For a moment he closed his eyes,
once more seeing that veiled figure lifting her arms to the moon.
"Is she going to do the sacrifices?" They moved slowly towards the
central square, for the herd of cattle was still ahead of them, lowing anxiously
and pressing together at the strange sights and smells.
Gaius shook his head. "These days, anyway, the Druids or whoever runs
their worship don't sacrifice anything except fruit and flowers."

"I heard they did lots of sacrifices—even human," said the centurion.
"Gates of Tartarus, no." Gaius remembered how indignant Eilan had been
when he asked the same question. "Really, this festival's pretty tame. I was
here once, and —"
"Oh, by Caligula's balls! Somebody's scared the cows," the centurion
exclaimed, peering ahead of them. "That was what I was afraid of."
A big man in a checked robe had upset a lantern, and the cows were
shifting about, lowing uneasily.
Beyond him an older man was haranguing the crowd. More than a
hundred people had gathered to hear. Gaius edged forward to listen. This was
why he was here, in case someone used the peaceful gathering to stir up
rebellion. People in the crowd were yelling in agreement, ignoring the
growing unease in the herd.
A lad came running with a bucket of water, splashing one of the shouters
as he went by. The man turned, yelling, and the nearest cow threw up its head
with a bellow, pricking its neighbor with a twisted horn.
"Oh, Hades, that's done it; those cows are going to stampede," Gaius
shouted, even as one of the lead cows burst into a clumsy gallop, knocking
into her drover and sending him head over heels into the crowd.
The speaker was still haranguing the crowd, but his audience were
shouting at each other now. Two or three men were crowded off their feet, and
a woman screamed, and then the whole front line of cattle burst into a
lumbering run. A cow bellowed, swerving, and Gaius saw red on its horn.
Somebody screamed. Men, women, and a few children surged backward,
yelling.
Now everyone was pushing, trying to get out of the way. Within moments
the central square was a confusion of motion and sound. Mothers reached for
their crying children; one of the legionaries, not accustomed to cattle, was
pushed off his feet and went down howling. Gaius struggled to keep his feet
and was swept away from his men.
Someone grabbed at his arm. "Here, you look strong, you must help me;

the Lady will fall." A tall, dark-haired woman in a blue robe gripped Gaius's
arm and pulled him towards the edge of the square where an old woman
swathed in a blue cloak had collapsed against two women in linen dresses
with wreaths of green leaves over their unbleached linen veils.
Gaius reached out cautiously and the women let their burden sag into his
arms. He blinked, recognizing the Priestess who had invoked the Goddess two
years before. Carefully he lifted her, amazed at the fragility of the form within
the heavy robes. Most of the people had fled, but cattle were still bucketing
about angrily, or drifting in twos or threes with lowered horns and switching
tails, lowing defiance at anyone who tried to herd them.
Near by lay the still form of the giant who accompanied the Priestess
everywhere. "What's the matter with him?"
"Huw? Oh, he's all right," the older priestess said carelessly. "One of the
cows gored somebody; he's afraid of the sight of blood."
Some bodyguard, Gaius could not help thinking. "We've got to get her out
of the way of the cows," he said aloud. "Where shall I carry her?"
"This way." The taller of the two attending priestesses quickly led the way
through the tumble of wrecked booths. Gaius settled his burden so that her
head rested against his shoulder, relieved to hear the rasp of her breathing. He
did not want to think what would happen to him if the High Priestess of
Vernemeton died in his arms.
His nostrils flared at a sudden scent and he realized that the priestess had
led them to the booth of a herb seller. The herbalist, plump and worried, was
lifting the hanging rug aside so that Gaius could carry the High Priestess in.
He knelt and laid her on the piled sleeping furs.
The place was dim and dusty, pungent with the fresh summery smell of
the herbs suspended from the beams or shelved in linen bags. Gaius
straightened, and his cloak fell back. From behind him came a sudden cry of
surprise. Gaius felt his heart begin to thud heavily in his breast. Slowly, for
suddenly he needed more courage than it had taken to face a charge of
Caledonian tribesmen, he turned.
The smaller of the attending priestesses had thrown back her veil. From its

shadowy folds he saw Eilan staring back at him. He felt the blood leaving his
head; the world darkened, then flared into brightness as he got his breath
again. You're dead . . . he thought. You died in the fire! But even when all
other vision failed, shining down at him he saw Eilan's eyes. He felt a breath
of air on his face and gradually his senses came back to him.
"Is it really you?" he croaked then. "I thought you had burned . . . I saw
what was left of your house after the raiders came."
She stepped backward, motioning him towards the end of the booth, while
the other priestesses bent over Lhiannon, and Gaius, his head still reeling, got
up and followed her.
"I was away helping my older sister with her new child," she said quietly
so they would not be overheard. "But my mother and little Senara were
there." Her voice broke. Then she stopped and sent a quick guilty glance at
the other priestesses.
In the dim light, wrapped in pale robes, she looked like a spirit. He
reached out to her. He could hardly believe she was there, alive, unharmed.
For a moment his fingers brushed cool linen, then she twitched away.
"We cannot talk here," she said breathlessly, "even though you are not in
uniform."
"Eilan," he said quickly, "when can I see you?"
"That is not possible," she said. "I am a priestess of the Forest House, and
not allowed —"
"You are not allowed to speak to a man?" A Vestal, he thought. The girl I
love is as forbidden to me as if she were a Vestal.
"It is not so bad as that -" she said with a faint smile. "But you are a
Roman, and you know what my father would say."
"Indeed I do," he said after a moment, and then thought of what his father
would say. Had the Prefect let Gaius grieve, knowing there was no need?
Along with his wonder at her presence came a surge of anger.

Looking into Eilan's hazel eyes, he realized suddenly that in all the time
since he had left the house of Bendeigid, he had not felt so alive.
She shifted uneasily. "Dieda is looking at us; she may well recognize you.
And Caillean, the older priestess —"
"I remember Dieda," he said harshly. "And I must get back to my
centurion. Gods! I am glad to see you alive," he said, suddenly and intensely,
but he did not move. The other priestesses were both looking at them now,
and she raised her hand in a gesture of blessing.
"I thank you," she said in a voice that shook only a little. "Lhiannon is too
heavy for any of us to lift. If you see Huw and he seems recovered, will you
send him to us here?"
"To keep him safe from the cows," he said, and was rewarded by the
sudden flicker of her smile.
"Go now."
"I must," he agreed. At that moment Lhiannon stirred; one of the women
bent over and spoke soothingly to her, and hearing those low tones, it finally
reached him that Eilan was a priestess of the Druids now.
He stumbled towards the entrance, and it was only when he was outside,
blinking in the light, that he realized that he had not said goodbye or wished
her well. Was she happy in the Forest House? Had she chosen that life, or had
they forced her into it? But the door flap had fallen closed behind him. As he
strode away, he heard Dieda's voice behind him.
"Eilan, what were you saying to that man? He walks like a Roman!"
"Oh, I don't think so," he heard Eilan say slowly. "Wouldn't he have been
in uniform? The rest of them all were."
He slowed, amazed at her guile. It was at least partly her innocence that
had at first attracted him.
Now where the devil had his centurion got to? He forced himself into
motion again. Was the man likely to tell Macellius about this? And, more

important, how would Gaius manage to see Eilan again? Now that he had
found her once more, he could not simply let her go.
Behind him in the tent, Eilan clasped her hands over her pounding heart. It
seemed almost impossible that the other priestesses could not hear it.
Lhiannon stirred, and murmured, "What happened? Was anyone hurt?"
"Some fool frightened the cattle and they stampeded," Caillean answered.
"How . . .how did I get here?"
"A passer-by carried you. Huw fainted - the great halfwit," Caillean said
crisply. "No, your rescuer is gone; Eilan blessed him in your name."
Eilan, hearing, thought it lucky Gaius had not been wearing Roman
uniform and wondered why. She wondered what he would look like in the
uniform of the Legions. Handsome, she imagined, but then, he was nicelooking anyhow. She shook her head, knowing that she should not be thinking
of him that way, certainly not here. That part of her life was over.
"First make certain that Huw is all right, then bring him in here."
Lhiannon ordered. "If the cattle have stampeded, they probably cannot be
rounded up at once, and we will be here for the rest of the day."
Eilan went out into the sunlight. She found Huw sitting on the ground,
barely conscious, shaking his head dizzily.
"Is the Holy Lady safe?"
"No thanks to you, if she is," Eilan said crossly. "She fainted, and a
passer-by carried her into the herb seller's booth."
"Where's all the cattle?"
Eilan looked around her and realized that Lhiannon had been wrong. The
square was busy with folk setting up fallen booths and chattering, but there
was not a cow to be seen.
"Only the gods know that, and maybe their drovers; they stampeded." The

man who had been gored, she noticed, had been carried away by his friends.
"That's why they gored that man; they were frightened," she said crisply.
"It was the Romans frightened them," Huw mumbled, getting painfully to
his feet again. "Marching in all clanking and glittering that way. A murrain on
them; why did they come here anyway? Did they think the blessing of the
cattle was some kind of unlawful gathering?"
"There'll be no blessing of the cattle this day," he went on, shaking his
head, "I'd best carry the Lady home. With Romans around there's more likely
than not to be some kind of trouble," he added in a grumbling undertone.
Not for the first time, Eilan wondered why Lhiannon tolerated this great
oaf. He was little use to her as a bodyguard; Eilan could not see that he was
any use at all. If she should be ever in the position of the Oracle priestess little as she desired it - the first thing she would do would be to rid herself of
the services of this great bobby.
About a month after Beltane, Eilan was summoned to Lhiannon, and
found her with a man who reminded her oddly of Cynric, and a little girl of
eight or ten years with light reddish hair sun-touched with gold.
Eilan smiled at the child, who returned her gaze bashfully. Lhiannon said,
"Hadron is one of the Raven Brotherhood. Tell her your story yourself,
Hadron."
"It is soon told," the man said. "I have a foster brother who-has joined the
Legions as an auxiliary, and he interceded for me or I would have been taken
and sent to the lead mines. After his intercession, the penalty was removed
and my life spared, and so I was given only ten years of exile from any
Roman possession. I must now flee to the North, and I cannot take a girl child
with me where I go."
"So what is the problem?" Eilan knew Lhiannon had the authority simply
to take the girl into the Forest House without consulting anyone. The fact that
she had not already done so meant that there was some difficulty.
"She seems to me to be too young for a place among us," Lhiannon said,
frowning. "I do not know what to say to him."

"If that is all," Eilan replied, "I should be happy to care for her until she
can be sent to fosterage elsewhere. Or is there a female relative to whom she
might be consigned?"
"There is not," said the man. "For my wife was Roman born, and I know
very little of her near kinfolk."
"So your child is partly Roman? Cannot you send her to her kin among
them?" Lhiannon asked."
The man answered sullenly, "My wife quarreled with her kindred to marry
me; she begged me with her dying breath to make certain her daughter never
fell into their hands. I thought if I might leave her in the care of the priestesses
. . ."
Lhiannon said sternly, "We are not a refuge for orphans. Although for one
of the Brotherhood of the Ravens we might possibly make an exception."
Eilan looked at the child and thought of her own little sister, dead at the
hands of raiders three years ago now. If Senara were alive, who was looking
after her? She had looked forward to tending Miellyn's baby as a kind of
substitute for her lost sister, but the older woman had miscarried the YearKing's child.
"I would willingly care for her, Lhiannon."
"That is why I called you. You are not yet committed to any very exacting
duties here among us," Lhiannon replied. "Although this goes beyond the
usual requirements. Still, if you will have it so, I will put this little refugee in
your charge." She paused and asked Hadron, "What is her name?"
"My wife called her Valeria, My Lady."
Lhiannon scowled. "That is a Roman name; she cannot be called by it
here."
"My wife had given up all her kin to marry me," said Hadron. "The least I
could do was allow her to give her family name to her child."
"Even so, she must have a new name if she is to live here among us,"

Lhiannon said firmly. "Eilan, will you give her one?"
Eilan looked at the child, who was gazing at her with frightened eyes. She
had lost all else; now she was to lose her father and even her name. Eilan said
gently, "By your leave, I will call her Senara."
"That will do very well," said Lhiannon. "Now go; find her a place to
sleep and suitable clothing. When she is of a proper age she may take vows
among us as a priestess, if she wishes."
When Hadron had gone, Eilan looked once more at the little girl, who
stood gazing raptly at the Lady.
"I am sorry to lay this upon you, Eilan. I have never had to deal with a
child this age. What are we to do with her?" said Lhiannon.
"Perhaps she can run errands." Eilan put her arm around the little girl and
smiled.
Lhiannon nodded. "Since she is not under vows, perhaps she could carry
messages beyond our walls."
"She is a little young for that, but if you are truly uncertain about having
her stay here, perhaps we should ask among the Romans," Eilan suggested.
"Despite what Hadron said, her mother's people might want her. We should at
least make inquiries."
"That is a good thought," Lhiannon agreed a little vaguely, her attention
already flitting away. "Look after it, Eilan, if you will."
The little hand slipped trustingly into her own, and something in Eilan's
heart that had been sore since she lost her sister at last began to ease. As they
walked across the courtyard, she asked the child, "You are not unhappy to be
called Senara? It was my sister's name."
"Not at all," the little girl answered. "Where is your sister? Is she dead?"
"Dead or carried off beyond the seas," Eilan replied. "Alas that I do not
know." And then she wondered why she had not asked Caillean for some
word of her sister's fate, and her mother's when the older woman was scrying.

Was it perhaps that she preferred to think of Senara peacefully dead than
living in slavery?
She looked at the child, seeking some sign of her Roman parentage, and
thought of Gaius. As the Prefect's son, Gaius could find out if there was
anything to be known. Before Valeria became Senara forever, she owed it to
the child at least to try.
As Eilan showed her charge where she was to sleep and found a linen
novice's gown that could be cut down for her to wear, she found herself
thinking about Gaius as much as about the girl.
Where was he now? Was he thinking of her as eagerly as she was of him?
Had he put some spell on her, that she could not only think of nothing else,
but did not particularly want to? She sighed, remembering the strength of his
voice, his handsome face and form; the slight accent with which he spoke her
name, his lingering kiss at the Beltane fires.
I did not then realize fully what he wanted of me, she thought. I was too
young to know - or care. But now I am older, and I am beginning to
understand. What have I thrown away? The thought came to her then: For the
rest of my life am I to dwell unloved — until I am as old and loveless as
Lhiannon?
Who could she ask? Who could she tell? Dieda would understand, but
separated from her own beloved, she would hardly sympathize. Caillean,
mishandled and unloved so young, would be angry. And if Caillean would not
understand, how could she expect it of anyone else here?
There was no one to whom she could describe the hungry need in her
heart just to look on him once more, even if after that she should never set
eyes on him again.
The next morning, as she was cutting bread and cheese for Senara, she
asked, "Do you remember anything about your kin in the Roman town?"
"They are not in the town, Eilan. I think my mother's brother was some
kind of Roman official; he wrote the letters for the Prefect of the camp, and
other such things."

"Indeed?" Eilan stared at her. Surely the gods were smiling, for this man
must be the secretary to Gaius's own father.
She thought for a moment of taking the child into her confidence, but after
a moment's reflection decided against it. If a priestess of the Forest House
should be discovered in the company of a Roman, no matter how innocent her
motives, it would mean trouble for anyone involved. And would it be all that
innocent?

Twelve

That very day, Valerius, who was secretary to Gaius's father, had arrived
out of breath and looking shaken. "I have just heard that my sister is dead," he
told Gaius.
"Tell me about it," suggested Gaius as they walked across the parade
ground towards his father's offices.
"It's a long story," Valerius replied. "I lost contact with my sister when she
married; I haven't seen her a dozen times in as many years."
"Did she move far away?"
Valerius gave a short laugh. "Only so far as Deva, but she married a man
of the tribes, and my father disowned her."
Gaius nodded. It was bad enough for a Roman to marry a native woman
of a princely house. He knew only too well how Roman" society would view
a daughter who ran off with a native lover.
"An old woman who used to be my sister's nurse and mine sent me the
news of her death," Valerius went on, "and I found out by asking some
questions about the trouble her husband's in. I've seen him only a time or two,
but he had a foster brother who's with the auxiliaries who told me that Hadron
is one of the Ravens and has been proscribed. The thing is, she left a small
daughter, and I don't know what's become of the child. Didn't you know a
couple of the Ravens?"

"I knew some of them, yes," said Gaius, thinking of Cynric. Considering
the conditions of Cynric's birth, he did not wonder that he had joined a secret
society dedicated to revenge. In similar circumstances, he thought, he might
have felt much the same.
"Somehow or other I must find my sister's child. Hadron's foster brother is
one of the auxiliaries, as I said, and he has no wife to whom he could consign
a female child, which leaves me the girl's nearest relative. Can you think of
me as the guardian of a little girl?
I have not seen the child since she was in swaddling clothes; I suppose she
must be eight or thereabouts."
"First you have to find her . . ." said Gaius slowly. Cynric might know
where Hadron had gone with his child. And in the process Cynric, who knew
what it was to be separated from his beloved, might be able to help him see
Eilan.
"Can you really help me?" Valerius slowed. They were almost at the
Prefect's offices now, and the secretary was well aware of Macellius's
disapproval of any contact between his son and his mother's people.
"Perhaps . . ." Gaius said cautiously. "I might know someone who could
inquire for you."
He had heard that Cynric had been summoned south to ride with the
legionaries who had been despatched to punish the raiders who had burned
the house of Bendeigid. It had amazed him at the time, but revenge made
strange bedfellows. The word was that Cynric was now working with the
auxiliaries as a guide and interpreter, Gaius wondered if he had changed his
mind or if he still belonged to the Ravens.
If he tried to contact Cynric through army channels, his father would hear,
but he was bound to see the young Briton sooner or later, hanging around the
taverns that served the fortress.
"May Bona Dea bless you!" Valerius reached out to clasp Gaius's hand.
Then the door opened, and both men stiffened to military attention.
Only a few days later Gaius, making his way through Deva's crowded

marketplace, saw Cynric standing head and shoulders above the crowd. His
curls had darkened somewhat, and his face now bore the beginnings of a
beard. Gaius shouted, saw Cynric frown, decide this young officer was no one
he knew, and prepare to move on.
Gaius swore and thrust through the crowd to face him. "Wait, man - don't
you know me?" He stopped, tensing as the blue gaze descended and darkened.
Surely the lad wouldn't hold his own deception against him now, when he too
was serving Rome! "I think I still owe you a drink for hauling me out of that
boar pit," he said companionably. "There's a wine shop here; let's try its
wares."
Gaius drew a breath of relief as Cynric's frown changed to a rueful grin. "I
remember you now," he said, adding, "but I don't suppose your name is
Gawen. What do I call you, Tribune?"
"As a matter of fact," Gaius said, "my mother named me Gawen and
called me so until the day she died. I told you the truth as far as I dared. But in
the Roman town I bear my father's name: Gaius Macellius Severus. My
mother was a woman of the Silures; I bear the cognomen Siluricus after her."
"If I had known this at the time I would have killed you," admitted
Cynric. "But a lot has happened since then. I'll drink with you, Roman, or
whatever you may be."
In the dusty darkness of the wine shop, Gaius said, "I was sorry when I
heard of the burning of your house; I could hardly have been more distressed
if my own kin had been killed by those Hibernian bastards. I am glad that
your father was not hurt, and more sorry than I can say that your mother
died."
"She was my foster mother," Cynric remarked, "but for her sake I thank
you. We have a saying in the North that blood binds for three generations, but
fosterage for seven. And indeed my foster father's wife was as good to me as
if I had been born to her."
"She was a gracious lady indeed," Gaius agreed. "And for your sake I
grieve for her." If he had married Eilan he would have welcomed this man as
a brother. And yet, by accident of birth, he and Cynric had been on opposite
sides of this struggle until now. At least others than Romans commit outrages,

he thought. "I saw the ashes of your home, but my father sent me north
immediately thereafter. Perhaps I struck a blow or two on her behalf against
those Caledonians. I was glad to hear that the Hibernian raiders were
punished."
"At least I, too, got to strike a blow for them. That was the first time in my
life I was not ashamed of the Roman blood in my veins." Cynric went on. "I
think that Beltane when you guested with us was the last time we were all
happy together. All who survived are scattered now."
"I was at the Hill of the Maidens this last Beltane," Gaius said carefully. "I
saw Dieda, and Eilan your foster sister, there. I was glad to know she had
survived."
"Aye," Cynric said shortly. "She is in the Forest House, a priestess of the
Great Goddess. As for Dieda, she is Eilan's kin, but none to me. Nor likely to
be, if she stays there!"
"I have a friend in the Legions -" Gaius said then.
Cynric laughed. "Well, I am not surprised at that-"
Gaius shook his head. "His sister married a Briton, and was cast off by her
kin. They had a daughter, but the sister's dead now, and they say her husband
is on the run. My friend wants to find the little girl."
"On the run . . ." Cynric said thoughtfully. "Why are you asking me?"
"Because they say he was one of those who fly at midnight —"
"Many birds fly at midnight." Cynric gazed into his wine. "What was the
man's name?"
"Hadron," said Gaius. "His wife was called Valeria."
"I know little of birds," said Cynric, "but I can ask around."
"Could they have taken the child to the Forest House? Would your
kinswomen know?"

"I could ask," answered Cynric.
I would rather ask her myself, thought Gaius, but he did not know how to
say so. And how did he know that Eilan even wanted to see him again? If she
was happy in the Forest House, would he be only breaking her peace to try
and see her there? He had done his duty to Valerius. Should he make some
excuse and disappear again?
He realized that he had been silent too long when Cynric refilled his cup
from the jug of wine and shoved it back at him.
"There's more to this than a lost child," said the Briton. "What did you
really want to say?"
"I must see Eilan again," Gaius burst out suddenly. "I swear I mean her no
harm. I only want to know she is happy there."
For a moment Cynric stared at him, then threw back his head with a roar
of laughter that turned heads all over the room. "You're in love!" he laughed
again. "I should have recognized the symptoms. Isn't my own girl locked
away behind those very walls?"
"But you're a kinsman," said Gaius seriously. "They'll let you talk to her.
Can you arrange something for me?"
"Why not?" Cynric grinned. "I've never seen any reason to keep the
priestesses all penned up. That's like something you Romans would do. Dieda
won't see or speak to me since she went in there, but my foster sister is not a
prisoner. I will see what I can arrange for you." He drained his wine cup. "Be
at the edge of the path leading to the Forest House three days from now, an
hour after noon."
As Eilan waited in the woods near the Sacred Grove in the unusual
brightness of the early summer sunlight she was surprised to find that she was
trembling. At first, when Cynric had spoken to her of a meeting with Gaius, it
had seemed like the answer to an unusually fervent prayer. But she soon
realized that the most dangerous thing in the world is an answered prayer. Her
chances of keeping the meeting a secret were slim indeed. And no one would
believe her if they were discovered.

In the end she had gone to Caillean for advice.
"There is nothing that you can do, since you have bidden him here, but to
meet him as has been arranged," Caillean had replied. "But I am going to be
within earshot every moment; so that if I am later asked I can swear that the
two of you have exchanged no word that could not be spoken in the presence
of the parents of either of you. Do you accept that?"
Eilan had bowed her head, then turned to go. In truth, she was even a little
relieved. If she must speak to him in the presence of the priestess; there would
then be no question of his asking of her anything . . .dangerous.
"Wait," Caillean had said. "Why did you bring this to me? Surely you
could not imagine that I would approve!"
"I am doing nothing that betrays my vows." Eilan faced the other woman
directly. "But I know how idle tongues can embroider a tale. I believe that you
would advise me as you thought right, whatever you might feel!" And then
she had turned once more, and gone. But she remembered with some
satisfaction the flush of color that had stained the other woman's cheeks.
And so she waited, knowing that with the implacable watcher she had
nothing to fear. If she had earlier been asked whether she was afraid of Gaius
she would have unhesitatingly answered no; but as the shadows shortened,
she became frightened, then terrified.
"Oh, Caillean." She turned to the other woman, who sat upon a stone at
the edge of the clearing, working on a piece of embroidery. "What am I going
to say to him?"
"Why should you ask me? I am hardly the person to advise a maiden on
her dealings with a man," Caillean replied with a sardonic smile.
Eilan sighed. As time passed she realized that it would take a while for
him to come all the way from Deva. But as she waited, she found her hand
stealing into Caillean's.
Was she meddling in an affair which was, after all, none of her concern?
No, she told herself firmly. It was clearly her duty to find out all she could
about the child's surviving relatives. Thus fortified, she waited; and her heart

began to pound when at last she saw his shadow upon the path.
It was the first time she had seen Gaius in the uniform and helmet of the
Roman Legion; she was struck by how well it became him. He seemed taller
under the crimson crested helmet, and the color set off his dark eyes. He came
into the clearing and stopped short. If he was surprised to see two women
instead of one, it showed only in the momentary flicker of his eyes. Saluting
them, he lifted the helmet from his head and tucked it under one arm.
Eilan found herself staring. She had never before had more than a
momentary look at a Roman officer in full uniform; and it emphasized the
differences between them. And yet, she thought, by their laws we are all
Romans. It was like a revelation to her.
He looked at her and smiled, and suddenly all the things she had meant to
say to him vanished from her mind.
Gaius shifted his gaze from Eilan to the older priestess, wondering what
on earth he should say. He had never once envisioned that their meeting
would be attended by a third party. He had not chanced angering his father
and risking the wrath of hers, to exchange a few guarded remarks in the
presence of a veritable dragon.
But as he met Caillean's amused glance his anger cooled. If Eilan was a
Vestal Virgin or the nearest thing to one to be found within the British Isles,
he could hardly blame her for wanting a witness who could attest to her
unbroken vows. He wondered how he could make it clear, she was as
sacrosanct to him as a Virgin in the temple of Vesta. He remembered how
overwhelmed he had been by her trust when she sat beside him at the Beltane
fire, how touched by her innocence.
Caillean, of course, was another matter; he could tell at once that the older
woman would not have trusted him - or both of them - out of her sight, and
for Eilan's sake he was indignant. But he guessed that the priestess had been
brought up on tales of Roman outrages. To the women of the Forest House the
very fact that he was a Roman and a man was enough.
And the truth was that if Caillean had not been there, he might have kissed
Eilan; she looked very enticing in the pale linen dress that set off the gold of
her hair. He thought the garb must be some kind of standard dress among the

priestesses, for Caillean was wearing the same kind of draperies, though hers
were dark blue and unbecoming. Both had little curved daggers hanging from
their girdles.
After a moment Eilan began to tell him about the girl in the house of the
priestesses, not very coherently, but he knew at once that this must be the
child of Valerius's sister. "But this is amazing," he exclaimed. "I think this
must be the same girl I came here to speak about to you, the niece of my
father's secretary. How old is she?"
"The Goddess must be guiding us indeed," said Eilan. "I do not think she
has passed her tenth year."
"Oh, well, she is not old enough to be marriageable," he said, for Roman
law did not permit the marriage of a girl under twelve. He added lightly,
"That's good; otherwise Valerius would probably feel in honor bound to make
some arrangement. Now he'll just have to marry someone else to have a home
for her."
"That is not necessary," said Eilan. "The girl is well and happy where she
is, and you may tell him so."
Gaius frowned; he knew that for Valerius, who came of a good old family,
it would not be considered suitable that a kinswoman should live away from
the family's protection. But Valerius had no other family to take care of the
girl now, and perhaps Eilan's insistence that she would personally watch over
the child's health and safety would be enough for him.
After all, in Rome, it was the greatest possible honor for a little girl to be
taken into the temple of Vesta. For as long as she retained her ritual position
she was treated like a queen, or an empress at least. Somehow he would make
Valerius understand.
He realized that he was still making ineffectual remarks about the little
girl, whom he had not even seen, when he saw Caillean glaring at him. They
had already said everything they could legitimately say to one another, and
were beginning to repeat themselves. It was time to say goodbye.
He paused, eyeing Eilan wistfully. He supposed he would never have
another opportunity to speak with her in even this much privacy. He would

have liked to bid her a proper goodbye, but he could certainly not do that
under Caillean's eyes. And he should probably not expose himself to that kind
of temptation anyhow. But Eilan was still looking at him, a question in her
eyes.
"Eilan —" he stammered, for Caillean was watching as well. "You know
what I would say to you . . ." He held out his hand, not daring to touch her,
and then, as Caillean coughed, turned it to a formal salute of farewell. But he
read Eilan's answer in her smile.
When he had withdrawn, Eilan ran to Caillean.
"So that is the Roman who has had you daydreaming to the point where
you can hardly be trusted to stuff a mattress with bracken. I cannot understand
it; he does not seem in any way special to me."
"Well, I did not suppose that you would particularly like him," Eilan
protested, "but he is well favored, is he not?"
"I cannot see that he is any more so than any other Roman," Caillean
remarked. "Or for that matter any other man. To me your foster brother
Cynric is much better looking. He has a gentler face and does not appear to
think the world must revolve about his comings and goings."
Eilan supposed there was no accounting for taste; she herself did not think
Cynric was particularly attractive, but Dieda certainly did. But Gaius was
something different; to her he did not seem typically Roman, not in any way.
Nor did Gaius himself appear to think of his Roman lineage as anything very
special. Certainly he could not if he was for a time thinking of abandoning it
for marriage with me, she told herself then.
She had never for an instant considered marrying anyone else; and as for
men, the world was full of them. She hardly realized how much thinking of
Gaius had come between her old life and what now seemed natural to her.
"Eilan, you are daydreaming again," Caillean remarked sharply. "Go and
find Senara and tell her what you have discovered; and then go to Latis for
your lesson. If you can manage to pay attention, some day you may be as
skilled in the lore of herbs as Miellyn."

Thus admonished, Eilan went about her duties; but she could not resist
going obsessively over and over every word she had said to Gaius and every
word he had said to her. She could not believe she would never see or speak
with him again; he seemed too much a part of her life even after their formal
goodbye.
That night when she went in her turn to wait upon Lhiannon, the older
woman looked at her with dismay.
"What is this I have heard? That you have been out of the temple to meet
with a man? This is not the behavior expected of a priestess of the Forest
House. I am disappointed in you," she chided.
Eilan colored angrily. But this was why she had asked Caillean to witness
their meeting, after all. "I said not one word to him that could not have been
spoken in the presence of all of you."
Lhiannon sighed. "I did not say you did, but the fact of the matter is that it
was not spoken in the presence of all of us, and
there will be talk. The Goddess be thanked, Caillean was there; but she
should have known that we cannot afford to have even the suspicion of
scandal, so it is she and not you who will be punished for it. But I beseech
you before you do anything of this kind again, think that you have brought
punishment down on the head of another. You are young, Eilan, and the
young are always thoughtless."
"Punished? But that is not fair! What will you do to her?" Eilan asked
apprehensively.
"I will not beat her, if that is what you are thinking," Lhiannon said
smiling. "Even when she was a small child, I never beat her; perhaps I should
have done. As for her punishment, that is for her to tell if she wishes."
"But, Mother," Eilan protested, "it was you who told me to find out if the
child had any family."
"I did not say that you should inquire among the Romans," Lhiannon said
irritably. Eilan wondered how in the world she could have been expected to
find out about the relatives of a Roman child in any other way.

Later, among the priestesses, Eilan found an opportunity to speak to
Caillean. "Lhiannon told me she had to punish you. Can you forgive me? Will
it be too bad? She said she would not beat you."
"She will not," Caillean said. "There is a house in the forest where she
will probably send me to spend time meditating on my sins while I clear away
the brushwood and weeds with which it is surrounded and put the place in
order. It's not much of a punishment; Lhiannon probably does not realize that
it is actually a luxury to me to be alone with my music and my thoughts. So
you must not think I am being ill treated."
"Alone in the forest? But won't you be frightened?"
"What should frighten me? Bears? Wolves? Wandering men? The last
bears in this part of the world were trapped over thirty years ago. How long is
it since you have seen so much as a wolfskin rug in the market? And as for
men, you have good cause to know that I could frighten away any man alive.
No, I am not afraid."
"I should be terrified," Eilan said somberly.
"I am sure of it; but I am not afraid of my own company. And I can think
of my music as much as I wish, without a lesson or a duty interfering. So I
shall be quite content," Caillean assured her. "There is nothing in this
punishment - if she will call it so - to trouble me."
Eilan said no more, and she knew that at least when it came to waiting
upon Lhiannon, she and Dieda would willingly share Caillean's duties
between them. Well, that was no hardship; she loved Lhiannon in spite of her
flaws, and she knew that her kinswoman loved her too. She would miss
Caillean, though.
Now it occurred to her that if Lhiannon had been a different type of
person she herself might have been beaten or severely punished. Whatever
Caillean made of this penalty, it was Eilan who had brought it upon the older
woman. For that she felt guilty, but not enough to regret her meeting with
Gaius. She only wished she had been able to say half of what she wanted to,
though what that was she could not have named.

When Caillean departed from the Forest House, Eilan realized that the
older woman was really not much of a favorite with the other women there.
Only Miellyn and Eilidh seemed to be truly her friends — and of course
Lhiannon.
The weather changed as summer moved towards autumn. As the equinox
approached there was rain, and late one evening, while the women in the
House of Maidens were seated around the fire, Eilan found herself thinking of
Caillean in her exile. Was the roof of the hut leaky? How did she react to the
solitude and the silence of the forest?
The women had been inventing riddles, and at last, tired of this pastime,
they asked Dieda to sing or to tell them a story.
Dieda acquiesced. "What would you like me to tell you?"
"Tell us a tale of the Otherworld," said Miellyn. "Tell us how Bran son of
Febal voyaged to the western land. All the bards learn that one."
And so Dieda half told, half chanted, the tale of Bran and his encounter
with the sea god Manannan, Lord of Illusion, who turned the sea into a
flowering grove of trees, the fish into birds flying in the air, the waves into
flowering bushes, and the sea creatures into sheep; so it seemed as if they
sailed through a flowering grove. And when Manannan fell out of the boat,
the waves rushed in, so that the sea god was cast upon the shore and all the
other men drowned.
When she had finished they called for another tale, like little children
sitting spellbound.
"Tell the story of the King and the Three Hags," suggested one of the
women, and Dieda began as all tales were begun.
"A long time ago, times were better than now, and there were more gates
between the Otherworld and this, and if I had been there, I should not now be
here . . .well then, in a longer time ago than the oldest grandfather can tell, in
a house on the borders of the Underworld, there lived a king and his queen . . .
"And it was on the eve of Samaine, when the gates between the world are
open, and at the time between times, between the midnight of one year and

the dawn of the next, there came to the door three hags. The first had a snout
like a pig, and her lower lip hung down to her knees and concealed her
garment; the second had lips both on one side of her head and a beard which
hung down concealing her breasts; and the third was a hideous creature with
one arm and one leg. Under her arm she carried a pig which was so much
better looking than she was that it was as if the pig were a princess."
By this time all the women were laughing. Dieda herself smiled a little
and went on. "The three hags came in and took three seats by the fire so that
there were no seats by the fire for the King and his queen, who were forced to
take seats by the door.
"Then the first of them, the one with the long lower lip, said, 'I am hungry;
what have you to eat?' And they hastened to make her a pot of porridge; and
she ate up the pot of porridge, and it was enough for a dozen men, and she
cried out, 'You are stingy; I hunger still.'
"Now on this night no request of a guest can be denied; and so the Queen
set herself and her serving maids to make more porridge for her guests and
put some oatcakes on the hearth to bake. But no matter how much food they
set before the guest, she growled, 'I am still hungry.'
"Then the second, the bearded one, complained, 'I am thirsty.' When they
brought out a barrel of beer, she drank it all down at one draft and complained
that she was still dry. And when they began to fear that the hags would eat all
the provision for the winter to come, the Queen and the King went out and
consulted together what they should do with their guests. And then one of the
fairy folk appeared to them from out of a mound and gave the Queen goodday.
" 'All the gods preserve you, good lady; why are you weeping?' And the
Queen told them of the three hideous hags and their fear that the creatures
meant to eat them out of house and home, and then to eat the King and the
Queen. And the Fairy Woman told her what she should do.
"So the Queen went in and sat down to her knitting; and finally the first
hag asked, 'What are you making, Granny?'
"And the Queen replied, 'Knitting a shroud, dear Aunty.'

"And the second hag asked through her beard. 'Who is the shroud for,
Granny?'
" 'Oh, for anyone I can find who is homeless this night, dear Aunty.'
"And after a while the third asked, kissing her pig, 'And when will you be
using the shroud, Granny?'
"And just then the King rushed in and cried out, 'The black mountain and
the sky over it are all on fire!'
"And when they heard that, the three hags cried out, 'Alas, alas, our father
is gone,' and rushed out of the door, and they were never seen again in that
country by any living man; or if they were, then I have not heard of it."
Dieda fell silent. After a long pause, while the wind wailed loudly around
the building, Miellyn said, "I heard Caillean tell a story very like that, long
ago; did you learn it from her?"
"I did not," said Dieda. "I heard my father tell it once when I was a very
small girl."
"I suppose it is very old," said Miellyn, "and of course he is one of the
greatest bards. But you told it as well as any Druid. You or Caillean could
head the College as well as he."
"Oh, no doubt," Dieda scoffed. "And why not make us judges as well?"
Why not, indeed? Eilan wondered. Caillean would have had an answer to
that, but Caillean was not here.

Thirteen

Once Gaius had reassured Valerius that his kinswoman was safe in Eilan's
care in the Forest House, he made plans to leave again before his father could
begin nagging him again about marriage. Since seeing Eilan, he was even
more determined not to be married off to some Roman girl. Ever since the
death of the Emperor Titus and the accession of Domitian everything had
been unsettled, and Gaius knew that his father was looking about for
alliances.
After a time he went out into the town. The morning had been warm and
muggy, but now great clouds were building in the west, and he felt his hair
ruffled by a cool wind. An old centurion had told him once that in this
country there were two ways to tell the weather: if you could see the hills, it
was about to rain; if not, it was already raining. The man had sighed then,
homesick for the flat blue skies of Italia, but Gaius took a grateful breath of
the damp wind. As the first drop of rain fell, the Romans began to scurry for
shelter. But there was one man who stood still, as he did, turning his face to
the sky.
Without much surprise, Gaius recognized Cynric.
"Join me for a cup of wine?" He gestured towards the wine shop where
they had met before.
Cynric shook his head. "Thank you; I think I had better not. I'd rather that

you could say that you haven't seen me. As a matter of fact it would be much
better for you if you could say that you don't know too much about my
comings and goings. That way I won't have to ask you to lie."
Gaius lifted one eyebrow. "Are you joking?"
"I wish I were. I shouldn't even stand about talking to you like this;
though you can honestly say you encountered me by chance."
"Don't worry," said Gaius, looking around him. A gust of wind sent
raindrops spattering across the road, sending up little puffs of dust as they fell.
"All the good Romans are safe under cover, and won't care about two fools
standing out in the rain! Listen, Cynric, I need to talk to you about Eilan . . ."
Cynric grimaced. "I beg of you, don't speak of that. That was quite the
biggest mistake I've made this year; Lhiannon was furious with me. No real
harm was done, but don't try to see my foster sister again." He looked
nervously around him. "Even if you can afford it, I should not be seen talking
to an officer of the Legions in full uniform. In fact, you'd better pretend you
don't know me if we meet by accident again."
He added, "I won't be offended. Somebody finally figured out that I was
still working for the Ravens, and it occurred to them that serving with the
auxiliaries put me in a prime position to make trouble when the time comes.
So they've proscribed me, and if I'm spotted within twenty miles of the
Roman town, I could be sentenced to the mines - or to something worse - if
there is anything worse. Farewell!" Cynric turned away.
Gaius blinked, realizing suddenly that Cynric no longer wore the insignia
of Rome. .That must be why he was willing to speak so plainly. He was still
trying to think of something to say as his friend slid into a side street and
disappeared, leaving him alone with the rain. Gaius checked the impulse to
follow him. If Cynric were truly an enemy of Rome, even a quick death
would be better than sending him to the Mendip lead mines.
"Don't try to see my foster sister again."
Cynric's words echoed in his head. Was this, then, the end to his hope of
contact with Eilan? No doubt Cynric and his father were right. But as he
pulled the garnet-colored folds of his military cloak over his head and started

down the street, the moisture on his cheeks was not entirely from the rain.
Caillean paused in the doorway of the main hall, wincing as the cackle
smote her ears. After more then two moons alone, she had forgotten how
much noise women could make when they were all cooped up together. For a
moment she wanted to turn and flee back to the solitude of her hut in the
forest.
"So, you're back," commented Dieda, finally noticing her. "I wonder why,
after the way Lhiannon has treated you. Having got free of us, I should think
you would have kept going!"
"And why are you still here?" stung, Caillean replied. "The man you loved
is away in the North with the Eagles after him. Is your place then not by his
side?"
For a moment anger flared in the younger woman's face, to be replaced in
a moment by something closer to despair.
"Don't you think I would have been away in a moment if he had asked
me?" she said bitterly. "But his loyalty is given to the Lady of Ravens, and if I
cannot be first with the man I love I will take the final vows of a priestess and
not have one at all!" Her voice faltered as the other women turned, and
Caillean gazed at her with reluctant pity, grateful that she had never been
tempted to love.
"Caillean —" Eilidh hurried towards her. "I was hoping you would return
today. Lhiannon is in her rooms. Go to her now. She never complains, but I
know that she has missed you."
And well she might, thought Caillean wryly as she crossed the courtyard,
pulling her shawl over her head to keep off the rain, since it was she who sent
me away!
As always after an absence, Caillean was struck by Lhiannon's fragility.
She will not make old bones, she thought now, looking at her. There was no
obvious sign of illness, only an increasing translucence, but an instinct honed
by years as a priestess told her that the older woman was being consumed
from within.

"Mother, I am here," she said softly. "Were you wanting to see me?"
Lhiannon turned, and Caillean saw that her faded eyes were glistening
with tears. "I have been waiting for you," she said softly. "Will you forgive
me for sending you away?"
Caillean shook her head, feeling her own throat tighten, and crossed the
room swiftly to kneel beside the High Priestess's chair.
"What is there to forgive?" she asked brokenly, laying her head on the
older woman's knees. She felt her own tears begin to fall as Lhiannon touched
her hair. "I should never have become a priestess, such a trouble to you I have
been!" Suddenly, by that tender touch on her brow, a barrier that had begun to
crack when she poured out her heart to Eilan so long ago was swept away.
"I never could tell you," she whispered, "at first I did not understand, and
then I was ashamed. I am no pure maiden. In Eriu, before you found me, I
was used by a man —" Her voice choked. There was a silence, and then the
thin fingers began once more to stroke her hair.
"Ah, little one, is that what has troubled you? I thought there was
something, but did not want to ask. You were not even a
woman yet when I took you from Eriu. How could you sin? It is only that
we do not speak of such things, because there are those who would not
understand. We must preserve appearances. That is why I punished you for
helping Eilan. But listen, Caillean, my dear one - whatever befell you before
you came here is of no importance, not to the Goddess, and certainly not to
me, so long as while you dwell in Her House you serve Her faithfully and
well!"
Still weeping, Caillean reached up to clasp the older woman's arms.
Despite occasional exasperation, she realized then that what she felt for
Lhiannon was surely as deep as any love she might have had for a man,
though it was different in kind. And she loved Eilan, whose sympathy had
first enabled her to face these memories. But at least neither of these loves
would ever conflict with her vows as priestess.
There had been moments, during the days of Caillean's exile, when the
raindrops that fell from the eaves of the Forest House had seemed to strike

Eilan's heart. Gaius was gone, and she would not see him again, that much
had been made clear. It was a relief to have those thoughts interrupted when
Caillean summoned her.
"You're back!" she exclaimed as she pushed through the woolen hangings
at the door of Caillean's chamber. "No one told me! How long have you been
here?"
"A day only," said the priestess. "I was with Lhiannon."
Eilan embraced her and stood back to look Caillean up and down. "It's
done you no harm, anyway." She looked brown and healthy, and the little line
that sometimes marred the blue crescent tattooed between her brows had
smoothed away. "Have they quite forgiven you for my crime?"
Caillean smiled. "It is forgotten. And that, child, is why I sent for you.
You have been here for three years now and done well in your studies. The
time has come for you to decide if you wish to become truly one of us and
take your vows."
"Has it been so long?" It was hard to believe that Mairi's daughter was
already a thriving toddler three years old, and her older child nearly five. And
yet at the same time it seemed to Eilan that she had always been here. Her old
life was forgotten, and when she dreamed of Gaius it was always of his arms
around her and his voice murmuring in her ear. She could not imagine living
with him in the Roman world.
"Is Dieda to take her vows now too?" They were all aware of Dieda's
bitterness over what she saw as Cynric's defection, and now that he was
proscribed, who could say when it would be safe for him to return? His
commitment to the training of a warrior and his vengeance still commanded
his first loyalty. Like the loyalty that holds Gains to his father's world, Eilan
thought.
"That is between her and the Goddess," Caillean said sternly. "Now we
are speaking of you. Is it still your wish to persevere among us, little one?"
Dieda will make her vows, and so shall I, Eilan thought. Why not, when
neither of us can ever have the man we love?

"Yes, it is. At least —" she hesitated - "if the Goddess still wants me,
knowing that my love was first given to a man."
"That does not matter," Caillean smiled radiantly. "The Goddess no longer
regards anything that happened to you before you made your vows. I have
finally told Lhiannon what happened to me, and she has assured me that is so.
I owe that blessing to you, my dear, and I am glad to be able to pass it on!"
"There are some who would not see it that way," Eilan said bitterly.
"You must not let them trouble you." Caillean set her hands on Eilan's
shoulders and stared into her eyes, and it seemed to Eilan that the dark eyes of
the priestess were like the sacred pool, in which past and future could be seen.
"Listen, little sister, and I will tell you the truth at the heart of the
Mysteries. All the gods, and all the goddesses too, are one, whether we call
her Arianrhod or Cathubodva or Don. The Light of Truth is One, but we see it
as light reflects through crystals or prisms, in many colors. Each of the ways
in which men and women see their gods - or their goddesses - has a part of
that truth. We who live in the Forest House are privileged to see the Goddess
in many ways, and to call Her by many names, but we know this first and
greatest of all secrets, that the gods, whatever they are called, are all one."
"Then does this mean that the gods of the Romans are the same gods and
goddesses we serve?"
"Indeed — that is why they carve their images with the attributes of both
when they build their votive altars here. But it is true that while we in the
Forest House know the identity of all gods by whatever name we may call
them, we believe that we serve the Goddess in perhaps Her purest form, as the
divinity in all women. And so we pledge ourselves to serve Her as Mother,
Sister and Daughter. This is why we sometimes speak of seeing the Face of
the Goddess in the face of every woman."
For a moment the exaltation in Caillean's words held her, then Eilan felt a
sudden spurt of anger. Why had they all been so angry at her interest in a
Roman if their gods were all the same? Caillean had been present when she
spoke with Gaius and knew how she felt about him. How could she say that
those feelings would no longer matter once she had taken her vows? They
were a part of her, as holy as the ecstasy she had felt sometimes when the

presence of the Goddess filled her like moonlight glimmering on the sacred
pool.
"What will be required of me?"
"You will take a vow to remain forever chaste unless you should be
chosen by the god. And you will pledge that you will not speak foolishly of
temple secrets to the unsworn, and that you will strive always to do the will of
the Goddess and of anyone who shall command you lawfully in any of Her
names."
Caillean paused, watching her and Eilan reflected on how much she loved
her, and had come to love the other women and the life they had there. She
met the priestess's dark gaze. "To all this I will willingly swear . . ."
"And you will demonstrate that you are mistress of the skills we have
taught you, and that the Goddess is willing to accept you? You will
understand that I cannot describe it - indeed they say that for each candidate
the ordeal is different, so even if my oath did not forbid it I could tell you
nothing more."
Eilan suppressed a shiver of anxiety. Living in the House of Maidens she
had heard rumors of candidates who had failed and been sent away, or worse
still, disappeared. "I understand, and I am willing," she said quietly.
"So be it, then," said Caillean, In Her name I now welcome you as a
candidate priestess." She kissed Eilan on the cheek; and Eilan remembered
that one of the younger priestesses had done this when first she came to the
Forest House. For a moment the two kisses blurred; she blinked, dizzied by
the sense that she was repeating a moment she had lived many times before.
"At the full moon before Samaine, then, you shall speak your vows in the
presence of the priestesses. Lhiannon and your grandfather will be greatly
pleased."
Eilan stared at her. She was certainly not doing this for their sake!
Caillean had asked her to choose, but had her decision in fact
been molded by her family's expectations and perhaps other forces dimly
hovering in the shadows beyond perception.

"Caillean —" she whispered, reaching out to the priestess. "If I vow
myself to the Goddess, it will not be because I am the daughter and
granddaughter of Druids, or even because I will never see Gaius again. There
has to be something more."
Caillean looked at her. "When we first met it seemed to me you had a
destiny among us," she said slowly. "I feel it even more strongly now. But I
cannot guarantee that you will be happy, child."
"I do not expect to be —" Eilan caught her breath on a sob. "So long as
there is some reason, some purpose, in it all!"
Caillean sighed and held out her arms, and Eilan leaned against her,
feeling the tightness in her throat ease as the other woman stroked her hair.
"There is always a reason, my dear, though it may be long before we
understand it - that is all the comfort I can offer you. If the Goddess does not
know what She is doing, what meaning is there in the world?"
"It is enough," whispered Eilan, hearing the other woman's heart beating,
steady and slow, beneath her ear. "If I also have your love."
"You do . . ." Caillean's voice was almost too low to be heard. "I love you
as Lhiannon has loved me . . ."
The full moon looked down from the heavens like a watchful eye, as if
Arianrhod had personally decided to observe the ceremonies. As the chanting
of the priestesses who had brought her here faded to silence, an inner chill
pebbled Eilan's arms, though the night was warm. Had she been hoping for
rain? It would have made no difference; if the Druids had allowed the weather
to affect their rituals they would not have had much of a religion. She knew
she should be glad that the skies had chosen to bless her initiation, but the
moonlight made her uneasy.
At least the brightness should make it easier to follow the path, and all the
priestesses had asked was that she walk through the forest back to the temple,
which did not seem a great ordeal. Eager for it to be done, Eilan hurried into
the shadows beneath the trees, away from the moon's implacable gaze.

She had been walking for scarcely the time it takes to spin a yard of thread
when she realized that she was lost.
Controlling her breathing, Eilan turned. This, she supposed, must be the
first test of her training, to see if she could use her inner senses to find her
way. She drew on the steady power of the earth beneath her - that, at least,
had not changed. The energies of moon and stars sang above, and as she
opened herself to become the pillar that linked them, breathing out and in
regular rhythm until she knew herself to be at the center of the universe, the
fear went away.
She opened her eyes once more. The panic was gone, but the moonlight
that filtered through the leaves seemed to be coming from all quarters at once,
and she had no idea in which direction the temple lay. Still, if she chose a
direction and walked in it she should eventually get through the forest. Once,
she had been told, all this island had been covered by trees, but now the land
was dotted with roads and pastures and fields. Surely she could not walk for
long without finding someone who could show her the way.
Humming softly, Eilan made her way forward, and only later realized that
what she had been singing was the song the priestesses chanted at the rising
of the moon.
As she walked, the dappled radiance of the moon transformed the world,
and she understood why it had made her afraid. Each twig was outlined in
silver; the leaves glittered, and light danced and flickered from every stone . .
.but now Eilan realized that she was seeing something more than moonlight.
Every living thing in the forest had its own glow — a radiance that increased
until she could see almost as well as in the light of day. But it was not day, for
this light was shadowless, a diffuse illumination in which the colors of the
forest glowed like muted jewels. With a little shiver she understood that
somehow she had passed the boundary that separates the fields of men from
the Otherworld.
Truly it was as her teachers had told her; the Land of the Living and the
world of men lay like the folds in a cloak, and where they touched, one could
pass easily from one to the other. Or perhaps it was only sometimes that the
worlds came thus closely together - at times like this, when the priestesses
had sung the sacred songs.

The wood she had entered was filled with oak and hazel and thorn like
any other. Now some of the trees she saw were familiar, but others were of no
race she knew. Next to a thriving oak she glimpsed a tree with silver bark and
little flowers of gold. A rowan tree bore white blossoms and red berries at the
same time, though in the human world the flowering time had passed and the
berries were not yet ripening on the bough.
Blossoms filled the air with a heady perfume. Now that she could see her
way she walked with more confidence, her delight almost making her forget
why she had come. Dimly she realized that this seduction of the senses might
be the greatest danger, and tried to remember her goal. A lingering sense of
duty, more than any other emotion, drew her to a halt in a small clearing
where silver birches and rowans rustled in the fragrant breeze like maidens
watching a festival. She closed her eyes.
"Lady, help me! Powers that dwell in this place, I honor you — " she said
softly. "Of your favor, show me where I need to go . . ."
When she looked again, she glimpsed through the trees an avenue edged
with rough stones. She moved along it, walking with the graceful pacing gait
the maidens had been taught to use in the ceremonies. Presently the road
passed between two great uprights carved with spirals and chevrons. Beyond
them Eilan saw a pool whose waters glimmered as if reflecting the light of the
hidden moon.
Hardly daring to breathe, Eilan moved between the great stones, and
looked down into the pool. This at least had been part of her training, for one
of her first skills was to see in the scrying bowl. A sudden wind ruffled the
waters, and as they cleared she realized that the bowl had been like a candle
to the sun beside the power of the pool.
In its depths Eilan saw the sea, glittering emerald and sapphire beneath a
sky like translucent blue glass. As she stared, pool and forest and stones all
disappeared and she floated like a bird on the wing above the waves.
Embraced by those waters was an island girt with cliffs of red sandstone,
crowned by white temples set among groves of dark trees. On the highest hill
stood a temple greater than all the others, whose roof gleamed with gold.
Eilan swooped lower, and saw a white-robed woman pacing along the
parapet, gazing out to sea. There was gold on the woman's neck and wrists,

gold bound her brow, and her hair was like flame, but she had Caillean's eyes.
A young man emerged from the temple and knelt before her, pressing his head
against her belly. As the priestess blessed him, Eilan saw the tattooed dragons
coiling up his arms. And it seemed to her that a voice like falling raindrops
sang "Alas for the land beyond the wave — Alas for the land that none could
save — The knowledge lost that gods once gave . . ."
Even as the singing faded, the scene changed. She had the sense that many
years had passed. Suddenly the center of the island exploded in a great gout of
ruddy flame, and the waters rose like a wall of green glass and swallowed
trees and temples and all. Even as the island fell, a fleet of ships sped away
from it, leaping through the water like frightened gulls. One with a dragon
painted on its sail she followed as it arrowed through the water, faring
northward until silver mists blotted out the sun's radiance, and the sea grew
gray and green as the waters she knew.
Now she saw land once more, white cliffs and high grassy downs. Over
hill and dale she soared, and came to a high, broad plain where long lines of
men toiled with ropes, dragging great blocks of stone. Part of the henge was
in place already and she could envision the rest of it. She had heard the
Giants' Dance described often enough to recognize the great circle of stones.
The man who was directing the work looked like her father, but he deferred to
another who reminded her of Gaius, shorter and dark as a Silure tribesman,
but vibrant with power. The second man gestured towards the henge, and she
saw the dragons that had been tattooed upon his forearms ripple as the
muscles moved.
A wind stroked the high grass of the plain, and when it passed, the scene
had changed once more. Fascinated, Eilan watched as one image followed
another. Coloring and cast of feature changed as each new people came into
the land. But again and again she recognized an expression or gesture that
was familiar — her grandfather's touch on a harp; Lhiannon's regal grace; and
even herself, riding in a chariot like a queen. A tall man rode beside her, and
she knew that it was he whose touch had given her access to her own power.

"All that has been will ever be;

The dragon rises from the sea;
Only the wise are truly free -"
came that clear voice from beyond the world.
The last image was of a hill of knobbed granite where the purple heather
grew. Chill winds swept eastward from the sea, scouring the rolling fields. In
this windswept place real trees grew only along the strait where the island
fronted the grim bulk of the mainland. Even as she realized that she was
seeing Mona, the scene changed, and Eilan saw men of her own race clad in
white, and women in robes of midnight blue, their faces grim as they piled
wood into great pyres.
For a moment she did not understand. Then a shiver of light rippled along
the opposite shore. She blinked, recognizing Roman armor. The people of
Mona saw it too, and suddenly the pyres were blazing. The priestesses danced
forward, their shadows contorting as they screamed their spells. For a time the
Romans hung back and their leaders harangued them, then the first rank went
splashing into the water. The strait frothed as the Legion pushed across it.
They came out dripping, but their swords gleamed red in the firelight. With
grim precision they pursued the Druids, and their swords dripped with a
brighter crimson as they slew all those they found.
For a time then all was silent. The fading firelight gave way to the cold
grey of dawn. Ravens were already busy at the bodies. As Eilan watched, they
rose suddenly upward, screaming, their wings darkening the sky.
"While Eagles gorge, the Dragon sleeps,
When Ravens fly, the Lady weeps,
What hate has sown compassion reaps . . ."
As she heard the song Eilan felt her heart pierced by sorrow, and the
vision blurred as tears filled her eyes.

When she could see again, she was standing beside the pool once more.
But she was no longer alone. Mirrored in the water she saw a figure, and
looking up she realized that it was a man wrapped in a spotted bull's hide with
a headdress framed by hawk's wings and crowned by the antlers of a great
stag. Her eyes widened, for this was a costume the Druids wore only for their
most sacred ceremonies.
"Lord —" she gave him the salutation due his rank, "who are you?" For a
moment he had reminded her of her grandfather, but she realized now that he
was younger, despite the silver in his beard, and in his eyes shone a wisdom
and power she had no more than glimpsed in any mortal man.
This is what Ardanos was meant to be! she thought then, like the great
priestess she had glimpsed sometimes shining through Lhiannon in the rituals.
This was the reality.
He smiled, and it seemed to her that the light brightened around them until
the pool shone. "I have been in many shapes, and had many names. I have
been the Hawk of the Sun, and the White Stallion, the Golden Stag, and the
Black Boar. But here and now I am the Merlin of Britannia."
Eilan swallowed. She had heard something of this in her studies, for the
Merlin was a title that had been borne by the Arch-Druid in previous years.
But the soul to whom it belonged did not take flesh in every generation, and it
was said that only the greatest of the Druids met him in the Otherworld.
She licked her lips. "What do you want of me?"
"Daughter of the Holy Isle, will you serve your people, and your gods?"
"I serve the Lady of Life," answered Eilan steadily. "And I would do Her
will."
"This is an hour of omen, when many paths may meet, but only with your
consent, for the way that opens before you will require that you give
everything, and if you follow it you will find scant understanding or reward."
He moved around the edge of the pool.
"And what do the omens say this hour is propitious for?" Close to, the
reality of his presence was overpowering. Eilan was glad the old tales had

taught her how to reply.
"It is propitious for the making of a priestess in the ancient way," he said
gently. "They have told you that a priestess must be physically a virgin, but it
is not so. A priestess of the Goddess gives herself at her own time and season,
and when the power has passed through her, resumes her sovereignty. She
gives, but is never taken. She is the initiator who sanctifies the Sacred King,
that he may bestow the blessing on his queen, and life may be renewed in the
land."
"And that is what you want of me?" Eilan realized that she was trembling.
"How can I do it? I do not know how!"
"Not you, but the Goddess within you —" Eilan's breath stopped as he
smiled. "And it is my office to awaken Her."
He released the hide, and as its stiff folds fell away she saw that he was
naked, his body the image of the potent god. He smoothed the hair that curled
away from her temples, and it seemed to her she would have fallen without
the support of those strong hands. Then he bent to kiss her upon the brow.
Goddess! her spirit cried, and felt consciousness ignited by a white flame
that surged downward as he kissed her lips, her
breasts, and knelt to bless her womb. In that moment she was aware of her
own essence as she had never been before, and yet at the same time, all
selfhood was subsumed in Another, and whether that Presence was a part of
her or she of it, or Her, Eilan could not say. What she knew beyond question
was that in a sense that surpassed even the comfort of Gaius's arms around
her, she was no longer alone.
Eilan burned and was not consumed, and it seemed to her that the voice
she had heard sang in tones of flame —
"The enemy you would conquer, you must love . . .The law you would
fulfill, you must defy . . .The thing that you would keep, you must now
give . . .
Thus will you have the victory . . .Daughter of Druids, through you the

Dragon will
be reborn."
Her awareness flared with images of blood and splendor, battles and stone
cities and a green tor above an inland sea, fire and sword and finally a fairhaired man with Gaius's eyes who rode to battle with the image of the Lady
on his shield.
"I will!" came her reply. "But do not leave me alone—"
"Daughter, I am always here" came the reply. "Thou art Mine, from age to
age, while Time endures."
She knew that she had heard those words before, that this was only the
renewing of an ancient bond, but the love that lapped her was becoming a sea
in which she drowned, a light in which all awareness was consumed.
Eilan's next conscious thought was of floating in cool water. She sensed
dark trees around her, and moonlight, and in the next moment many hands
had hold of her and were lifting her to the shore. She blinked in amazement as
she realized that she was lying beside the bathing pool in the stream below the
House of Maidens.
Eilan tried to speak and found she could not. She realized then that what
had happened to her was a mystery too deep for telling, even here. And yet
she wondered that they could not see it, for the Divine Heat still blazed within
her so that her skin dried as soon as they helped her rise from the pool. In
silence the other women clad her in a robe of new linen dyed the deep blue
that the consecrated priestesses wore.
"You have journeyed between the worlds; you have seen the light that is
without shadow; you have been purified . . ." said a voice Eilan recognized as
Caillean's. She looked up, but it was the woman she had seen on the parapet
in her vision who seemed to be standing there. "Daughter of the Goddess,
arise, that your sisters may welcome you —"
The priestesses helped her to her feet and fell in behind her as she
followed Caillean along the path that led to the Sacred Grove.

By the light of the torches that flickered among the trees Eilan saw that
Lhiannon was waiting, attended by Eilidh. Beside her stood Dieda, her eyes
as huge and dazzled as Eilan knew her own must be, and her hair clinging to
her brow in damp tendrils. What, Eilan wondered, happened to her? Their
eyes met, and all the barriers that the past years had built between them
vanished; they remembered only that they were sisters now.
I am glad that we will be making our vows together . . .she thought. The
testing was always the same, but each priestess received the vision the gods
willed. Dieda, she supposed, would have found music. She looked at the other
girl, and it seemed to her that the Goddess smiled back at her from Dieda's
eyes.
Eilan looked around her and saw that they were all here — Miellyn and
Eilidh and the others who had taught her for the past three years. But in each
woman's face she saw a reflection of the light of the Otherworld, and in some
of them, something more, a hint of faces she had seen in her visions,
constantly changing and yet always the same.
Why do men fear death when we will live again? Eilan wondered then.
The Druids taught that the soul could take many forms through the circling
years, and she had always thought she believed it, but now she knew that it
was true.
At last she understood Caillean's serenity, and the holiness that despite her
fragility and fallibility, she sensed in Lhiannon. They too had been where she
had gone, and no mortal accidents could change the truth of it.
She heard the words of the ceremony as if in a dream, and made her vows
without hesitation, for the most important promise, the one that included and
commanded all others, had already been made to the Goddess in the
Otherworld. With the blood still singing in her veins, and the light of the Lady
in her eyes, she scarcely felt the prick of the thorn as the blue crescent that
proclaimed her priestess was drawn between her brows.

Fourteen

It was the tradition in the Forest House that after the priestesses took their
vows they should undergo a period of seclusion. Eilan was grateful. During
the days that followed her initiation she lay as exhausted as Lhiannon after
giving an Oracle, and even when she recovered physically, she found her
attention focused inward as she tried to understand what had occurred.
Sometimes the Druid's words to her seemed impossible — a demented
dream born of her frustrated love for Gaius. But when the priestesses gathered
in the frosty darkness to salute the winter moon, Eilan would find her spirit
lifted as the women's voices soared. At such times, when the moonlight filled
her like a silver flame, she knew that what she had experienced was no dream.
Sometimes she found Caillean watching her rather curiously, but not even
when the older priestess taught them the secrets of the Wise Ones who had
come over the sea — the lore that only the sworn priestesses were allowed to
learn — did Eilan feel free to speak of the Merlin and the destiny she believed
he had offered her. For gradually she had realized that whatever ecstasies the
other priestesses experienced in their initiations, this mystery had been for her
alone. And so the dark days of winter passed and lengthened into spring, and
the mark of the Goddess healed upon Eilan's brow.
Gaius lounged on the bench in his father's office at Deva, breathing deeply
of the breeze that came through the open window and wondering how soon he
could get away. For a year he had been attached to his father's staff, and he
was tired of fortress walls. Spring was overwhelming the fields and
woodlands. He could smell apple blossom on that breeze, and it made him
think of Eilan.

"Most of the men will be taking leave for the Floralia, but I don't want too
many of my officers away at one time." His father's voice seemed to come
from far away. "When you're up for leave where will you go?"
"I hadn't thought about it," Gaius blurted out. Some of the officers used
their free time to go hunting, but killing things for sport no longer particularly
interested him. Really, there was nowhere he wanted to be.
"You might go and see the Procurator," his father suggested. "You haven't
met his daughter yet."
"And if the gods are kind to me I never will," Gaius returned abruptly to
the present and sat up. His father looked pained.
"Now, how could it possibly hurt you," Macellius inquired, obviously
holding on to his temper, "just to see the girl? I think she's already fifteen
years old."
"Father, I know she's marriageable. How stupid do you think I am,
anyway?"
His father only smiled. "I haven't said a word about marrying her."
"You don't have to," Gaius said sullenly. If he could not have Eilan, he
was damned if he would marry any woman in Britain -let alone one his father
suggested.
"You don't have to be rude," his father said. "As a matter of fact, I was
thinking of spending the holidays in Londinium, and -"
"Well, I wasn't," Gaius said, no longer caring what his father thought of
his manners. He did not know where he would go but it would be as far away
from Londinium as he could possibly get.
"I hope you're not thinking of that British girl again," Macellius
commented, almost, Gaius thought, as if his father were reading his mind. If
only he had left it at that. But Macellius went on to say, "I'm sure you've had
the sense to put her out of your mind for good and all."

And that decided him. "As a matter of fact," he said deliberately, "I was
thinking of going to see Clotinus." It had been after staying with the British
lord, after all, that he had first met Eilan, and he could at least enjoy the
memories.
Gaius enjoyed the trip southward, thinking of Eilan, and of Cynric who
might have been his friend and was lost to him, through no fault of their own.
Spring was advancing like a conquering army, and the weather was beautiful;
mornings clear and cold, making him glad to be warmly clad, and days warm,
bright and almost dry except for a sprinkle of soft rain late in the day.
Clotinus greeted him gladly and welcomed him, and although Gaius knew
it was mostly that Clotinus wished to keep on the best of terms with the
powerful Romans, he enjoyed it anyway. Gwenna had gone away to be
married, so there was no one to trouble him.
The household of Clotinus, he realized, was not at all a bad place to spend
a vacation. The food was good, and even Clotinus's remaining daughter, only
twelve or so, was good company, and sympathetic enough when he told her
that his father had tried to arrange a marriage for him with an unknown. She
might well have been offering to console him on some subtle level but Gaius
remembered - not before time, he thought - what his father had said about
entangling himself with native women. If the girl was sending him any
wordless signals, he pretended not to notice them.
But except for prayers dimly directed at Venus, he could think of no way
to approach Eilan. In sleep he ground himself against his blankets, moaning,
and waking, knew that it was of Eilan that he had dreamed.
I love her, he thought in self-pity, when the hopelessness of his situation
overwhelmed him. It isn't as if I meant to seduce and abandon the girl. I'd be
happy to marry her if I could get the permission of all the people who seem to
have made it their business to control our lives. After all, he was twentythree, and an officer — though a very minor one - in his Legion. If that did
not make him old enough to marry at his own will, how old would he have to
be?
One day when he was riding out under the excuse of hunting, he found
himself traveling past the burned-out walls that once had been the house of
Bendeigid, and he realized he must be somewhere in the vicinity of the Forest

House. His leg ached a bit as he remembered the boar pit — it seemed to him
very long ago - and the first time he had ever laid eyes on Eilan.
I cannot stay here . . . he thought suddenly. Every tree and stone will bring
back painful memories. He had thought he could bear it. Certainly seeing old
Ardanos from time to time in Deva had not troubled his peace. Perhaps he
should ride south to visit his mother's people. It would not please Macellius,
but he did not much care to please his father just now.
That night before the fire he spoke of it to Clotinus, who urged him to
remain another day or two.
"There will be too many folk on the road till the festival," Clotinus
pointed out. "You should stay until that is past at least and then you can travel
in comfort."
"People won't bother me, but perhaps I should not travel in full uniform,"
said Gaius. "I will make better time and attract less attention if I wear the
common dress of a Briton."
"That's true," Clotinus grinned sourly. "You are, in a sense, one of us. I
daresay I can come up with something that will serve."
The next morning his steward produced clothing which fitted Gaius well
enough: tan breeches and a tunic dyed green, in new cloth, clean and decent
but not particularly luxurious, and with them a voluminous dark brown cloak
of heavy wool. "The nights are still chilly, lad," Clotinus said. "You will need
this when darkness falls."
When Gaius put it on his Roman identity seemed to fall away.
"You are no longer Gaius Macellius Severus in this garb." The old man
eyed him oddly. Gaius grinned. "As I think I told you, my mother called me
Gawen while she lived; now I look nothing else and I should use only that
name."
Clotinus was quick to exclaim how well the clothing became him, yet
somehow Gaius knew the man regretted the disappearance of his importantlooking Roman guest.

"If I attend the festival, I will be just another Briton," Gaius went on.
"Maybe I should have you send a message to Macellius that I am traveling in
disguise!" He suspected his father would not be pleased, and the excuse of
gathering information might justify this escapade.
When Eilan woke on Beltane morning she had the oddest feeling that
Gaius was somewhere near. Perhaps, she thought, he is thinking of me. It was
Beltane, after all, and all their most significant meetings had been at that
festival. It was natural, in any case, that her thoughts should turn to him on
this day when, throughout the land, the hearts of men and maidens were
turning to love.
Here in the chaste sanctuary of the House of Maidens she should not be
thinking of such things, or if she did, she should view them with the detached
benevolence of one who existed far beyond such fleshly cravings. During the
winter that had been easy. It seemed to her that the passion with which the
Druid of her vision had touched her had been refined to a radiance as pure as
an altar flame, and her vows of chastity no great sacrifice.
But now, when the sap was rising in the trees and every bud was bursting
into flower, she was beginning to wonder. When she thought about her vision,
her body flamed, and at night she dreamed about lying with a lover who was
sometimes the Druid and sometimes Gaius, and sometimes a stranger with the
eyes of a king. My body is still untouched, she thought suddenly, but my spirit
is virgin no longer. Goddess, how will I bear this sweet pain?
"Eilan, are you helping Lhiannon prepare for this evening's ritual?"
Miellyn's voice brought her back to the world and she shook her head. "Then
why not come out with the rest of us this morning and enjoy the festival? It
will do you good to get some fresh air."
"The rest of us" turned out to include Senara, who was entirely delighted
to be out of doors. It was a crisp bright day, and in the hedges the hawthorn
glowed as if the light of the sun had settled on the boughs. The people were
jammed together in a way that made Eilan, used to the peace and quiet after
her months of seclusion, tremble. How quickly she had grown accustomed to
silence and peace, or perhaps her initiation had altered her. She had always
been a little uncomfortable in crowds, but she felt now as if she were walking
about without her skin.

But Senara was in high spirits as she walked between them. She was
fascinated by everything: a stall of round cheeses; a table where a seller of
glass bangles had spread his glittering wares; and everywhere, the flowers.
Eilan had not seen so many people since last Beltane when she had met
Gaius again. It seemed to her that everyone in Britain or the islands must be
here, jostling, laughing, eating, drinking; and every craft from the making of
cakes to rope-dancing.
"Will Lhiannon be here during the day?" Senara asked.
Miellyn nodded. "Ardanos will escort her. It is a part of her duty to show
herself to the crowds at festivals." Miellyn paused, and added "And not the
happier part. Between ourselves, I think she is very tired. Every year now, I
wonder if it will be her last festival."
Seeing Eilan's face grow pale, she added, "Does it frighten you? Death is
as much a part of life as birth; as a priestess you should know that."
But the crowds were so thick she could hardly hear what Miellyn was
saying. A group of people were watching a man with a dancing bear; Senara
cried out that she wanted to see, and they pressed forward for a better view.
As people glimpsed the blue linen dresses of priestesses from the Forest
House they parted before them till they stood at the ringside, watching the
animal dance - or, at least, lumber heavily in a circle on its hind legs, which
she supposed was as near as such a beast could come to dancing. The bear's
muzzle was tightly wrapped with rope; she thought it looked miserable.
"Poor thing," she said, and Miellyn sighed.
"Sometimes it comes to me that Lhiannon is like that bear," the other
priestess replied. "Always on display, never speaking her own words." Eilan
gasped at the thought of comparing the High Priestess to a trained animal.
"And who leads her?" Senara giggled. "Miellyn, you should not say such
things."
"Why not? Speaking the truth is usually considered to be a virtue,"
Miellyn said stoutly, and Eilan was reminded of Caillean. Her grandfather's
treatment of the High Priestess seemed very different from the sovereignty

that the Druid of her vision had proclaimed.
"I speak the truth as I see it; and when I see Lhiannon growing so feeble, I
wonder —"
Miellyn did not finish her sentence, for at that moment the bear dropped
to all fours and lumbered directly toward them. Senara shrieked and jumped
away, but the crowd pressed in on every side. Eilan pulled back, stepping on a
strange woman's dress, and hearing it rip.
"Watch where you are stepping!" the stranger said peevishly. Eilan
apologized, trying to make herself smaller, and at that moment the bear
surged forward again, his leading rope coming loose as someone cried out in
alarm. The whole crowd pressed backward and when Eilan recovered her
balance Miellyn and Senara had disappeared in the crushing crowd.
It was the first time in years that Eilan had been alone. She had grown
accustomed to the constant chaperonage of the Forest House. Now it occurred
to her that the supervision had another purpose than propriety; the presence of
her sisters had helped to keep people away both physically and psychically.
Alone, the tumult of alien thoughts and emotions buffeted her like a strong
wind. She tried to draw strength from the earth for protection, but the strange
faces surrounding her filled her with confusion. How did Lhiannon stand
walking among the people when she was already half-tranced and opened to
the power of the gods? So hemmed in by the crowd and the press of strangers
was she that she could see nothing familiar; not even the avenue of trees that
led towards the Forest House, nor the mound from which they gave the
Oracles.
Once she glimpsed through the crowd what looked like a familiar blue
gown; but when she neared it, it was the cloak of a complete stranger.
Another time she thought she spotted a group of priestesses; but there were
four of them, and by the time it occurred to her that her companions could
have met with some others from the Forest House and that they could all be
looking for her they had disappeared in the press of strangers again. The
temporary landscape of the fair seemed as strange to her as the Otherworld.
This is ridiculous — shielding myself from other people's emotions was the
first thing they taught us! I should simply ask someone, she kept telling
herself, but vulnerable as she was, she dared not speak to a stranger; for what
would they think of a priestess who could not find the way back to her own

dwelling place?
She moved through the crowds, trying to hold reasonless terror at bay. If
she could just restore her defenses, she would ask someone in which direction
the Forest House lay. Some day, no doubt, she would look back on this day
with amusement, as an adventure. Only at the moment there could be no
doubt that she was both lost and terrified.
A sudden movement of the crowd swept her almost off her feet; she lost
her balance and collided with a man in a dark cloak. He murmured something,
then started. "Eilan! Is it really you?" Strong hands seized her elbows and a
familiar voice demanded, "Where did you come from?"
And Eilan looked up into the one face which of all the faces in the world
she had least expected to see; the face of Gaius Macellius.
Wordless, she clung to him. He felt her trembling and pulled her closer.
Abruptly the confusion around her was stilled by the circle of his arms.
"Eilan -" he repeated. "I did not dare dream I would find you here!"
But I did, thought Eilan dimly. When I woke this morning my first thought
was that you were near; why did I not trust it?
His arms tightened around her; and in that moment she forgot all of
Caillean's words of warning, all her own misgivings and fears. She knew only
that she was happy.
She laughed a little shakily. "I'm afraid I lost myself; I was trying to return
to the Forest House, or at least to the other priestesses who came to the
festival, but I was not sure which way to go."
"The road is over there," he began, and then at her involuntary movement,
broke out, "Must you really go back at once? I came to this - this part of the
world, only in the hope of seeing you —"
She could hear, as clearly as if he had spoken, I cannot bear to let her go
now!
"If you go we may never meet again," he burst out, his voice shaking as

he spoke. "I think I could not bear it, to lose you again. Eilan . . ." His lips
hesitated on the sound of her name like a caress; she felt it like a wash of cool
fire across her skin. "You cannot leave me . . ." he murmured into her veil. "It
is Fate that has brought you here, alone . . ."
Not precisely alone! she thought, smiling at the surging crowds around
them. But it was true; only Fate, or the Goddess, could have brought her here,
to his arms. Deliberately she set aside the training that had required a sworn
priestess in the company of a man who was neither father, grandsire of
brother to keep her eyes modestly cast down, and looked at him.
And what had she thought she would see? What could her eyes tell her,
she wondered, seeing how strongly his hair still curled off his forehead, the
stubborn jut of the jaw beneath the short beard he had grown on his last
campaign, and the naked need in his dark eyes, that her heart did not already
know? The inner and outer vision came abruptly together, and she saw at once
the pinched face of the boy she had nursed four years ago, the strong features
of the man he was becoming, and something else, a face battered by
experience and discontent, its young promise being eroded by the years.
My poor love - she thought, is that what you will be?
"Must you really go?" he repeated, and she murmured "No."
Gaius swallowed, and lifted her veil back from her forehead. She felt him
stiffen then, and realized that he had noticed for the first time the blue
crescent drawn between her brows.
"I am a priestess," she said quietly and felt him flinch in understanding.
But he did not let her go, and she did not pull away.
The very thought that she might not see him again was beginning to take
the light from the sky. No doubt Caillean would have told her to leave him at
once; but for once she would not do what the older priestess thought wiser,
but what she wanted to do. And whatever came of it, this time, at least,
Caillean could not be punished for it.
Two drovers blundered into them and backed away, eyeing them oddly as
they caught sight of Eilan's blue robes. Gaius frowned and wrapped his brown
cloak around her, pulling her veil back up to hide her bright hair.

"Let's get you out of this crowd, anyway," he muttered. His arm was still
around her, strong and steadying, and as they walked on, neither knew quite
where they were going, only that they were together, and it was away from
the crowds.
"Tell me how came you here? I had no notion that you were in this part of
the world."
"I think I came to see you," he began, and Eilan leaned against him,
listening.
"It was Fate, or perhaps my father. At least I was heading the opposite
way to where he wanted me to go! Is little Valeria well?"
"Senara - so we call her in the House of Maidens. Indeed, she is perfectly
well and happy."
"I am glad to hear it," he answered, but she could tell that already Senara
was forgotten. "Cynric is proscribed, did you know?" Gaius said then., "I met
him before he left, and he told me to stay away from you . . ."
His voice faltered. What did he want to hear from her? wondered Eilan.
Maybe only the sound of her voice, to know she was thinking of him.
Couldn't he tell? She was aware of him with every sense in her body, every
inch of her skin.
"Maybe he's right. My father has taken it into his head that I should marry
some Roman girl, the Procurator's daughter in Londinium —"
"Will you obey him?" Eilan asked carefully, her blood pounding.
Marriage! Why had he told her? She knew it changed nothing, but why
should the thought give her such pain?
Somehow they had reached the edge of the fairgrounds. Another step
would hide them in the shelter of the hazel trees. Last night, men and girls had
wandered these woods to gather greenery and flowers and to lie with each
other on the new grass. The forest still remembered; Eilan could feel the
memory of their passion like an echo around her, conflicting with the tumult
of the fair.

He turned to face her. "You know I will never marry anyone but you!"
"I cannot marry," she answered him. "My life is sworn to the gods. . ."
"Then I will never marry anyone," he said firmly.
But you will . . .Even as the irrational burst of happiness surged through
her, foreknowledge tolled in Eilan's awareness. An image flickered in her
mind of the woman who would be his wife. And why should Eilan resent her?
Was she so selfish that she would
wish Gaius to be alone for ever? Or had she wanted him to carry her
away, to move heaven and earth to have her released from her vows? What
words of men could erase the crescent set between her brows?
She stumbled over a tree root, and Gaius reached out to steady her.
Blinking, she realized that they had entered the forest. The noise of the
crowds was suddenly faint with distance, as if they had traveled miles away,
as if they had stepped into the Otherworld. Great trees hid them in a leafdappled shadow. The sun had gone behind a cloud and a chill wind was
beginning to blow. Was it going to rain? As if in answer, a few drops blew
down on them, the beginnings of rain or perhaps moisture from the upper
leaves.
"Eilan . . ." he whispered, and his grip tightened. "Please — Eilan!"
Turning, she felt the force of his need for her, and the world seemed to
stop. From the moment the crowd had swept her away from Miellyn until
now, thought Eilan, she had wandered in a dream. But she was awake now,
and she could see both past and future with a terrible clarity. Perhaps Fate had
brought them here, but what she decided at this moment would determine his
future and her own — and perhaps other lives as well. Awareness pulsed
outward, embracing other times in an ever-widening circle until she saw once
more the bright-haired warrior who had been in her vision, with the Dragons
on his wrists and the eagle-look she had learned to love in Gaius in his eyes.
Now it was he who was trembling. With clumsy fingers Gaius put back
her veil and his hand, falling, brushed her cheek, for a moment clung there,
and then, as if an irresistible force had drawn it downward, slipped along the

softness of her neck and came to rest upon the swell of her breast beneath the
opening of her gown. The turf stretched soft and green before them. She
heard, like an echo, "The Goddess is not worshiped in a temple made by
human hands . . ."
But it was forbidden - not six months ago she had sworn to give her
virginity only to the Sacred King. And like an answer, the certainty came to
her. From this man of two bloods shall spring the King who is to be . . .For
this, the Merlin had initiated her. This was her destiny.
When they first met, she must have seemed to Gaius a child, but she knew
herself immeasurably older now. Like an echo, the voice of the Merlin came
to her: "A priestess of the Goddess gives herself at her own time and season,
and when the power has passed through her resumes her sovereignty."
"By the rites of men we cannot be married," she said softly. "Are you
willing to take me as your wife in the old way, as the priestesses mated with
the men of the royal kindred, before the gods?"
He groaned as his hand curved around her breast, and she felt her nipple
hardening against his palm. "Till death and after, by Mithras and the Mother,"
he muttered. "Eilan, oh, Eilan!"
When the Merlin touched her, the fire had flared from the crown of her
head to her heels; but this flame seemed to rise upward from the earth,
burning all other thoughts away.
She touched his face and he reached for her. A clumsy hand tangled in her
hair and her veil fell unheeded to the ground. Then his lips claimed hers, no
longer gentle but demanding, like a starving man. For a moment surprise held
her still in his grasp; then she became aware of an answering hunger, and her
lips opened, welcoming him.
As they kissed her arms went around his neck; her hair, released from its
careful coils, tumbled down her back as hairpins scattered across the grass.
Gaius groaned and pulled her against him. Now she could feel the hard
strength of his body, and his need. His hands moved from her shoulders down
her back, molding her body to his.
Eilan felt the strength going out of her knees. She clung to him, and her

weight drew them both downward to the green grass. His lips moved to her
cheek, her eyelids, and the soft skin of her neck as if he would devour her,
and she arched against him, trembling. Her skirts had ridden upwards as they
fell; his exploring hand moved down her body, paused a moment as he
touched soft skin, and then brushed upward again beneath the cloth until it
came to rest in the sacred place between her thighs.
Gaius grew suddenly still, breathing hard. Then he pulled away, his eyes
wide and dazed, as if they had looked into too much light.
"Lady," he whispered. She could see the tremors shaking him, but
somehow he was finding the control to act deliberately, dealing with their
clothing, worshiping her body with an authority that grew until the light filled
him also and she realized that he was not entirely Gaius any more.
"My King!" she whispered as the flame he had kindled seared along every
nerve. "Come to me!"
He sighed then, sinking into her embrace as the sun into the sea, yielding
to her even as she gave herself to him. In the distance she could hear shouting,
as if it came from another world, and knew that the priests had lit the Beltane
fires.
But a greater fire was blazing within her, and by that time, even if
Caillean and all the women in the Forest House had been standing in a row
watching them, Eilan would neither have known nor cared.
The day was far advanced and the sun was setting when Gaius finally
stirred. Eilan drew reluctantly away from him; he reached for her once more
and kissed her hard.
"I must return to the Forest House," she said very gently. "They will be
looking for me." Indeed, Miellyn would be beside herself with worry. But if
Eilan could manage somehow to get back into the enclosure unseen, they
might believe that the crowds had kept them apart and she had somehow
found her way back alone.
Even now, when passion had ebbed and she could think clearly once
more, Eilan did not regret breaking her vows; the Goddess had known and
had not intervened, proof enough that she had served a higher law. Part of the

secret doctrine that Caillean had revealed in the months since Eilan's initiation
was that before the coming of the Romans, the priestesses had taken lovers as
they chose, or even married. It was only since the coming of the Romans that
men had had the arrogance to control the private lives of their women.
Caillean had never met the man who would tempt her to break her vows, but
perhaps she would understand. On the other hand, Caillean would not agree
with Eilan's choice of a lover, so perhaps she had better not tell the older
priestess after all.
"Eilan, don't go back." Gaius raised himself on one elbow to look down at
her. "I am afraid for you."
"I am the Arch-Druid's granddaughter; what do you suppose they would
do to me?" she replied.
Her father had once said he would kill her with his own hands if she
allowed what Gaius had just done, but this was not the moment to mention
that. She was a woman now, and a priestess sworn, accountable only to her
sisters and the gods.
"If I were there to protect you, it wouldn't matter what they tried," he said
darkly.
"And would I be so safe if we ran away? Where could we go? The wild
tribes of the North might accept me, but you would be in danger, and where
else could we run beyond the reach of Rome? You are a soldier, Gaius, as
bound by oaths as I. I broke one vow to fulfill a greater one, but that does not
release me. I still belong to the Goddess, and must trust her to take care of me
. . ."
"That's more than I can do —" he said then, rubbing his eyes.
"Nonsense. If you go back on active service you will certainly be in
greater danger than I." Eilan clung to him once more at the thought of cold
iron piercing the heart that now beat against her own, and as he kissed her
again, all thoughts of the future were forgotten. For a little while.

Fifteen

Lying with a man had not, despite the whispered speculations Eilan
remembered from the House of Maidens, destroyed her magic. At least the
shielding spell she murmured as she eased through the kitchen gate and along
the path to the Hall of the Priestesses appeared to prevent the few people who
were about from noticing her as she passed.
In her own room she slid out of her gown and washed herself, hiding her
stained shift until she should have time to soak the smear of maiden blood
away. That done, she put on her night-garment and built up the fire, realizing
that she was half frozen with cold, and famished. It was past the hour of the
sunset meal. She ought to go to the kitchens and find herself something to eat;
but she needed time to think about what had happened to her and Gaius. Or
perhaps, she thought with unaccustomed self-mockery, she simply wished to
close her eyes and relive their lovemaking again.
She might have expected that Gaius would be eager, but not that he would
be so tender, holding back until he quivered like a drawn bow lest he go too
fast and hurt her. But virgin though her body might be, the pleasure that
pulsed through her had more than matched his. And in the final moments,
when the ecstasy became almost too great for mortal endurance, it had
seemed to her that once more it was the Goddess who encompassed her and
received the gift of the God.
She sighed, noting the unaccustomed soreness and the sweet lassitude that
weighted her limbs. Will the Goddess strike me dead for breaking my oath,
she wondered, or will my punishment be to weep in the night, remembering
what I will never have again? Isn't that better than never having known it at

all? She pitied Caillean, scarred since childhood from her only experience of
what men call love.
As day followed day, a certain equilibrium began to assert itself. Eilan
attended Lhiannon at the rite of the full moon, and no lightning struck. The
advanced training that followed initiation continued, both in skills and in lore,
and as the days grew longer, they met with the older priestesses when weather
permitted in one of the gardens or in the holy grove.
There were thirteen sacred oak trees, twelve in a circle, and the oldest, in
the center, shading the stone altar. To Eilan, looking up at them, it seemed that
even in the drowsy warmth of afternoon the trees still held something of the
magic with which the moon had vested them a few nights before. Caillean's
voice receded to a background murmur as Eilan gazed upward. Surely the
light that glowed in their leaves was more than sunshine. All her senses
seemed heightened since Beltane.
The voice of the priestess came into focus again. "In the old days there
was a sisterhood of nine high priestesses, one for each region of this land.
They stood behind the queen of each tribe, advising and supporting her."
Eilan sat back against the sturdy trunk of the oak tree, linking into its
steady strength, and tried to keep her eyes open.
"They were not queens themselves?" Dieda asked.
"Their role was a less public one, though they were often of the royal line.
But they were the initiators of kings, for when a king came to his hallowing, it
was the priestess who became the channel by which the Goddess accepted his
service, conferring a power that he in turn passed on to his queen."
"They were not virgins," Miellyn said sourly, and Eilan found herself
suddenly wide awake, remembering the Merlin's words. Had she been the
Goddess for Gaius? What then was his destiny?
"The priestesses lay with men when the service of the Lady required it,"
responded Caillean in a neutral tone. "But they did not marry, and they bore
children only when it was the only way to preserve a royal line. They
remained free."

"In the Forest House we do not marry, but I would not call us free," Dieda
observed, frowning. "Even though the Priestess of the Oracle chooses her
successor, the Council of Druids must approve her choice."
"Why did things change?" Eilan asked, need adding intensity to her tone.
"Was it because of Mona?"
"The Druids say that our present seclusion is for our own, protection,"
Caillean answered with the same careful neutrality.
"They say that only if we remain pure as Vestals will we be respected by
Rome."
Eilan stared at her. Then what I did with Gains was not flouting the Law of
the Lady, but only the Druids' rules!
"But will we always have to live like this?" Miellyn asked wistfully. "Is
there no place where we can speak the truth and serve the Goddess without
interference from men?"
Caillean's eyes closed. For a moment it seemed to Eilan that the very trees
stilled, waiting to hear what the priestess would say.
"Only in a place outside time . . ." Caillean whispered. "Protected by a
mist of magic from the world." And for a moment then Eilan seemed to see
what the older woman was seeing - mist drifting like a veil across the silver
waters, and white swans singing as they took the air.
Then Caillean started and opened her eyes, staring in confusion around
her, and through the trees they heard the gong summoning them to the
evening meal.
For a time Eilan's anxieties were eased, but as the days lengthened
towards Midsummer, she began to guess why the Goddess had not stricken
her at once. At first, when the usual time came to seclude herself for
purification according to the customs of the Forest House and there was no
bloodsign, she was unconcerned; she had never been regular. But when the
second month had come and gone, she became certain that the fertile magic of
Beltane had worked on her only too well.

Her first, instinctive joy soon yielded to terror. What would Bendeigid
say? Or do? She wept then, wishing that she could go back in time and seek
the comfort of her mother's arms. Then, as the days went by, she wondered if
instead of pregnancy some serious illness had seized upon her as punishment
for her sacrilege.
All her life she had been healthy and strong, but now she grew sick
whenever she tried to eat or drink; shudders racked her every day and she had
no appetite for her food. She longed for harvest and thought wistfully of its
fruits, as if they would not make her so sick. About all she could swallow
without retching was the thinnest and sourest of buttermilk. Surely her sister
Mairi's pregnancies had not tormented her this way, so this could hardly be an
early symptom. Even the waters of the Sacred Well, when the priestesses
gathered on the longest day to drink of them and see the future, racked her
with icy shudders.
From time to time she sensed Caillean watching her, but the older woman
was sick too; Eilan, who was perhaps closer to her than any other, did not
know what ailed her. When asked, Caillean said that her moon cycle was
troubled, but the older woman's ill-health only filled Eilan with greater fear.
Surely Caillean could not be pregnant! Eilan wondered sometimes if her sin
had cursed the whole Forest House, if her illness would spread first to
Caillean, and presently kill them all. She dared not ask.
Caillean plucked a few thyme leaves from the bed Lads had growing in
the inner court and rubbed them between her fingers, breathing deeply as the
sweet scent hung in the moist morning air. Thyme was good for headaches,
and perhaps it would clear hers. Today, at least, her womb had ceased the
painful intermittent bleeding that had plagued her all summer, and perhaps
this contact with the earth could ease the nagging sense of dread that had
haunted her as well.
From the privies on the other side of the wall she could hear someone
retching. She waited, wondering who had been awakened at such an early
hour. Presently she glimpsed a figure in a white shift slipping through the
archway as if she feared to be seen. For the first time in weeks Caillean's
inner senses awakened and she knew who it must be, and with a sudden
certainty, what was wrong with her.
"Eilan, come here!" It was the priestess-voice of command, and the girl

was too well trained not to obey. With lagging footsteps, Eilan returned, and
Caillean noted the pinched cheeks and the new fullness in the girl's breasts.
Her own troubles must have been more distracting than she realized, she
thought bitterly.
"How long have you been this way? Since Beltane?" she asked. Eilan
stared at her, her face contorting. "My poor child!" Caillean held out her arms
and suddenly Eilan was clinging to her and sobbing.
"Oh, Caillean, Caillean! I thought I was ill . . . I thought I was going to
die!"
Caillean stroked her hair. "Have you had your courses during this time?"
Eilan shook her head. "Then it is life, not death, you are carrying," she said,
and felt the betraying release of tension in the thin body beneath her hands.
Her own eyes filled with tears. This was a dreadful thing, certainly, and
yet she could not help feeling a desperate envy, remembering how her own
body was betraying her now and not knowing if what had come to her was
only the end of the fertility she had never used or the end of her life indeed.
"Who has done this to you, my darling?" she murmured into the girl's soft
hair. "No wonder you have been so quiet. Why didn't you tell me? You cannot
have thought I would not understand!"
Eilan looked up with red-rimmed eyes, and Caillean remembered that this
girl did not lie. "It was not rape -"
Caillean sighed. "Then I suppose it was that Roman boy." It was not a
question and Eilan nodded mutely. Caillean sighed again and looked off into
space. "Poor child," she said at last. "If I had known at once, something might
have been contrived, but you are three months along. We will have to tell
Lhiannon, you know."
"What will she do to me?" Eilan quavered.
"I don't know," Caillean said. "Nothing very much, I imagine." There was
an ancient law that demanded death for a priestess who broke her vows, but
surely they would never apply that to Eilan. "Probably you will only be sent
away - you were prepared for that, I suppose. But I am sure that is the worst,"

she added.
And if they try to punish her more harshly, thought Caillean with a spurt
of her old energy, they will have to reckon with me!
"You wretch, you dirty little animal!" cried Lhiannon. A sudden purple
suffused the High Priestess's cheeks and Eilan recoiled. "Who did this to
you?"
Eilan shook her head, her eyes burning.
"You did this on purpose - you did not scream? Traitor! Did you mean to
shame us all, or did you simply not think? Rutting like an animal in heat, after
all our care for you —" Lhiannon sucked in breath, gasping horribly.
Caillean had suspected there would be a scene when the High Priestess
was told, but it was worse than she expected. Lhiannon's health and temper
had become increasingly precarious, and Caillean could see this was one of
her bad days. But by then it was too late. Suddenly she slapped the girl,
shouting, "Do you think this was a holy passion? You are no better than a
whore!
"Lhiannon —" Caillean got an arm around the old woman's shoulders and
felt some of the tension ease. "This is not good for you. Calm yourself,
Mother; let me get you some tea." She passed her hand across the older
woman's brow and Lhiannon sagged in her arms. One-handed, Caillean
poured tea from the flask into a beaker and held it to Lhiannon's lips. A minty
fragrance spread through the room. The High Priestess drank, then let out her
breath in a long, shuddering sigh.
Eilan still stood numb and tearless before her. It had taken all her strength
to come here. What happened next was in the lap of the gods, and at this
moment, still appalled by Lhiannon's fury, she obviously found it hard to care.
When Lhiannon roused, she seemed to have forgotten her fury.
"Sit down!" she said querulously. "It hurts my neck to look up at you."
Caillean pointed to a three-legged stool, and Eilan, still hot-eyed and
resentful, complied.

"Very well," Lhiannon said in something closer to her normal tone. "Now
what's to be done? I'm sorry I slapped you, but this upsets plans . . ." She
stopped, frowning. "Well, we must manage something. I suppose we had
better tell Ardanos."
"For the life of me I cannot see what he has to do with it," said Caillean.
Unless, she thought, it is his plans that have been upset by Eilan's disgrace!
"It's not as if she were the first to kindle from the Beltane fires, nor will she be
the last, I am sure. It would be easier if Eilan were any other man's daughter.
But Ardanos and Bendeigid will just have to live with it! Surely the fate of a
priestess of Vernemeton is our own affair. Do you mean to say we cannot find
the right thing to do?"
"I did not say that," Lhiannon answered fretfully, "but Ardanos should be
told."
"Why? What law requires it except the Roman law which makes women
no more than chattels of their menfolk?" Caillean grew angry. "Do you really
have such respect for his wisdom?"
Lhiannon passed her hand over her eyes. "Why must your voice be so
sharp, Caillean? You will give me a headache. You must know by now that it
is not a question of wisdom but of power. By the treaty that protects this
place, everything to do with the Forest House is in his charge."
"Yes, more's the pity," said Caillean bitterly. "Tell me, who appointed him
to be the god?"
Lhiannon rubbed her left arm as if it pained her. "In any case he is one of
Eilan's few surviving kinsmen, and it is only right to tell him," she said
tiredly.
Caillean felt an unwilling pang of pity. Obviously Lhiannon was only too
eager to unload the problem on to someone else's shoulders. In view of her
poor health, perhaps this was not altogether surprising.
Eilan was still silent, as if this confession had taken all her strength. Her
gaze was turned inward, as if what they said had nothing at all to do with her,
or she no longer cared.

Say something, child! Caillean glared at her. This is your fate we are
deciding! Caillean knew that Ardanos could not do anything to her; he had
tried, but Lhiannon was fond of her fosterling, and they had come to a certain
accommodation by carefully pretending that Caillean did not exist. She, for
her part, tried to avoid attracting his attention, or opposing him; but for Eilan's
sake she felt she would even try to face the old Druid down.
"Very well then, send for Ardanos," she said aloud. "But think twice
before you put her into his power."
"Well?" Ardanos frowned at the three women who awaited him in the
High Priestess's dwelling. "What has happened that is so important that you
had to send for me?" Lhiannon looked fragile and tired, and Caillean loomed
like a shadow behind her. Was it her health? he wondered with a sudden stab
of alarm as he noticed Eilan sitting beside the window. Had they sent for him
because the High Priestess was dying? She did not look that ill, and surely
they would not have already told Eilan . . .
"Be clear about this," said Caillean clearly. "I did not send for you. And if
it were my dying breath I would still deny that you have authority over the
priestesses."
"Woman!" Ardanos thundered. "What -?"
"And don't you say 'Woman!' to me in that tone, as if they had nothing to
do with you, as if your own mother had not been one," Caillean retorted
furiously. "Men who do not fear the Goddess -who are they to speak for Her?"
Ardanos grimaced and turned back to Lhiannon. "Well, you had better tell
me what all this is about," he said, none too gently. "It is for sure that I will
not hear it from Caillean."
This was not a good time for him to leave Deva, he thought in irritation.
With the Governor away fighting in Caledonia, some of the local officials had
begun to presume on their powers. He needed to be back where his agents
could keep him informed, and if necessary he could use his contacts among
the Romans to prevent trouble.
Lhiannon made an odd strangled sound, coughed, and tried again. "Eilan
is pregnant by the Prefect's son, and we do not know what to do."

Ardanos looked at her in amazement, then his gaze traveled to Eilan. "Is
this true?"
Eilan said in a low voice, "I always tell the truth."
"Aye," grunted Ardanos, his mind whirling with calculation. "I'll give you
that; you're no liar, girl."
She looked as if she would much rather have told him nothing at all.
Caillean moved to her side and took her hand protectively. He felt the anger
rising. Do these silly hens have any idea how devastating this could be? The
very survival of the Forest House depended on maintaining the myth of their
purity! They must be made to understand!
"Why do you ask me?" His words rang with all the power of bardic
training. "You know the penalty as well as I. It is death for a sworn priestess
to lie with any man except the Sacred King."
Death. The word made a silence, even in the quiet of the room. Then
Lhiannon moaned and Caillean moved quickly to catch her in her arms.
"You cruel, heartless old man!" she burst out. "And to think it is she who
insisted on laying this before you!" She held the older woman against her,
feeling for the pulse point at the neck. "Goddess! Her heart is leaping like a
frightened horse! But you have not quite killed her, not this time." She
straightened as Lhiannon moaned and stirred. "You know her heart is weak.
Would you like to try again?"
Ardanos bent over her. He said quietly, "She has only fainted; she will
recover." He felt more shaken than he had expected. "I did not know that it
would upset her so."
He helped Caillean to lift the old woman, surprised at how light she was
beneath the robes, and lay her on the bed, raised a little on pillows so that she
could breathe. Caillean poured a few drops of some potion into a cup of water
and set it to the High Priestess's lips. Ardanos saw the muscles of Lhiannon's
throat constrict as she swallowed, and after a few moments her eyelids
fluttered open once more.

Her eyes are still beautiful, Ardanos thought in surprise, even now, when
they are clouded by pain. He would grieve when death took her, but that
knowledge could not be allowed to interfere with what he had to do.
"Not death," she whispered. "Is there no other way?"
Ardanos glanced at Eilan, who sat huddled on her bench with her
knuckles against her lips, staring at Lhiannon.
"I would say the same if it were my own daughter, Dieda. I thought at first
that it was she —"
"Dieda doesn't matter —" Lhiannon said more strongly. "We cannot let
them hurt Eilan!"
"Of course not," Caillean said soothingly. "Ardanos knows as well as you
or I, that this penalty has never been exacted. After all, it is not as if this were
an unknown thing."
"Well," Ardanos asked carefully, "what do you suggest we do?" It gave
him a perverse satisfaction to see Caillean so subdued. Perhaps she would be
less troublesome now.
"Miellyn's child was fathered by the Year-King, and in any case she
miscarried, so the problem did not arise. But five or six years ago there was a
case of this kind and the girl was quietly sent away."
"That is true," said Ardanos. "But the girl in question was not the daughter
of an important Druid —"
"Nor the granddaughter of one," snapped Caillean. "So now we come to
it; you are afraid that it will reflect upon you!"
"Be quiet, Caillean," said Lhiannon. "How can you sit here wrangling
with Ardanos while this poor child" - she glanced over at Eilan — "is
listening, not knowing whether she is to live or die."
Ardanos looked at his granddaughter; he could read nothing from her
expression. Was she being stubborn or did she really not care? He shook his
head in exasperation. The work they had done here must not be jeopardized

by one silly girl. "Is this known among the others?" he asked, and Caillean
shook her head. "Take care to keep it that way, and perhaps we can find a way
—"
"Oh, that's kindness!" said Caillean sarcastically, "to do for your own
granddaughter as much as you would for a stranger . . ."
"Be quiet, child," Lhiannon repeated tiredly. "You should not speak so to
the Arch-Druid. He is trying, I am sure, to do the best he can for Eilan - and
for us all."
Caillean looked skeptical, but she held her peace.
"In any case, you are not the only ones concerned here," Ardanos said
grimly. The rape of a holy priestess, for that was what he would call it,
whatever Eilan might say, was a torch that could set the whole of Britain
aflame. He drew his cloak around him and looked down at them. There was
one Roman, at least, who should be as anxious to see this handled discreetly
as he. "I will go to Deva and speak with Macellius; maybe I will see the
young Roman as
well."
During the next month, Eilan's sickness subsided and during much of the
time she felt as well as ever. Her loose robes concealed the changes in her
breasts, and with a first child it would be some time yet before any rounding
was visible in her belly.
She wondered what Gaius had said when he learned of her pregnancy. She
was not sorry that she had lain with him, but she saw now the power of the
forces arrayed against her, and it seemed to her that she had been a fool to
think that things might change. Her visions of being a great priestess in the
old way were dimming. Now she wanted only to be the mother of Gaius's
child. But even then, despite Ardanos's parting words, she did not dare to
believe that they would let her marry him.
At least Caillean and Lhiannon did not seem to believe that her condition
disqualified her from participating in the rituals. Most of the time she spent
memorizing the full-moon ceremony along with the other sworn priestesses.

It had become a point of pride with her to prove that her loss of virginity
had not affected her ability to function as a priestess, so she set herself to
memorize the minutiae of the rituals. Of them all, Dieda was her closest
match in intelligence. When they were children they had worked to produce
the best spun wool or the neatest embroidery and win Rheis's praise. In those
days Eilan had pitied her kinswoman because Dieda's mother had died
whereas she herself had always had a mother's loving care and had drawn
back from competition. Dieda needed to be first; Eilan did not. But now she
had a reason to excel.
Eilan had a good mind and, put on her mettle by Dieda, she used it to the
utmost. Dieda's memory was more precise, and of course no one could match
her singing; but, of the two, Eilan often proved to have the better
understanding.
As Lhiannon spoke to them, Eilan found herself hanging on every word.
The High Priestess had grown so frail that she found it hard to remember that
Lhiannon was only in her sixties now.
Eilan wondered sometimes who would succeed her. It ought to be
Caillean, but the Irishwoman had said the priests would never accept her.
Miellyn was too outspoken, and bitter since the loss of her child, and Eilidh
too retiring. It might be Dieda, she thought then, and wondered what it would
be like to live here under her kinswoman's rule.
By the time the moon was at the full once more, Lhiannon seemed much
better, but as the ritual progressed, they could hear her voice grow fainter. She
completed the ceremony, but it was clear to all of them how much it had cost
her. On the following day she collapsed, and this time, when she was put to
bed, she could not find the strength to leave it again.

Sixteen

Ardanos might have found a certain satisfaction in telling Macellius
Severus what his son had done, but, whatever he hoped for, in the Perfect he
had met his equal. Macellius heard him out with great courtesy and then
informed him quietly that Gaius had gone to Londinium to be married. And as
soon as the Arch-Druid had gone away, he set about making it so.
Macellius had no doubt that Ardanos was telling him the truth. The only
surprise was how he could have deluded himself about his son's passion.
There was a stubborn streak in the boy that came from him, and a romantic
streak that was his legacy from his mother. Macellius rubbed at his eyes.
Moruadh had braved the displeasure of all her relations to marry him. He
should not have underestimated the force of that wild, Celtic blood.
With so unruly a horse or slave he would have known to take sterner
measures. Perhaps it was harder for him to discipline Gaius because so often
he saw Moruadh looking out of her son's eyes. But marriage to a good Roman
girl would settle the lad. As the Druid's footsteps receded along the tiled
corridor, Macellius called for his secretary.
The sight of his employer's stormy face stopped young Valerius from
making any of his customary jokes. He saluted smartly, and went in search of
Gaius. He found him in the library, reading the account of Caesar's Gallic
wars.
"I'll go at once." Gaius put down the scroll. "Do you have any idea what

my father wants?"
"No. None. But I think he's angry," Valerius warned. "He had a visit this
morning from the old Druid, Ardanos, and he came out looking like thunder,
master Gaius."
"Oh? I wonder what the old fellow wanted?" Gaius asked, feeling a tiny
shiver begin to work its way up his spine. Ardanos had been in and out of the
place since he was a child about some native problem or other. People were
always turning up with requests, legitimate and otherwise, and when they
proved too unreasonable, it was likely to put his father out of temper. There
was no reason for this summons to have anything to do with Ardanos being
Eilan's grandfather, but as he strode down the tiled corridor, he could not help
worrying.
The elder Severus was holding a set of military orders. "You are to set out
for Londinium at once," he barked out.
Gaius looked at him, startled. He opened his mouth to ask why, and
realized that his father was in a towering rage.
"I told you to leave that girl alone!"
Comprehension began to dawn. Ardanos must have told the Prefect that
he had been with Eilan. Had someone seen them? Surely Eilan had told no
one. Gaius would have been happy to proclaim his love from the housetops; it
was she who had insisted on secrecy.
"With respect, sir, I don't think -"
"No, you don't think. That's half the trouble," Macellius snarled. "I
suppose you do know that you could hardly have done anything worse if you
had hunted all over Britain, unless you had raped their High Priestess in broad
daylight on their High Altar, or cut down their Sacred Oak. Do you want to
get us all massacred?"
Macellius did not wait for an answer. "The folk around here need no
excuse for rioting. No, not a word," he said with a peremptory gesture as
Gaius would have spoken, "I trusted once to your word - and never again. I
don't think for a moment that you raped the girl, but I can believe, all too

easily, that you got her pregnant. I have no doubt whatever she's a very good
girl in her own way, and that she deserves better of you than this. A sworn
virgin, and the Arch-Druid's granddaughter!"
Gaius's mouth slowly closed again. Eilan pregnant! Eilan, carrying his
child! He remembered the sweetness of her mouth and the softness of her
body beneath him and swallowed, scarcely hearing his father's next words.
"I will not soon forgive you for putting me in a position where we cannot
even make honorable amends, but, as things are now around here, I cannot
even order you to marry her."
"But I want to —" Gaius began.
Macellius shook his head. "The South would explode as it did twenty
years ago if the people heard of it, a fact of which the old man is very well
aware. He's already wrung a concession on the levies out of me, and I daresay
it won't end there. But at least he shall not use you against me. I have told
Ardanos you were in Londinium, and that, my lad, is where you shall go. I'll
give you a letter to Licinius, and with luck not see you again until you are
properly married."
Gaius heard him in disbelief. "Married? But that's impossible!"
"We'll see about that," snapped his father. "Can you think of any other
way to undo your folly? Ardanos has promised they won't hurt the girl,
provided you stay away from her, and I can't think of any better way to make
certain you never go near her again. You know that Licinius and I have talked
of this, and dowry and settlements will be no problem. If she will still have
you after this, you will marry that girl."
Gaius shook his head, trying to find words to protest, and his father glared
at him.
"You will." he commanded softly but with so much concealed anger that
Gaius did not dare protest. "I've gone to too much trouble to save you from
your own folly to let you destroy yourself now. You set out in half an hour."
His father scribbled his signature on a roll of papyrus and looked up at Gaius.
"If you refuse I don't know what they'll do to the girl. You might try thinking
of her for a change."

Gaius stared at him, trying to remember the Roman penalty for a Vestal
who broke her vows; as he recalled, they buried them alive. He realized
abruptly that nothing he could say would be taken as anything but selfdefense. Indeed, he could endanger Eilan's life. Fear for her dried up the
words in his throat.
Macellius rolled up the letter, sealed it, and handed it to his son. "Take this
to Licinius," he instructed. "My orderly Capellus will go with you," he added.
"I have already sent word to him to pack your things."
Within the hour, Gaius found himself on the road to Londinium with the
massive figure of old Capellus at his side. All his attempts to begin a
conversation were politely, but firmly rebuffed. When, almost desperate, he
offered the man a bribe - he had to stop, to get word somehow to Eilan - the
big man only snorted.
"No offense, sir, but your father told me you'd probably try that, and he
paid me well to see you didn't go nowhere but directly to Londinium. And I
works for your father and I don't want to be out of a job, see? So you relax sir,
and do like the Prefect says. When you think it over, sir, it'll all be for the
best, see?"
The journey to Londinium took the best part of six days. By the third day
Gaius's natural optimism had begun to reassert itself, and he watched with
increasing interest the neat villas that were springing up across the land. He
could see now how untamed the West Country was still. But this ordered
landscape was what the Empire was meant to be. He admired it, but he was
not sure he liked it.
It was nearing dark when they passed the city gates and drew up in front
of the Procurator's mansion, set between the Forum, where the treasury
offices were located, and the new palace that Agricola was building, with its
ornamental pools. He had been to Londinium several times as a child, and
when he assumed the toga and officially became a man, but never since
Agricola had become governor there.
The city had a gracious glow in the summer dusk, and a cool wind off the
river dispelled the mugginess of the day. The scars of Boudicca's burning
were mostly hidden now, and the Governor's building plans suggested the

noble proportions of the city that would one day be. Of course it would never
rival Rome, but in comparison to Deva it was a metropolis.
Gaius handed his letter to an imposing freedman at the portico and was
bidden to enter and take a seat in the central courtyard. Here it was still warm,
and fragrant with shrubs and flowers set round in pots. From the fountain
came a tinkle of falling water and, somewhere in the rooms beyond the
courtyard the music of a young girl's laughter. After a time an old gardener
came out and began to cut flowers, probably for the table, but he knew, or
feigned to know, none of the languages in which Gaius addressed him. For a
time Gaius wandered about, glad to stretch his legs after the long day in the
saddle. Presently he took a seat on a stone bench, all the fatigue of the journey
overtook him, and he fell asleep.
Somehow the sound of a girl's laughter wove itself into his dream . .
.Gaius started awake, staring about him, but there was no one to be seen
except a heavy-set, middle-aged man on crutches, draped in a formal toga.
Gaius sprang to his feet, flushing with embarrassment.
"Gaius Macellius Severus?"
"Yes, sir -"
"I should have known it." The old man smiled, "My name is Licinius, and
your father and I have been friends most of our lives. It is a real pleasure to
welcome his son. Is your father well?"
"He was when I last saw him a few days ago, sir."
"Good. Good. Well, young man, I had of course hoped he could get away
to pay me a visit, but you are most heartily welcome in his stead. Given our
arrangement, you can imagine that I've been eager to meet you."
Gaius had been telling himself all the way from Deva that he would not be
hurried into any such ill-considered wedding, but he could not burst out into
protest before the eyes of his father's old friend. He had agreed to this because
of the danger to Eilan and knew he ought to be grateful Licinius was so
kindly.
"Yes, sir," he said, temporizing. "Father did say something of this . . ."

"Well, I should hope so," Licinius said gruffly. "As I say, we've had it in
our minds since you were born. By Mithras, boy, if Macellius had said
nothing of this, I'd have wondered what he was using for a head these days."
Despite its gruffness, this was the first wholly friendly voice Gaius had heard
for a good many days, and, almost against his will, he was warmed by it. It
was good to be welcomed. The Procurator took it for granted that he should
be treated as a valued friend and a prospective son-in-law, and it had been a
long time since Gaius had been made to feel a part of a family. He realized
with a pang that the last time he had been made to feel so had been in the
house of Bendeigid. Eilan, Cynric, what would become of them? Would he
ever know? He had worried about this all the way to Londinium - he had to
stop now.
"Well then, son," said Licinius, "You must be longing to meet your bride."
Speak up, Gaius said to himself. But he could not bring himself to put out
the light that glowed in the old man's eyes, and mumbled something
noncommittal instead. They will punish Eilan if I try to see her again, he
reminded himself sternly. The best thing he could do for her would be to go
through this ceremony as expected of him. Or is that just an excuse to avoid a
confrontation? he wondered.
But Licinius had already beckoned to a well-dressed upper servant. "Send
for the Lady Julia," he ordered.
Gaius knew that now was the time to say that he would have nothing to do
with this farce of an arranged marriage - but without waiting for him to reply,
the Procurator had hauled himself to his feet.
"She'll be with you in a moment. I'll leave you young people alone to get
acquainted." Before Gaius could find the words to stop him, he was limping
away.
Julia Licinia had been keeping house for her father since her mother's
death three years earlier. An only child, from girlhood she had assumed she
would be married off to whatever man her father chose. He had told her that
he had arranged a marriage with the son of Macellius; at least this meant she
would not be given to some unknown patrician twice her age, as had
happened to more than one of her friends. Trying to look unconcerned she

plucked a ripening fig from one of the trees growing in the pots in the
colonnaded atrium as her father came towards her.
He grinned broadly. "He is here now, my dear, Gaius Macellius the
younger, your promised husband. Go and see what you think; it's you, after
all, who is to marry him. But I think if you do not like the look of the young
man, you'd be hard to please."
Julia stared at her father. She said, "I was not expecting this so soon."
And yet it occurred to her that there was no point in delay. She was eager
to have something all her own; and certainly when she had borne this young
tribune legionary a son, he would value her above all things. She was already
used to running a household, but she wanted children who would love her.
She was determined not to fail at giving her husband a son as her own mother
had done.
"Nor was I," her father said good-naturedly. "I wanted to keep my little
girl a bit longer. Now I'll probably have to marry some old widow to keep
house for me. But the young man's evidently got himself entangled with some
native woman, and Macellius feels that marriage will settle him. And so —"
A native girl? Julia's brows rose. She was aware that most fathers would
not have spoken to a daughter so frankly, but she had always been as much a
companion for Licinius as a child. "And so?"
"And so the young man's turned up on our doorstep, and it's time for you
young folks to get acquainted with one another. I suppose you're eager to see
him?"
"I must admit I'm curious." What sort of husband had she drawn? One
escapade could be condoned, but if he was the type
who habitually went after women, she was not sure she wanted him.
"Then run along, daughter," her father said. "I must say, if he doesn't like
you he too will be hard to please."
In sudden panic Julia remembered she was wearing an old tunica, and that
she had combed her hair very sketchily.

"Like this?" she asked. Flustered, she tried to adjust the folds of her dress
to hide a berry stain.
"I'm sure it's you he wants to see, not your taste in gowns," admonished
her father fondly. "You look perfectly lovely. He knows that you're my
daughter, and that's really what matters. Run along and see what you think of
him. Don't be silly, child."
Julia knew there was no appeal. Licinius was a kind father, even
indulgent, but when he had once made up his mind, she could not tease or
coax him out of it.
Once more Gaius heard the soft sound of girlish laughter, and for some
reason he thought of Odysseus surprised on the beach by Nausicaa and her
maidens; he could only stare as the girl herself slipped out from behind one of
the flowering trees and came towards him.
A girl? A child, Gaius thought at first; for although he himself was not
tall, the girl who entered barely reached his shoulder; she had a small wellshaped head with thick dark curls, loosely knotted at the nape of her neck.
Her eyes were dark too, and met his fearlessly. She had evidently been eating
berries, for her fine white wool tunic, and her lips, were stained pink with
berry juice. His father had said she was fifteen, but she hardly looked more
than twelve.
"You are Julia Licinia?"
"I am." She looked him up and down. "My father's promised me to some
half-Roman barbarian, and I came here to have a look at him. Who are you?"
"I'm afraid I'm that half-Roman barbarian," he said a little stiffly.
The girl surveyed him coolly, and he felt as if he were waiting for some
verdict of tremendous import; then she giggled.
"Well, you look Roman enough," she said. "I was prepared for some great
blond barbarian whose sons would never look Roman born. It is true that our
Governor's policy of teaching the sons of chieftains Roman arts and manners
had been quite successful," she added consideringly, "but those of us with

Roman blood must not forget to whom the Empire belongs. I would bear no
babes whose portraits would look out of place among those of my ancestors."
Roman or Tuscani blood? Gaius wondered cynically, remembering that
Licinius came from the same Etruscan country stock as his own father, and
owed his rise in rank to merit, not ancestors. Those common origins were no
doubt part of the bond. Gaius thought of Cynric, who was also half Roman,
however unwillingly. At least he Gaius Macellius looked what he was
supposed to be, and his father had spared no pains to have him accepted as
such.
He said dryly, "I suppose I should be grateful that I pass your inspection."
"Oh, come," she said, "I am sure you want your sons to look like proper
Romans no less than I do."
With a sudden pang he wondered, And what of Eilan's child'? Would he
be as fair as his mother, or show his father's breeding in his face? He made
himself return Julia's droll smile. "Oh, I'm sure all our sons will be Roman
and brave."
They were laughing together when Licinius returned. He peered, as if for
confirmation, at Julia's rosy face, then said "That's settled, then."
Gaius blinked as his prospective father-in-law clasped his hand, feeling as
if some great siege engine had run him down. But there was only Julia, small
and smiling, at his side. She looked so harmless; like a child.
But she isn't, he thought. One meeting was enough to convince him. Far
from it. Harmless is the last word I'd use for her.
"Of course," the Procurator said, "a wedding like this cannot be put
together quickly. He was trying to be jocular. "People would certainly think
that Julia had somehow misbehaved, being married off at a moment's notice
to a stranger from nowhere. Local society and my family must have a chance
to know and value you."
That was exactly the point of this wedding, Gaius thought wryly, except
that he was the one who had misbehaved. But he could see that Julia would
not want to be hurried into marriage with - as the Procurator had put it - a

stranger from nowhere. She must be given a chance to be married as a
respected member of her own community. And the delay would give him a
chance to catch his breath and figure out what to do. Perhaps on closer
acquaintance the girl would decide she did not like him after all, and even his
father could not blame him for not marrying her then.
Licinius tapped the scroll from Macellius. "Officially, this transfers you to
detached duty under my command. You may not think a young officer needs
to know anything about finances, but when you come to command a Legion,
you'll find your job easier if you know something about the system that keeps
your men shod and fed! No doubt you'll find it easy duty after the frontier. It's
not Rome, but Londinium is growing, and the women will make much of you
with all the young officers on the Governor's staff gone off to the North."
He paused, and fixed Gaius with a hard stare. "It goes without saying," he
added, "that there will be no improper behavior while you are here —" The
Procurator went on, "You will live with Julia under this roof as if she were
your sister, even though I will gradually let it be known that she has been your
promised wife from infancy. But until after the ceremony —"
"Father," Julia protested, "do you really believe I would so disgrace both
you and myself?"
Licinius's eyes softened as he looked at her. "I should hope not, girl," he
growled. "I just wanted to make it clear to this young man."
"I should hope not indeed," Gaius muttered. But there was little danger;
he found it hard to believe that Julia would ever be overcome by emotion. She
was certainly different from Eilan, who had thought of his best interests
before her own, and now was suffering the consequences.
Would they now hasten her into a marriage of convenience with someone
more "suitable" as they were trying to do with him? He suddenly pictured her,
beaten or bullied into compliance, tearful, wretched, perhaps weeping. She
was, after all, of noble birth as the Britons counted such things, and an
alliance with her family could be considered advantageous - as this marriage
with Julia would be politically advantageous for his father - and, he supposed,
for him.
But I am sure that if they try she will refuse it, he thought then. She has

more integrity than I. Ecstatic as his union with Eilan had been, there had
been moments when she had almost frightened him. Or perhaps it was his
own response that had made him afraid.
Julia smiled with an appearance of timidity. It was, Gaius thought,
assumed for her father's benefit; the last hour had taught him that anything
less timid than Julia — except maybe one of Hannibal's war elephants —
would be hard to imagine. But maybe her father still thought of her as a shy
child; fathers were the last to know what their children were really like.
But that made him think of Eilan again; her father had trusted him, and
look what had happened; he could not fault Julia's father for being more
careful.
The duties of an officer attached to the Procurator's staff turned out to
include a number of tasks which would probably have been easy for Valerius,
but which for Gaius, whose tutor had been pensioned off several years ago,
were as stressful to the mind as his first weeks in the army had been for his
body. Fortunately these tasks were often interrupted by assignment to escort
duty for visiting dignitaries.
He was not much used to cities, but he soon learned to find his way
around well enough. Gnaeus Julius Agricola, the Governor, had instituted a
program of building of which Londinium had been the first beneficiary. The
Britons had been a pastoral people, whereas Roman life centered around the
city, with its shops and baths, its games and theaters. A bridge linked
Londinium with the south and other roads stretched away to the north and
westward. Along these arteries came trade from every corner of the province,
and the ships that anchored at the wharves carried goods from all over the
Empire.
Shepherding the strangers gave him an excuse to explore, and expose him
to visitors of high station. When Gaius got up the nerve to ask him, Licinius
said that he had planned it that way.
"For of course, if this marriage is successful —" he said, and broke off
without finishing the sentence. "You know, I have no sons; no child at all but
Julia, and if things went as they should, she should be allowed to succeed me,
and perhaps even attain to senator. But of course a woman, no matter how
capable, can only bestow her rank on her husband. That is why it pleases me

so much that she should marry the son of my oldest friend."
Only then did Gaius really understand Macellius's plan. Married to Julia,
Gaius could legitimately aspire to the position for which his father's
injudicious marriage had disqualified him. He would not have been human nor Macellius's son - if he had been indifferent to the possibilities. Living in
Londinium had already altered his perspective, and he was beginning to
understand what he would have been giving up if he had run away with Eilan.
Had she been ill used? He could only hope she knew that nothing on earth short of his father's will or the threat to Eilan herself -could have made him
abandon her.
He had not realized that Julia was aware of his troubles until she brought
up the subject herself.
"Father told me," she said after the evening meal when they were sitting
on the terrace together watching the late summer sunset gild the basilica's
dome, "that you were sent here because you had formed some sort of alliance
with a native woman, the daughter of a proscribed man. Tell me something
about her. How old was she?"
Gaius felt his face flame and coughed to cover his confusion. It had never
occurred to him that her father would have told her; but perhaps it was just as
well to get things clear between them.
"A few years older than you are, I think." In truth, he supposed that Julia
must now be just the age Eilan had been when he first met her. Though
otherwise they were utterly different, Julia had the quality of innocence he
had first loved in Eilan.
The Procurator had kept him busy, and so had local society. It was a heady
experience for a young man of mixed blood. He had told his father once that
he was not ambitious, but that was before he had realized what rewards
wealth, and the right connections, could bring.
Julia smiled at him kindly. "Did you care very much about being married
to her?"
"I thought I did. I was in love. Of course I had not met you then," he said
quickly, wondering what love could possibly mean to Julia.

She looked at him, long and steadily. "I think you should see her again
before we are married," she said, "just to be certain that you are not going to
pine for her once you are married to me."
"I have every intention of being a good husband —" he began, but Julia
either misunderstood or chose to pretend to. Her eyes were too dark; he could
not read them. Eilan's eyes had been clear as a forest pool.
"Because," she said straightforwardly, "I do not want a man who would
rather be married to someone else. I really think you should see her again, and
find out what you want your life to be. Then, when you come back, I'll know
that marriage with me is really what you want to do."
She sounded like her father, he thought grimly, when he was negotiating a
contract; she sounded as if she thought marriage was a career. But then,
brought up in the capital as she had been, that was probably exactly what she
expected it to be! And what other
career could there be for a Roman woman? What could she know of the
fire that pulsed in the blood when the Beltane drums began, or the longing
that ate at the heart like the music of the pipes the shepherds played on the
hills?
In any case, his father had made it impossible for him to see Eilan; no
doubt even Julia would be horrified if she heard that his beloved was the local
equivalent of a Vestal Virgin. But Julia was already making plans, and once
again Gaius felt as if he was in the path of a cavalry charge.
"Father is going to send you north with despatches for Agricola —"
Gaius raised one eyebrow, for he had heard nothing of this, but it did not
really surprise him. Julia was the darling of every clerk in the tabularium, and
when a change in orders was contemplated, they were always the first to
know. And the last one to know is always the man most concerned! he
thought.
"On your way you can make time to see this girl. When you come back
you will be quite, quite sure that you would rather be married to me."

Gaius suppressed a smile, for she did not know as much as she thought if
she imagined he would have much time for side trips on government service.
But perhaps he could manage something; already his blood beat faster in his
veins at the thought of seeing Eilan again.
Thanks be to Venus that Julia could not know what he was thinking,
though there were times when he credited her with the powers of a Sibyl, or
maybe all women had this kind of power. But Julia was chattering about her
wedding veil, which was to be made of a fabulous material to be brought in
by caravan from halfway around the world.
It would be rather a relief, he thought, even if he must travel to the wilds
of Caledonia, to get back to the regular army again.

Seventeen

As the summer ripened towards Lughnasad it did not seem to Eilan that
Lhiannon grew any better. Sometimes the old woman's heart pained her, and
always she was tired. Ardanos came daily, and at first he and the High
Priestess would talk, but as the days passed, and her attention drew
increasingly inward, he simply sat by her bedside in silence, and when he
spoke it was with Caillean, or to himself. After these sessions, Caillean would
be silent and pensive, but she had always been one for keeping her own
counsel.
Eilan found it strange that as her own body was becoming a vessel of life,
Lhiannon should be undergoing a parallel transformation, preparing to release
her spirit - but in what world she would be reborn no one could say. Joy at the
new life within her muted Eilan's own sorrow. But in those days the Forest
House grew very silent, and all the women went about their tasks with
mingled excitement and dread. For no one had yet dared to ask who
Lhiannon's successor was to be.
It was fortunate that everyone was too distracted by Lhiannon's illness to
take much notice of anyone else, but what would Eilan do when her belly
could no longer be concealed by her loose robes?
Not for a moment was Eilan allowed to forget that as far as Ardanos was
concerned she was under sentence of death; she

fancied that even Dieda regarded her with barely concealed contempt.
Miellyn was still mourning the loss of her own child and could offer no
comfort. Only Caillean never changed toward her - but then Caillean had
always been a law unto herself; the one thing that sustained Eilan when she
grew most afraid was her awareness of the older woman's love.
She did not know when, if ever, she would see Gaius again; but
remembering the kingly spirit she had glimpsed when they lay together, she
felt certain they would meet again. She did not want to believe - as the ArchDruid said - that he had hastily been married off to someone else. Even
among the Romans the solemnizing of a marriage must demand more
formality and time than that.
A month passed, and Caillean presided over the full moon rituals. Now it
was obvious, nurse and care for her as they might, that Lhiannon was dying.
Her feet swelled so that she could no longer even stagger to the privy.
Caillean nursed her tenderly; no mother ever had a more devoted daughter.
But still the fluid filled her body.
Caillean fed her herb brews and spoke of dropsy, and once they went far
afield to find the purple flowers of the foxglove, which Caillean said were
sovereign for an ailing heart. Eilan cautiously tasted the brew Caillean made
of them, and found it bitter as sorrow.
But in spite of all their care, day by day Lhiannon grew weaker and more
swollen and pale.
"Caillean—"
For a moment she doubted she had heard it; the call was like a breath
drawn by the wind. Then the bed creaked. Wearily, Caillean turned.
Lhiannon's eyes were open. Caillean rubbed the sleep from her own and made
herself smile. Illness had consumed the flesh from the older woman's face so
that the good bones showed with a terrible clarity. It is almost over. The
unwelcome knowledge came to her. Soon, only the essentials will remain.
"Are you thirsty? Here's cool water, or I can stir up the fire and give you
some tea . . ."

"Something hot . . .would ease me . . ." Lhiannon drew breath. "You are
too good to me, Caillean."
Caillean shook her head. When she was ten years old and halfway to
death with the fever, Lhiannon had nursed her back again, more than her
mother or father would have done. Her feelings for the older woman went
beyond love or hatred. How could you put that into words? If Lhiannon could
not sense them in the taste of an infusion or the touch of a cool cloth on her
brow, she would never know.
"I suppose there are those who think you are doing this so that I will make
you my heir . . .Women cooped up together can be very petty, and it is true,
you are a greater priestess than all of them put together . . .but you know
better, do you not?"
"I know." Caillean managed a smile. "I am destined to live for ever in the
shadows, but I will support whoever rules. Please the Goddess, it will not be
for yet a while."
And who knows how long I will live after you? she thought then. Her
strange bleeding had ceased at last, but fatigue dragged at her limbs as if they
had been cast of lead from the Mendip mines.
"Perhaps . . .Do not be so sure you know everything, my child. Despite
what people think, my Sight comes not always at the Druids' bidding. And I
have seen you with the ornaments of a High Priestess and a mist that is not of
this world blowing around you. A life path may have strange twists and
turnings, and we do not always end up where we intend to go . . ."
Boiling water hissed in the little cauldron, and Caillean spooned • in the
mixture of yarrow and chamomile and white willow, and set it to steep beside
the flame.
"Goddess knows I have not done so!" Lhiannon burst out suddenly. "We
had such dreams when we were young, Ardanos and I - but he grew greedy
for power . . .and I had none!"
You could have stood against him, thought Caillean. You were the Voice of
the Goddess, and for twenty years the people have lived by your words. And
you don't even know what you have been saying! If you had ever allowed

yourself to know, you would have had to act, for then it would have been real.
..
But she bit back the words, for Lhiannon had given more hope to the
people unknowing than Caillean with all her conscious wisdom, and that
outweighed all her failings, whatever cynics like Dieda might say.
With a little honey to take away the bitterness, the tea was ready. Caillean
slid her arm around Lhiannon's fragile shoulders and held the spoon to her
lips. The sick woman's head turned fretfully, and her cheeks glistened with
tears. "I am tired, Caillean . . ." she whispered, "so very tired, and afraid . . ."
"There, there, my dear; you are surrounded by those who love you," she
whispered. "Drink this now, it will give you ease." Lhiannon swallowed a
little of the bittersweet brew, and sighed.
"I promised Ardanos I would choose my successor . . . to serve his plan.
He is waiting . . ." She grimaced. "Like a crow watching a sick ewe. It was to
be Eilan, but she . . .must be sent away soon. Now he says I must choose
Dieda, but I will not, and she would not, unless the Goddess —" a fit of
coughing took her and Caillean hastily set the tea down, holding Lhiannon
upright and patting her back until she was still.
"Until the Goddess shows you Her will," Caillean finished for her, and the
High Priestess of Vernemeton smiled.
Lhiannon was dying. It was obvious to everyone - everyone except
perhaps Caillean, who nursed her so devotedly and with a despairing
tenderness, night and day, seldom stepping beyond the room where the sick
woman lay. Even those of the priestesses who had always been suspicious of
Caillean as an outlander had to admire her dedication now. Both Dieda and
Eilan guessed what was coming — but it would have taken a braver woman
than either one of them to name it to Caillean.
"But she is so skilled in healing," Dieda said as they carried Lhiannon's
soiled bedding down to the river. "She must know."
"I suppose she does," said Eilan, "but admitting it would make it real."
She looked at her kinswoman curiously. Apart from commenting sarcastically
that the dirty laundry of a High Priestess smelled no different from anyone

else's, and she could not see why a sworn priestess was required to wash it,
Dieda had done her share of the work uncomplainingly.
It seemed odd that they should have become such strangers now, when
they were sister priestesses. Working with Dieda these past weeks, when
Caillean's attention was fixed on Lhiannon, reminded Eilan how close they
had been as girls. Distracted by her thoughts, she tripped on a tree root.
Dieda put out a hand to steady her.
"Thank you," Eilan said in surprise. The other woman glared at her.
"Why are you staring?" said Dieda. "I don't hate you."
Eilan felt the hot color flare in her cheeks, then fade. "You know then,"
she whispered.
"You are the fool, not I," came the answer. "Cooped up with you and
Caillean all this time I could hardly help overhearing something. But for the
sake of our family's honor I have kept silent. If any of the other women know
your secret, they did not learn it from me. At least pregnancy seems to agree
with you. Are you feeling well?"
It was a relief to Eilan to speak of something other than Lhiannon's
illness, and it seemed to her that Dieda felt that way as well. By the time they
returned to the Forest House, they were more in harmony than they had been
in years.
But a day came when even Caillean could not deny it any longer. Ardanos
said that the priestesses must be summoned for the deathwatch. He looked
grieved and gray, and Eilan remembered that her kinswoman had once said
there was love between them. She thought it must have been a long time ago,
or a very strange kind of love.
Certainly it was not at all what she would call love, thought Eilan, and
surely she was an expert. But Ardanos sat close to the unconscious woman
and held her hand; the priestesses slipped in and out to keep watch by twos
and threes, and Caillean fidgeted lest they disturb Lhiannon.
"Why does she trouble herself? I do not think anything will disturb the

High Priestess any more," Eilan whispered to Dieda, and the other girl
nodded, but without words.
It was near sunset, and Ardanos had stepped into the air for a few breaths.
Like all sickrooms, this one was hot and close, and Eilan could not blame him
for a moment for wishing to escape it. Though it was nearly Lughnasad the
light still lingered late. Sunset made a glare in the room, but the angle of the
sinking sun told Eilan it would soon be gone. She had crossed the room to
light the lamp when she became aware that Lhiannon was awake and looking
at her with recognition for the first time in many days.
"Where is Caillean?" she whispered.
"She has gone to make you more tea, Mother," Eilan replied, "Will you
have me call her?"
"No time," the High Priestess coughed. "Come here - is it Dieda?"
"I'm Eilan, but Dieda is in the garden; do you want me to call her?"
There was a strange, raspy, rustling sound, and Eilan realized the sick
woman was trying to laugh.
"Even now I cannot tell one from the other," Lhiannon whispered. "Do
you not see the hand of the gods in this?"
Eilan wondered if Lhiannon had sunk into the delirium she had been
warned might come before the end. The High Priestess said harshly, "Call
Dieda; my time is short. I do not rave; I know very well what I am doing and I
must finish before I die."
Eilan hurried to the door to summon Dieda. When they returned, the
dying woman smiled as they stood side by side.
"It is true what they say," she whispered. "The dying see clearly.
Dieda, now you must bear witness. Eilan, daughter of Rheis, take the
torque that lies beside me - take it!" she gasped for breath, and with trembling
hands Eilan picked up the ring of twisted gold that lay on the pillow. "And the
arm rings . . .Now put them on . . ."

"But only the High Priestess - Eilan began, but the old woman's eyes held
hers with such terrible fixity that she found herself twisting the necklace to
open it, and sliding it on. For a moment it seemed cold, then it settled about
her own slim throat, warming as if grateful to be close to human flesh once
more.
From Dieda came a small, strangled sound, but the rattle in Lhiannon's
throat was louder.
Then the High Priestess rasped, "Be it so. Maiden and Mother, I see the
Goddess in you now . . .Tell Caillean —" She was silent a moment as if
struggling for breath, and Eilan wondered if the old woman was delirious, or
if it were she. She reached up once more to touch the heavy gold.
"Caillean is yonder, Mother; shall I summon her?" Dieda asked.
"Go," whispered Lhiannon with more strength than she had before. "Tell
her I love her . . ."
As Dieda hurried out, the gaze of the dying woman fixed on Eilan.
"I know now what Ardanos wanted when he bade me choose you, child,
and instead the gods brought Dieda into my hand. He was wrong about you,
and yet he did the Lady's will all the same!" Her lips twisted with what Eilan
realized was laughter. "Remember — it is important! Perhaps even the
Goddess Herself could not tell you two one from the other. Nor the Romans
— I see now —" and she was silent again. Eilan looked down at her, unable
to move.
She was silent so long that Caillean, returning, asked, "Does she sleep? If
she can sleep, then perhaps she may live another moon —" and then, tiptoeing
to Lhiannon's side, caught her breath on a gasp and whispered, "Ah, she will
never sleep more -"
Caillean knelt beside the bed and kissed Lhiannon on the brow, and then,
very tenderly, closed her eyes. With every moment that passed more
expression was fading from the dead woman's face, so that she no longer
looked asleep; she did not even look like Lhiannon any more. Eilan hugged
her arms, and winced as she felt the hard metal of the arm-ring. She felt dizzy,

and cold.
Then Caillean stood, and as her gaze focused on the ornaments Eilan was
wearing her eyes widened. Then she smiled.
"Lady of Vernemeton, I salute you in the name of the Mother of all!"
Ardanos, coming into the room behind Dieda, bent over the dead
and then stood back again. "She is gone," he said in a strange, flat,
voice. He turned, and something flickered in his eyes as he, too,
saw the golden ornaments that Eilan wore.
The other priestesses were crowding around them, but it was old Lads the
herb mistress who pushed forward and bowed, saying with a strange
deference that terrified her, "I pray you, Voice of the Goddess, tell us
everything the Holy Lady said with her last breath to you."
"Lhiannon, may the Goddess rest her, chose an uncommonly awkward
season for her dying," Ardanos said sharply. "For we must have a priestess of
the Oracle at the rites at Lughnasad, and obviously we cannot use Eilan!" He
surveyed the two women before him grimly.
The three days of ritual mourning were past, and Lhiannon laid in her
grave; Ardanos was surprised at how much it still hurt when he looked around
this chamber where he had always met with her and remembered she was
gone. He supposed he would continue to miss her for a long time, but he
could not afford to show his grief now. Caillean sat frowning, but Eilan stared
at him with wide, unreadable eyes. He glared back at her.
"You know as well as I do that it is superstition to believe that only a
virgin can serve the shrine, but for Eilan to bear the power of the Goddess
right now would be dangerous both for her and her child," agreed Caillean.
Sexual abstinence was necessary during performance of the great magics a magic such as the complete surrender of body and spirit necessary for the
Goddess to speak through a mortal.

For the power to flow freely, the spirit must be detached from the senses.
Thus it was forbidden to do those things that would increase their attraction
and clog the pathways, such as eating the flesh of some animals, drinking
mead or other liquors, or lying with a man.
"Lhiannon should have thought of that when she chose her," the ArchDruid replied. "It will not do, you know. It's bad enough that she is still here.
But a pregnant High Priestess? Impossible!"
"I could take her place in the ritual —" Caillean began.
"And how would we explain that to the people? We could have justified a
temporary substitution on the grounds that Lhiannon
was ill, but they know that she is dead. Transitions are always delicate.
People are wondering if the new High Priestess will survive her ordeal,
whether the Goddess will still come to them now that Lhiannon is gone."
He rubbed his forehead. None of them had had enough sleep for far too
long. Caillean's eyes looked dark and haunted, and despite the bloom of
pregnancy, Eilan seemed anxious and strained. And well she might be, it
occurred to him then. Lhiannon had put them all in a quandary when she
chose the girl.
"I tell you this - whatever madness came on Lhiannon at her ending, I will
not allow it to destroy all that we have labored so hard to build!" He sighed.
"There is no help for it. We shall have to choose again. There is a precedent;
old Helve tried to pass her power to — what was her name? — that poor mad
girl who died. And then the council chose Lhiannon."
"You would like that, wouldn't you!" Caillean began, but Eilan, who had
been silent for so long the Arch-Druid had almost forgotten she was there, got
to her feet suddenly.
"Not until after the ordeal!" she said loudly. Spots of color flamed in her
cheeks as the other two stared at her. "They named a new High Priestess after
the chosen one failed to carry the power of the Goddess in the ritual, didn't
they? What kind of talk do you think there will be if I do not even attempt it?
Everyone in Vernemeton knows that Lhiannon chose me."

"But the danger!" exclaimed Caillean.
"Do you think the Goddess will strike me dead? If what I did was such a
sin, then She is welcome to do so!" Eilan exclaimed. "But if I survive, you
will know that She has chosen me indeed!"
"And what do you propose that we should do with you if you live?" he
said acidly. "Your condition will be showing soon, and the Romans will have
a good laugh when they see our High Priestess wallowing around with a belly
like a pregnant cow!"
"Lhiannon thought of a way," said Eilan. "It was the last thing she said to
me. Once the ritual is over, Dieda must take my place and you must pretend
that it is she who had to be sent away. You yourself cannot tell us apart,
Grandfather, and you have known us both since we were babies!"
Ardanos eyed her narrowly, calculation spinning in his brain. The
wretched child might indeed have solved their problem. If the ritual killed her,
as was most likely, they would have every right to choose her successor, and
if Eilan died in childbirth, Dieda would already be in place, ready to take over
with no one the wiser. They would do well enough, he told himself, with
either girl, for neither would ever think herself quite secure in her office. If
the High Priestess needed the support of the priesthood, she would do what
she was told.
"But will Dieda agree?" he asked.
"Leave her to me," Caillean replied.
Still wondering at the summons, Dieda faced Caillean in .the chamber that
had for so long been Lhiannon's.
"Ardanos has agreed to let you substitute for Eilan after the ordeal of the
Oracle. Dieda - you must help us now," said Caillean.
Dieda shook her head. "Why should I care what Ardanos wants when he
has never cared about me? Eilan has brought her troubles on her own head. I
will not consent to this deception, and you may tell my father so!"
"Fine words, indeed, but if you are always determined to do exactly the

reverse of what Ardanos decrees, then his will still rules you. I suppose if I
had told you he opposes this you would have agreed?" Caillean replied.
Dieda stared at the older priestess, her mind whirling.
"He doesn't at all like it, you know," Caillean added, watching her intently.
"He would rather reject Eilan now and make you High Priestess in her place. I
think he agreed to suggest the substitution only because he thought you would
react in just this way . . ."
"High Priestess?" Dieda exclaimed. "I would never escape from this place
then!"
"It would only be temporary, after all," Caillean reflected. "As soon as
Eilan's babe is born she would return to take up her duties, and then, in any
case, you would have to go away —"
"Would you let me go north to be with Cynric?" Dieda asked suspiciously.
"If that is what you desire. But we had thought of sending you to Eriu for
advanced training in the skills of a bard . . ."
"You know perfectly well it is what I have always wanted most!" Dieda
exclaimed. Caillean looked at her steadily. "Then it seems there is something I
still can promise or deny you. If you do this for Eilan -and for me -I will see
that you are allowed to learn from the greatest poets and harpers in Eriu. If
you do not, Ardanos will surely make you Priestess, and I will make sure that
you rot within these walls."
"You would not," Dieda said. But she felt a chill of fear.
"You shall see," Caillean responded calmly. "There is no alternative. It
was Lhiannon's wish, and I will do her will as we all have always done."
Dieda sighed. She did not want to see anything evil happen to Eilan. She
had loved her once, but after the past few years she found it hard to love
anyone. It seemed to her that the other girl had been a great fool. She had had
the kind of love Dieda had been denied and thrown it away. Nor could she see
why Caillean should care. Still, she would not cross her. Caillean could be a
good friend or a dangerous enemy — both to her and possibly to Cynric as

well. Dieda had dwelt in the Forest House long enough to know just how
much influence the Irishwoman wielded in her quiet way.
"So be it," she said. "I pledge to stand substitute for Eilan until she is
delivered if afterward you will be responsible for giving me my desire."
"I will," Caillean lifted one hand. "And may the Goddess bear witness.
And no one alive can say I have ever broken an oath."
Half a moon had passed since Lhiannon's passing, and they were come to
the Feast of Lughnasad. Eilan waited with Caillean in the separate dwelling
where the High Priestess had so often prepared for the rituals. Hearing
sharpened by anxiety alerted her to the scuff of sandaled feet outside the door.
Then it swung open, and she saw the hooded figure, seeming impossibly tall
in the half-light, standing there. She could just make out the shapes of the
other Druids behind him.
"Eilan, daughter of Rheis, the Voice of the Goddess has chosen you. Are
you prepared to give yourself to Her completely?" Ardanos's voice tolled like
a great bell, and Eilan felt her belly tighten with fear.
Now all the tales she had heard in the House of Maidens rose up to sweep
her careful reasoning away. It hardly mattered whether the Goddess really
cared about what she had done with Gaius, Eilan thought despairingly. To
survive the ritual without damage would require a miracle. I meant only to
challenge the Druids, but I have challenged Her, daring Her wrath this way.
Surely the Goddess will strike me down! And what will this do to my child?
Eilan wondered. But if the Goddess would punish an unborn baby for what
the mother had done, She was not the loving Presence Eilan had sworn to
serve.
Ardanos was waiting for her answer — they were all waiting, watching
with hope or judgment in their eyes - and slowly she calmed. If the Lady does
not want me as I am, I do not wish to live. She took a deep breath, righting her
way back to the decision to which in the sleepless nights since Lhiannon's
death she had come.
"I am ready." Her voice trembled only a little. At least her own father was
in the North somewhere with Cynric. She was glad. She did not think she
could have met his eyes.

"And do you declare yourself a fit vessel for Her power?"
Eilan swallowed. Was she? The night before she had doubted it, and wept
on Caillean's shoulder like a terrified child.
"fit? Who is, if you put it like that?" Caillean had asked. "We are all only
mortal; but it is you who have been chosen. Why else have you been
preparing for so many years?"
The Arch-Druid was watching her like a hawk waiting for some betraying
rustle in the grass, waiting for her to perjure herself so that she would be in
his power. She realized dimly that he was enjoying this.
Lhiannon thought I was fit, she told herself then. Only by going through
with this could she justify Lhiannon's dying choice, and the choice she herself
had made when she gave herself to Gaius beneath the trees. It had seemed to
her then that she was affirming a more ancient law of the Goddess than the
one pledging her to chastity. To refuse this test was to admit that act of love
had been a sin. She lifted her chin proudly. "I am a fit and holy vessel. Let the
earth rise up and cover me, let the sky fall down and crush me, and let the
gods by whom I swear forsake me if I lie!"
"The candidate has been questioned, and she has sworn —" Ardanos said
to the Druids who attended him. He turned to the priestesses. "Let her now be
purified and prepared for the ritual —"
For a moment he looked at her, and pity, exasperation, and satisfaction
seemed to war in his gaze. Then he turned on his heel and led the men from
the room.
"Eilan, you must not tremble so," Caillean said softly. "Don't let that old
buzzard scare you, there is nothing to fear. The Goddess is merciful. She is
our mother, Eilan, and the Mother of all women, the maker of all things
mortal. Do not forget it."
Eilan nodded, knowing that even if this moment had come to her in the
ordinary course of events she would still have been afraid. If she must die, it
should be at the hands of the Goddess, there was no need to perish of fear
beforehand.

The curtain stirred again and four of the youngest priestesses, among them
Senara and Eilidh, came into the room carrying pails of water from the sacred
spring. They stopped just inside the door, looking at her in awe. The hand of
the Goddess has descended on me, she thought, and it seemed that she saw in
their faces something of that same wonder with which she herself had always
looked on Lhiannon. They were all young; not one of them, except Eilidh,
even as old as she was herself . . .
She wanted to cry out, "Nothing has changed; I am still Eilan —" but in
fact everything had changed. Yet when they stripped off her gown and she
looked down, she was startled that her body still looked so little altered.
But these were virgins. So it was not surprising that they should not see
the slight changes her pregnancy had made. As Eilan had done so often for
Lhiannon, the girls helped her to bathe. She stood shivering in the chilly
room, feeling the icy touch of the clear water on her body as, curiously, a
purification; as if somehow it were dissolving away not only the last traces of
her contact with Gaius, but the whole of her previous life.
It was an entirely new Eilan who allowed them to robe her in the ritual
garments. About her forehead they bound the traditional garland. As she felt
the vines tighten around her forehead, she had a moment of dizziness, and
wondered if this was the first, faraway touch of the Goddess.
She felt strange and light-headed, altogether unlike herself; vaguely she
recognized hunger. The sacred herbs in the potion' given her at the
commencement of the ritual must be taken on an empty stomach, lest they
make her very ill. Caillean had once said that she believed that Lhiannon's ill
health was partly caused by her protracted use of these herbs. Briefly Eilan
wondered if before long her own health would be endangered as well. Then
she smiled, thinking it would be time enough to worry about her future if she
survived this evening.
They brought her the chased golden bowl with the magical potion of
Vision. She knew that it contained berries of mistletoe and other sacred herbs;
she had more than once seen Miellyn gathering those herbs. The sacred potion
also contained various mushrooms; the common people avoided them, as
much for their sacred character as for belief that they were poisonous, and
certainly they were useless as food. The priestesses knew, however, that taken

in small quantities they could amplify the ordinary clairvoyance in which she
had been trained.
Trembling, Eilan did as she had often enough seen Lhiannon do, and took
it from Eilidh's hands. Caillean had been right, she thought as she raised the
bowl to her lips. She had assisted in this ritual so often that she did know what
to do.
And from her ceremonial sips she had thought she knew what to expect
from the potion as well. But as she tipped it upward, she realized that the
priestess was required to drain it at a single draft because otherwise no one
would ever have been able to get it down. It was intensely bitter, and when
she had swallowed it, she began to wonder if it was poison after all. That
would have been a good way for Ardanos to get rid of her. But Caillean had
assured her that she would prepare the herbs herself and let no one else have
access to them, and she had to trust her.
Her head swam and for a moment her stomach revolted. Perhaps her
punishment was beginning now. But after a short, sharp struggle she
controlled herself, swallowed a few sips of water to clear her mouth of the
taste and closed her eyes, waiting.
Presently, the acute feeling of sickness passed. Eilan closed her eyes
against the wave of dizziness, and sat down, waiting to recover her balance.
Vaguely she remembered that this, too, had been part of the procedure with
Lhiannon. At the time, Eilan had thought it the weakness of age. But
Lhiannon had really not been so old. Would she, too, age before her time?
Well, she could only hope she would have a chance to grow old!
There was a little stir in the room, and the young girls drew away. Eilan
realized that Ardanos was standing before her. She lifted heavy eyelids to
look at him, and he met her gaze with an unsmiling stare.
"Eilan, I see they have prepared you. You look very beautiful, my dear.
The people will be sure the Goddess has come to them . . ." The kindly words
sounded strange from his lips.
Will they? she wondered muzzily. And what do you think, old man, if you
believe in the Goddess at all? By your rules, these garlands should be
withering on my brow! But it no longer mattered; she felt as if she were

floating above all this, with every moment she drifted further away.
"The drink is taking her swiftly," he muttered, and gestured to the maidens
to stand away. "Listen, my child - I know you can still hear me . . ." His voice
slipped into the melodic intonation of ritual as he went on.
Eilan knew that he was saying something of great importance, something
that she must remember . . .what, she was not certain. Time passed, and he
was no longer there. Did any of it matter, she wondered then? She felt as if
she were floating above a green darkness. The very tops of the trees were far
below. She was being carried in something - a litter — then they set her down
and helped her to stand. She could feel Caillean beside her and someone else,
she thought it was Latis, on her other side. They took her hands and drew her
into the procession towards the torches that ringed the sacred mound.
Eilan was aware enough to hang back for a moment when she saw the
three-legged stool. There had been some reason why she should not sit there;
some sin upon her soul. But her attendants drew her forward, and she thought
that if she could not remember it, perhaps it made no difference.
They had sacrificed the sacred bull already and shared its meat among the
people. The priests had played out the ritual in which the young god wrested
the harvest from the old. Now it was time to seek omens for the autumntide.
In the east the harvest moon was rising, golden as the ornaments that her
priestess wore.
Look down on me, Lady, Eilan fought to form the prayer. Ward me well!
One of the attendant priestesses had placed in her hand the little curved
golden dagger of ritual. She raised the dagger, and with one swift movement
plunged it into her fingertip. She felt a sharp pain, and one heavy drop of
blood gleamed on the surface; she held it over the golden bowl, letting three
drops of blood fall. The bowl was filled to the brim with water from the
Sacred Well, and floating on the surface were leaves of the sacred plant, the
mistletoe. Planted by no human hand, and growing between air and earth, it
partook of the very nature of the lightning which had engendered it.
Now they were turning her; she felt the hard wood against the backs of
her knees and sat down. There was a moment of dizziness as the priests lifted
her and carried her to the mound. The attendant priestesses had drawn back.

As the priests began to sing Eilan felt as if she were falling, or perhaps
rising, borne away by the song in some direction that had no relation to
ordinary reality. She wondered why she had been afraid. In this place she
floated; needing and wanting nothing, content simply to be . . .
A blaze of torches assaulted her eyes; below her all the assembled crowd
seemed to blur into a single face. Their eyes upon her were like a weight, a
positive physical pressure drawing her back to a place that was in, and yet not
of, the world.
"Children of Don, why have you come here?" Ardanos's voice seemed
very far away.
"We seek the blessing of the Goddess," a male voice replied.
"Then call Her!"
Eilan's nostrils flared as smoke swirled around her, heavy with the scent
of sacred herbs. Involuntarily she breathed in and her breath caught; the world
whirled and she fought for balance; she heard a voice whimpering and did not
know it was her own. From below rose the sound of many other voices,
calling, calling:
Dark Huntress . . .Bright Mother . . .Lady of Flowers, hear us . . .Come to
us, Lady of the Silver Wheel. . .
I am Eilan . . .Eilan . . .She clung to her own identity, crying out as the
need in those voices assaulted her until she felt their pressure as a physical
pain. At the same time, another pressure was building up behind her, or
perhaps within her, demanding that she let it in. Spasms shook her body as
she fought; she felt terror as the Self that she knew was constricted between
them; she could not breathe. Help me! her spirit cried.
She slumped forward, seeing the glimmer of water before her, and a voice
that seemed to come from within her said then:
"Daughter, I am always here. To see Me, you have only to gaze into the
Sacred Pool."

"Look into the water, Lady —" a voice that was very near commanded.
"Look into the bowl, and see!"
An image was forming in the troubled surface of the water, but as it
cleared Eilan saw that the face reflected there was not her own. She jerked
back in panic, and heard the voice once more.
"My daughter, rest now. Your spirit will be safe with Me . . ."
With the words came a tide of love that Eilan remembered, and with the
same trust with which she had given herself to Gaius she sighed and slid away
into the warm comfort of the Lady's arms.
As if from a great distance, she was aware that her body was
straightening, she was putting back her veil, lifting her hands to the moon.
"Behold, the Lady of Life has come to us!" in a great voice Caillean cried.
"Let us welcome her!"
And the sound of many voices rose like a tide and carried her to a place
where she could watch the body she had left behind move and speak with
wonder, but with no fear.
As the cheering subsided, the High Priestess sank back on to the seat once
more; the identity that filled her waiting in a timeless patience for the
response of humankind.
"There are the questions the people bring to you," the Arch-Druid said,
and because he spoke to her in the old speech of the Wise Ones, it was in that
language that the Goddess answered him.
After each question the priest turned to the people and said something in
the common language. From that far-off realm from which Eilan was listening
it seemed to her odd that his statements, if they were translations, had so little
to do with what the Goddess replied. That did not seem right, but perhaps she
had not heard him clearly, and in this place in which she had found refuge it
was hard to care.
The questioning went on, but as time passed, she found her perceptions
becoming more and more disjointed. It seemed to her that Ardanos frowned

then and leaned close to her.
"Lady, we thank you for your words. It is time to leave this body through
which you have spoken. Hail now, and farewell!" He plucked the sprig of
mistletoe from the golden bowl and shook droplets of water over her.
For a moment Eilan was blinded, then her body convulsed. Pain stabbed
through her and she fell into darkness on a shimmer of silver bells.
When awareness began to return Eilan realized that the priestesses were
singing. She knew the song; it seemed to her that once she had sung it but,
aching and dizzied as she was, she could not sing now. They had removed the
constricting garlands from her head, and someone was bathing her brow and
hands. Someone gave her water to drink and a voice murmured in her ear.
Caillean .. . She felt herself lifted and settled into the carrying chair.
"Hail unto Thee," the women sang.
"Jewel of the night!" the Druids replied.
"Beauty of the heavens . . .Mother of the stars . . .Fosterling of the Sun . .
." The priestesses held up their white arms to the silver moon.
"Majesty of the stars . . ." they sang, and with each chorus, Jewel of the
night!" the deep voices of the men replied.
A long time later, it seemed, Eilan found herself back in her own bed in
the House of the High Priestess. The light of the torches was no longer
assaulting her eyes, and the effects of the sacred drink must be wearing off at
last, for she found that she could think clearly once more. For some reason a
fragment of an ancient ballad was floating in her mind.
"After they stripped her ornaments away, and burned her sacred flowers .
. ." She could not remember where it had come from, but she knew that her
garlands had been thrown on the fire; the sweet scent of their burning had
filled the air. Now other things came back to her - the singing of the
priestesses, the silver moon.
But though she knew there had been questions, Eilan found she could not
remember a word of her replies. Whatever they had been, the populace had

seemed to find them satisfactory.
And the Goddess, she thought then. She did not strike me dead after all!
At least not yet, though she might yet come to wish She had done so. Eilan's
stomach was still unsettled; she felt as if she had been beaten with sticks and
would no doubt feel even worse tomorrow. But it was her belly, not her
womb, that was aching. She had faced her ordeal and survived.
"Good night, Lady," said Eilidh from the doorway. "May you rest well."
Lady . . .thought Eilan. It was true, then. She was Lady of Vernemeton
now.
A few days later Caillean summoned Dieda to the High Priestess's rooms.
Eilan sat by the fire, looking pale and strained.
"The time has come for you to keep your word. Eilan is well enough to
travel now, and we are sending her into hiding to bear her child."
"This is ridiculous. Do you really think no one will notice the change?"
Dieda said bitterly.
"Since she became High Priestess, she has been veiled so much of the
time that few of the women in the house will know the difference, and no
doubt they will put it down to the effects of the ritual."
Cynric would know, Dieda thought with longing, wishing he would appear
and carry her away. But it had been over a year since she had heard from him.
Even if he knew, would he have come?
"Your father is grateful to you," said Caillean.
Dieda grimaced, And well he should be. If I had insisted on leaving here
to marry Cynric, what would have become of this fine charade?
"Dieda." For the first time Eilan spoke on her own behalf. "We have been
like sisters. For the sake of the blood we share, and because you, too, know
what it is to love, please help me!"
"At least I had better sense than to give myself to a man who would

abandon me!" Dieda said tartly. "Caillean has vowed to send me to Eriu.
Sister, what will you promise me?"
"If I remain High Priestess I will try to help you and Cynric. If I fail in
this, you have the knowledge to destroy me. Will that be enough for you?"
"That is true." Dieda found herself smiling strangely. And when she had
finished learning from the Druids of Eriu, she would be able to raise blisters
on a man's skin with a word, or charm any bird or beast with her song; she
would have skills of which these pious fools did not dream. She realized
suddenly that it was only the constraints of the priestesses that irked her. She
could learn to enjoy wielding power.
"Very well, I will help you," she said, and held out her hand for the veil.

Eighteen

Despite the tales the Romans of Londinium told about the North, traveling
through northern Britain at the end of summer was no hardship for a young
and healthy man. It did not rain every day, and the air was sweet with the
smell of curing hay. As Gaius traveled up the eastern side of Britain through
country that grew ever wilder, he observed the woods and hills with a
professional interest, for on his previous campaign they had marched up the
western coast through Lenacum, and the eastern was new to him. With
Capellus, his father's orderly, once more at his side, the details of making
camp and tending the horses were handled efficiently. And his own British
tongue was enough to win them a welcome when they had to seek shelter at a
native holding.
As Gaius moved further north, more of the talk was of the Governor
Agricola's campaigns. From a newly retired veteran who managed one of the
posting stations he learned that in the previous year the appearance of a
Roman fleet off the Caledonian coast had struck the natives with such panic
that they had attacked in desperation, and succeeded in savaging the already
weakened Ninth Legion before Agricola sent his cavalry around to attack
their rear.
"It was bad, my boy, very bad," admitted the station-keeper, "with them
demons howling like wolves in the middle of our camp and men falling over
tent lines as they tried to get to their arms. But somehow we held them, and I
won't forget the moment when suddenly we could see the glitter of our
standards and knew that day was coming at last." He took another long drink

of the thin wine and wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
"Then, I'll tell you, we found our courage, and when the Twentieth finally
came up to help us we were ready to tell them they were too late for the party
and should go home! But the General kept the men to their work. If those
painted devils hadn't
scuttled back to their pestilent woods and marshes, we'd have mopped
them up entirely. But I suppose we had to leave something for you young
glory-hounds to do!" He laughed and offered Gaius more wine.
Gaius suppressed a smile. He had learned something of the battle from
men who had been sent home to Deva, but it was interesting to hear the story
from someone who had actually been inside the camp when the Caledonians
attacked it.
"Ah, the General is a great man! After last summer, even those who hung
back and whined about the danger are singing his praises. He'll find work for
you, no doubt about it, and you'll start your career with some honors behind
you! I wish I was coming with you, lad, so I do!"
Licinius had said nothing about the possibility of actually serving with the
Governor, but Gaius wondered suddenly if the messages he carried were at
least partially intended to bring him to Agricola's attention. As a provincial
governor, Agricola was unusual in that he had got on quite well with his
procurators. A word from Licinius might indeed be useful.
In the previous campaign Gaius had been no more than one of a gaggle of
young officers, all eager for glory and depending heavily on their centurions.
He had been impressed by what he had seen of their commander, but there
was no reason for the General to remember him. Ambition stirred within at
the thought of winning his commander's esteem.
Presently Gaius left the hunting runs of the Brigantes behind him and
moved into even wilder country where the folk spoke a dialect he did not
know. Rome might conquer these lands, he thought, as he rode over barren
heaths and through shadowed forests, but he wondered if she could ever rule
them. Only the need to prevent the wild Caledonians and their Hibernian
allies from tearing at the richer fields of the South - as they had destroyed the
house of Bendeigid - could begin to justify a Roman presence here.

The long northern twilight was deepening the sky to violet when Gaius
rode into Pinnata Castra, the fortress the Twentieth Legion was building
above the firth of the Tava where the fleet had made so impressive a showing
the summer before. Stone walls were already rising behind the stout palisade,
and the leather tents of a marching camp had been replaced by barracks and
stabling of timber that looked as if they could stand up even to a winter in
these wilds. The place seemed all the larger because it appeared to be almost
empty.
"Where is everyone?" he asked as he rode under the legionary wild boar
emblazoned on the gate and presented his orders to the officer on duty.
"Up there." The man waved vaguely towards the North. "The word is that
the tribes have united at last under a Votadini chieftain called Calgacus. The
Old Alan's been chasing 'em all summer, laying down marching camps behind
him like stepping stones. You'll have another week's riding to catch him, but
tonight at least you can sleep under a roof and put a hot meal inside you. No
doubt the Prefect will give you an escort in the morning; it would be a shame
to get picked off by an ambush after you've come so far!"
By this time Gaius was less interested in a meal than in soaking himself in
the legionary bathhouse, but he was glad enough for the dinner once he was
clean again, and his host, who was clearly lonely and a little nervous, left here
with his small command, seemed glad to welcome him to his quarters and
have someone new to talk to.
"Did you hear about the Usipii mutiny?" asked the Prefect as the remains
of the sauced grouse on which they had been dining were cleared away.
Gaius set down his wine cup - it had been a rather nice Falernian - and
looked expectant.
"A bunch of raw Germans, you know, fresh from their dismal marshes,
sent up to Lenacum as levies. They mutinied and stole three ships - ended up
sailing all the way from west to east around the coast of Britannia."
Gaius stared. "Then Britannia is an island . . ." That question had been a
topic of dinner-table debate for as long as he could remember.

"It would seem so," the man nodded. "Eventually the Suevi caught the
survivors and sold them as slaves back to the Roman side of the Rhenus, and
so we learned the story!"
"Remarkable!" said Gaius. The wine had done its work, and he was
beginning to feel nicely toasted. It would make a good story to tell Julia when
he got back to Londinium. He was a little surprised to realize that he was
thinking of it as something to share with her - but it was a tale whose ironies
could only be appreciated by someone from his own world. Eilan would not
have understood at all. He realized that he was really two people - the Roman
who was betrothed to Julia, and the Briton who loved Eilan.
The next day it began to drizzle. Gaius snuffled and coughed as they
moved forward through the sodden landscape, thinking that it was no wonder
they said the tribesmen could dissolve into the heather at will. It seemed to
him that the hills were dissolving into the sky, and the woods into the soil, and
he and his horse into the mud through which they toiled.
At least, he thought dismally, he was riding. He pitied the legionaries who
had to slog along this road weighted by all their weapons and gear.
Sometimes they saw sheep on a hillside, or the little black cattle the natives
herded, but except for an arrow that flashed by Gaius's head from the trees as
they were fording one of the streams, there was no sign of hostile forces
anywhere.
"Good news for us, but maybe bad for the army," the decurion who led his
escort said somberly. "If the warriors aren't guarding their own hunting runs,
it can only mean they really have united at last. No one can deny they're good
enough fighters when their blood is up. If the tribes had been able to join
forces when Caesar came, the Empire would still end on the coasts of Gaul."
Gaius nodded and pulled his brick-colored cloak more tightly around him,
wondering what fate had inspired Licinius to send his messages at just the
moment when perhaps the most formidable confederation of British tribes
ever to assemble was about to attack the army that Agricola had led north . . .
"You have news from Martius Julius Licinius? Tell me, is he well?" The
man who emerged from the large leather tent was only of middle height, and
without his armor almost slender, but despite the raindrops glittering in his
graying hair and the shadows around his eyes, he projected an aura of

authority that would have identified him even without the cloak, of scarlet so
deep it was almost purple, that he wore.
"Gaius Macellius Severus Siluricus reporting, sir!" He drew himself up
and saluted, ignoring the water that dripped from the brim of his helmet. "The
Procurator is well, and sends you his dearest greetings. As you may read in
his letters, sir —"
"Indeed." Agricola held out his hand for the packet and smiled. "And best
read under cover before they dissolve from damp. You must be wet as well,
after your ride. Tacitus here will take you over to the officers' campfire and
see to your billeting." He indicated a tall, saturnine young man whom Gaius
later learned was his son-in-law. "Now that you are here, you had best wait
for the conclusion of the fighting so that I can send a report home with you
again."
Gaius blinked as the Governor withdrew into his tent. He had forgotten
the man's charm, or perhaps it had never been directed at him personally
when he was just one junior officer among many. Then Tacitus took his arm,
and, wincing a little as his stiffening thigh muscles protested, Gaius followed
him.
It was very good to sit around a campfire with his brother officers once
more, eating hot lentil stew and hard bread and drinking sour wine. Only now
did Gaius realize how much he had missed that camaraderie. Once the other
tribunes had been reminded of his previous campaign experience and realized
he was not just a parade-ground soldier they accepted him, and as the wine
jug went round, even the rain that was still beading on his cloak did not seem
so cold. The tension he sensed around him was only to be expected, and
morale seemed high. The loricas of the men on duty were scoured and shining
despite the weather, and new paint gleamed on battered shields. The young
staff officers with whom he was sitting seemed serious, but not afraid.
"Do you think the General will be able to bring Calgacus to battle?" he
asked.
One of the other men laughed. "More likely to be the other way round.
Can't you hear 'em?" He gestured into the windy darkness. "They're up there
all right, howling and painting themselves blue! The scouts say there's thirty
thousand men up on Graupius -warriors of the Votadini and Selgovae,

Novantae and Dobunni and all the other little clans we've been chasing these
past four years, and Caledonians from northern tribes whose names even they
don't know. Calgacus will give us a battle, no doubt of it; he has to, before
they all start remembering old feuds and begin to fight each other instead!"
"And how many," Gaius asked carefully, "have we?"
"From the Legions, fifteen thousand: the Twentieth Valeria Victrix,
Second Adiutrix, and what's left of the Ninth," said one of the tribunes, who
by his insignia, was attached to the Second.
Gaius looked at him with interest. The tribune had joined the Legion since
Gaius had been in Londinium, but there must be others here from his father's
Legion whom he would know.
"And eight thousand auxiliary infantry, mostly Batavians and Tungri,
some Brigantian irregulars and four wings of cavalry." This was from a troop
commander, who shortly thereafter took his leave to return to his men.
"Well, that's not so unequal, is it?" Gaius said brightly, and someone
laughed.
"It would be no problem at all, except that they hold the higher ground."
On the upper slopes of the peak the Romans called Mons Graupius, the
wind was colder. The Britons gave the mountain other names - the Old
Woman, ancient and enduring, Deathbringer and Winter Hag. As the night
wore on, it was in her latter aspect that Cynric was meeting her. Here, the
gusts of rain that fell in the valleys were coming down in bursts of sleet that
stung his cheeks and fell hissing into the fires.
The Caledonians did not appear to mind. They sat around their campfires,
draining skins of heather ale and boasting of tomorrow's victory. Cynric
pulled his checked cloak over his head, hoping that it would hide his
shivering.
"The hunter who boasts too loudly at dawning may find himself with an
empty cookpot when night falls," said a quiet voice at his elbow.
Cynric turned and recognized Bendeigid, his pale robes a ghostly blur in

the darkness.
"Our warriors have always chanted thus before battle - it raises their
spirits!"
He turned and gazed at the men around the fire. This lot were Novantae of
the White Horse Clan, from the south-east coast of Caledonia, where the
Salmaes firth ran in towards Luguvalium. But at the fire beyond them
Selgovae men were drinking, their hereditary enemies. The volume rose and
he saw the figure of their commander lit suddenly as someone threw a new
log on the fire. The chieftain threw back his head, laughing, and the light
flamed anew in his pale eyes and his red hair.
"We're on our own ground, lads, and the land itself will fight for us! The
Red-cloaks are driven by greed, which is a cold counselor, but we burn with
the fire of freedom! How can we fail?"
The Novantae, hearing his words, left their own fire to gather around him,
and in moments the two groups had become a single mass of cheering men.
"He's right," said Cynric. "If Calgacus has been able to persuade this lot to
stand together, how can we fail?"
Bendeigid remained silent and, despite his bold words, Cynric felt the
serpent of anxiety that had been gnawing at him since night fell begin to stir
once more.
"What is it?" he asked. "Have you had an omen?"
Bendeigid shook his head. "No omens - I think the odds for this fight are
so evenly balanced that even the gods will not wager on its outcome. We have
the advantage, true, but Agricola is a formidable opponent. If Calgacus, great
leader though he is, underestimates him, it could be fatal."
Cynric let out his breath in a long sigh. He had fought so hard to prove
himself to these tribesmen, who had begun by mocking him as the son of a
defeated people even when they did not know his blood was tainted by that of
Rome, defiance had become second nature. But with his foster father he need
not pretend.

"I hear the singing, but I cannot join in it; I drink, but my belly remains
cold. Father, will my courage fail me tomorrow when we face the Roman
steel?" At times like this, he could not help wondering if he should have run
off with Dieda when he had the chance.
Bendeigid turned him so the Druid could look into Cynric's eyes. "You
will not fail," he said fiercely. "These men are still fighting for glory. They do
not understand their enemy as you do. But in battle your despair will only
make you more terrible. Remember that you are a Raven, Cynric, and what
you will seek down there tomorrow is not honor, but revenge!"
That night Gaius lay listening to other men's breathing and wondering
why sleep came so hard. This was a drier bed than any he had slept in for
some time, and he had been in battles before. But his other fights, he
reflected, had been unexpected skirmishes that were over almost as soon as
they had begun.
He sought for some distraction, and suddenly found himself remembering
Eilan. During the journey north it had been Julia he thought of, imagining her
amusement at some bit of odd gossip or army tale. But he could never admit
to Julia the things that in this moment of darkness were haunting him Surrounded by all these men I feel alone . . . I want to lay my head on
your breast and feel your arms around me . . . I am alone, Eilan, and I am
afraid!
Finally he passed at last into an uneasy slumber, and in his dreaming it
seemed to him that he and Eilan were together in a hut
in the midst of the forest. He kissed her, and realized that her body was
rounding with his child. She smiled at him and pulled her gown tight over her
belly so that he could see; he laid his hand upon the hard curve and felt the
child move within and thought that she had never been so beautiful. She
opened her arms to him and drew him down beside her, murmuring words of
love.
Gaius fell into a deeper sleep then. When he woke, men were stirring
around him, pulling on their tunics and fumbling to lace their armor in the
dim gray hour before the dawn.

"Why isn't he putting the Legions in the battle line?" Gaius asked Tacitus
in an undertone.
They sat their horses with the rest of the General's personal staff on a little
hill, watching the light infantry spread out in a long line below the mountain
with the cavalry to either side. The pale light gleamed on the smooth tops of
their bronze helmets and their spear points, and glinted on their mail. Rough
pasture rose towards the lower slopes beyond them, where the dry grass gave
way to broad swathes of garnet-brown bracken and the paler purple of
heather. But much of the topography of Graupius could only be guessed at,
for the lower part of the mountain was hidden by armed men.
"Because they're under strength," the answer came. "The Emperor
siphoned off men from all four Legions, remember, for his German campaign.
As a result, three thousand of our crack troops are kicking their heels in
Germania while the Chatti and the Sugambri laugh at them, and Agricola will
have to use every trick he knows to compensate. He's got the Legions formed
up in front of the entrenchments where they can support us if we fall back, but
he hopes it won't come to that."
"But it was the Emperor who ordered the Governor to secure northern
Caledonia, wasn't it?" Gaius asked. "Domitian is a soldier. Wouldn't he know
-?"
Tacitus smiled and Gaius felt suddenly like a child.
"Some would say," he answered softly, "that he knows all too well. Titus
gave our Governor a hero's honors for his successes in Britannia, and when
this campaign is over Agricola's term as Governor will be done. Perhaps the
Emperor feels there is not room tor two victorious generals in Rome."
Gaius looked towards their Commander, who was watching the
deployment of his troops with grave attention. His armor, of dagged scale
over mail, glittered in the growing light, and the horse-hair crest of his helmet
stirred slightly in the breeze. Beneath the mail, tunic and breeches were
snowy white, but in the early morning light his crimson cloak glowed
balefully.
Years later, on a visit to Rome, Gaius read the passage from the biography
of Agricola in which Tacitus described that day. He had to smile at the

speeches, which had been elaborated for literary effect in the best rhetorical
tradition, for while they had both heard the General's words, the wind brought
them only fragments of the harangue of Calgacus, which Gaius no doubt
understood much better than Tacitus.
Calgacus had begun first; at least they could see a tall man with hair the
color of a fox-pelt striding back and forth before the most richly dressed of
the enemy, and assumed it must be he. Echoing from the slopes behind him,
phrases drifted across the open ground.
". . . they have eaten the land, and behind us remains only the sea!"
Calgacus gestured northward. ". . .let us destroy these monsters who would
sell our children into slavery!" The Caledonians began to roar approval, and
the next words were lost. When Gaius could hear again, the enemy leader
seemed to be talking about the Iceni rebellion.
". . .ran in terror when Boudicca, a woman, raised the Trinobantes against
them . . . do not even risk their own people against us! Let the Gauls and our
brothers the Brigantes remember how the Romans have betrayed them, and
let the Batavians desert them as the Usipii have done!" There was a little stir
in the ranks of the auxiliaries from those who understood this as Calgacus
continued his appeal to the Caledonians to fight for their liberty, but a word
from their commanders calmed them.
The tribesmen were crowding forward, singing and shaking their spears,
and Gaius trembled, hearing in that wild music a call that awakened memories
almost too old for him to have words for them, of songs that he had heard
among the Silures when he was a babe in arms. And the hidden side of his
soul, the mother's side, wept in answer, for Gaius had seen the Mendip mines,
and the lines of British slaves being marched on to ships for sale in Rome,
and he knew that what Calgacus said was true.
The Romans, understanding the tone if not the words, were stirring
angrily. It was in that moment, when it seemed that their discipline, if not
their loyalty might break, that Agricola raised his hand and reined his white
horse around to face them, and hi? officers drew close to hear what he would
say.
The General seemed to speak quietly, like a kindly father reassuring an
excited child, but his words carried. He spoke of the distance they had

covered, their courage in going beyond the boundaries of the Roman world,
and gently pointed out the dangers of trying to retreat through such a hostile
country.
". . . a retiring general or army is never safe . . .death with honor is
preferable to life with ignominy . . .Even to fall in this extremest verge of
earth and of nature cannot be thought an inglorious fate."
As for the Caledonians, whom Calgacus had called the last free men in
Britain, in Agricola's version they became fugitives, ". . . the remaining
number consists solely of the cowardly and spiritless; whom you see at length
within your reach, not because they have stood their ground, but because they
are overtaken." For a moment, listening to that calm and kindly voice destroy
the Caledonian vision of glory, Gaius almost hated him. But he could not
deny the General's conclusion, which was that a Roman victory today could
bring an end to a struggle that had gone on for fifty years.
It seemed to Gaius that in this man he saw the essence of what Macellius
meant by a Roman. Despite the fact that Agricola's family was of Gaulish
extraction and had risen through successful public service first to the middle
rank of equestrian and then to senator, he made Gaius think of the old heroes
of republican Rome.
Licinius's clerks held their master in affection, but in the way Agricola's
officers watched him Gaius sensed something else, an intensity of devotion
that kept them steady even when the savages on the mountain began to raise
their courage to battle heat by war cries and beating on their shields.
Apparently this attitude extended to the men under Agricola's command, and
Gaius, observing that stern profile and hearing the General speak as calmly as
if he had been conversing in his tent with a few friends, thought suddenly,
This is the kind of devotion that makes Emperors. Perhaps Domitian was right
to be afraid.
The Caledonians were ranged upon the rising ground, their ranks rising in
tier upon tier above the plain. Now their chariots came rushing down the
slope with the horsemen ranging about them, agile ponies careering at full tilt
with their drivers swaying on the wickerwork platforms while the spearmen
they carried shook their weapons and laughed.
To Gaius they were an image of beauty and terror. He understood that he

was seeing the warrior soul of Britannia as Caesar and
Frontinus had seen it, sensing that after this it would never be seen in all
its glory again. The chariots hurtled forward, turning at the last moment as
their javelins thudded into the Roman shields, and the warriors ran out along
the poles between the horses, throwing their swords glittering into the air and
catching them again. They had come to this battle as if to a festival, and the
sun glinted from torques and armrings. Some had mail and helmets, but most
fought in brightly checked tunics or half naked, their fair skin painted with
spiraling designs in blue. Gaius could hear their boasting above the rattle of
the chariot wheels, and felt not terror but a terrible sorrow.
One of the tribunes protested loudly as Agricola dismounted and a man
came up to lead his horse away, but the faces of the others set grimly at this
evidence that whatever happened to his army, Agricola would not flee. They
would give their lives to protect him, thought Gaius, and so, he realized
suddenly, would I. Some of the General's personal staff were dismounting as
quiet orders set others cantering down the lines. Gaius reined back, uncertain
what to do.
"You." The General gestured him closer. "Get down to the Tungri and tell
them to spread out further. Tell them that I know it weakens the center, but I
don't want the enemy outflanking us."
As he kicked his pony into a gallop, Gaius heard the thunk of javelins
slamming into shields behind him and realized that the British chariots had
pulled away and their first line of infantry were moving in. He bent over the
animal's neck and urged it to better speed. The space between two armies that
were closing for the first, devastating exchange of missiles was no place to be.
He saw the gleam of the Tungrian standard before him and the line parted to
let him through; then he was gabbling his message, moving behind the men as
they began to press sideways, and watching from the corner of his eye as the
enemy attack expanded outward.
The British warriors were good, he thought as he saw them deflecting
Roman spears with their round shields. Their greatswords were longer even
than the Roman spatha, slashing weapons blunt at the tips but wickedly
sharpened along the side. The Roman trumpets blared and Agricola's center
bulged forward, closing with the enemy.

Gaius knew he could do no more good here with the infantry, but the
General had given him no further orders; with sudden decision he kneed his
mount further down the line to join the cavalry there. Over the heads of the
auxiliaries he saw the battle
lines breaking up into a close, confused struggle in which the Caledonians
had no room to swing their longer swords. This was the Batavians' favorite
kind of fighting; they pressed forward, stabbing with their gladii and
smashing enemy faces with the bosses of their shields. There was a shout
from the Romans as the first line of foes gave way, and Agricola's center
began to advance up the lower slopes of the mountain after them.
More slowly, the infantry to either side tried to follow them, but now the
British chariots, seeing their lines thin and sensing a weakness, plunged
towards them, bouncing on the rough ground. In another moment they were in
among the infantry like wolves in a sheepfold, savaging the footsoldiers with
sword and spear. Someone screamed at the men to close ranks; men and
horses and chariots swirled in confusion; Gaius saw a blue-painted warrior
loom up before him and thrust with his spear.
In the moments that followed, things happened too fast for thinking. Gaius
stabbed and parried as weapons flared around him. A chariot plunged towards
him and his pony whirled, throwing him hard against the back horns of his
saddle. He felt the spear wrenched out of his hand and ducked as a javelin
sped towards him. The missile clanged on his helmet, caught for a moment in
the crest and fell away. Gaius blinked dizzily, understanding now why only
officers wore crests on their helms in battle, but the pony, wiser than its
master, was already carrying him out of danger.
For a moment he was clear; Gaius tugged his spatha from its sheath and
straightened. He could see now that the chariots, having failed to break
through the Roman lines, were becoming entangled within them. A chariot
lurched towards him on the uneven ground; wood crunched as a wheel hit a
boulder and it slewed round. He saw the driver hacking at the traces.
Whinnying wildly, the horses sprang free, joining the others that careered in
panic through the battle, knocking down friend and foe.
Battle was fairly joined now; the slopes of Graupius seethed with knots of
struggling men, clumping and unraveling and knotting again in a constantly
shifting tapestry. But it appeared to Gaius that little by little, the Romans were

gaining ground.
Then a spear seemed to thrust up from the ground before him with a
snarling face behind it; his pony reared as he whacked the shaft aside with his
sword and slashed downward. Red covered the blue designs as the blade bit,
then the horse leaped forward and the face was gone, and Gaius was slashing
and guarding with no time for thinking at all.
When he next had a moment to focus, they were well up the mountain.
From the left he heard shouting; the Caledonians who had been watching the
battle from the summit were now descending, leaping down the slope with
appalling swiftness to take the Romans from the rear. Could Agricola see it?
Gaius heard once more the bray of the Roman trumpets, and grinned as the
four wings of cavalry the General had been reserving swung into action at
last. They outflanked the Britons and hammered them against the anvil of the
infantry; then the true slaughter began.
Calgacus's force had lost all cohesion. Some men were still fighting,
others tried to flee, but the Romans were everywhere, killing or making
prisoners only to slay them in turn as yet more enemy warriors came their
way. Gaius saw a gleam of white near by and spotted Agricola in the middle
of the battle with only two tribunes and a couple of legionaries to guard him.
He turned his mount that way.
As he neared them, one of the tribunes shouted. Three Britons, their finery
soaked in blood and armed only with knives and stones, were charging. Gaius
kicked the pony hard. He swung and his blade tore a crimson gash through the
chest of the first man. Then his horse stumbled on something soft; Gaius felt
himself falling, released his shield and wrenched himself free as the animal
went down. He saw a knife flash and felt pain sear his thigh; the horse tried to
struggle to its feet and the knife flared again, sinking into its neck; the animal
jerked and went back down.
Gaius got up on one elbow, sank his own dagger into the Briton's chest
and then used it to cut the throat of the dying horse. Then, grimacing as his
thigh began to throb, he started to get up, searching around for his shield and
sword.
"You all right, lad?" Agricola was looking down at him.

"Yes, sir!" he started to salute, realized that the dagger was still in his
hand, and sheathed it again.
"Fall in, then," said the General, "we still have work to do."
"Yes —" Gaius began, but Agricola was already turning away to give
someone else an order. One of the tribunes helped him to his feet, and he tried
to catch his breath.
Blood had dyed the bracken at his feet a deeper crimson. The field seemed
a mass of broken men and weapons, and those enemies left alive were
scattering, pursued by the cavalry. The Romans on foot followed more slowly
as the Caledonians fled towards the forest on the other side of the mountain.
Agricola ordered some of the men to dismount and beat through the wood
while the others circled round behind it.
It was at the edge of the wood as dusk was falling that Gaius whirled to
face a man who sprang out at them. He swung instinctively, but he was tired
and the blade turned in his hand, taking the warrior on the side of the head
and bearing him to the ground. He drew his dagger and bent over the man to
finish him, and swore as a bloody hand seized his arm. He lost his balance
and came down on top of his enemy; the two of them rolled over and over,
fighting for possession of the blade.
Gaius's arm began to shake as muscles that had never quite recovered
from the old wound where the boar stake had gone into his shoulder began to
give way. Panic tapped his last reserves of energy, and his fingers closed on
the other man's throat. For a moment they heaved, the dagger digging
uselessly into his armor. Then all the fight went out of the other man and he
lay still.
Shaking, Gaius pulled himself upright and plucked the weapon from his
enemy's nerveless fingers. He bent over to finish the job he had begun and
found himself staring into Cynric's dazed eyes.
"Don't move!" he said in British, and the other stilled. Gaius looked
quickly around him. "I can save you — they're beginning to take hostages.
Will you surrender to me now?"
"Roman." Cynric spat, but weakly. "I should have left you in the boar pit!"

It was then that Gaius realized the other man had recognized him as well.
"Better for me . . .and for Eilan!"
"You have as much Roman blood as I do!" Guilt added venom to Gaius's
reply.
"Your mother sold her honor! Mine died!"
Gaius found himself pushing down on the blade, and at the last moment
realized that was what Cynric wanted him to do.
"You saved my life once. Now I give you yours, and Hades take your
damned British pride! Surrender, and another day you can fight me." He knew
this was foolish; even lying in his blood Cynric looked dangerous. But saving
him was the only thing he could do for Eilan.
"You win . . ." Cynric's head fell back in exhaustion, and Gaius saw new
blood seeping from the gashes on his arms and thighs, ". . . today . . ." Their
eyes met, and Gaius saw the hatred still burning in his eyes. "But one day you
will pay . . ." He fell silent as the wagon that was picking up the wounded
creaked towards them.
Gaius watched two battered legionaries load him in with the others, his
satisfaction in the Roman victory dissipating as he realized that he had lost his
friend as surely as if he had seen Cynric die before his own eyes.
With darkness Agricola called off the pursuit, not wishing to risk his men
on unfamiliar ground. But for the Caledonians who survived it was not yet
over. Far into the night the Romans could hear women calling as they
searched the battlefield. Over the next few days returning scouts reported an
ever-widening circle of devastation. The land that had once supported a
thriving people was now a silent world in which the bodies of women and
children killed by their own men to save them from slavery gazed blankly at
the heavens, and the smoke of burned housesteads darkened the weeping sky.
When the numbers were finally tallied it was estimated that wounds or
battle had accounted for ten thousand of the enemy; while only three hundred
and sixty Romans died.
As Gaius rode along the column of men marching south to winter

quarters, he remembered the words of Calgacus: "To ravage, to slaughter, to
usurp under false titles they call Empire; and where they make a desert, they
call it peace."
Certainly the North was peaceful now, the last hopes for British freedom
as dead as the men who had defended it. It was this, more than the fact that
the despatches he carried included a very flattering description of his own
conduct on the battlefield, that made Gaius realize that he must become
entirely a Roman now.

Nineteen

Despite Agricola's hopes, the pacification of the North was not to be
neatly accomplished with a single battle. And though the people of Rome
danced in the streets when the triumphant account of Mons Graupius was
proclaimed, a great deal remained to be done to secure the victory. The
despatches that Gaius bore southward included an order for him to return as
soon as his wounds were healed, for the Governor was not inclined to let so
useful a young man go to waste in Londinium.
One of Gaius's assignments was to visit the compound where they were
keeping the more important prisoners. Cynric was still there, scarred and
embittered, but alive, and grimly triumphant that Calgacus had not been
captured to grace Agricola's triumph in Rome. Indeed, no one seemed to
know what had happened to the British leader. There were rumors that the
Druid Bendeigid was hiding out in the hills.
"I was taken in arms, and expect no mercy," said Cynric in a momentary
softening, "but if your general has any regard for you, ask him to pardon the
old man. I pulled you out of the boar pit, but he saved your life. For that, I
think you owe him something, don't you?"
And Gaius had agreed. In truth, his debt was greater than Cynric knew,
and since it could not be proven that Bendeigid had fought against Rome,
Agricola was willing to let word be circulated through the North that the
Druid could safely return home.
In the event, it was not until the Governor himself headed south to prepare

for his return to Rome that Gaius was given leave to do the same. And so it
was the end of winter by the time he found himself on the road to visit his
father in Deva, free at last to follow the instructions Julia had given him
months before to make his peace with Eilan.
Winter in the North had been black and chill, with bitter winds and nights
that seemed to have no end. Even this far south the air was brisk, though the
first buds were beginning to tip the branches with green, and Gaius was glad
of his wolfskin cloak. In Britain even the deified Julius had sometimes worn
three tunics, one above the other, against the cold.
It felt strange to ride through a country that was at peace. It seemed to
Gaius that everything must have changed since last he saw it, as if he had
been gone for years. But as he neared Deva, the raw wind that blew in off the
estuary was the same, and the dark mountains that hung on the western
horizon were the brooding shadows that had haunted him since he was a
child. He rode past the mighty embankments of the fortress to the main gate,
and found the timber stockade that crowned them only a little more weathered
than he remembered. It was he himself that had changed.
His footsteps rang on the stone pavement of the praetorium as he strode
towards his father's office. Valerius looked up as he entered, frowning for a
moment until Gaius began to strip off his wrappings. Then he grinned. But it
was when Macellius emerged from the inner office that Gaius realized he was
not the only one to have grown older.
"Well, my boy! Is it you indeed? We had begun to fear that the Governor
would take you back to Rome with him. He wrote very favorably about your
work up there, lad, very favorably indeed." Macellius held out his arms, and
clasped Gaius in a hearty embrace, cut short, as if the older man were afraid
to betray himself if he held on to his son for too long.
But Gaius had felt how his father's fingers gripped him, as if he needed to
reassure himself that his boy was there in the flesh, alive. He had no need to
ask if Macellius had been worried; he did not think that settling the petty
squabbles of men in winter quarters and tallying up stores had put the new
gray in the Camp Prefect's hair.
"So how long are we to have the pleasure of your company before they
need you back in Londinium?"

"I have a few weeks of leave, sir." Gaius forced a smile. "I thought it was
time I came home for a while." With a pang he realized that Macellius had not
said a word about his wedding. The old man must realize that I have grown up
at last!
But Macellius no longer needed to ask about it. Since the battle of Mons
Graupius Gaius had somehow begun to take his marriage to Julia for granted.
But now that the familiar hills of Deva were bringing back old memories he
wondered. Could he really go through with it, and if he did not, what would
he do?
But Gaius had found out one thing about himself in these last months: he
was ambitious after all. Agricola was a great man, and he had been an
excellent Governor, but who could say whom Domitian would send after
him? And there were things about this land that even Agricola could never
understand. The old Britannia of the tribes was dead. Its people would have to
change and become Romans, but how could some Gaul or Spaniard
understand them? To make this country the gem of the Empire could require
the leadership of someone both British and Roman. Someone like himself, if
he made the right moves now.
". . .invite a few of the senior officers to join us for dinner," his father was
saying. "If you're not too tired?"
"I'm fine," Gaius smiled. "After the roads in Caledonia, it was a pleasure
to ride here."
Macellius nodded, and Gaius could see the pride radiating off of him like
heat from a fire. He swallowed, suddenly realizing that Macellius had never
before given him such unqualified approval — and how much he needed to
see that glow in his father's eyes.
It was usual for the High Priestess to spend some time in seclusion after
the great festivals, recovering from the ritual. The women of the Forest House
had become accustomed to this when Lhiannon ruled them, and no one
thought it odd that after Eilan's first appearance as High Priestess her recovery
should be protracted.
And once she was up and about again, they might have been disappointed

that she did not participate much in the life of their community, and so often
went heavily veiled, but they were not surprised. Lhiannon was the only High
Priestess that most of them had ever known, and during her last years she had
kept mostly to her rooms, served by Caillean, or by her chosen attendants. In
any case a period of retreat was required so that the new Oracle could
commune with the gods.
And the reclusiveness of their new High Priestess was less intriguing a
topic of gossip than the disappearance of Dieda. Some were sure that she had
gone voluntarily, angry because she had not been chosen High Priestess.
Others suggested that she had run away to join Cynric, whom several had
seen when he visited the Forest House in the company of Bendeigid.
But when someone heard from a woodcutter that a pregnant woman was
living in the hut in the forest, the solution to the mystery became appallingly
obvious. Dieda must be with child; she had been sent to live in the isolation of
the forest until she should be delivered of her shame.
The truth, of course, was so impossible that no one guessed it. In the
event, Dieda's part in the deception was not even very taxing, for after the
battle of Mons Graupius the Governor had forbidden all public assemblies lest
they spark unrest. This far south they had heard only rumors of the
destruction; for most folk, getting in food for the winter was a more pressing
concern. At the feast of Samaine folk had to make do with the little
divinations of apples and nuts and the hearthfire, for there was no fair or
festival, and no Oracle.
As for Eilan, she spent the winter snug in the round hut in the forest,
visited from time to time by Caillean, and attended by an old woman who did
not know her name. She made a little altar to the Goddess as Mother by the
fireside, and as she watched her belly ripen, she wavered between joy in the
new life that was growing within her and anguish because she did not know if
she would ever see her child's father again.
But it was the natural course of things that even the longest winter should
one day give way to spring. Though there were times when Eilan had felt that
she would be pregnant for ever, the feast of Brigantia was approaching, when
her child should be born. A few days before the festival Caillean appeared in
the doorway, and though these days she came easily to tears or laughter, Eilan
felt so glad to see her that she thought she would weep.

"There is fresh oat bread that I baked this morning," she said. "Sit here
and join me in my noon meal —" She hesitated. "— unless you feel that I
contaminate you by my forsworn presence?"
Caillean laughed, "Never," she replied. "If it had not been for the snows, I
would have come before."
"And how are things in the Forest House?" Eilan asked. "How does Dieda
in my place? Tell me everything; I am very dull here; growing like a
vegetable!"
"Surely not." Caillean smiled. "Perhaps a fruit tree come to harvest not in
autumn but spring. As for Vernemeton, Dieda performs your duties faithfully,
though perhaps not as well as you would do. I promise you I will come when
your child is born. Send me word by the old woman when the time comes."
"How will I know?"
Caillean laughed, not unkindly. "You were present when your sister's
second child was born. How much do you remember?"
"What I remember of that time is the raiders, and how you carried fire,"
Eilan said meekly.
Caillean smiled. "Well, I think it will not be long now. Perhaps you will
deliver on the Feast of the Maiden — your hands were busy this morning, and
such restlessness is often seen when a child stirs in readiness to be born. And
I have brought you a gift, a garland of white birch twigs, sacred to the Mother.
See - I will hang it above your bed that it may bring you good fortune at Her
hands." She rose and drew the wreath from her bag.
"The gods men follow may seem to shun you, but the Goddess cares for
all Her daughters who stand where you stand now. After the festival I will
come again, though it will be no pleasure seeing Dieda in your place there."
"How delighted I am to hear your opinion," someone said from the
doorway, the sweetness of her voice intensifying the sting of her words. "But
if you do not like me in the role of High Priestess, surely it is a little late to be
saying so!"

A figure heavily veiled in dark blue was standing there. Eilan's eyes
widened and Caillean flushed angrily.
"Why have you come here?"
"Why not?" Dieda asked. "Do you not think it gracious of the High
Priestess to visit her fallen kinswoman? All of our dear sisters are aware that
someone is living here, you know, and have concluded it is me. I will not
have a shred of reputation left when I eventually 'return'."
Eilan's voice shook. "Did you come only to gloat over my shame, Dieda?"
"Strangely enough, I did not," Dieda put back her veil. "Eilan, in spite of
all that has been between us, I wish you well. You are not the only one who is
alone. I have had no word of Cynric since he went north, and he has sent no
word to me. He cares for nothing but the fate of the Ravens. Perhaps when
this deception is over I should go north instead of to Eriu and become one of
the warrior women who serve the goddess of battles."
"Nonsense," said Caillean tartly. "You would make a very poor warrior,
but you are a gifted bard."
Dieda shrugged helplessly. "Perhaps, but I must find some way to atone
for serving Ardanos's treachery."
"Do you truly call it so?" asked Eilan; "I do not. I have had time to think,
living here, and it seems to me that the Lady has allowed this to happen to
Her priestess so that I may understand the need to protect all the children of
this land. It is peace, not war, that I will work for when I return."
Dieda looked down at Eilan. She said slowly, "I never had any wish for a
child by Cynric or any other man. And yet I think that if I were bearing a
child to Cynric, I might feel as you do." Her eyes were glistening with tears
and she dashed them angrily away. "I must return before busy tongues have
time to spin too many tales. I came only to wish you good fortune; but it
seems that even here, Caillean has forestalled me."
She turned, pulling her veil over her face once more, and before either of
them could find words to reply, was gone.

Every day, it seemed, the light lasted a little longer. The branches blushed
with returning sap and the swans began courting in the marshes. Though
winter storms might still come to lash the land, there was a sense that spring
was coming. The men who worked the land took down their plowshares from
the rafters, and the fishermen began to caulk their vessels, and the shepherds
stayed out all night on the cold hillsides with the lambing ewes.
Gaius rode out, listening to the sounds of new life all around him, and
counted the days. It had been Beltane when he and Eilan lay together, and
since then nine moons had passed. She would be giving birth soon now.
Women died in childbirth sometimes. He watched returning waterfowl
unraveling across the sky and knew that whether he married Julia or not, he
had to see Eilan once more.
The higher he rose among the Romans, the more he could do for Eilan and
their child. If it were a son, perhaps Eilan would let him raise him. She
certainly could not keep him in the Forest House. It did not seem so unlikely;
his mother's people had been willing enough to give him up completely into
his father's hands.
As he rode back to the fortress his thoughts went round and round. It
would be hard to tell her that they could not be married, at least not yet. If
Julia did not give him a son, well, he sometimes thought divorced couples
were more common than married ones in the Roman world. When his
position was assured perhaps they could marry; at least he could give his child
a good start in the world. Would she believe that? Would she forgive him? He
bit his lip, wondering what he would say to her.
But mostly his heart beat hard simply at the thought of seeing Eilan again,
even at a distance; just to know that all was well with her.
Of course, there was still the problem of how he was going to get in to see
her. At length he realized that he would have to trust to the gods to help him.
The Legate who commanded the Second Adiutrix Legion had retired the
preceding winter and it was just at this moment that his replacement arrived.
Gaius knew that his father would have more than enough to do helping the
new Commander settle in. When he announced he was going off for a few
days' hunting, Macellius hardly had time to say farewell.

It was at the festival of the goddess the Britons called Brigantia that
celebrated the end of the winter that Gaius rode once more past the Hill of the
Maidens, just at that time when the young men dressed in costumes of straw
and carried an image of the Lady from house to house to give Her blessing in
exchange for cakes and ale. But here, he had heard, the priestess who was the
Voice of the Goddess came out to proclaim the coming of spring to the
people. In the wood outside the village Gaius changed into the British
clothing he had brought along. Then he joined the others who were gathering
to await the priestesses. From conversations overheard around him, he learned
that this year the crowd was bigger than usual.
"The old Priestess died last autumn," one of the women told him. "And
they say that the new one is young, and very beautiful."
"Who is she?" he asked, his heart beginning to beat heavily in his breast.
"The Arch-Druid's granddaughter, I am told, and some whisper there was
more than chance in her choosing. But I say that the old blood is best for the
old ways, and who should be better fitted for such a task than one whose
fathers and mothers before her have served the gods?"
Eilan! he thought. How could it be? Had she lost the child? If she was
really High Priestess, how was he ever to see her again? He waited with illconcealed impatience for nightfall, and grew silent with the others as they saw
the procession of white-robed maidens emerge from the timber gate of the
Forest House and come towards them down the avenue. At their head walked
a slender woman with a scarlet cloak over her white gown. Beneath the thin
veil he could see the glint of golden hair. She came crowned with light and
attended by harpsong. Eilan . . . his heart cried. Can you feel me near you,
Eilan?
"Out of the winter's darkness I have come —" she said, and her voice was
like music. Too much like music, thought Gaius; Eilan's voice had been sweet
to him, but it had not this resonance. He pressed closer, trying to see. This
woman's voice sounded as if she were a trained singer.
"Light-bearer am I, and bearer of blessings. Now comes the springtide;
new leaves shall spring soon from the branches, and the rainbow flowers.
May your beasts bear in abundance; good fortune to your plowing. Take now

the light, my children, and with it my favor."
The Priestess bent, and they lifted from her head the crown of candles. As
they lowered it to the ground before her, Gaius saw her face for the first time
in full light. It was the face he had dreamed of, and yet, even in a single
moment of illumination, he knew it was not Eilan. He remembered, now, how
beautifully Dieda had sung.
He pulled away, shaking. Had the woman got it wrong or was Eilan the
victim of some dreadful deception?
"Hail to the Lady!" the people cried. "Hail to the Holy Bride!" Cheering,
the young men touched their torches to the candle crown and began to form
the procession that would carry the light to every hut and farm. It was
certainly Dieda, and she must know where Eilan was. But he could not
approach her now.
He turned away and recognized another face in the crowd. At this
moment, danger meant nothing.
"Caillean," he whispered harshly. "I must speak to you! In the name of
mercy - where is Eilan?"
In the half-light he felt sharp eyes on him; he heard a voice speaking in a
whisper, "What are you saying?" A hard grip closed on his hand. "Come away
from this crowd; we cannot speak here."
He went unresisting. It seemed to him that if death should descend on
him, it would be no more than his due. But when they were beyond the
crowd, he stopped in his tracks and turned to the priestess.
His voice was low and hoarse. "Mistress Caillean, I know how Eilan
loved you. In the name of any god you cherish, tell me -where is she now?"
Caillean pointed to the dais where the white-veiled woman presided over
the festivities.
"Cry out and betray me if you will, but do not lie to me." Gaius stared into
her eyes. "Though every man here should swear that is Eilan, I know better.
Tell me if she is alive and well!"

Caillean stared back at him with widening eyes in which he read
amazement, anger, and fear. Then she let out her breath in an explosive sigh
and pulled him after her, further away from the circle of torchlight where
Dieda was lifting her hands to bless the crowd. As he followed Caillean into
the shadows, Gaius told himself that the catch in his throat was only from the
smoke of the fires.
"I should tell them who you are and let them kill you," she said finally.
"But I, too, love Eilan, and she has had enough pain."
"Is she alive?" Gaius's voice cracked.
"No thanks to you," Caillean retorted. "Ardanos would have put her to
death when he heard what you had done! But he was persuaded to spare her,
and she told me everything. Why did you never come for her? Is it true that
you have married someone else as we were told?"
"My father sent me away —"
"To Londinium," she confirmed. "Then it was one of the Arch-Druids's
lies that you had been married off to some Roman girl?"
"Not yet," he said. "But I have been on service and was not free to come.
If Eilan was not punished, why do I not see her here?"
Caillean looked at him with contempt; and Gaius felt it withering him. At
last she said, "Would you expect her to be out here dancing when she has just
given birth to your son?"
Gaius's breath caught. "Is she alive? Is the child?" It was dark here, away
from the fires, but it seemed to him that Caillean's stern expression softened.
"She is alive, but weak, for the birth was hard; I have been very frightened
for her. You do not seem to me worth dying for, but seeing you might be the
medicine she needs. The gods know I am no judge. I care nothing what
Ardanos might say. Come with me."
Caillean was only a dark shadow in the night as she led him around the
crowd and back along the road, away from the Forest House and the Hill of

Maidens. When they could no longer see the light of the fires, Gaius asked,
"Where are you taking me?"
"Eilan is not in the Forest House now; she has dwelt in a little house in the
deepest part of the woods since the child began to show." After a moment
Caillean added hesitantly, "I have been very troubled for her. Women are
sometimes very sorrowful after
they have had a child, and the gods know that Eilan has enough reason to
be unhappy; perhaps when she sees that you have not abandoned her, she will
recover more quickly."
"They told me that if I did not attempt to see her, she would not be
mistreated —" he protested,
Caillean laughed, a brief bitter sound. "Ardanos was furious, of course,
the wretched old tyrant. He is convinced that only if you Romans think of our
priestesses as Vestals will you protect them. But the choice of the Goddess
had fallen on Eilan, and he could not deny it, when Lhiannon with almost her
dying breath had proposed this deception."
Caillean did not speak again. After a time Gaius saw through the trees a
small glimmer of light against a greater darkness.
"There is the house."
Caillean's voice came soft in his ear. "Wait in the shadows while I get rid
of the old woman." She opened the door.
"The blessing of the Lady to you, Eilan; I've come to keep you company.
Annis, I'll care for her now. Why don't you go out and enjoy the festival?"
Presently he saw the old woman emerging, well-swaddled in shawls, and
as she passed down the pathway he drew back beneath the trees. Caillean
stood in the open doorway behind her, framed by the light. She gestured, and
as he came forward, heart thumping like a charge of cavalry, said quietly into
the golden glow behind her, "I have brought you a visitor, Eilan." He heard
her going out to keep watch behind him.
For a moment Gaius's eyes were dazzled by the light. When he could

focus again, he saw Eilan lying on a narrow bed, at her side the bundle that he
knew must be the child.
Eilan forced her eyes to open. She supposed it was kind of Caillean to
come to her, but why should she bring a visitor? She did not want to see
anyone except Caillean, but she had been sure the older priestess would be
busy with the festival. A dull curiosity stirring within her, she opened her
eyes.
A man's shape was standing between her and the light. Her grip on the
child tightened in instinctive alarm and the baby made a little squeaking
sound of protest. At that, the man took a quick step forward, and as the light
fell full upon his face, she knew him at last.
"Gaius!" she exclaimed, and at once burst into tears. She saw him redden,
shifting uncomfortably from foot to foot, unable to meet her eyes.
"I was sent to Londinium; I had no choice," he said. "I wanted to come to
you."
"I'm sorry -" she said, though she was not really sure why she was
apologizing, "I seem to weep very easily these days."
His gaze flicked swiftly to her, and then to the bundle.
"Is this my son?"
"No other," she said, "or do you really think perhaps that because —"
suddenly she was crying so hard she could hardly speak — "that because I
gave myself to you, I would lie down for any other man who came along?"
"Eilan!" From his face, she could see that the thought had never occurred
to him, and did not know whether to be flattered or indignant. His hands
clenched and unclenched. "Please! Let me hold my son."
Eilan felt her tears ceasing as abruptly as they had come. She looked up at
Gaius, for the first time really seeing him as he knelt beside her, and lifted the
baby into his arms. He looked older and grimmer, fine drawn by hardship and
with a shadow in his eyes as if he too had known pain; on his cheek was a
new scar. But as he held the child she saw his face begin to change.

"My son —" he whispered, gazing at the crumpled features, "my firstborn son . . ." Even if he went through with his marriage to the Roman girl,
thought Eilan, this moment was hers.
As the baby's pale blue, wandering eyes met those of his father and
seemed to fix on him, Gaius's arms tightened protectively around him. All the
hardness had gone from his features now; his focus was entirely on the baby,
as if he would do anything to safeguard this child who lay so trusting and
helpless in his arms. It came to Eilan that even when Gaius had been making
love to her she had never seen him look so radiant. She recognized the Fatherface of the God.
"What sort of world will this be for you, little one?" Gaius whispered, his
voice cracking. "How can I protect you, give you a home that will be secure?"
For a long moment he and the child seemed lost in mutual contemplation;
then the baby burped suddenly and began to chew on his thumb.
Gaius's gaze returned to Eilan, and as he set the child once more within
the curve of her arm she realized that, wan and exhausted though she might
be, to him she was the Goddess as well.
"So, how do you like him, my dear?" she said gently. "I have called him
Gawen, the name that your mother gave you."
"I think he is beautiful, Eilan." His voice was shaking. "How can I ever
thank you for this great gift?"
Run away with me! her heart cried. Carry us both away to some land
where we can all live together and be free! But the lamplight glinted balefully
on the signet ring he wore, and she knew that there was no such country,
beyond the reach of Rome.
"Make a world that will be safe for him." She echoed his own words. She
remembered her vision; in this child the blood of the Dragon and the Eagle
had mingled with the old line of the Wise; the saviors of Britannia would
come from his line. But for that to happen he must live to be a man.
"Sometimes I wonder if that is possible." His gaze went inward, and she
saw the grim shadow once more in his eyes.

"You have been in battle since I saw you," she said gently, "you did not
get that scar in Londinium . . .Tell me."
"Have you heard about the battle of Mons Graupius?" Gaius's voice grew
harsher. "Well, I was there." As the story poured out of him in a succession of
images, she flinched, feeling the horror, and the pity, and the fear.
"I knew that something had happened," she said in a low voice when he
was done. "There was a night, a moon after Lughnasad, when I felt that you
were in great danger. I spent the following day in terror, but the feeling passed
off after nightfall. I thought then that perhaps you had been fighting, but
though I could sense nothing more I was certain that you had survived! You
are part of me, my beloved. Surely if you had died, I would know!"
Gaius reached out blindly and took her hand. "It is true. I dreamed I was
in your arms. No other woman will ever live in my heart as you do, Eilan. No
other woman can give me my first-born son! But —" His voice cracked. "I
cannot acknowledge him. I cannot marry you!"
His face working, he looked down at the child. "When I could not find out
what had happened to you, I kept telling myself that we should have fled
together when we had the chance. I could have endured a life on the run if we
were together — but what kind of a life would that have been for you, and
what kind of life for him?" He reached out and touched the baby's cheek.
"He is so little, so soft," he said wonderingly. "If anything tried to harm
him, right now I think I could kill it with my bare hands!" Gaius's gaze flicked
from the child to Eilan and he grew red, as if embarrassed by his own
emotion.
"You said to make the world safe for him," he went on in a low voice. "As
things are now, I can think of only one way to do that. But you will need as
much courage as some ancient Roman matron of the Republic." At the
moment neither thought it odd that despite their great Emperors, Romans
always invoked the days of the Republic whenever they wished to call great
virtue to mind.
"You are trying to tell me that you are going to marry your Roman girl,"
Eilan said harshly. She was crying once more.

"I have to!" he exclaimed. "Don't you see? Mons Graupius was the last
stand of the tribes. The only hope of mercy for your people now is in rulers
who are both Roman and British, like me, but my only hope of gaining power
in the Roman world is through alliance to an important family. "Don't cry," he
begged raggedly. "I have never been able to endure your tears, my little one.
Think of him." He gestured toward the sleeping baby. "For his sake, surely we
can bear whatever we must."
You will not have to bear what I do, she struggled against her tears, what I
have already borne!
"You won't be alone for ever, I promise you that," he said. "I'll claim you
as soon as I can. And," he added disingenuously, "surely you know that
among our people a marriage is not indissoluble."
"Yes, I have heard that," Eilan said acidly, sure that if he was marrying
into a noble family, that the union would be as tight as the girl's kinfolk could
make it. "But what is she like, this Roman girl? Is she beautiful?"
He looked at her ruefully. "She has not half your beauty, my precious. She
is a little thing," he added, "but very determined. There are times when it
seems that I have been thrown unarmed into the arena to face a war-elephant,
or a savage wild animal unarmed, as I have heard is done with criminals in
Rome."
Then she will never let go of him, thought Eilan, but she managed a smile.
"Then you do not. . .really care about her?"
"Darling," he said, kneeling at her side, and the relief in his voice made
her want to laugh, "if it were not that her father is the Procurator, I give you
my word, I would never have looked twice at her. With his help I can become
a senator, even a Governor of Britain one day. Think of all I could do for you
and the baby then!"
Gaius bent over the child and once more that fierce protectiveness
flickered in his eyes. Then, sensing that Eilan was watching him, he looked
up again.
Eilan continued to stare until she saw him becoming uneasy again.

Caillean was right, she thought with bitter resignation, he has fallen in love
with a delusion and persuaded himself it is reality - like every other man!
Well, that should make it easier to tell him what she had to say.
"Gaius, you know that I love you," she began, "but you must believe that
even if you were free to offer me marriage I could not accept you." She
sighed, seeing confusion flicker in his eyes.
"I am High Priestess of Vernemeton, the Voice of the Goddess, did not
they tell you? What you hope to be among the Romans, Gaius, among my
people I already am! I risked my life to prove myself worthy, and the ordeal
was every bit as dangerous as your battle. I can no more give up that victory
than you can throw away the honor you have won!"
He frowned, trying to accept it, and Eilan realized that they were really far
more alike than he knew. But it seemed to her that he was prompted by
ambition, while she — if that were not also a delusion - was obeying the will
of the gods.
"Then, though no one else knows it, we will work together -said Gaius
finally, his gaze returning to the child. "And with a Governor and a High
Priestess for parents, what might this little one not do? Who knows; perhaps
he will be Emperor himself someday."
At that, the baby opened his eyes, considering them both impartially with
his vague gaze. Gaius picked him up again, cradling him awkwardly. "Be still
now, Lord of the World," he whispered as the baby squirmed, "and let me
hold you."
At that thought - that anything so small and pink could ever grow up to be
Emperor - his parents laughed.

Twenty

Gaius returned to Londinium in a kind of bittersweet daze. He had found
Eilan, and lost her. He had been forced to leave
the child she had borne him, and yet, he had a son! At times, as the capital
and Julia drew nearer, he wanted to turn his horse
and gallop back to Eilan, but he could find no way they could stay
together as a family. And he remembered how stern her face had grown when
Eilan told him what being High Priestess meant to her. For a few moments
she had not looked like his Eilan at all. It chilled him to think of the risk she
had run to prove herself worthy, and how she had risked his son!
And yet she had wept when they parted. So, to be truthful, had he. If Eilan
thought he got any pleasure from the thought of being married to Julia
Licinia, she was very much mistaken. As he breasted the last hill and saw the
tile roofs of the city basking in the afternoon sun, he reminded himself that he
was only doing this for her sake and for the sake of their child.
It was twilight by the time he reached the house of Licinius. The
Procurator had not yet returned from the tabularium, but Gaius found Julia in
the women's atrium. Her eyes lit up at the sight of him; making her prettier
than he had ever seen her. Not, of course, as pretty as Eilan; but then no one
could be as beautiful as Eilan had become. Still, Julia might become very
handsome in time.
She greeted him demurely. "So you are back from the West Country,
Gaius."
"As I stand before you, what would you say if I told you I was still in the
North?"
She giggled. "Well, I have heard that the spirits of the slain sometimes
appear to those they leave behind." Suddenly she was frightened, and the
mirth went out of her voice. "Gaius, tell me you are only teasing me and that I

truly see you here, alive and well!" Abruptly he realized how young she was.
"I am flesh and blood," he said wearily. But since he had been here last he
had seen death and dealt it; he had seen his future in the eyes of a new-born
child. Before, he had been a boy. He was a man now, and had learned to think
like one. No wonder if Julia was confused by the change.
Julia came forward and touched his arm. "Yes - you are alive," she said,
more steadily. "And you have seen your British girl?" She gazed up at him.
"I have seen her —" he began, searching for a way to tell her what had
happened. Julia had a right to know what kind of a husband she would be
getting if she married him.
But before he could get the words out, he heard Licinius's halting step on
the mosaic floor and the moment was lost.
"So you're back, my dear fellow." Licinius seemed genuinely glad to see
him. "I suppose this means we shall soon be having a wedding here."
"I hope so, sir," Gaius said, and hoped they thought his hesitation had
been modesty. Perhaps it was just as well, for if Julia had refused to marry
him, what hope had he of fulfilling his promises to protect Eilan and their
child?
Julia smiled radiantly. Perhaps being married to her would have its
compensations. She caught his glance and blushed.
"Come and see my wedding veil," she said invitingly. "I have been
working on the embroidery for months. It's all right to show it to Gaius now,
isn't it, Father?" she asked.
"Yes, my dear, of course, but I still think you should have been content
with a linen veil. That was good enough for a Roman woman in the days of
the Republic, and it should have been good enough for you," Licinius
grumbled.
"And look at what became of your Republic," Julia said impertinently. "I
wanted the most fashionable veil that could be had — and I think you did
too!"
The veil was indeed beautiful, of sheer, flame-colored silk, which Julia
was embroidering in gold thread with fruit and flowers.
When she had left them, Licinius took Gaius quietly aside.
"I have set the date for the formal betrothal at the end of this month,
before the unlucky days at the beginning of March. Your father cannot be
present, but the Legate should be able to do without him for a time by April,
when my augurs have found a
favorable day for the wedding. It is short notice, but I think we can be
ready. Otherwise it would be the second half of June before the season was
auspicious, and while you have been off winning honors among the

Caledonians my daughter has had to wait an extra year to be married." He
smiled benignly. "If that's quite all right with you, my dear boy?"
"Oh yes, quite -" Gaius said faintly. And what would they all do, he
wondered, if he said it was not? He wondered why Licinius bothered to
consult him at all.
Then Julia came back into the room, and as she reached out to him, he
realized that he could not betray the trust in those dark eyes. He and Eilan had
never really had a chance; at least he might be able to give some happiness to
this Roman girl.
A watery sunlight streamed through the door of the hut in the forest, for it
had been raining earlier. Eilan moved slowly about inside. Putting on her
clothes, part of her awareness turned to the small sounds the baby made in his
sleep. Her strength had returned more quickly after Gaius's visit, but it still
hurt to move. She had been much torn by the birth, and she was easily tired.
The baby slumbered in his basket, wrapped in an old shawl. Eilan stopped
for a moment to admire him. To her, Gawen was all the more beautiful
because she fancied she could see a blurred reflection of his father in the nub
of his nose and the dark feathering of his brows.
She sat for a moment contemplating her child's face. Gawen . . .she
thought, my little king! What would Macellius - supposing he should ever
hear of his grandson - think of that? She wanted to pick him up but she had so
much else to do, and he was sleeping peacefully. So peacefully, in fact, that
she bent close to catch the small sound of his breathing. Reassured, she
straightened again.
One garment at a time, with long rests between them, she managed to
dress and to comb and braid her long hair. Ordinarily Annis would have
helped her, but she had been sent to the village to replenish their supplies.
Having preserved her secret so long, it would not do to have the old woman
present when Ardanos arrived.
Eilan wrapped the braid around her head in a matronly style that was new
to her. Perhaps she could face him with more confidence if he saw her as a
grown woman instead of a frightened child.
What did the old man want? Reason told her that he had come to order her
back to the Forest House, but again and again she had to repress a chill of
fear. Did he mean to send her away after all?
She thought wildly of following Gaius, if he was not yet married. Or
Mairi might shelter her, unless their father forbade it. Caillean had told her
that Bendeigid was back from the North, gaunt as a winter wolf and much
embittered by the ruin of their cause. But so long as he lived quietly at his
elder daughter's steading, the Romans were unlikely to bother him.

Once Eilan got her strength back she could care for herself and her child
by hiring out to some farm. A healthy boy could always earn his keep. It
might be wiser, though, not to say who his father was. She herself was skilled
in all manner of household work, spinning and weaving, milking and
churning; if she had to support herself and her son, she certainly could. She"
sighed and sat back on the bed, knowing that these were only fantasies.
She had heard that the Roman Vestals could leave the temple when they
reached the age of thirty, but here the only release for a High Priestess was the
funeral fire. She remembered that Ardanos's first reaction to her pregnancy
had been to sentence her and her unborn child to death, and there was
Bendeigid's threat to strangle her with his own hands. But surely, if they
meant to kill her, they could already have easily done it.
By the time the Arch-Druid's shadow fell across the doorway she had
worked herself into a state of numb apprehension.
"I am glad to see you are better," he said neutrally, looking down at her.
"Oh yes, I am feeling quite well, Grandsire."
He scowled. "Indeed I am your grandsire, and you will do well to
remember it!"
He strode to the basket, looked down at the child for a moment, then lifted
it in his arms. "But you have made your bed, and now we must all lie in it.
This masquerade has gone on long enough. Three days should be enough for
your milk to dry off, and then you will return to the Forest House to prepare
for the spring rituals. As for your son, he will be fostered elsewhere." He
turned and started towards the door.
"Stop!" Eilan cried out. "Where are you taking him?" She felt anguish
swelling in her throat and remembered how their hound bitch had howled
when Bendeigid took her puppies out to be drowned because she had
mismated with a neighbor's terrier.
He regarded her unblinkingly. "Believe me, it is better that you do not
know. I pledge you that he will be perfectly well and safe. Perhaps, if you do
everything you are told, we may let you see him from time to time."
Eilan wondered why she had never noticed before how cruel Ardanos
looked when he smiled, and how very long and sharp his teeth were. "You
cannot," she cried. "I will care for him. You must not take him from me. Oh,
please, I beg you —"
Ardanos's bushy brows met. "Why such surprise?" he asked with edged
control. "Did you suppose you could nurse your child before all the
priestesses in the House of Maidens. Be reasonable."
"Give him to me," she cried. "You cannot have him." She snatched at the
wrapped bundle in her grandfather's arms, and the baby, waking, began to

scream.
"You little fool, let him go."
Eilan's legs would no longer uphold her, but she clung to his knees. "I beg
you, I beg you, Grandfather! You cannot," she was babbling, "you cannot take
my son from me . . ."
"I must, and I will," Ardanos said fiercely, thrust outward with his knee
and wrenched his robe free. As she collapsed he carried the wailing infant out
through the open door.
And then there was only the dappling of sunlight, as innocently mocking
as a baby's smile.
"Is this your revenge, you monster?" Caillean banged the door shut behind
her and stormed into the room, too angry to appreciate the fact that in his
quarters in the Roman town, the Arch-Druid had a door to slam. By Roman
standards the house would have seemed plain and small; its straight, plastered
walls and sharp corners seemed unfriendly to British eyes.
Ardanos looked up from his meal, agape, and she marshaled the words
stored up during her ride from Vernemeton.
"You wicked, cruel old man! I promised Lhiannon before she died to help
you. But that does not make me your slave or your torturer!"
He opened his mouth to speak but she raged on. "How could you treat
Eilan - your own daughter's child - that way? I tell you I will be no part of
this; let her keep her child or —" she drew breath, "or I will appeal directly to
the people and let the Goddess judge between us."
"You would not —" Ardanos began.
"Try me!" Caillean retorted implacably. "I assume that you have some use
for her or you would not have let her survive," she continued more
moderately. "Well, I tell you, unless Eilan is allowed to have her child with
her she will die."
"I suppose it is not surprising that the girl should be such a fool, but I did
not expect it of you," he said when she let him get a word in at last. "Stop
exaggerating. Women do not die so easily."
"Do they not? Eilan was bleeding again when I found her. You almost lost
her, old man, and then where would all your plans be? Do you truly believe
Dieda would be as pliant to your will?"
"In the Goddess's name, what do you want of me, woman?"
"Don't dare to speak of the Goddess; you have shown me over and over
that you know less than nothing of Her," Caillean said angrily. For the sake of
Lhiannon who - the gods know why — loved you and believed in your plans,
I have helped you so far.
"But you cannot intimidate me as you did Lhiannon, nor frighten me; I

have too little to lose. I would be willing to go to the priests and let them
judge between us. Treating with the Romans and interfering with Oracles is a
nasty business, or at least they would think it so, not understanding —" she
stopped to sneer - "your high purpose."
"Why are you doing this? Eilan is no kin of yours." Ardanos was gazing at
her as if he really did not understand.
Caillean sighed. She had loved Lhiannon as a mother, but she was coming
to realize that Eilan was like a sister, or like the daughter she had never had
— and never would, now that her moonblood had ceased to flow. Barren as
she was, and in a way that would have been impossible when she was
younger, she understood Eilan's passionate need to keep her child.
"It should be enough to know that you really cannot stop me. I suggest
that you believe that, Ardanos, for you have more to lose than I. Do you think
the other priests of your Order would not inquire why this child should live at
all? You have a hold over Eilan while she knows you can take her child; you
have - thanks be to all the gods at once - none over me."
The Arch-Druid looked thoughtful, but even as she began to hope that she
was convincing him, Caillean realized that what she had said was not strictly
true. Ardanos threatened her by threatening Eilan.
"Bring the baby back, Ardanos," Caillean, who in her years with
Lhiannon had learned all about compromise, softened her voice. "Even if
Eilan has the child with her, they are still in your power.
Do you think it is a small thing to have the Priestess of the Oracles in the
hollow of your hand?"
"Perhaps I did act a little hastily -" he said finally. "But what I told the girl
was true. If she flaunts her son at the Forest House we might as well proclaim
her shame to the world. How do you suggest we maintain the deception if I let
her keep him there?"
Caillean's shoulders slumped as she realized that she had won. "I have
thought of a way —"
The day appointed for Gaius's wedding dawned clear and bright. Gaius
woke when the spring sun shone in through his window, and blinked as it
glowed blindingly on the whiteness of the toga draped across the chair. In the
past year he had been required to wear the garment at the social and
diplomatic occasions at which he had accompanied his prospective father-inlaw and had become a little more used to handling its draperies, but he still
found it awkward. Agricola boasted that he had taught the sons of British
chieftains to wear the toga, but Gaius wondered. He had been brought up as a
Roman, but he was still more comfortable in uniform or in the tunic and trews
of the tribes.

He sat up, surveying the garment in dismay. His father, who had come in
from Deva the day before and was sleeping in the same room, turned over and
lifted one eyebrow.
"I do think they could invent a better ceremonial garment," Gaius
grumbled, "or at least something more convenient."
"A toga is more than a garment," said Macellius. "It is a symbol." He sat
up and to the amazement of his son, who was never at his best the first thing
in the morning, began to discourse on the toga's honorable history.
But presently Gaius started to understand. Even, or perhaps especially,
here at the far end of the Empire, the right to wear the white toga of a citizen
was a way of distinguishing between the masters of the world and those they
had conquered, and the narrow purple stripe of the eques that marked his
tunic an honor dearly won. And that was very important to men like his
father. Compared to that, the comfort of the garment was irrelevant.
Much as he would have liked to toss the offending piece of cloth out of
the window, it was just one of the things he had to accept when he threw in
his lot with Rome. At least the toga was woolen, and so was the tunic he
would wear beneath it. Though the April wind blew chill and rainy he would
not freeze.
Sighing, he allowed himself to be bathed and shaved by his freedman,
slipped into his tunic and sandals, and then set to work trying to figure out
how to drape the thing. After a few moments his father, his face gone so
wooden that Gaius felt sure he was suppressing a grin, took the toga away
from him. Deftly he arranged the pleats of white wool to hang down in front
of the left shoulder, adjusted the drape across the back and under his son's
right arm, and then drew the remainder carefully across his chest and over the
left shoulder in the other direction so that the folds were draped gracefully
over his arm.
"There now." He stepped back and surveyed his son indulgently. "Stand
up a little straighter and you could pose for a statue."
"I feel like one," Gaius mumbled, afraid to move lest the whole
arrangement come undone. This time his father did laugh.
"Never mind; it's natural for a bridegroom to be nervous. You'll feel better
when it's all done."
"Did you?" Gaius asked abruptly. "When you married my mother, were
you afraid?"
Macellius stilled, and for a moment his eyes clouded with remembered
pain. "I felt joy when she came to me and every day of our lives together until
she was gone . . ." he whispered.
As I did when Eilan lay in my arms . . .Gaius thought bitterly. But I have

consented to this mummery, and have no choice but to go through with it now.
The sight of the haruspex who had been called in to take the auspices for
the marriage did nothing to improve his mood. In the noon sunlight the man's
bald red head and long skinny legs made him look like one of his own
chickens and Gaius was cynically certain that whatever spots he found on the
entrails of the unfortunate fowl would indicate it was an auspicious day. With
most of the dignitaries of Londinium standing about it would be exceedingly
inconvenient to cancel the festivities. In any case, the augurs had already been
consulted weeks ago to select the proper day.
The atrium, its pillars twined with greenery, was crowded with what
seemed to be an appalling number of people; he recognized a couple of
wrinkled prune-faced elderly dowagers whom he had met in Licinius's house
several times over the last few months. He noticed that they really smiled, if
not actually at him, at least somewhere in his direction. Maybe they were
happy for Julia; if
they only knew how mixed a bargain she was getting they would frown!
In due course the sacrificer declared it a very good day for a wedding and
offered congratulations. No day on which Julia had decided to be married
would dare to be unfavorable.
There was a little murmur as the sacrifice was cleared away and the bride
entered on her father's arm. Gaius could see little but the hem of her white
tunica beneath the crimson flamma, the famous veil. One of Licinius's
secretaries unrolled the marriage contract and began to read in a nasal drone.
Most of it had been completed at the ceremony of betrothal: the amount of the
coemptio which Gaius was offering, and the sum which Julia would bring to
the marriage, the fact that she was to remain "in the hand" of her father as a
legal part of his family, and would retain her own property. It had been
explained to him that these days that arrangement was more usual, and no one
would think the less of him. There was a provision that he could not divorce
Julia except for "grievous misconduct", which must be attested by at least two
noble matrons. Gaius would have laughed if anything now could have made
him laugh; anyone less likely to misbehave than the dignified Julia, he simply
could not imagine, and she had made it too clear that she wanted this marriage
to jeopardize it. Even her sober demeanor today could not hide the triumph in
her eyes.
"Gaius Macellius Severus Siluricus, do you agree to the terms of this
contract, and are you willing to take this woman as your wife according to the
law?" his father asked then. Gaius realized that they were all looking at him,
but still it seemed an endless time before he could say the words.
"I am willing-"

"Julia Licinia?" Her father turned to the girl and repeated the question.
Her agreement came a good deal more swiftly. The secretary presented the
document to each of them for signing and then carried it away to be registered
in the archives.
Gaius felt as if his freedom were going with it, but the Roman gravity that
went with the toga did not require him to smile. A sweet-faced lady, identified
as the daughter of Agricola, came forward, took Julia's hand and led her to
Gaius. He felt a pang of guilt as her small fingers tightened on his.
There were prayers then, a great many it seemed, invoking Juno and
Jupiter, Vesta and every other deity who might be assumed to be concerned
with the preservation of hearth and home. He and Julia were given a bowl of
grain and a flagon of oil to offer to the fire on the altar. As it crackled in the
flames the scent of cooked food came suddenly from the dining hall off the
atrium, mingling in a rather sickening fashion with the incense that had been
burned. The feast was almost ready. Julia put back her veil. He took the cake
of rough spelt wheat - he hoped they would have something better to eat at the
feast to follow - broke it and thrust a morsel between Julia's lips. She repeated
the gesture, saying the appointed words that made them legally one. The ritual
had acquired its own momentum, and from now on he had only to go through
the motions.
He sat through the wedding feast in the dining chamber, as lavish as
Licinius's purse and Julia's pride could make it, in a kind of daze. He was
aware that the tables were laden with an amazing variety of things. People
spoke to him; he accepted congratulations from an elderly friend of Licinius
and agreed that yes, he was indeed lucky to be getting a splendid girl. The old
senator lingered, insisting on telling him anecdotes of Julia as a toddler; he
had known her all her life. Somewhere near by two of the magistrates were
discussing in low tones the Emperor's upcoming German campaign.
Slaves, murmuring congratulations, served them, not the meat of the
sacrifices, but tender roast chickens, roast pork and delicate cakes of fine
wheat bread. And there was a liberal amount of wine; which Gaius, drinking
everything he was given, soon decided was better than he had thought. An
almost endless stream of guests kept coming and offering him
congratulations; he had seldom seen Macellius look so happy.
As the feasting continued, Gaius drew on all his reserves of courtesy and
self-control, while at the back of his mind wondering what Eilan would think
of all this nonsense, whether she would ever know or appreciate what he was
doing for her and for their son.
Julia giggled at the rude jokes of the mountebanks who entertained them,
but he was not sure whether she really understood them. This part of the

ceremony was traditionally to encourage the begetting of children; the clowns
seemed very eager to make sure nobody could possibly miss the point. The
sight of food was beginning to revolt him, but he continued to make a
pretense of eating, and agreed for the ninetieth time that Julia was a lovely
girl and he a very lucky man.
Julia was beginning to look sleepy; she had accepted a second and then a
third glass of the wine, and since it was considerably stronger than what
Licinius served at his everyday table, her normal vivacity was muted. Gaius
envied her condition; he was still, unfortunately, quite conscious.
It was growing dark. From outside he heard shouting, and grinned
foolishly when the Master of Ceremonies announced that the moment for the
bridal procession had arrived. It was all quite ridiculous really, for since
Macellius had no house in the town, the new couple was only moving to the
far wing of Licinius's mansion, but Julia was apparently determined not to
miss a single tradition on her big day.
It was just as well that he was not really expected to carry off his bride,
thought Gaius as he gripped Julia by the wrist with simulated roughness and
pulled her after him. In his current state of unsteadiness he could have been
held off by an old woman and a lame dog.
The Master of Ceremonies handed him a bag full of gilded walnuts and
small copper coins; he indicated that Gaius should scatter them to the beggars
outside who frequented weddings just for this. Julia had a similar bag which
matched her crimson veil. The litter bearers ceremoniously carried them out
of Licinius's house, down the avenue to the forum, past the new Governor's
palace and the tabularium, preceded by flute players and singers and
surrounded by torches, and finally circled back to the entrance of the new
apartment that had been made ready for them. Gaius suppressed a desire to
giggle. He scattered coins and heard the blessings of the crowd. Only a little
further now . . .
The whitethorn torch sent a flickering light through the doorway,
banishing shadows and evil magic. Gaius, whose head had been somewhat
cleared by the chill air, wished it could banish memory. Someone handed
Julia a bowl of oil with which to anoint the doorposts and the strands of white
wool with which to adorn them.
The elderly dowagers kissed Julia, murmuring wishes for her happiness,
and after a moment's thought kissed Gaius too; this touched off a regular
storm of embraces, kisses and congratulations. Macellius, a bit drunk - the
first time Gaius had ever seen his father affected even a little by wine embraced them both; Licinius kissed Julia and Gaius, and said it had been a
splendid wedding.

Then Gaius lifted her, marveling once more at how light she was m his
arms, carried her over the threshold, and kicked the door shut behind him.
He could smell fresh paint on the walls, competing with the incense and
the scent of Julia's flowers. She stood still before him, and with more
tenderness than he had thought he could muster he lifted the flamma away.
Her wreath was wilting; the six locks of hair that her maid had so
carefully curled unraveling around the neck of her gown. She looked far too
young to be married. Before he could speak she led the way to the altar in the
center of their own atrium, and stood waiting expectantly.
He pulled the end of his toga up to cover his head and saluted the little
terracotta statues that represented the family gods.
"By fire and water I welcome you as my wife and priestess of my home
—" he said hoarsely. He poured water across her hands and held the towel for
her to dry them; then handed her the taper from which to light the fire.
"May the gods bless us at bed and at board; and grant that I bear you
many sons," she answered him.
The bridal bed had been made up against the wall. He led her towards it
and fumbled to undo the peculiar knot with which her woolen girdle was tied,
wondering how many eager grooms had lost patience and simply cut the thing
loose. At least now he could unwind himself from the swaddling folds of his
toga.
Julia lay in the big bed with the covers drawn up to her chin, watching
him. In the morning the bloody sheets would be ceremoniously presented to
the dowagers as evidence of consummation; but Gaius would not even have
to be present. And in any case he did not doubt that Julia - always practical had provided herself with a little bag of chicken blood in case he should be
too drunk to perform. Almost every bride had sense enough for that, he had
been told.
But he was not that drunk, and if he did his duty with more efficiency than
passion, at least he was gentle, and Julia was too innocent to expect more.

Twenty-One

Eilan did not return to Vernemeton until March, for despite Caillean's
promise to bring her son back to her, it took some time to recover from the
shock of losing him. Once she had wept herself out she came to understand
that even when he was restored to her it would not be the same.
After a few days her breasts ceased to ache and she knew that another
woman would feed her little one now. Another woman would hold him close
during the long night hours and pat the bubbles away and comfort him, would
have the sweet labor of bathing the firm little body. Someone else would lean
over his cradle and sing the lullabies her mother had taught her. But not Eilan.
She could not - she must not - or all she had suffered to achieve was lost.
It was announced that the High Priestess was ill to cover the transition,
and late one night Eilan was brought back to the Forest House and Dieda was
spirited away, bound for further bardic training in Eriu as promised. By the
time she returned, it was their hope that everyone would have forgotten there
had ever been two maidens in Vernemeton who looked almost the same. With
Cynric still a prisoner, it was clearly impossible for Dieda to go to him even if
she had desired it. In the end, Dieda seemed reconciled to the prospect of
learning from the bards of a land that had never been touched by Rome.
Only now, as she resumed her duties as Priestess of the Oracles, did Eilan
realize how isolated she would henceforward be. Part of this was the result of
the seclusion forced on Dieda as part of the deception, but it was also a result
of her change in status. As was her right, Eilan honored Caillean, Eilidh,

Miellyn and young Senara by choosing them as her primary attendants, but
she saw little of the other priestesses except at the ceremonies.
From time to time in the past the Forest House had sheltered women or
children like Senara who had need of care. It was therefore unusual, but not
unheard of, to take in the young woman called Lia and the infant the ArchDruid had brought to her to wet-nurse and install them in the roundhouse next
to the herb sheds where visitors usually stayed. Nor was it even so surprising
that Caillean should take the baby to the High Priestess, saying that she might
be cheered by holding a young child.
After that first joyful reunion, Eilan wept copiously; for it seemed to her
that Gawen, being nursed by Lia, had somehow become almost more Lia's
child than hers. Nevertheless it seemed a miracle to her that Ardanos, even
under duress, had kept his word. She wondered sometimes how Caillean had
persuaded him, but did not dare to ask.
Naturally her partiality for the child caused gossip. But Caillean took the
precaution of confiding to old Latis — in strictest confidence - that the child
belonged to Eilan's sister Mairi, born of a father unknown, and had been sent
here because Mairi was thinking of marrying again. Within a week the story
was all over Vernemeton, as they had expected. But although there were some
who believed the baby was Dieda's, no one appeared to suspect he was
Eilan's. And with most of the women the boy soon became a pet.
Eilan felt guilt for the damage to the reputations of her sister and the girl
who had been like a sister to her. But after all they had assented, however
reluctantly. Worse was the torment of not being able to acknowledge her
child. But she must not - she would not - and, as week followed week,
confession became less and less possible.
It seemed to Eilan that time went by very slowly under this uneasy
reprieve; Ardanos had returned from Deva, and, almost gloating, reported that
Macellius's son was married to the daughter of the Procurator in Londinium.
She had known this must happen, but she could hardly keep from weeping,
though she resolved not to in the sight of Ardanos.
She had to believe that both she and Gaius had made the right decision,
but she could not help wondering about the woman whom she could not keep
from thinking of as her rival. Was she beautiful? Did he speak words of love

to her, from time to time? Eilan was the mother of his first son; did that not
count for something? Or was she forgotten? And if she were, how would she
ever know?
But time went on — as it always does, no matter what shifts are taken to
ignore its passing - and the festival of Beltane came upon her, when she must
serve again as the voice of the Oracle.
Eilan had thought that she had resolved her doubts when she became High
Priestess. Perhaps they were returning now because of the child. In the dark
hours of the night she wondered if this time she would be punished for her
blasphemy, though by daylight she reasoned that if she had lived through the
first time, the Goddess was unlikely to be insulted now. If the Power she had
felt during her initiation was a delusion, then she had given up Gaius for
nothing. But if Ardanos did not truly believe in the Goddess he served, then it
was he not she, who was committing the blasphemy. If she meant to continue
in this role, it was essential to learn whether it was the Arch-Druid's
interpretation or the Goddess Herself that was the lie.
As Eilan was preparing and purifying herself, it occurred to her that
drinking from the golden bowl would be more dramatic done in the sight of
the people, and resolved to speak of this to Ardanos when she saw him again.
He readily agreed to the change, as if surprised that she should have thought
upon the matter at all.
This time, Eilan herself mixed the herbs she would be drinking, and made
certain substitutions, retaining those that would increase vision and leaving
out the ones that detached the senses from the will. As a result she was
vividly aware of the vast hush that descended over the assembled gathering.
She could feel their reverence and expectation. From a purely public point of
view she could understand it. She knew that the people responded to her
beauty as they had never responded to Lhiannon's faded charm. But there
must have been a time when Lhiannon too had been young and very beautiful.
Had it never been any more than this - a drama staged by the priests of whom
her grandfather was foremost? Surely the first time she sat in the Oracle's
chair the Power that spoke through her had been real.
Eilan drank, and felt the familiar dip and lift of the trance state take her.
Remembering how the potion had affected her before, she slumped in her
chair with lids half-closed so that Ardanos would not see the intelligence in

her eyes. And this time, when the Arch-Druid began his incantation she was
aware that instructions were being interspersed into the spell. It was clear
what was wanted -and why.
Now she understood why Ardanos wanted a Priestess of the Oracles who
did not rely on inspiration. She had heard him speak before of all the benefits
to Britain that would come from the civilizing influence of the Romans. In
fact she remembered his saying something like this on that evening in her
father's house before she knew who Gaius really was. Well, at least the ArchDruid could not be accused of inconsistency.
In her last meeting with Gaius she had learned enough to agree that - for
now — Ardanos might even have the right idea. Used wisely, the Oracle
could be a powerful tool to bring peace to Britain. So long as Ardanos was
Arch-Druid, and so long as his policies were indeed the path of wisdom,
perhaps what they were doing was not even so great a sin. But if Eilan were to
be something more than Ardanos's instrument; she would have to understand
what was going on in the world outside her walls. Potentially, the High
Priestess of Vernemeton could exercise an influence that went far beyond her
role as Oracle. By learning what her grandfather was doing, she had also
taken on the responsibility for deciding whether or not to cooperate, and how
far.
Eilan believed that something other than her own hidden will had spoken
through her before. But no single human could carry the full power of a
goddess. When a divine spirit possessed a body, it not only became
accessible, but took on some of that body's limitations; it had to work with the
material at hand.
Goddess, help me! her spirit cried. If You are there, Lady, and not just my
delusion, show me how to do Your will!
Ardanos's invocation ended, but the expectation of the crowd around her
was building. As the smoke of the sacred herbs billowed from the fires, Eilan
felt a Presence building up behind her.
Lady, I am in Your hands. With a sigh, Eilan allowed control to slip away.
She had the sensation that soft arms were holding her, but at the same time
she knew that her body was sitting up, and the One whose power now flowed
through it was fixing Ardanos with a radiant smile.

Grandfather, she thought, be careful! Can you not see Who has come to
you now? But he had turned to the people, and was leading them in the
invocation, and she knew he could not see. Her awareness turned inward then.
Goddess have mercy! her spirit cried. He works for the good of his people —
give him the wisdom to do the right thing - for the sake of us all!
And in the silence of the place to which she had come, it seemed to her
that there was a reply.
"Daughter, I care for all my children, even when they quarrel; and for all
times, not only the one you are living through. My Light may be your
darkness; and your winter the prelude to My spring. Will you accept this, that
a greater good may come?"
"I will, but do not leave, me, for You are all I have," she answered, and
once more that Voice spoke within her.
"How could I leave you — do you not know I love you as you love your
child?"
The Lady's love surrounded her. Eilan allowed herself to sink into it as
into her own mother's arms. As if from a great distance she was aware of
Ardanos's questions. She remembered the answers he had told her to give, but
they no longer seemed important. Knowledge came to her; she knew what she
said in reply, and yet the Self who spoke those words, this time in the
language of the people, was not the Eilan she knew.
Eilan could not tell how long it went on. In that state where she rested
now there was no time at all. And yet a time did come when she heard her
own name called. She moaned and tried to turn away. Why should she return?
But the cool air with which they were fanning her and the drops of water that
splashed her face and hands could not be ignored. They drew her back into
her body once more.
She shuddered and gasped, and suddenly she was herself, Eilan, once
more, looking at the awed faces of the people around her with wide eyes.
Ardanos was instructing the people to depart in peace. There was almost a
hint of smugness in the satisfaction that filled his smile.

He does not understand, Eilan thought then. He thinks he did it all . . .But
if the Arch-Druid did not understand the power of the Goddess he said he
served, it was not for her to enlighten him. She could only trust that the Lady
knew Her own business, and would continue to watch over them.
Gaius spent the first months of his marriage fighting the awareness that it
was based upon a lie. He suspected that Julia was more enamored of being
married than she was of him, but she was cheerful and affectionate, and as
long as he was reasonably attentive, she seemed satisfied with his
companionship. He could only thank the gods for the innocence, or perhaps
the lack of emotional depth, which prevented her from realizing a relationship
between a man and a woman ought to be a great deal more.
Licinius, who believed that a young couple should not be separated in the
first year of their marriage, had arranged for Gaius to serve as an aedile in
charge of government buildings in Londinium, which would give him some
of the experience in public service necessary to advance his career. At first he
had protested lack of background, and wondered if his father-in-law had got
him the job simply so that Julia could continue to keep house for him, but he
found that although his staff of slaves and freedmen could do the work, they
needed the authority of a man of status to deal with the rest of the
government. Presently, he realized that a childhood spent listening to his
father deal with the problems of maintaining a major fortress had prepared
him for his new responsibilities quite well.
"Treasure the time you have with Julia now, my lad," Licinius would say,
patting him on the shoulder, "for you'll be parted often enough in the future,
especially if you're assigned duty in Dacia or some other post on the frontier."
They both knew that the path of promotion led all over the Empire; a longterm provincial post such as Camp Prefect or Procurator was awarded only at
the end of a career.
These were the crucial years, when the name a young man made for
himself - and the contacts - determined how far he would rise. Soon Gaius
would need to spend some time in Rome itself; he found himself looking
forward to it. Meanwhile he applied himself to understanding the workings of
government in the smaller reflection of the capital that Londinium had
become.

More quickly than he could have imagined, a year went by. From time to
time disturbing news came from Rome. The Emperor had got himself elected
to the office of Consul for the next ten years, and Censor for life in addition to
the powers he already had. The patricians muttered darkly that it was a plot to
gain control over the Senate, but did little more, for at the moment the army
was quite happy with their Emperor, who had raised pay by one-third. As an
officer Gaius could not object to that, but it was clear which way the wind
was blowing. Even more than his predecessors, Domitian seemed to regard
the remaining democratic institutions of Rome as outdated, and certainly
inconvenient.
A few months after their marriage, Licinius had engaged a tutor -primarily
for Julia, he said - so that she might learn to speak better Greek and more
polished Latin, and Gaius, to his chagrin, was urged to share these lessons.
"For if you go to Rome, it will be necessary for you to speak good Greek; and
a more aristocratic Latin," he pointed out.
Stung, Gaius had protested. From his earliest boyhood, Macellius had
insisted that tutors should be engaged, and that he became as fluent in Latin as
in the tribal Celtic language of his mother's kin.
"Plain Latin is good enough for me," he protested.
"No doubt it's good enough for an army camp," Julia argued, "but believe
me, it would be better to speak to the Senate in Celtic than in that vulgar
dialect of Deva."
Gaius felt like protesting that his Latin was no worse than that of
Macellius; but it was true that Macellius had never had to speak to the
senators of Rome. And it would do him no harm to learn the language of
educated men everywhere, which would always be Greek. But the lessons did
not go on for long. By the end of the summer Julia was pregnant and so
queasy much of the time that the tutor was dismissed.
But by this time Gaius was conversing with the Greek house slaves
whenever he had the opportunity, including Charis, Julia's chambermaid, who
had herself been born on Apollo's own island of Mytilene. One of the
freedmen who worked for him had originally come to Britain as a secretary to
a former Governor, and was glad enough to earn a few extra sesterces by
correcting Gaius's accent and making him copy out the speeches of Cicero to

improve his Latin style.
He was resolved that when Julia's child was born and she felt well enough
to resume her lessons — if she ever did — he would have far surpassed her.
And so the winter passed. By their first anniversary, Julia's sickness had
subsided. She did not protest when her father proposed that Gaius join a
hunting party for boar in the woods north of Londinium, escorting a wealthy
senator with interests in the wine trade who claimed to have undertaken the
hazardous journey all the way there for the sake of the hunting. Licinius did
not think a great deal of the man's skill, but admitted his political power, and
flattered the man by assigning his own son-in-law to escort duty.
Julia, far from resenting his absence, was a little relieved to have him out
of the house. Like most men, Gaius appeared to feel that any admission of
difficulty was a plea for help. Since he could not help her, and indeed, was the
cause of her condition, he was inclined to react with annoyance if she
mentioned ill health or anxiety. Her father was not much better, and she had
too much pride to unburden her heart to the slaves.
And so, on the morning Gaius left to go hunting, Julia sought the temple
of Juno. Her maid Charis complained about walking all the way, but ungainly
as she had become, Julia was sure the jolt of a wagon or the sway of a litter
would have made her queasy again.
Nor did she mind when the eunuch who watched the door told her she
must wait until the priestess should have time for her, for the interior of the
temple was dim and cool after the brightness and dust of the street outside,
and she was quite content to sit there for a time, gazing up at the painted
statue.
Domina Dea . . .she prayed, I thought it would be so easy. But the slaves
gossip about women who have died in childbirth when they think I cannot
hear. I'm not afraid of that, Goddess, but what if my baby should die? What if
I am like my mother, who bore only one child who lived beyond a year? My
father has political power and Gaius can fight battles. But the only thing that
I can do is give them a legitimate heir. She pulled her veil across her face so
that no one could see that she was weeping. Help me to deliver a healthy son .
. .please, Goddess, please!

She started as the eunuch touched her shoulder, then wiped her eyes and
followed him to the inner chamber, ignoring the nagging pain in her lower
back.
Juno's high priestess was a woman of middle years, her face painted to
look younger, whose hard eyes silently priced Julia's jewels and gown. But
she greeted Julia with an effusive warmth that sparked lively caution in the
girl.
"You are worried about the birthing." The woman patted her arm. "And it
is your first, so it is only natural that you should be afraid . .."
Julia pulled back a little, eyeing her warily. Didn't the woman understand
that it was not for herself that she feared?
"I want a son," she began, and coughed at the wave of scent as the
priestess bent closer.
"Of course you do. And if you make an offering, the Goddess will help
you."
"What kind of animal should I buy for the sacrifice?"
"Well, dear —" The woman looked down at her rings. "We really have
enough of that sort of thing. But they are building a lavish temple for Isis
down near the wharfs, and it would be a pity if Juno should be left looking
like a poor relation. Surely she will give you what you want if you offer a
generous gift to her shrine."
Julia stared at her, understanding all too well, and rose heavily to her feet.
"Indeed," she said dryly. "I must go now, but I thank you for your good
counsel."
She turned on her heel, wishing she had the height to make an impressive
exit, and stalked from the room, leaving the priestess gaping behind her. As
she crossed the threshold, the ache in her back became a stabbing pain that for
a moment took her breath away.
"My lady —" Charis reached out to help her.

"Go summon a chair for me," Julia told her, supporting herself against a
pillar. "I believe I will ride home after all."
Gaius did not return to Londinium until late in the evening, having seen to
it that the distinguished guest got the trophy he wanted, and taking leave of
him with some relief. When he came in, he discovered all in chaos; for during
his absence, Julia had gone into premature labor and borne him a daughter. He
received the news from Licinius, who said all had been over for an hour or
two, and Julia was asleep.
It was time to toast the birth of his first child, said Licinius, holding out a
dusty clay flagon with a Greek seal. It was all too clear, Gaius thought, that
his father-in-law had already been celebrating.
"I do not know how to thank you for this great gift," he said somewhat
drunkenly. "I have always wanted to be a grandfather; and if the child is only
a daughter, well, I do not mind that; Julia has been as good a child to me as
forty sons, and she brought you into our family. No doubt that your next child
will be a boy."
"I certainly hope you are right," Gaius said. It would not be his fault if she
did not, since he had begotten one son already.
"I put this wine away when Julia was born, to be drunk when my first
grandchild was born," Licinius said, removing the seal. "Drink with me, my
son; and don't spoil it by putting too much water with it."
Gaius had had no supper and would much rather have had a cup of ale
with a bowl of beans or a roast fowl, but with the household in such disarray
he'd be lucky to get some cold bread and meat if he could corner one of the
household slaves. He resigned himself to going to bed half drunk, and joined
Licinius.
"To your daughter," Licinius said. "May she be as good to you as Julia has
been to me."
Gaius drank and then the old man proposed a toast to his son.
Gaius blinked and sputtered, and his father-in-law elaborated, "Surely you
will have a son next year."

"Oh, yes, of course."
But as Gaius lifted his goblet it was of Eilan and the son he already had
that he was thinking. By now the boy would be a year old. Was he walking?
Had the fuzz of dark hair turned to gold?
And then of course they had to drink to Julia; if the serving woman had
not come in at around that point to say he might see her, Gaius would have
been very drunk indeed. Grateful for the interruption, he followed the woman
to the bedchamber.
Julia struck her husband as very small, small and pale. Tucked in her arms
was the tiny swaddled form of the child.
Julia looked up at him and began to cry. "I'm so sorry. I did so want to
give you a son - I was so sure . . ."
Made generous by the thought of Eilan's son, far to the west, he stooped
and kissed her. "Don't cry," he said. "We will have a boy next time, if the gods
wish it."
"Then you accept her?"
The slave woman picked up the child and held it out and they all looked at
him expectantly. After a moment Gaius realized what he was supposed to do
and took the baby, rather awkwardly. He looked down into the crumpled
features, waiting for the tide of tenderness that had overwhelmed him when
he held his son. But his only emotion was amazement, for it seemed to him
impossible that something so tiny could be real. He sighed.
"In the name of my ancestors I claim this child as my daughter," Gaius
said loudly. "Macellia Severina shall be her name."
Just after Beltane, Bendeigid sought audience with the Lady of
Vernemeton. By this time Eilan had settled into her role as High Priestess, but
it still seemed strange that her own father, a powerful Druid, should seek
permission to visit her. Yet she sent an equally formal reply that she would
gladly receive him, and when he appeared in her outer chamber that
afternoon, she made ready to give him a cordial welcome.

Truth to tell, Eilan did not feel all that cordial. She could not help but
remember that it was her father's refusal even to consider her marriage to
Gaius that had placed her in a position in which, while she had comfort and
honor, had also made her a stranger to her own son. She made certain that
Gawen was out of sight and hearing for the afternoon. Bendeigid at least
would know that Mairi had not borne another child, and Gawen was getting to
look more like his father.
She set out a pitcher of fresh water, newly drawn by Senara from the
Sacred Well, and indicated to Huw that he could let her visitor come in. It
gave her a certain pleasure to have her bodyguard looming over them. His
bulk made even her father, who was a big man, seem small. She had thought
that to be the recipient of such dog-like devotion would make her
uncomfortable, for Huw had gratefully transferred his loyalty to her as soon
as she emerged from her ritual seclusion and began to go about again, but he
never intruded. He was simply there, and she gradually came to appreciate his
usefulness in getting rid of visitors, or, as now, to overawe them.
"How may I serve you, my father?" she said coolly, remaining seated. Her
tone was the same as she would have used to any highly placed Druid.
Indeed, his time in the North had changed him. He was still a powerful man,
but the comfortable solidity she remembered had been worn away until he
was all sinew and bone.
Bendeigid stopped short, eyeing her oddly. What was he seeing, she
wondered? Not the daughter he remembered, for certain. The face she saw
when she looked into the Sacred Pool had lost its girlish roundness, and
suffering and responsibility had given a certain air of watchfulness to her
shadowed eyes. But perhaps those subtle signs of maturity would be less
striking than her golden ornaments and the crescent between her brows.
Although she had pushed the sheer veil of fine, dark blue linen back from
her face, its folds were draped about her head and shoulders. She had
continued to go veiled in the fashion Dieda had adopted to aid in the
deception; and by the time it might have been safe to go without it, she had
grown used to its protection. It seemed to lend an air of authority; certainly, it
added to her mystery.
"I only wanted to pay you my respects, daughter - or should I say Lady,"

replied the Druid. "It has been long since we met. I wanted to be sure that you
were well . . ."
It has taken you long enough, she thought grimly. But she could see that
the past few years had not been easy for him either. It was not entirely Huw's
bulk that made him seem smaller; his hair had gone completely gray and there
were new lines around his mouth and in his brow. He had always been stern,
but now purpose burned in his eyes like a dark flame.
Bendeigid accepted the silver-bound wooden cup she handed him and sat
down on a bench. Eilan took her seat in the great carven chair.
"Surely that is not the only reason you have come here, my father," she
said calmly.
"Lhiannon was old." He looked into his cup and then back up at her. "I
can well understand that she did not wish her country torn by war - and that
may be why the Goddess has counseled peace for the past few years. But now
there is a new time and a new priestess. Did you not know about the battle the
Romans call Mons Graupius? Have you heard how the Votadini lands are
become a desert in which a few survivors scratch for a living where once was
a thriving tribe?"
Eilan lowered her gaze away from his. Indeed she had heard of the battle,
from one who had fought in it, and Gaius had told her how that winter the
starving survivors had come to the gates of the fortress to be fed. It was true
that the Romans were the invaders, but she knew it was the defeated
tribesmen who in despair had fired their own villages and slaughtered their
animals to keep them out of Roman hands.
"Voice of the Goddess, tell me - the tears of captive women fall down like
rain and the blood of our slain warriors shrieks from the ground, why does
She not hear them? Why has the Goddess not answered our prayers, and why
does the Oracle still counsel us to keep this miserable peace?"
He surged to his feet, reaching out to her, and Huw took a heavy step into
the room. Eilan drew a long breath to conceal her astonishment and gestured
the man away. She had always assumed that her father was deep in the ArchDruid's counsels. Was it possible that he did not know how Ardanos had been
manipulating the Oracle all these years?

"Surely my father knows I speak only such Oracles as are given to me,"
she said soothingly. If he knows, then I have told him the truth — and if he
does not, then I have told him nothing he does not know.
Indeed, what she had said was a greater truth than even Ardanos knew, for
although Ardanos translated her answers to questions as he saw fit, when the
Goddess filled her and she spoke directly to the people, it was the Goddess
who agreed or disagreed with the policies of the Arch-Druid as She chose. So
far, at least, Her counsels had been sufficiently peaceable that he had not
questioned them.
Bendeigid rose and began nervously to wander about the room. He said,
"Then I must entreat you to pray to the Goddess to avenge us. The spirits of
the women of Mona still cry out for vengeance."
She frowned. "Has Cynric sent you to say this to me?" She knew that
Gaius had taken him prisoner, and saved his life and freedom by making him
one of the hostages, but did not know what had happened to him after that.
"He was captured," growled her father, "They were going to send him to
Rome to amuse the Emperor, but he killed his guards and won free."
"Where is he?" she asked in some alarm. If the Romans caught him now a
quick death was the best fate he could expect from them.
"I do not know," the Druid said evasively. "But there is a great anger
growing in the North, my daughter. The Romans are pulling back. The
Ravens were not all killed in that battle, and their wounds are healing. If the
Goddess does not rouse the land against the Romans, be sure that Cynric
will."
"But I speak only to those who attend the festivals at the Hill of the
Maidens," Eilan said uncomfortably. "The Cornovii and Ordovices primarily,
some Demetae and Silures, and a few of the wilder folk from the hills. What
have we to do with Caledonia?"
"Can it be that you do not understand your influence?" He faced her
directly. "The Romans have taken our lands and subverted our chieftains and
forbidden most of our religious rites. The Oracle here at Vernemeton is one of

the few things that remains to us, and if you do not think that the words of the
Goddess are repeated from one end of Britannia to the other you are a fool!"
He does not know that Ardanos influences the Oracle, Eilan thought then,
but he suspects it. While she pretended ignorance he could not openly ask her
support for an insurrection. But eventually matters were going to come to a
head.
"I have been very isolated . . ." she said softly. "But pilgrims do come to
make their prayers at the sacred well. Let those who have news come to drink
the waters on the new moon of each month, and if the veiled priestess who
attends them talks of ravens, let them speak to her there."
"Ah, Daughter ! I knew you would not betray your breeding!" he
exclaimed, his gaze kindling. "I will tell Cynric —"
"Tell him I make no promises," she interrupted, "but if you wish me to
pray to the Goddess for Her help, I must know what to ask! I can give you no
assurances how She will reply . . ."
With that, Bendeigid would have to be contented. Eilan sat for a long time
in thought when he had gone. Clearly Cynric was doing his best to start a
rebellion, and without her support, he would certainly fail.
But the Druid had apparently also realized that she was a grown woman
now and would make her own decisions. It was almost worth all she had
suffered to face him from such a position of power. But with that power came
a responsibility she could not avoid, not when there might come a day when
her father and foster brother faced the father of her son across a battlefield.
And if that happens, what will I do? Eilan closed her eyes in anguish.
Dear Goddess, what will I do?
As Julia's child grew they took to calling her "Cella", for it seemed
ridiculous to refer to something so tiny by such a long name. But Gaius
waited in vain for the bond he had felt with little Gawen when first he saw
him in Eilan's arms. Was it then something that happened only between a man
and his first-born son? Or was it because he did not have such a bond with the
child's mother?

At least Julia did not seem to find it odd that he would have little interest
in a girl-child. And Cella was a placid baby who soon promised to be pretty,
and was the delight of her grandfather's heart. Julia spent much of her time
with the infant, dressing her in beautifully embroidered clothes, which
seemed to Gaius a waste of time, and by the time the girl was a year old, Julia
was pregnant again. This time she was absolutely positive it would be the
longed-for son. A soothsayer, consulted at Julia's behest, promised that a son
awaited birth but Gaius was not so certain.
In the end, however, he did not have to suffer with his wife through this
pregnancy. The wars in Dacia had been going badly. Gaius felt a pang at
hearing the Second Legion was to be withdrawn and the fortress they had
built in the North destroyed. He supposed that it had become apparent that the
North could not be held without a far greater investment of men and materiel
than the Empire could afford. A lot of lives would have been saved, Gaius
thought grimly, if they had had the sense to see that three years earlier!
He took to spending his spare time at the army post, listening to the news.
On orders from the Emperor, the new Governor,
Sallustius Lucullus, had commanded that all the northernmost fortresses
be abandoned, their walls pulled down and their timber buildings burned so
that nothing would remain that could be of use to the enemy. The Twentieth
marched down from the North and settled back into their old quarters in
Glevum, but no one knew for how long.
It was the Second Legion, however, which was ordered from Deva to
Dacia. Macellius, announcing that he was too old to go dragging across the
Empire, decided that the time had come to retire and started planning a new
house in Deva. But Gaius was surprised by an invitation from the new
legionary Commander to join his staff and sail with them. What amazed him
almost as much was the fact that even Licinius did not object when he
indicated that he would like to accept the offer.
"We'll miss you, lad," the old man said, "but it's time that you were
attending to your career now that you've started your family. Haven't I been
singing your praises all over Londinium for just this reason? It's a pity you
won't be here for the birth of your second child, but it was only to be
expected. Don't worry about Julia - I'll take care of her. You do your duty and
come back covered with glory!"

Twenty-Two

Dieda returned to the Forest House in the middle of May, a little over four
years after she had gone into exile in Eriu. For once the day was sunny, and
Eilan received her in the garden, hoping their meeting might be eased by a
more informal setting, but she had asked Caillean to stay with her just the
same. She sat up straighter, her veil sliding down over her shoulders, as Dieda
came through the gateway, and Caillean hurried forward to greet her.
"Dieda, my child, it is good indeed to see you. It has been too long —"
They embraced ceremoniously, pressing cheek to cheek.
Dieda was wearing a loose gown of white linen in the Irish style, lavishly
embroidered, with a bard's mantle of sky blue edged with golden fringe and
held with a golden pin. Her hair, confined by an embroidered band, fell down
in ringlets but, despite the festive raiment, her manner seemed strained.
"Ah, I had forgotten the peace here —" said Dieda, looking around her at
the glossy green of the mint beds, and the silvery foliage of lavender where
the bees buzzed among the purple flowers.
"I am afraid you will find us quiet indeed after all the kings and the
princes of Eriu." Eilan found her voice.
"It is a fine land, certainly, and very appreciative of singers and poets and
all kinds of makers of music, but after a time one begins to miss one's own
country."

"Well you certainly have the very lilt of Eriu in your voice, my child,"
observed Caillean. "It is good to hear that music again!"
Certainly nobody who heard her speak could confuse us now, thought
Eilan. It was not only a matter of accent but of depth and timbre. Dieda's
voice had always been pleasant, but now she used it like a well-tuned
instrument. Even ill words said in such a beautiful voice could be forgiven
more easily.
"I've had time and enough to acquire it," said Dieda. Her gaze slid to
Eilan. "It seemed half a lifetime I was away."
Eilan nodded. She felt herself to be a century older than the girl Lhiannon
had chosen as her successor five years ago. But there was a petulant twist to
Dieda's mouth. Did she still resent being sent away?
"It has been long enough for half a dozen new girls to come to us," she
said evenly. "A promising group - I think that most of them will eventually
take their vows."
Dieda looked at her. "And what had you in mind for me?"
"Teach these girls as much as you can of the skills you have learned!"
Eilan leaned forward. "I don't mean only hymns to make our rituals more
beautiful, but the ancient learning, the lore of the gods and heroes as well."
"The priests will not like it."
"They will have nothing to say about it," said Eilan. Dieda's eyes widened.
"These days the chieftains buy Latin tutors for their sons and teach them to
recite Virgil and appreciate Italian wines. They are doing their best to turn our
men into Romans, but they do not care what women do. The last sanctuary for
the old wisdom of our people may be here at Vernemeton, and I would not
have it lost!"
"Things have changed indeed since I went away." For the first time, Dieda
smiled. Then her eyes fixed on something beyond Eilan, and her expression
changed.
Gawen was running towards them with his nurse trailing behind him.

Eilan's hands twisted in the folds of her veil as she fought the compulsion to
reach out and take him into her arms.
"Moon Lady! Moon Lady!" he cried, then stopped and peered up into
Dieda's face. "You're not the Moon Lady!" he said disapprovingly.
"Not any more," Dieda said with a strange smile.
"This lady is our kinswoman Dieda," Eilan said through stiff lips. "She
sings as beautifully as any bird."
For a few moments the boy looked from one to the other, frowning. His
eyes were the same changeable hazel as Eilan's, but his hair was dark and
curling like his father's, and he would have the same broad brow when he was
a man.
"My Lady, I'm sorry," Lia said breathlessly, catching up with him and
reaching for his hand. "He got away from me!"
Gawen's lower lip began to quiver and Eilan, recognizing the signs,
gestured to the nurse to let him be. I suppose we have spoiled him, she
thought, but he is so little, and I will lose him so soon!
"Did you want to see me, my heartling?" she asked softly. "I cannot play
now, but if you come to me at sunset we will go down and feed the salmon in
the Sacred Pool. Will that make you happy?"
Solemnly Gawen nodded. She reached out to touch his cheek, and her
breath caught as he grinned and the dimple suddenly appeared. And then, as
swiftly as he had come, he darted back to his nurse and let her lead him away.
The day seemed to darken when he had gone.
"That is the child?" Dieda said in the silence after they had disappeared.
As Eilan nodded, fury flared in her blue eyes. "You are mad to have him here!
If he is discovered we are all lost! Have I spent four years in exile so that you
could enjoy the pleasures of motherhood as well as the honor of being High
Priestess?"
"He does not know I am his mother," Eilan whispered brokenly.

"But you can see him! They did not kill him, or you! You owe that to me,
O holy Moon Lady of Vernemeton!" Dieda began to walk up and down,
vibrating like one of her own harp strings.
"Have some pity, Dieda," Caillean said sternly. "The boy will be fostered
out in a year or two, and no one knows."
"Whose child do they think he is then?" Dieda spat over her shoulder.
"Poor Main's, or perhaps mine?" In their faces she could read the answer. "So.
Now that I have finished your exile, I will also have to bear your shame. Well,
when they see me with the boy perhaps that rumor will die. For I warn you, I
do not like children at all!"
"But you will stay, and keep silent?" Caillean asked bluntly.
"I will," Dieda said after a time, "for I believe in the work you are doing
here. But Eilan, hear me, for I have said this to you before, when I agreed to
the substitution - if ever you betray our people, then beware, for I will be your
doom!"
The new moon was already high in the sunset sky, adding a silver gleam
to the opalescent waters of the Sacred Pool. The salmon had come when
summoned, and taken the cake Gawen offered almost from the boy's hand.
Eilan waited until she could hear his prattling die away into the silence of the
evening, then drew her veil over her face and took the path up to the shrine
they had built around the spring that fed the pool.
Her maidens thought it a great grace in their High Priestess to take her
turn to minister to those who came to the Forest House for counsel. And often
enough, that was all that Eilan did, serving as a sympathetic ear for the
troubled, or referring those with more tangible problems to one of the spellwomen or herbalists. But since learning of Cynric's plans for insurrection, she
climbed this path with a little tremor, dreading those nights when the one who
waited would whisper of ravens and rebellion.
It was cool in the shrine; Eilan pulled her mantle more closely around her,
letting the murmur of running water soothe her. The water trickled from a
fissure in the rock with a leaden figure of the Lady set into a niche above it,
and splashed into the channel that led to the drinking well and the Sacred
Pool.

Source of life . . .she prayed, bending to cup some of the icy water in her
hand and touch it to lips and brow. Sacred water, forever upwelling, fill me
with your serenity. Then she lit the lamp below the image, and settled herself
to wait.
The moon was high in the sky when she heard the dragging footsteps of
someone who was either ill or exhausted forcing himself up the path. Her
throat tightened as the dark figure appeared in the doorway. It was a man,
wrapped in a coarse sagum that might belong to any farmer, but below the
cloak old blood stained his trews. When he saw her, some of the tension went
out of him in a long sigh.
"Rest, drink, receive the Lady's peace . . ." she murmured. He dropped to
his knees and scooped water from the channel, visibly struggling for control.
"I have been fighting . . .the ravens flew over the battlefield," he
whispered, looking up at her.
"Ravens fly at midnight as well," she answered. "What have you to say to
me?"
"The rising . . .was set for midsummer. Red-cloaks found out about it
somehow, attacked us —" He passed his hand over his eyes. "Night before
last."
"Where is Cynric?" she asked, her voice low and quick. Was her foster
brother still among the living? "What does he want from us here?"
The man shrugged hopelessly. "Cynric? On the run, probably. There may
be more like me coming, needing a place to lick their wounds."
Eilan nodded. "Behind our kitchens a path goes off into the forest. It leads
to a hut our women use sometimes for meditation. Go now. You can sleep
there, and someone will come with food." His shoulders sagged, and she
wondered if he would have the strength to get that far.
"Blessed be the Lady," he murmured, "and a blessing on you, for helping
me." He heaved himself to his feet, saluted the image, and then, more silently
than she would have thought possible, was gone.

But Eilan sat for a long time after he had left her, listening to the plash of
the water and watching the hypnotic flicker of lamplight on the wall.
Goddess, she prayed, have pity on all fugitives; have pity on us all! In a
month it will be Midsummer; Ardanos will want me to tell the people to
accept this latest blow, and my father will want them to rise and avenge the
Ravens in blood and fire. What should I say to them? How can we bring
peace to this land?
She waited for what seemed a long time, but the only vision that came to
her was that of water continually welling forth from the rock and running
away down the hill.
Gaius sat writing in his quarters in the fort at Colonia Agrippensis,
listening to the rain. He supposed that Germania Inferior was not really wetter
than Britannia, but it had been a rainy spring. Sometimes the two years he had
been gone, first in the lands north and west of Italia and now here, where the
gorge of the Rhenus ended and it began its meanderings through flat marshes
towards the northern sea, seemed only weeks. But today it felt to him as if he
had been away from home for centuries.
He dipped his quill into the inkpot and began to form the letters of the
next sentence in the letter he was writing to Licinius. Two years of regular
correspondence, he reflected wryly, had made him almost as facile a writer as
his slave secretary; at first it had been hard, but he had come to appreciate the
value of a private correspondence.
". . . the last of the legionaries who a year ago followed Saturninus into
rebellion have been judged and, for the most part, split up and integrated into
other legions" he wrote carefully. "The Emperor's new order of only one
legion per camp is causing some inconvenience, and a great deal of work for
the engineers. I do not know if it will discourage conspiracy, but it may be a
good thing to have our forces spread more evenly along the border. Has the
order been implemented in Britannia?"
For a moment he paused, listening to the regular tramp of hobnailed
sandals on stone as the watch went by, then bent to his work again.
"The word here is that the Marcomanni and Quadi are restive again, and

Domitian has had to pause in his campaign against Dacia to deal with them.
My advice would be to make an ally of King Decebalus if possible, and use
the Dacians to deal with the Marcomanni. The Emperor, however, has not yet
included me among the select circle of his advisers, so who knows what he
will do?"
He smiled, knowing that Licinius would understand his humor. He had
been in the Emperor's presence several times before he was transferred from
the Second Legion in Dacia to a cavalry command in Germania, but he rather
doubted that Domitian was aware of his existence.
"Training with my wing of cavalry goes well. The Brigantes stationed here
are fearless horsemen, and very grateful to have a commander who can speak
to them in their own language. The poor beggars must be as homesick as I
am. Give my love to Julia and the children. I suppose Cella must be quite a
big girl now, and it is hard to believe that little Secunda is more than a year
old.
"I think of Britannia as a haven of peace compared to the frontier of
Germania," he went on, "but I suppose that is an illusion. I overheard one of
the new men in my command talking about ravens, and suddenly I am
wondering about that secret society that we used to hear of years ago . . ."
Once more he paused, telling himself that the anxiety that had suddenly
overwhelmed him was only his reaction to the rain, but before he could return
to his writing, someone knocked on his door with word that the Legate
wanted to see him, and he pulled on his cloak and left his quarters, wondering
what it could be.
"It's new orders, tribune," said his Commander. "And I must say I'll be
sorry to lose you, for you were shaping well here —"
"Is the wing being transferred?" Gaius looked at him in some confusion,
for a wave of camp gossip usually preceded any move of this kind.
"Just you, lad, more's the pity. You're being transferred to the staff of the
Governor in Britannia. Seems there's been some kind of local dust-up, and
they need a man with your particular background there."
The Ravens . . .thought Gaius, and Cynric's face as he had last seen it,

sullen with hatred, came to mind. I shall pay more attention to my
premonitions from now on. He could see Licinius's hand in this summons. As
one officer among many on the frontier, only the greatest good luck would
bring him to the attention of anyone who could offer useful patronage. But if
he could prevent a rebellion . . .
Licinius was no doubt congratulating himself at finding a way for his sonin-law to do his duty and at the same time advance his career. Only Gaius
would know, or care, that to do so he must destroy a man who had been his
friend. He made some kind of polite response to his Commander, scarcely
hearing the reply, and went back to his quarters to pack his gear.
As the days ripened towards Midsummer, whispers of the fate of the
Ravens' rebellion circulated through the land. Eilan had hoped that the
Governor would forbid public assemblies in response to the rising, but it
seemed that the official line was to discourage popular support by refusing to
recognize that anything was wrong. But from the refugees, Eilan learned that
Cynric had gone back to his friends in the North and raised a force from the
survivors of Mons Graupius with men of the Ravens to lead them. That was
easy enough, for the Romans had simply withdrawn from the desert they had
made, leaving the people with nothing to sustain them but their hatred.
But then he had attempted to raise Brigantia, where the severity with
which Venutius's rebellion had been put down had been followed by some
attempt to rebuild the province. It was probably some man of the Brigantes,
thought Eilan, or perhaps, remembering Cartimandua, a woman who had
betrayed them, having decided that a limited prosperity in chains was
preferable to the Roman sword.
By ones and twos more of the Ravens made their way southward,
anguished by grief or sullen with despair. They were tended by Eilan's most
trustworthy women, given new names and clothing and sent on their way.
They told her that Cynric was still in the North with a remnant of unwounded
men, being hunted by a special detachment from the Legions. The
Caledonians had melted back into their hills, but the Ravens were clanless
men, and had no homes to flee to when they could fight no more.
The ones who came to the Forest House were only Cynric's age, but
hardship had made old men of them. Eilan looked at them with anguish, for
some, like her own Gawen, showed their Roman blood in their faces. In her

vision, she had seen that it was necessary for the blood of Rome and the tribes
to mingle. But the Merlin had not said whether this would occur in friendship
or through generation after generation in which men planted their seed and
died, leaving grieving women to carry on.
Ardanos and Lhiannon, remembering the rape of Mona, had chosen a
policy of accommodation as the lesser evil; her father and Cynric seemed to
feel that death was preferable to slavery. As Eilan watched Gawen grow, she
knew only that she would protect her child.
And so the lengthening days brought them at last to Midsummer, and the
priestesses of the Forest House went out to the Hill of the Maidens to perform
the ritual.
Even from the avenue Eilan could see the glow of the great bonfires atop
the mound, and the fiery arcs the torches traced against the dark sky. The
drums pulsed with a heavy insistence, their beat deepening to thunder as the
young men of the countryside competed to toss their torches highest. Kings
and armies might come and go, but the real struggle - sometimes it seemed to
Eilan the only struggle that mattered - was the one that men waged each year
to protect their fields and nurture the young crops.
In the distance she could hear the lowing of the cattle that had already
been protected by driving them between the sacred fires; she smelled
woodsmoke and cooked meat and the sharp fragrance of mugwort and
hypericum from her garland.
"Oh look," said Senara, beside her. "See how high they are throwing the
torches, like shooting stars!"
"May the crops grow as high as the torches rise!" Caillean answered her.
They had brought a bench for Eilan to sit on until it was time for the rite
of the Oracle; she huddled there gratefully, letting the murmured conversation
of the other women eddy around her. It was not only the crops that were
growing, she thought, listening to Senara's commentary. The frightened eightyear-old who had been given into her care five years ago was becoming a
leggy maiden with a promise of beauty in her long bones and amber hair.
There was a last crescendo from the hill, and then the fires appeared to

explode outwards as lads snatched brands from the bonfires and raced down
the hill in every direction to bear their Protecting sun-power to the fields. The
drumming settled to a hypnotic heartbeat, and Eilan felt the familiar flutter of
approaching trance.
It will be soon now, she thought, and then, whatever comes of this night's
work, it will be done. For the first time in years she had mixed the most
powerful trance herbs into the potion, afraid that without their help her own
fears might keep the Goddess from coming through. She knew that Ardanos
was anxious as well, though his face did not show it. He was like a carven
image, she thought, a shell in which the spirit flickered ever more fitfully, and
she had seen how much he needed the support of his oaken staff. One day,
perhaps soon, he would be gone. There had been times when she hated him,
but in the past years they had come to an unspoken understanding. And there
was no telling who his successor would be.
But that was a fear she could face once this night was past. The procession
was beginning to move now. Eilan allowed Caillean to assist her to her feet
and started up the hill.
The Druids were chanting; their song pulsed through the warm air.
"Behold, the holy priestess comes,
Sacred herbs are in her crown;
The golden crescent in her hand . . ."
Even after five years, there was always that moment of surprise when
Eilan felt the first wave of expectation from the assembled crowd. And she
had certainly forgotten the nausea, and the sickening lurch in consciousness
as the drugs began to take hold. She fought back the flicker of panic as the
world whirled around her. She had sought this; whether out of faith or
cowardice she was not sure, but this time she wanted the world to go away.
Lady of Life, to You I entrust my spirit. Mother, be merciful to all your
children!
Years of practice had given her full control over the techniques of focus
and breathing that loosed the spirit from the body. The herbs in the potion

aided the process, as if her head had been shattered like a broken bowl so that
Other could flood into her, tossing her consciousness aside like a leaf on a
stream.
Eilan felt the priestesses assisting her into the chair, and the unsettling
sensation of falling even though she knew they were lifting her. Her spirit
swung between earth and heaven; there was a slight jerk as they set the chair
atop the mound, and she was free. She was floating in a golden mist, and for a
time it was enough simply to enjoy the sense of being safe, protected, and at
home. Suspended in this certainty, the fears she had left behind her seemed
transitory, even absurd. But the silver cord that still tied her to her body would
not entirely release her, and presently, ever reluctantly, the mist thinned
enough so that she could see, and hear.
She looked down upon the huddle of blue robes in the tall chair and knew
it for her body, dimly illuminated by the embers of the great bonfires to either
side. The priests and priestesses made a circle with the people behind them,
pale robes on one side and dark on the other in two great curves of light and
shadow. The great mass of folk who had come for the festival darkened the
hillside; points of fire winked from the booths and tents of the encampment
that had sprung up around it. Beyond stretched the patchwork of field and
forest, with the pale glimmer of roads cutting through the trees. Without
curiosity she noted a swirl of motion in one part of the crowd, and further off
a more regular movement along the road from Deva, and the gleam as metal
caught the light of the setting moon.
The Druids were invoking the Goddess, twining all the incoherent
imaginings of the people into a single, mighty image which was at the same
time as various as there were people to echo their call. Eilan saw the power
they were raising as a swirl of multicolored light and pitied the fragile human
form into which it was descending. Now her body was almost hidden; the
energy was taking shape; she saw a female figure, heroic in stature and
splendid in form, though the features could not yet be seen.
Eilan drew closer, wondering what face the Lady would wear for this
gathering.
And in that moment, the disturbance in the crowd reached the center; she
saw the red gleam of swords and heard male voices harsh with anguish
crying, "Great Queen, hear us! Cathubodva, we call you - Lady of Ravens,

avenge your sons!"
Ardanos turned, his face contorting, to silence them, but the intensity of
emotion in that call had done its work. A whirl of dark-winged shadows
fluttered across the circle as a sudden chill wind stirred the fires; and the
figure in the chair seemed to expand suddenly and sat bolt upright, flinging
the veil aside.
"I hear your summoning, and I come," she said in the language of the
tribes. "Who is it that dares to call on Me?"
The murmur of fright that had swept the circle faded to absolute silence as
a man limped into the circle of firelight. Eilan recognized Cynric, a bloody
bandage around his head and a naked sword in his hand. "Mother, it is I who
call you - ever have I served you! Lady of Ravens, arise now in wrath!"
The chair creaked as the figure who sat there leaned forward. In the
firelight Her face and Her hair were as red as Cynric's sword. Ardanos looked
from one to the other, straining to stop this; but the force that linked them was
too strong and he did not dare.
"Well indeed have you served me . . ." Her voice scraped the silence.
"Severed heads and dismembered bodies are your offerings, blood the libation
you pour upon the ground. The wails of women and the groans of the dying
are your sacred music; your ritual fires are fueled by the bodies of men . .
.You have called me, red raven. What would you, now that I have come?"
She smiled terribly, and Midsummer though it was, the wind was
suddenly icy, as if Cathubodva's darkness had killed the sun. The people
began to edge backward. Only Cynric, Ardanos, and the two attendant
priestesses held their ground.
"Destroy the invaders; strike down the despoilers of our land! Victory,
Lady, is what I demand!"
"Victory?" Hideously, the battle-goddess began to laugh. "I do not give
victory - I am the battle-bride; I am the devouring mother; death is the only
victory that you will find in my arms!" She raised her hands and the folds of
her cloak flared out like dark wings. This time even Cynric recoiled.

"But our cause is just. . ." he faltered.
"Justice! Is there ever justice in the wars of men? Everything the Romans
do to you, men of your blood have done to each other, and to the peoples who
were before them in this land! Your blood feeds the earth whether you die in
the straw or on the battlefield -it makes no difference to Me!"
Cynric was shaking his head bewilderedly. "But I fought for my people.
At least tell me that our enemies will also suffer one day . . ."
The Goddess leaned forward, staring at him, and he could not look away.
"I see…" She whispered. "From the bright god's shoulders the ravens are
flying - no more shall they counsel him. Instead it is an eagle he welcomes.
He shall become an eagle, betrayed and betraying, suffering in the branches of
the oak tree until he becomes a god once more. . .
"I see the eagle put" to flight by a white horse that gallops from across the
sea. Now the eagle joins with the red dragon, and together they fight the
stallion, and the stallion battles dragons from the North and lions from the
South . . . I see one beast killing another and arising in its turn to defend the
land. The blood of all of them shall feed the earth, and the blood of all of
them shall mingle, till no man can say who is the enemy . . ."
There was silence in the circle when She had finished, as if folk did not
know whether to hope or fear. From further away came the moaning of cattle,
and a sound like drumming, though the musicians were still.
"Tell us, Lady -" Cynric croaked as if he found it hard to get the words
out. "Tell us what we should do . . ."
The Lady sat back, and this time her laugh was low and amused.
"Flee," She said softly. "Flee now, for your enemies are upon you." She
lifted her head and looked around the circle. "All of you, go swiftly and
quietly, and you will live . . .for a while."
Some of the people began to shift away from the fires, but the remainder
stayed staring as if enchanted.
"Go!" She flung up her hand, and a wing of darkness swept the circle.

Startled into movement, people began to push against their neighbors like the
first rolling pebbles in an avalanche of stones. "Cynric son of Junius, run,"
she screamed suddenly. "Run, for the Eagles come!"
And as the people fled the distant drumming became a present thunder
and the Roman cavalry charged.
Gaius let the impetus of the charge sweep him forward, willing his
awareness to confine itself to the movement of the horse beneath him, and the
riders to either side, the rising ground, the running shapes of men and women
and the glow of the flames. He tried to banish the memories which colored his
perceptions, but he kept seeing a full moon and dancers, Cynric walking hand
in hand with Dieda, and Eilan's rosy face lit by the Beltane fires.
The anterior horns of the saddle jabbed his buttocks as the slope
steepened; he gripped with his knees and settled lance and shield, scanning
the fleeing figures for armed men. Their orders had been dear enough - to
avoid slaughtering a peaceful population, but to keep the fugitive rebels
among them from getting away. The Legate had not explained how, in the
confusion and darkness, that was to be done.
Still cursing the fate that had sent him after Cynric and the Ravens at this
of all places, Gaius saw a glint of metal, a white face contorting in fear or
fury. Responses trained into him by ten years as a soldier moved his arm
without the need for decision. He felt the jerk and tug as the lance pierced
flesh and pulled free again, and the face disappeared.
The charge was slowing; they reached the flattened hilltop and saw it
almost deserted, though people were streaming away on every side. A terse
order to his optio sent riders swinging outward in pursuit. His mount halfreared as a white figure waved its arms wildly, mouthing something about
sacred ground. Gaius kneed the animal in a rocking canter around the
perimeter, looking for Cynric, heard the clash of metal on the other side of the
mound in the center, and headed toward it.
And suddenly his mount was plunging, whinnying in terror as a wing of
shadow swirled around it and someone screamed. It was not fear he heard but
anger, anguish; a cry that contained all the horror and fear and fury of all the
battlefields in the world; a shriek that turned the bowels to water and shivered
the bones. Every animal that heard it for a moment was maddened, and every

human felt the spirit within him gibber with fear. Gaius lost his reins and his
lance and clung to his pony's mane as the world whirled around him. The face
of a Fury hung before him, haloed by seething tendrils of shining hair.
His mount plunged onward and he came into the leaping firelight; all
around him men stood frozen as if by some spell. Then his horse came to a
shivering halt and people began to move again, but he could still see the terror
in their eyes. He took a deep breath, realizing that surprise was lost, and
looked around.
Some of the Druids were supporting a man in white whom he realized in
shock must be Ardanos; he looked very old now. The blue-robed priestesses
were easing what looked like a bundle of cloth out of the chair on the top of
the mound. As his battle fury drained away, Gaius felt suddenly very tired.
Another rider, his optio, appeared at his side. "They've scattered, sir."
Gaius nodded. "But they can't have gone far. Set the men to scouring the
area. They can report back to me here."
Stiffly he swung his leg over the pony's neck, slid to the ground, and
walked forward, the horse plodding behind him. As he neared, Ardanos
stirred, looking at him pleadingly.
"It was not my doing," he mumbled. "Called the Goddess — suddenly
Cynric was there!"
Gaius nodded. He knew the Arch-Druid's policies well enough to believe
him. It was the woman whose shriek had paralyzed them who had given the
rebels the extra moment they needed to melt into the crowd. He continued
walking towards the group of women. Somehow he was not surprised when
Caillean turned, staring at him defiantly, but it was the woman who lay on the
ground he wanted to see.
He took another step and found himself staring down at a woman's face;
white, unconscious, identifiable only in its broadest outlines with the Fury
who had appeared to him. And yet with a sick certainty he knew that it was
She, and at the same time that it was Eilan.

Twenty-Three

As the Romans hunted Ravens in the days that followed the fight at the
Hill of Maidens, Gaius felt as if he had become two people, the one
dispassionately reporting the results of the operation to the Commander in
Deva and then returning to Londinium to repeat the story to the Governor,
while the other tried to reconcile the mask of fury he had seen there with the
image of the woman he loved. Julia hovered about him with wifely solicitude,
but after the first nightmare, they both agreed that for a time it might be better
if he slept alone.
Julia did not seem to mind. She was as affectionate as ever, but during the
two years he had been away her focus had shifted to her children. The girls
were growing fast, miniatures of their mother, although there were times
when Gaius thought he saw a gleam of Macellus's determination in his elder
daughter's eyes. But though they were dutiful, he had become a stranger. It
hurt a little to hear their laughter cease when he entered the room, and it
occurred to him that perhaps if he could find the time to get to know them
better the distance between them would disappear.
But he could not bring himself to try to bridge it, not now, when his heart
was telling him that whatever love had remained between him and Eilan had
been swept away by the Power that possessed her. At times the strain of
concealing his anguish made him want to howl. Gaius was relieved when the
Commander at Deva requested him to return for consultation, a postscript
indicating that his father was hoping that instead of staying in the fortress,
Gaius could pay him a visit in the new house he had built in the town. Perhaps
it would be easier there to reconcile the conflict that was tearing at him.

"Have they captured any more fugitives from the Raven conspiracy?"
Macellius poured wine for Gaius and handed him the cup, good but not
gaudy, like the dining chamber itself and the mansion that surrounded it. His
father's place was one of the better houses that had been built around the
fortress, evidence of a growing civilian presence as the country settled down.
Gaius shook his head.
"That fellow Cynric — he was their leader, wasn't he?" Macellius said
then. "Didn't you capture him at Mons Graupius?"
Gaius nodded and took a long drink of sour wine, wincing as the
movement stretched the healing slash on his side. He had not noticed it until
the fight at the Hill was over, but it was more annoying than serious; he had
had far worse on the German frontier. The shock of realizing that the Fury
who had cursed them all was Eilan was his worst wound. After a moment he
realized that his father was waiting for an answer. "I did - but later he got
away."
"Seems to be good at that," observed his father, "like that bastard
Caractacus. But we got him in the end, and eventually somebody will betray
your Cynric too, someone from his own side . . ."
Gaius stirred uncomfortably at the pronoun, hoping his father would not
remember that Cynric was Bendeigid's foster son. It would have saved
everyone a lot of trouble, he thought grimly, if he had killed Cynric when he
had the chance.
"Ah well," the older man continued, "nobody blames you for not catching
him, and wherever the survivors run to, it's not likely we'll see them here . . ."
He looked around him with what Gaius could only characterize as a smug
sigh.
"Not likely," his son agreed. "Are you really comfortable here?" After
retiring from the army, Macellius had built his mansion, almost immediately
been elected a decurion and was rapidly becoming a pillar of the community.
"Oh yes, it's a nice place. Settled down a lot in the past few years, and the
town is growing. The amphitheater is a draw, of course. More shops every
day, it seems to me, and I've just coughed up a goodly sum to pay for the new
temple."

"A miniature Rome, in fact," Gaius said, smiling. "All you lack is a
coliseum for the Games."
"Gods preserve me." Macellius held up one hand, laughing. "No doubt I'd
have to pay for those as well. This business of being a city father is highly
overrated. I hardly dare open my door for fear II be given the honor of
contributing to something new!"
But he was laughing, Gaius observed, and thought that he had never seen
his father so contented.
"There's one thing I'd not grudge the money for, though," said Macellius,
"and that's to send you to Rome. It's time, you know. You'll get a good
recommendation from the Governor after this last bit of service, and you can't
rise much further on the kind of patronage your father-in-law and I can give
you. Has Licinius said anything?"
"He's mentioned it," Gaius said cautiously. "But I can't go until everyone's
satisfied that things will stay quiet here."
"I can't help wishing Vespasian had lived longer." Macellius frowned.
"There was a stingy old fox for you, but he knew how to pick good men. This
cub of his, Domitian, seems determined to rule like an Eastern despot. He's
banished the philosophers, I hear. Now I ask you, what harm could a lot of
prosy old bores do?"
Gaius, remembering his own desperation when his old tutor had droned
on about Plato, felt a sneaking sympathy for the Emperor.
"In any case, he's the man you'll have to impress if you want a good
posting, and though I'll miss you, a procuratorship somewhere in one of the
older provinces is the logical next step in your career."
"I'll miss you, too," said Gaius quietly. And that was true, but he realized
that he would not particularly miss Licinius, or even Julia and the girls. In
fact, he thought he would be glad to get away from Britain for a while, to
some place where nothing would remind him of Cynric or Eilan.
Gaius finally set out for Rome on the ides of August, attended by a Greek

slave called Philo, a gift from Licinius, who swore he could be depended
upon to drape a toga decently and send his master out each morning looking
like a gentleman. In his saddlebag was the Procurator's annual report on the
economy of the Province, which gave Gaius the status of official courier and
carried with it the right to use the military post houses.
The weather held fair, but even so it seemed a weary journey. The further
south they traveled the drier the country became - to Gaius's northern eyes a
desert, though the officers at the posting houses laughed to hear him say so
and traded stories of Egypt and Palestine, where the desert sands scoured
monuments older than Rome. He found himself wishing that like Caesar he
could while away the time by writing his memoirs, but even if he waited forty
years to do so, he doubted anyone would be interested in reading them.
Even Julia's chatter would have been welcome, though these days all she
seemed able to talk about was the children. But children were what he had
married her for, he reminded himself; children, and social standing. And so
far everything had gone more or less to plan. Only, as he passed through the
endless miles of slave-farmed estates in Gaul, Gaius found himself wondering
if this pursuit of rank and position was really worth it. And then they would
come to the next inn, or the next villa belonging to one of Licinius's friends.
In the arms of whatever pretty slave girl they sent to warm his bed he could
forget both Julia and Eilan, and in the morning he would tell himself that it
was only his fatigue that had been speaking, or perhaps a natural anxiety
about how he would do in Rome.
Once he reached Rome, it began to rain, heavily and continuously, as if
making up for lost time. The kinsman of Licinius with whom he was staying
was hospitable enough, but Gaius very quickly became tired of jokes about
bringing his British weather with him. And it was not even true, really, for in
Britannia there was an honest chill to the rain, but Rome was not so much
cold as plagued by a pervasive and pestilent damp. Forever after, Gaius's
memories of that time were linked to the alkaline smell of damp plaster and
the reek of wet wool.
Rome was mud and smoky skies; the rank smell of the Tiber and the
exotically spiced cooking fires of a hundred different nationalities. Rome was
white marble and gilding and heady perfumes; the blare of trumpets and the
shrieking of market-women and the eternal, sub-aural hum of more people,
speaking more languages than Gaius had ever imagined existed, crammed

together on seven hills whose contours had long ago disappeared beneath this
encrustation of humanity. Rome was the pulsing heart of the world.
"And this is your first visit to Rome?" The lady to whom Gaius was
talking favored him with a laugh that tinkled like the silver bangles she wore.
Exquisitely curled women and elegantly draped men crowded the atrium of
Licinius's cousin, who was giving the party, and conversation hummed like
bees in an orchard. "So what do you think of the Mistress of Nations, diadem
of the Empire?" her painted eyelids drooped coquettishly. This was another
question Gaius had heard so often he had been forced to memorize an answer.
"I think the splendor of the city far eclipsed by the beauty that adorns it,"
he said gallantly. He would have said "might," and "power," if he had been
talking to a man.
This earned him another burst of tinkling; then his host rescued him and
bore him away to the peristyle, where toga-clad men were grouped like
figures on a piece of statuary. He joined them with some relief. Even among
the men, there were dangers, but at least he understood them. Roman women
produced in him something of the same paralysis he had felt when he first met
Julia.
But she was straightforward by comparison to the ladies he was meeting
now. One or two of them had invited him to bed, but a lively sense of selfpreservation had kept him free of such entrapments. Rome attracted the best
of everything, and if he needed a woman, there were courtesans who
demanded nothing of him but his money, and whose arts could banish anxiety,
for a little while.
Moving in Roman society was like leading a cavalry charge across icy
ground - exhilarating while it lasted, but you never knew when some
treacherous bit would bring you down. Gaius wondered if Julia could have
held her own in that company. And as for Eilan -it was like trying to imagine
a wild antelope, or perhaps a wildcat, among a herd of high-bred racing mares
to picture her here: both were beautiful, but different orders of being entirely.
"I understand that you served under Agricola in Caledonia . . ."
Gaius blinked, realizing that one of the older men was talking to him. He
caught the flicker of a broad purple stripe on the tunic and straightened as if

he were facing a superior officer, racking his brains to remember the man's
name. Most of his host's friends were from the equestrian class; he had done
well to get a senator here.
"Yes, sir, I had that honor. I had hoped to call upon him here in Rome."
"I believe that at present he is residing on the family estates in Gaul," the
Senator said neutrally. Marcellus Clodius Malleus, that was his name.
"It is hard to imagine him resting." Gaius grinned. "I had supposed he
would be putting the fear of the gods into the enemies of Rome somewhere on
the frontiers or bringing the Pax Romana to one of the provinces."
"Indeed, one might think so." The Senator's manner warmed perceptibly.
"But you might be wiser not to say so until you are sure of your company . . ."
Gaius stilled, thinking once more of icy ground, but Malleus continued to
smile.
"There are many here in Rome who appreciate Agricola's qualities,
qualities that appear ever more admirable each time we learn of some
mishandled campaign by one of our other generals."
"Then why doesn't the Emperor employ him?" Gaius asked.
"Because victory for Roman arms is secondary to keeping the Emperor in
power. The more people clamor for Agricola to be sent out as General, the
more our "lord and god" suspects him. In another year he will be due for a
major consular appointment, but as things are now, his friends must advise
him not to accept it."
"I can see the problem," said Gaius thoughtfully. "Agricola is far too
conscientious to fail deliberately, but if he does well, the Emperor will feel
threatened by his success. Well, he will be remembered with honor in
Britannia, whatever happens in Rome."
"Tacitus would be happy to hear you say that," said Malleus.
"Oh, do you know him? I served with him in Caledonia." The
conversation moved into a general discussion of the northern campaign,

which the Senator proved to have followed closely. It was only as the guests
were being herded to the gardens for a display by some Bithynian dancing
girls that the conversation became personal once more.
"I'm giving a small dinner party three weeks from now —" Malleus laid a
friendly hand on Gaius's arm. "Nothing elaborate, just a few men whom I
think you will find interesting. Would you honor me by attending? Cornelius
Tacitus has promised to be there."
From that day forward it seemed to Gaius that the superficial round of
parties and entertainments that had begun to exasperate him took on a new
dimension. It felt as if he were at last penetrating the veil with which Roman
society protected itself against outsiders, and if it was only one segment of
that society, and perhaps a dangerous one, even that was preferable to dying
of boredom.
A few days later Licinius's cousin, whose agnomen was Corax, took Gaius
with him to the Games in the new Coliseum that Domitian was building on
the site where Nero's overwrought palace had once stood.
"There's a certain appropriateness in the location," Corax observed as they
took their seats in the section reserved for the equestrians, "since Nero
himself put on Games such as Rome had never seen before, especially when
he was trying to convince everyone that that odd Jewish sect - you know, the
Christians -had caused the great fire."
"Did they?" Gaius was looking around him. They had arrived between
fights, and slaves were replacing the bloodstained sand.
"You hardly need deliberate sabotage to start a fire in this city, my lad,"
his host said wryly. "Why do you think every district has a fire watch to
which we all contribute so willingly? But this was a particularly bad one, and
the Emperor needed a scapegoat to counter the rumors that he had started the
blaze himself!"
Gaius turned to stare at him.
"New buildings, lad, new buildings!" Corax explained. "Nero fancied
himself an architect, and the people who owned the property where the fire
started wouldn't sell. The fire got out of hand, and the Emperor needed

someone to blame. The Games were really quite horrid - no skill involved at
all - just a lot of poor souls who died more like sheep than like men."
Gaius was suddenly glad he had not captured Cynric after all. Such a
fighter would certainly have been sent here, and he did not deserve it, though
surely he would have not been a sheep but rather a wolf or a bear.
Trumpets blared and a shiver of expectation ran through the vast throng.
Gaius felt his own heartbeat quicken and was reminded oddly of the moment
before battle; it was the only time he had been in the presence of so many
thousands, all nerving themselves up to make blood flow. But at least in war
both sides were at equal risk. It was other men's blood these Romans were
offering, not their own.
He had seen bear baitings at home, of course, as entertainment for the
Legions. There was certainly a fascination in some of the pairings of wild
beasts imported for the Games. A lion and a giraffe, for instance, or a wild
boar and a panther. Corax told him that on one occasion a pregnant sow had
been fighting and actually farrowed a piglet during her death throes. But the
real focus of the afternoon was on the most dangerous of all animals — man.
"Now we shall see some skill," said Corax as the mock combats finished
and the first of the gladiators, hide and armor alike oiled and gleaming,
stalked across the sand. "This kind of thing is what makes the Games worth
seeing. Those fights in which they throw in untrained prisoners of war or
criminals, even women and children, are simply a stupid slaughter. Here, for
instance, we have a Samnite and a Retarius -" He indicated the first gladiator,
wearing greaves and a visored helmet crowned with a tuft of feathers and
armed with a shortsword and big rectangular shield, and his more agile
opponent, flourishing his net and trident.
Gaius, trained to judge fighting men, found his professional interest
engaged. All around him bets were being placed with an intensity that almost
matched that of the fighters. Corax kept up a running commentary, and it was
not until the Samnite fighter was down with the net-man's trident at his throat
that he realized that the man giving the thumb's down signal from the purplehung box was the Emperor.
The trident thrust and the Samnite convulsed and then was still, his bright
blood staining the sand. Gaius sat back, licking dry lips, his throat raw from

cheering. He must have been intent indeed not to hear the trumpets
announcing the entrance of the Emperor. From this distance he could see only
a figure in a purple tunic, wrapped in a mantle that glittered with gold.
Later that night, as Corax's masseur pummeled him after his soak in the
bath, Gaius realized that his whole body was a mass of aching muscles, which
had been tensed against one another as he watched the Games. At the time he
had not noticed.
But he felt also a great sense of release. Going to the Coliseum was indeed
like being in a battle, like that moment when all existence is simplified into a
single struggle, and you are carried beyond yourself and become one with a
greater whole. For a moment, it seemed to him he understood why the
Romans loved their Games with such a passion. However perverse and
pointless it seemed, they were moved by the same force that had enabled the
Legions to conquer half the world.
The night of Malleus's party was cold and windy, but the streets were
choked as usual with food sellers and barbers, men hawking pots and every
other kind of street merchant, hoping for one more sale before darkness
forced them all indoors. As Gaius's litter bearers forced their way towards the
Aventine, it occurred to him that he had almost become used to the noise, as
he had grown accustomed to the clatter of iron-shod cartwheels on
cobblestones that made the night almost as noisy as the day.
But as they turned on to the main avenue he heard a new sound. The litter
stopped, and he stuck his head through the curtains to see. A religious
procession was making its way along the road; he glimpsed shaven-headed
priests in white robes and women in veils. The women were wailing, their
lamentations punctuated by the sibilance of shaking sistrums and the deep
boom of a drum.
Despite the warmth of his toga Gaius found himself shivering, for the
mourning touched something that deeply disturbed his urbane persona, and
even the easy competence of the man he was at home.
Even without understanding its cause, he felt that anguish as his own. It
was like the mourning in the Mithraeum when the bull is killed. Another
group of priests went by, and then more women, their gliding gait reminding
him of the priestesses at home, and then a litter on which he could see the

black-veiled statue of a golden cow. For a few moments longer the drumming
pounded in his ears; then the procession passed.
When Gaius finally got to it, the dinner party proved to be a gathering of
the kind that he had come to feel represented the best in Roman society. The
food was simple but well prepared, the company urbane and well informed.
Gaius felt outclassed, but these were men from whom he could learn.
The topic that had been proposed was "pietas," the wine mixed half and
half with water so that everyone remained focused enough to discuss it
seriously.
"I suppose one question is whether there is more than one true religion,"
Gaius said when his turn to speak arrived. "Of course each people has its faith
and should be allowed to keep it, but here in Rome you seem to worship more
gods than I ever knew existed. Just tonight, for instance, I saw some kind of
procession that sounded oriental, but most of those following it looked
Roman."
"That must have been the Isia," observed Herennius Senecio, one of the
more important of the guests. "The followers of Isis celebrate her search for
the dismembered body of Osiris at this time of year. When she has gathered
the pieces she reanimates his body and conceives the sun-child Horus anew."
"Do not the British tribes have a festival at this time also?" asked Tacitus.
"I seem to remember processions around the countryside with masks and
bones."
"True," replied Gaius. "At Samaine the white mare goes around with her
followers and the people invite the souls of their ancestors to reincarnate in
the wombs of the women of the tribe."
"Perhaps that is the answer then," said Malleus. "Though we all have
different names for the gods, they are all in essence the same, and therefore to
worship any of them is piety."
"For instance, the god whom we call Jupiter is known by his oak tree and
his thunderbolt," said Tacitus. "The Germans worship him as Donar, and the
British as Tanarus or Taranis."

Gaius was not so sure. It was hard to imagine any Celtic deity being
worshipped in a great temple like the one dedicated to Jupiter in the Forum.
At one party he had met a woman they said was a Vestal and he had observed
her with curiosity, but although the woman was marked by a certain dignity
and certainly more decorum than most of the Roman women he had seen,
there was none of the nobility he associated with the women of the Forest
House. Curiously, it was easier to identify the Egyptian Isis, whose procession
he had just seen, with the Great Goddess Eilan served.
"I think, that our British friend has put his ringer on a real problem," said
Malleus. "Surely that is why our fathers fought so hard to keep foreign cults
like that of Cybele and Dionysos from taking root in Rome. Even the temple
of Isis was burned."
"If we include all the peoples of the world in our Empire," Tacitus
countered, "then we must also include their gods. I would never deny that, for
I think that there is more honor, more purity of morals, and more of what we
would call piety in the hall of any German chieftain than in most of the
mansions of Rome. There is no harm in that, so long as the rituals that
preserve the State are given first priority."
"That seems to be what the deified Augustus had in mind when he
allowed his cult to spread through the Empire," Malleus replied. There was a
short silence.
"Dominus et Deus . . ." someone said softly, and Gaius remembered
hearing that was how the Emperor liked to be addressed these days. "He goes
too far! Will we return to the days when Caligula trotted out his favorite horse
for everyone to worship?"
Gaius looked around and realized in some surprise that the man who had
spoken was Flavius Clemens, some kind of cousin of the Emperor.
"Pietas is the essence of reverence and obligation between men and the
gods, not adulation for a mortal!" Senecio exclaimed. "Even Augustus
insisted that "Roma" be coupled with his name. We do not worship the man,
but his genius, the god within him. To believe that a mere human has the
wisdom and power to govern an Empire like this one would be impiety
indeed."

"Well, in the Provinces the cult works as a force for unity," Gaius
observed brightly in the even more uncomfortable silence that followed.
"When nobody knows what the Emperor is like personally, all they can do is
to worship the idea of a Divine Ruler. Whatever their personal religion,
everyone can come together to burn incense to the Emperor."
"Everyone except the Christians," someone observed, and, except for
Flavius Clemens, they all laughed.
"Well, there's no need to persecute them and make more martyrs," Tacitus
pointed out. "Their appeal is mostly to slaves and women. And they have so
many factions, they can be depended upon to destroy each other if we only
leave them alone!"
Sweets and cheese were served then, and the conversation passed to other
things. These were all civilized men, after all, not likely to be swayed by
religious enthusiasm. But Gaius could not help wondering if piety, duty, and
mutual obligation were enough to nourish the human soul. Perhaps people
were driven to cults such as that of Isis or the Christos by the aridity of the
State religion, or perhaps the bloody rituals of the Coliseum had become the
real religion of Rome.
The other thing he was beginning to realize was that among the thinking
men of the city - the men whose company he was increasingly coming to
value - there was a growing opposition to the Emperor. These connections
would not bring him the patronage he needed to advance in his career. If it
came to a choice between ambition and honor, which would he choose?
Shortly after Gaius's arrival, the Imperial Procurator's staff of busy
freedmen went to work to digest the content of the report from Licinius that
he had carried and analyze its implications for the Emperor. Yet the city
fathers retained enough authority so that this information must be delivered to
them eventually, and Gaius discovered that the influence of his new friends
was sufficient to win him an invitation to address the Senate and meet the
Emperor afterward.
On the morning he was to appear, Gaius had himself shaved with special
care - though he sometimes thought that the bearded Ardanos and Bendeigid
were less barbarian than he was himself, he did not think he could explain that
to the assembled conscript fathers.

It was very early when he arrived at the Senate and was given a seat
beneath a statue of the deified Augustus, who stood on his pedestal looking as
cold and cross as Gaius felt. The senators entered by ones and twos, talking
softly, followed by the secretaries with their piles of wax tablets, ready to
record the debates and decisions of the day. This, reflected Gaius, was where
the lords of the world decided the fates of nations. On this marble floor they
had debated the defense against Hannibal and the invasion of Britannia. The
river of time flowed strongly in this chamber; in comparison, even the pride
of the Caesars was only a ripple on the stream.
Just as the opening invocations were beginning the Emperor arrived,
resplendent in a purple toga sewn all over with golden stars that made Gaius
blink. He had heard of the toga picta, but had thought it was only worn by a
general presiding over his triumph. It was rather disturbing to see it worn
here, and he wondered if Domitian wanted to be seen as a conqueror, or was
simply fond of finery. This was the first time Gaius had seen his Emperor at
such close hand. The youngest son of the great Vespasian had the bull neck
and well-muscled shoulders of a soldier, but Gaius read petulance in the twist
of his mouth and suspicion in his eyes.
It was almost time for the noon recess before Gaius was beckoned
forward to read Licinius's report on the finances of Britannia. There were a
few questions, mostly on the subject of resources, and one from Clodius
Malleus that allowed Gaius to mention the part he had played in controlling
the latest rebellion. Despite some recent tutoring in oratory, he felt he must
have bored them, but at the end of his speech, they voted him a perfunctory
round of applause and - as Licinius had foreseen - confirmed that for the next
year a reasonable percentage of the tax money they had collected might be
retained in Britain. Since this was why Licinius had sent him in the first place,
Gaius was hardly surprised.
The meeting with Domitian afterwards was brief. On his way to another
engagement, the Emperor was already removing the gorgeous toga, but he
stopped long enough to give Gaius a careless word of thanks.
"You've been in the army?" he asked.
"As a tribune with the Second Legion. I had the privilege of serving under
you in Dacia," Gaius said carefully.

"Hmm . . .Well, I suppose we'll have to find you something to do in the
Provinces then," said the Emperor without much interest, turning away.
"Dominus et Deus," said Gaius, saluting, and hated himself for saying the
words.
On the way home Gaius shared a litter with Clodius Malleus. It was the
first time they had been able to talk privately all day.
"And what did you think of the Senate?" the older man asked.
"It made me proud to be a Roman," Gaius answered truthfully.
"And the Emperor?"
Gaius was silent. After a moment he heard the Senator sigh. "You have
seen how things are," Malleus said softly. "Such patronage as I have to offer
must be given carefully, at least for now. But if you are willing to face the
risks that this bond might bring you, along with its potential rewards, I would
be happy to accept you among my clients. I can arrange for you to serve as
Procurator for army supplies in Britannia. Ordinarily it would be somewhere
else in the Empire, but I think you would be most useful to us in the land that
you know best."
That collegial "us" made something in Gaius that the Emperor's lack of
interest had chilled awaken to warmth again. The Rome that his father and
Licinius had taught him to honor might be dead, but it seemed to Gaius that
under the leadership of such men as Malleus and Agricola the spirit of Rome
might revive.
"I would be honored," he said into the silence, and knew that like the
decision he had made after Mons Graupius, this choice would determine the
course of his life from now on.

Twenty-Four

The priestesses worshipped at the new moon in the Sacred Grove behind
the Forest House, following a ritual that men had not invented and were not
allowed to see. Caillean watched as the novices filed in to complete the circle,
feeling rather like a mother hen counting her chicks, or perhaps, observing the
pale glimmer of their gowns in the half-light, cygnets about to become swans.
For a moment there was silence as the circle was completed. She moved
into position before the stone cairn that was their altar, Dieda to her left and
Miellyn to her right, in the place that was usually her own. But tonight Eilan
was sick with cramps and the place of the High Priestess had fallen to
Caillean. It felt strange to stand here, and strange not to feel the younger
woman's familiar energy balancing her own.
Dieda lifted her hand, and the silence was broken by a shimmer of silver
bells.
"Hail to thee, thou new moon, guiding jewel of gentleness," sang the
maidens, nearly a round dozen, all of them come to the Forest House since
Eilan had become High Priestess. The most recent arrivals had been drawn by
Dieda's music. When old Ardanos had schemed to get his two kinswomen
into Vernemeton he had wrought better than he knew. Caillean listened to
those pure voices offering their praise to heaven and sighed in pure content.

"I am bending to thee my knee, I am offering thee my
love;
I am bending to thee my knee, I am giving thee my hand
I am lifting to thee mine eye Oh, new moon of the
seasons!"
With each phrase they were bending, then reaching upward in
supplication, eyes fixed on the silver sickle above, so that their chanting

became a dance. Now they began slowly to move sunwise around the circle,
arms uplifted to the sky.

"Hail to thee, thou new moon, Joyful maiden of my
love! Hail to thee, thou new moon Joyful maiden of the
graces! Thou art traveling in thy course, Thou art
showing us thy shining face, O new moon of the
seasons!"
Caillean let her gaze unfocus and allowed the rhythm of the chanting to
carry her ever deeper into trance. Each time it grew easier. There had been a
barren period in her life when nothing seemed to have meaning any more. But
thanks to the Goddess, that seemed to be over. With the ending of her blood
cycles, the floodgates of her spirit had opened, and with each season she felt
ever more strongly the tides of power.
And it is because of you, Eilan, she thought, sending her awareness
winging towards the dark bulk of the Forest House beyond the trees. Can you
hear how sweetly your daughters are singing now?
Unbidden, her own arms were opening; the girls that circled the altar
seemed to move in a haze of light.
"Thou queen-maiden of guidance, , Thou queen-maiden of good fortune,
Thou queen-maiden, my beloved new moon of the seasons!"
Once more the bells shivered sweetly and the singing faded to silence; but
it was a charged silence now, pregnant with power. Caillean reached out and
felt the shock of completion as the other two grasped her hands; a second shift
told her that the maidens had joined hands in a circle around them.
"Know, O my sisters, that the moon power is the Power of women, the
light that shines in the darkness, the tides that rule the inner planes. The
maiden moon governs all growth and all beginnings, and so it is that we draw
on her power for those purposes for which our help has been requested.
Sisters, are you willing to lend your energy to the work that we do now?"
There was a murmur of assent from the circle, and Caillean planted her
feet more firmly in the cool grass.
"We call upon the Goddess, the Lady of Life, whose garment is the starry
heavens; She is the virgin bride, the mother of all living, the wisdom beyond
the circles of the world. She is all goddesses, and all the goddesses are one
Goddess; in all Her phases, in all our faces, as She shines in the heavens, She
shines within us all!" It was as if she sought to breathe against the wind.
"Goddess, hear us -" she called.
"Goddess, be near us -" the others echoed her.

"Goddess hear us now!" The tension was almost unbearable; she could
feel it thrilling through the hands braced against her own.
"For the healing of Bethoc, mother of Ambigatos, we raise this power!"
She heard Dieda intone the first note of the healing chord and a quarter of
the circle joining her, the sound low and thrilling as a harp string, but deeper,
sweeter, louder, continuing on and on. Then came the second note; now half
the circle was singing; and the third, as the chord built and was completed on
a high note above which Dieda's voice rose in a clear descant like a lark
winging into the sky. It was a principle used by the harpers of Eriu in their
magic, but it had been Eilan's idea to apply it to singing, and Dieda who
worked out the technique of it and taught the girls. It was like being inside a
harp to stand in the midst of that singing. And gradually, as their voices
blended, Caillean began to touch the spirits of the others as well.
I am soaring with wings of light. Caillean could not tell whose thought
that had been, nor did it matter, for at this moment when they were linked
together she felt the same.
I see rainbows around the moon . . . in the sunlight . . .in the waterfall. .
.all the world is shimmering . . .
Cool water . . .a fire's warmth . . .softness of a duckling's down . . .my
mother's arms . . .
In this melding of sound all the senses were confounded. Only Dieda's
mind remained distinct from the others - critical, and still unsatisfied.
Breathe now, and hold . . .Tanais is wavering. Wait, wait — Rhian should
come in now with the fifth note - that's better. Now let's lift it, moving up the
scale - stay with me, all of you — maintain the harmony!
The last irregularities disappeared. The women's joined voices moved
upward together to become the Voice of the Goddess. For a time even Dieda's
inner monologue ceased. Caillean felt some tension in the other woman relax
as the chord vibrated with inhuman intensity. And though Caillean herself
was self-taught, and had no words to describe the Tightness of what she heard
she was singer enough to apprehend the ecstasy of a trained musician
experiencing perfect harmony.
It took an effort for Caillean to collect herself, to reach out to the energy
that was pulsing around her and gather it in, holding in her mind the image of
the sick woman they were working for. She could see it now, a mist of power
that grew brighter with every breath.
Caillean drew the Power inward, projecting upon it the image until they
could all see it, shimmering above the pile of stones. The sound built until it
seemed she could bear it no longer. Her arms were rising - all their arms were
lifting unbidden as the Power fountained upward in a pillar of light, a surge of

pure sound to send strength to the sick woman. And then it was gone. They
settled back, breathing as if they had been running, knowing they had
succeeded.
They raised the Power twice more that night for healing, and a last time,
gently, to replenish some of the energy they had lost. When it was over, a
measure of peace had returned even to Dieda's eyes. And then, with a final
murmur of thanks, they filed back to the Forest House for food and bed. But
Caillean, tired as she was, went to the separate building where the High
Priestess had her chambers to tell Eilan how it had gone.
"You do not have to tell me —" said Eilan as Caillean came into her room.
"Even from here I could hear you, I could feel the Power." The older woman
looked lit up from within.
"It's true, Eilan. This is the work we were meant for! When I was a child
serving Lhiannon, this is the kind of thing I dreamed of, but then the Druids
penned us up here, and the vision was lost. With all my knowledge, I did not
know how to find it again until you showed me the way."
"You would have found it . . ." Eilan sat up in bed and forced a smile. She
still felt out of sorts and achy, as she often did at this time of the moon. More
and more, she had become convinced that in ages past Caillean had been one
of the greatest of priestesses. So much of what they were doing now in the
Forest House came in spurts of certainty, as if they were not inventing it, but
remembering. She supposed that she herself had been a priestess too, but
while she had vision, there were times when Caillean was able to summon up
an amazing power. "I have often thought that you should have been chosen
High Priestess instead of me."
Caillean gave her a quick glance. "Once, I would have thought so too,"
she said. "I do not want it now."
"Sensible woman! But none the less, if you had to, you could do it." There
was more silver now in Caillean's dark hair, thought Eilan, but otherwise she
looked little different from the woman who had delivered Mairi's child ten
years ago.
"Well I don't have to do it now," Caillean said briskly. "Only to get a few
decisions out of you! We have had a rather odd request. A strange fellow from
that Roman sect they call Christians wants to live in the old hut in the forest.
He calls himself a hermit. Shall I say he may stay there or send him away?"
"He may as well," said Eilan, considering. "I don't intend to send any
more of our women there for punishment, nor, I suppose, do you, and the
Ravens have all found new hiding places." It gave her a pang to think of a
stranger living in the place where she had borne and suckled her child, but
there was no point in sentimentality.

"Very well," said Caillean. "And if Ardanos objects I can point to the
precedent set when they let Christians build the chapel of the white thorn on
the Isle of Apples below the Sacred Well."
"Have you been there?" Eilan asked.
"Long ago, when I was much younger," Caillean replied. "The Summer
Country is a strange land, all marsh and lake and meadow. If there's any rain
at all, the Tor turns to an island. Mist lies on the land sometimes so that you
think the next turning will bring you to the Otherworld; and then a flare of
sunlight cuts through the clouds and you see the holy Tor with its ring of
stones."
Listening to Caillean, Eilan felt as if she could almost see it. Then she was
seeing it, in a flash of vision as unexpected as it had been transitory - but
Caillean had been in the vision too, gliding through the mists towards the hill
in a flat-bottomed boat poled by the little dark men of the hills, with several
of the novice priestesses huddled in the stern. But Caillean stood upright, with
gold upon her neck and brow.
"Caillean," she began, and from the widening of the other woman's eyes,
something of what she had seen must have shown in her face, "you will be
High Priestess on the Isle of Apples. I have seen it. You will take the women
there."
"When -" Caillean began, and Eilan shook her head.
"I don't know!" She sighed, for the vision, as so often happened, had been
only a glimmering. "But it sounds a safe place, hidden from Roman eyes.
Perhaps we should think about installing some priestesses there."
Gaius's new position kept him much on the move about the country. Since
for the time, the main supply depot had been established at Deva, now
occupied by the Twentieth Legion, it made sense for him to move his family
to a pleasant estate that they called Villa Severina, south of the town. Julia
was not happy about leaving Londinium, but she settled in to country life with
a stoic resignation, and a year after their arrival in the West gave birth to twin
girls whom she named matter-of-factly, Tertia and Quarta. The latter was so
tiny they soon took to calling her Quartilla instead.
"But why?" asked Licinius. The old man had come to pay a visit to see his
new granddaughters.
"Can't you guess?" Julia asked, but without humor. "If she were a jug, we
would have to name her half-pint, not quart at all." Her father looked at her
oddly, and she realized that it was not much of a joke - but then Quartilla was
not much of a baby.
She found it hard to warm to the twins. When her belly grew so large, she
had been certain she was about to bear Gaius a strapping son at last. Surely to

go through such a hard labor with no more result than a pair of daughters, one
of whom was sickly, was a reason for depression?
She recovered slowly, for she had been much torn during the delivery, and
when it became clear that she could not nurse these children herself, gave
them up to wet nurses with hardly a pang. The sooner she was fertile once
more, the sooner she could try again for a son. The Greek physician had
hinted that it might be dangerous, but he was only a slave, and Julia's threats
kept him from saying anything to Gaius or her father.
Next time, she swore, I will build a temple to Juno in Deva if I have to —
but next time it will be a boy!
Yet, as the children grew, Julia became accustomed to living most of the
time among the gentle hills south of Deva and staying in her father's house in
Londinium only during the wintertime. Licinius loved the children, and was
already looking around for families with whom to ally them in marriage.
Gaius was a somewhat indifferent father, but she had expected no more.
She knew that when she was unwell he sometimes slept with one of the slave
girls, but so long as he did his duty in her bed as well she could hardly object
to it. She had married to gain the status of a matron and to give her father an
heir. Her relationship with Gaius was one of mutual respect and affection; for
a Roman girl of good family anything else would have been unseemly.
Observing the scandals and divorces that occurred even in the pale
imitation of Roman society that was Londinium, it seemed to her that she and
Gaius were one of the few couples who had managed to preserve the old
Roman values. Her marriage was a good one, and there were even times,
seeing her daughters playing together in the garden of the villa, their bright
tunics like flowers against the greenery, when Julia felt that perhaps she had
not done so badly as a mother.
And soon after the twins celebrated their second birthday, she was
pregnant once more.
After a long rainy spell, when the children chafed and whined at being
kept inside, the weather had turned warm at last. Julia sat on the veranda they
had built along the front of the house when they added the wings to either
side. Ostensibly she was going over the household accounts, but actually she
was dozing in the sunshine. Her hands rested lightly on the round of her belly,
where she could sense the movements of the child within, surely a son. He
had not moved much lately and she supposed that the warm weather had
made the baby as torpid as she was.
Julia lay still, eyes half-closed against the sunshine, listening to the
singing of the birds and the voices of the household slaves as they busied
themselves about the tasks of the farm. Gaius used to say that Julia's

household always ran with the efficiency of a Legion making camp. She knew
without checking where each of her servants would be and what he or she
would be doing at each hour of the day.
". . .playing in the garden." That was the voice of the strapping Gaulish
girl whose job it was to keep track of the children.
"That they are not!" Old Lydia, who ran the nursery, replied. "The twins
are eating their noon meal, and Cella is helping the cook make pies. But
Secunda is just at that age when if they are unwatched they will go exploring
—"
"She was in the garden . . ." the girl said weakly.
"And where were you? Flirting with the master's groom again?" Lydia
replied. "Well, she can't have gone far. You get out there and find her, and I
will call some of the men to help you. But I promise to personally see you
whipped if any harm has come to the child! What were you thinking of? You
know the mistress must not be worried with her time so near!"
Julia frowned, debating whether to get up and speak to them. But this
pregnancy had sapped her energy and her will, and surely Secunda would turn
up soon.
In the distance she heard more voices, and Gaius's deep tones questioning.
Good, she thought then, they have got him out looking. It is high time he
bestirred himself more on the children's behalf.
She lay back again, knowing that she ought to relax for the sake of her
unborn child, but as the moments wore on, she found tension bringing her
upright again. She could hardly hear the calling now. How far had Secunda
gone?
The shadow on the sundial had moved almost to the next hour when she
heard muted voices and footsteps crunching on the gravel of the path. They
had found her then — but why were they so silent? Secunda ought to have
been wailing if her father had paddled her as she deserved. A chill swept
through Julia's body. She hauled herself upright, clinging to the pillar, as the
little procession emerged from among the trees.
She saw Gaius's dark head and tried to call out to him, but words would
not come. Then the gardener moved aside and she saw that he was holding
Secunda in his arms. But even asleep she had never seen her little girl lie so
still.
"Why isn't she moving?" Her lips twitched soundlessly.
Gaius came forward, his face working, already blotched with tears. More
water dripped from Secunda's pink gown, and her black curls were plastered
tight to her skull. Julia stared, shock sending ice through her veins.
"She was in the stream," he said hoarsely, "at the edge of the field. I tried

to breathe life back into her. I tried . . ." He swallowed, looking down at the
small closed face, pale as marble now.
No, thought Julia numbly, Secunda would never breathe again. She
blinked, wondering why the world had gone so dim around her. Then she felt
a wrenching pain in her belly.
The next few hours were a confusion of grief and pain. She remembered
hearing Gaius swear he would have the Gaullish girl flayed, and Licinius
trying to calm him. Something was wrong with Secunda . . .She tried to get up
and go to her, but her women kept pushing her back down. And then the ache
in her belly would begin again. In her more lucid moments Julia knew this
was wrong. She was familiar with the pangs of labor, but she was barely six
months along. Gods, if you have any mercy, make it stop. You took my
daughter — don't let me lose my son!
It was nearly dawn when she convulsed and felt a last hot gush of blood
between her thighs. Lydia bent over her, swearing softly. Julia felt the
pressure as the woman jammed more cloths between her legs to stop the
bleeding. But for a moment she had glimpsed something else, something
small and purplish that did not move.
"My son." Her whisper was a thread of sound. "Let me hold him, please!"
Weeping, Lydia brought something wrapped in a bloody cloth and laid it
in the curve of her arm. The face had been wiped clean, and she could see the
tiny, perfect features, like the petals of a blighted rose.
She was still holding him when they finally let Gaius in to see her.
"The gods hate me," she whispered, tears sliding from her eyes.
He knelt beside the bed, lifted the damp hair from her brow and kissed her
with more tenderness than she expected. For a moment he looked down at the
stillborn child, and then, gently, he drew a fold of cloth across its face and
lifted it. She made a convulsive movement to stop him, but she could barely
move. For a moment he stood with the child in his arms, like any father about
to acknowledge his new-born son, then handed the still form to Lydia to take
away.
Julia turned her face into the pillow, sobbing, "Let me die! I have failed,
let me die!"
"That's not true, my poor darling. You still have three little girls who need
you. You must not weep so."
"My baby, my little boy is dead!"
"Hush, my love." Gaius tried to soothe her, looking at his father-in-law,
who had come into the room behind him, in appeal. "We are not yet old, my
dear. If the gods will it, we may yet have many children -"
Licinius bent down to kiss her as well. "And if you have no son, my dear

child, what of that? You have been a better child to me than many sons, that I
vow to you."
"You must think of our living children now," said Gaius.
Julia felt despair well up in her. "You never paid any attention to Secunda.
Why should you care about the others now? You only care that I have lost
your son."
"No," Gaius said very quietly, "I do not need you to give me a son. You
must sleep now." He got to his feet, looking down at her. "Sleep heals many
griefs, and in the morning you will feel differently."
But Julia, remembering the delicately carved features of her little boy, did
not really hear.
As the slow weeks of Julia's recovery wore on, Gaius found that he was
saddened more by her grief than any feelings of his own. He had been away
from home when Secunda was born, and had no great attachment to her. Nor
could he bring himself to grieve overmuch for one of four girls.
Yet when he thought of the son they had lost, he could not help thinking
about his son by Eilan. In Roman society, adoption of a healthy boy from
another family was a traditional solution. If Julia had no male children, and
after a consultation with the physician that began to seem improbable, she
was less likely to object if he claimed Eilan's son. And he was fond of his
daughters, although he felt no such bond as he had to his first-born boy.
But there was time and enough for that once Julia had her health again.
Hoping it would at least distract her from her grief, he agreed to take Julia on
a pilgrimage to the shrine of the Mother Goddess near Venta, but the journey
did little to help her recover her health and spirits, and when he offered to
move the family back to Londinium, she did not want to go.
"It is here that our children are buried," she told him. "I will not leave
them here."
Gaius privately considered this unreasonable. Despite native beliefs that
the land of the Silures held the entrance to the Otherworld, it seemed to him
that no earthly place could be nearer or further off than any other to the Land
of the Dead, but he gave way to Julia's whim and they remained.
Towards the end of that year news came that Agricola was dead as well.
"As Tacitus is fond of saying," wrote Licinius Corax, " 'It is a principle of
human nature to hate those whom we have injured.' But even our Divine
Emperor could find little in Agricola to justify his anger, and so our friend
escaped official disfavor. Indeed, the Emperor was remarkably solicitous
throughout Agricola's illness, and though there are those who whisper that
the General was taken off by poison; for myself, I think the cause was a heart
broken by witnessing Rome's dishonor. It may be that he is well out of it, and

it is we who will soon wish that we had gone on before. Be glad that you are
safely out of sight in Britannia . . ."
In the following year Licinius retired and came to make his home with
them, and so they added another wing to the Villa Severina, and the final year
of Gaius's service as Procurator for supplies began. He had hoped that when
he completed his term of office Senator Malleus would be able to arrange to
have him appointed to a higher position, but that year brought disturbing
news. The Emperor was growing ever more autocratic and suspicious. As a
military leader he had been reasonably successful, but he seemed to take his
successes as proof of divine favor, and was doing his best, wrote Licinius's
cousin Corax, to destroy what power remained to the patrician class.
Gaius wondered if this would be the spark that set the embers of rebellion
aflame, but the next thing they heard was that Herennius Senecio and several
others had been executed for treason.
Gaius understood that his career was likely to be on hold for some time.
His patron Senator Malleus, while not accused, had found it prudent to retire
to his estates in Campania. And so, when Gaius completed his term as
Procurator, he put off the visit to Rome with which he had planned to follow
it and, like his patron, decided to devote himself for a time to developing the
productivity of his lands.
Now he began at last to establish a stronger friendship with his remaining
daughters, but Julia remained depressed and sickly. Though they still shared a
bed, it was becoming ever clearer that she was unlikely to give him a son.
By now Eilan's child would be ten years old. Even a father who was not
precisely in the Emperor's favor could guarantee the child a better future than
a British priestess who must hide the very fact of his existence, and surely
Julia would rather raise a son of his than a stranger's child - although he could
never be quite sure what Julia would feel. But after all, Gaius could assure her
- and it would be the truth - that the boy had been fathered before he ever set
eyes on her.
The Forest House was scarcely an afternoon's ride away. His son could be
living just over the next hill, reflected Gaius, gazing southward through the
trees. But he found himself oddly afraid to face Eilan again. Did she hate
Rome? Did she hate him? The girl he had loved when he was a boy was gone,
transformed into the terrible priestess of Vernemeton. Sometimes it seemed to
him that the woman he had married was gone too, all the playfulness that had
attracted him dead with her son.
Gaius had been reasonably successful in his career, though he had hardly
fulfilled his father's dreams. But it occurred to him that he had little to love. In
his life he had often been lonely, but his father's discipline, or that of the

army, had kept him too busy to worry about it. But as the year wore on Gaius
found that though managing the estate exercised his body it left his mind free
to roam, and he was haunted by dreams of his childhood.
Perhaps it was all the time he was putting in on the land that was
stimulating his memories from that age when all the world was wonderful and
new. He had not allowed himself to think about his mother when he was a
child, but he dreamed of her now. He felt her holding him, heard her sweet
lullabies and woke in tears, calling to her not to leave him alone.
But she had gone away to the Land of the Dead, and Eilan had left him for
the Goddess she served, and now Julia was withdrawing from him as well.
Would there ever be anyone, he wondered, who could simply love without
trying to change him, whose love would endure?
Then Gaius would remember how he had felt when he held his son in his
arms. But whenever he began planning how to find the boy, he would flinch
from the possibility that when they did meet, his son would not care after all.
And so he did nothing.
One day when Gaius was riding out after the wild pigs that had been
rooting in his gardens he realized that he had reached the woodland above the
Forest House where Eilan had given birth to their son and found himself
reining his horse down the path. He knew that Eilan would not be there, but
perhaps there was someone who could give him news of her. Even if she
hated him, she could hardly refuse to give him news of their son.
At first he thought the place deserted. The promise of spring was blushing
in the branches with their hard buds of green, but the thatched roof of the hut
was ragged and weather-bleached, and the ground littered with sticks blown
down in the last storm and last year's dead leaves. Then he saw a thin haze of
smoke filtering up through the thatching. His pony snorted as he reined in and
a man peered out at him. "Welcome, my son," he said, "Who are you and why
have you come?"
Gaius gave his name, eyeing the fellow curiously. "And who might you
be?" he asked. The man was tall, with a sun-browned face and night-dark hair,
dressed in a coarse goat-hair robe above an untidy straggle of beard.
Gaius wondered if he were some homeless wanderer who had taken
refuge in the unused building; then he saw the crossed sticks that hung from
the man's neck on a thong and realized he must be some kind of Christian,
perhaps one of those hermits who were, in the last two or three years,
springing up from one end of the Empire to the other. Gaius had heard of
them in Egypt and Northern Africa, but it was strange to see one here. "What
are you doing here?" he asked again.
"I have come to minister to God's lost ones," the hermit answered. "In the

world I was known as Lycias; now I am called Father Petros. Surely God has
sent you to me because you are in need. What can I do for you?"
"How do you know it was God who sent me to you?" Gaius asked,
amused in spite of himself by the man's simplicity.
"You're here, aren't you?" asked Father Petros.
He shrugged and Petros went on. "Believe me, my son, nothing happens
without the knowledge of the God who set the stars in their places."
"Nothing?" Gaius said with a bitterness that surprised him. He realized
that at some point during the past three years, perhaps when he heard of the
death of Agricola, or perhaps while he was watching Julia's suffering, he had
ceased to believe in the gods. "Then perhaps you can tell me what kind of
deity would take a son, and a daughter, from a mother who loved them?"
"Is that your trouble?" Father Petros pulled the door wider. "Come in, my
son. Such matters are not explained in a breath, and your poor beast looks
tired."
A little guiltily, Gaius remembered how far the pony had carried him.
When he had tethered the animal with a long enough lead to let it reach the
dry grass, he went in.
Father Petros was setting out cups on a rough table. "What can I offer
you? I have beans and turnips and even some wine; the weather is such, here,
that I cannot fast as often as I did in a warmer climate. I drink nothing but
water, myself, but I am permitted to offer these worldly things to such guests
as come to me."
Gaius shook his head, realizing he had happened upon a philosopher. "I
will try your wine," he said, "but I tell you plainly; you will never convince
me your god is either all-powerful or good. For if he were all-powerful, why
can he not prevent suffering? And if he can and does not, why should men
worship him?"
"Ah," said Father Petros, "I can tell by that question that you have been
trained in the Stoic philosophy; for the words are theirs. But the philosophers
are wrong about the nature of God."
"And you, of course, are right?" Gaius's tone was belligerent.
Father Petros shook his head. "I am only a poor minister to such children
as seek my counsel. The only Son of God was crucified and returned from the
dead to save us; that is all I need to know. Those who believe in Him will live
eternally in glory."
It was the usual childish oriental legend, Gaius thought, remembering
what he had heard about the cult in Rome. He supposed he could see why the
story appealed to slaves and even a few women of good family. Suddenly it
occurred to him that this fellow's ramblings might interest Julia, or at least

give her something to think about. He set down his cup.
"I thank you for your wine, Father, and for your story," he said. "May my
wife call upon you? She is devastated with grief for our daughter."
"She will be welcome whenever she comes," Father Petros replied
graciously. "I am only sorry I have not convinced you. I haven't, have I?"
"I'm afraid not." Gaius was a little disarmed by the man's regret.
"I am not much of a preacher," said Father Petros, looking somewhat
crestfallen. "I wish Father Joseph were here; I am sure he could convince
you."
Gaius thought it highly unlikely, but he smiled politely. As he turned to
go, there was a knock at the door.
"Ah, Senara? Do come in," the hermit said.
"I see you have someone with you," a girl's voice replied. "I'll come
another time, if I may."
"It's all right, I'm just leaving." Gaius pushed aside the flap of leather that
covered the door. Before him was one of the prettiest young girls he had seen
at least since his first sight of Eilan, so long ago. But of course he too had
been very young then. She was about fifteen, he thought, with hair the color
of copper filings in a blacksmith's fire and eyes very blue, dressed in an
undyed linen gown.
Then he looked at her again and realized where he had seen her before.
Despite the Celtic coloring, there was a distinct look of his father's old
secretary Valerius in the line of her nose and jaw. That would explain her
knowledge of Latin.
It was not until he was untying his horse that he realized he could have
asked - what was it the hermit had called her, Senara? -how he might arrange
a meeting with Eilan. But by that time the doorflap had closed behind her, and
one of the few things he knew about women — not that he knew that much,
and since his marriage he felt he knew even less — was that it was never wise
to ask one woman about another.
It was well past sunset by the time Gaius reached the villa, but Julia's
greeting, if subdued, was friendly. Licinius was already awaiting them in the
dining room.
Macellia and Tertia were playing with a toy chariot on the veranda; they
had dressed Julia's pet monkey in baby clothes, and were trying to stuff it into
the chariot. He rescued the little animal and handed it to Julia. Sometimes he
wondered how three small girls and one woman, with only seven servants,
could make so much chaos in one house.
The little girls screamed, "Papa! Papa!" and Quartilla came running to join
them. Gaius hugged them all round, called for Lydia to take charge of them,

then went into the dining room with Julia.
She still had the monkey on her shoulder; it was about the size of a baby,
and for some reason, seeing it dressed in baby clothes annoyed him. He
couldn't imagine what Julia wanted with the creature; it was a hot-weather
animal and had to be cosseted as if it really were a child. Of all places to keep
such a pet, Britain was certainly the worst; even in summer, he supposed, it
was too cold for the little animal. "I wish you'd get rid of that wretched beast,"
he snapped irritably as they sat down to the meal.
Her eyes watered. "Secunda was so fond of it," she whispered.
The comment made him wonder, not for the first time, if Julia had lost her
mind. Secunda had been six years old when she died, and he didn't think she
had ever paid the slightest attention to the monkey. Still, if it pleased Julia to
think so . . . Seeing Licinius's warning glance from across the table, he sighed
and abandoned the subject.
"What were you doing today?" she asked, making an obvious effort to
speak cheerfully as the servants brought in the boiled eggs, a platter of
smoked oysters and salt fish, and a selection of salad greens dressed with
olive oil.
Gaius swallowed a piece of onion too quickly and coughed, mentally
editing his day. He reached across the table for a fragrant roll of fresh bread.
"I was trying to track those wild pigs and ended up on the other side of the
hills," he began. "The old hut in the woods down there has a new tenant, some
kind of a hermit."
"A Christian?" asked Licinius dubiously. He had never had any good to
say of the oriental cults that were invading Rome.
"Apparently so," said Gaius neutrally, letting the girl take his plate away
while others brought in the dish of ducklings sauced with plums soaked in
sweet wine. He dabbled his fingers in the bowl of scented water and wiped
them. "At any rate he believes that his god rose from the dead."
Licinius snorted, but Julia's eyes filled with tears. "Does he really?" The
helpless look in her eyes wrung Gaius's heart even while it exasperated him.
Whatever gives her comfort. He put down the duck wing, turning on his
dining couch to face her.
"Do you think he would let me come and speak to him? Will you allow
me to go?" she asked pleadingly.
"My dear Julia, I want you to do whatever will give you comfort." He
meant it in all sincerity. "Whatever makes you happy will please me."
"You are so good to me." Her eyes filled with tears again. She gulped
apologetically, and fled from the room.
"I don't understand her," admitted Licinius. "I raised her to live a virtuous

life and honor her ancestors. I loved the child too, but all of us will die one
day, be it late or soon. I chose well for my girl," he added. "You have been
kinder to her than I could be, even though she did not give you a son."
Gaius sighed and reached for the wine. He felt like a monstrous deceiver,
but held his peace. He had become responsible for this woman's happiness,
and to hurt her feelings was the first of many things he did not want to do. But
he could not help thinking that Eilan would never have been foolish enough to
be seduced by some Christian monk's ramblings.
When the sweets had been cleared away, Gaius went to the room where
Julia was supervising as the little girls were put to bed. Gaius was glad to see
the monkey had escaped; feeling very mean-spirited, he hoped it would run
off and, if they were lucky, get caught by a marauding dog.
The slave trimmed the wick and he and Julia stood for a moment,
watching the soft light flickering on smooth cheeks and dark lashes. Julia
spoke a phrase of blessing, and touched the amulet against fire that hung on
the wall. Of late she had become very superstitious. Of course a fire would be
disastrous, but the house was newly built and not at all drafty. On the whole
he had rather more faith in the fire-fighting abilities of their household slaves
than in most goddesses or charms.
As they came out into the hallway, she said, "I think I will go to bed now."
Gaius patted her shoulder and kissed the cheek she presented. He might
have expected that. The idea was that by the time he came to bed she would
be - or pretend to be - so deeply asleep that he would not disturb her. He
might as well not have a wife at all. And how could she expect him to give
her another child if she would not sleep with him?
But it was pointless to censure her. He wished her a good night and turned
towards his office in the other wing of the villa, where a scroll containing the
latest installment of Tacitus's Life of Agricola was waiting for him.
And there he discovered where Julia's monkey had taken refuge; it was on
his desk and had defecated, evil-smelling monkey excrement, all over his
papers. He shouted with rage, grabbed the little beast and flung it with all his
force into the yard. He heard an odd crunch and then a whimper, then nothing
more.
Good. If the creature was dead, he would not mourn; and tomorrow he
would have no compunction in telling Julia that a dog must have caught it.
The Christian priest could comfort her; though he had heard that they
preferred to have nothing to do with women. At the moment, he wished that
he need not either.

Twenty-Five

Gaius woke in the early morning. Today, whatever else happened, he must
do something about finding his son. Ardanos must know how to contact his
granddaughter. He was not anxious to talk to the old man, whom he suspected
of being as much a fanatic in his own way as Father Petros, but he could see
no alternative. The only problem that remained was how to find Ardanos,
who no longer lived near Deva.
But while he lay contemplating the problem, he heard a peremptory knock
on the front gate, and his steward complaining as he went to answer it. Gaius
threw on a robe and slid out of bed, carefully, so as not to wake Julia. A
legionary was waiting in the front courtyard with a request from Macellius for
a visit. Gaius raised one eyebrow. Officially, his father was retired, but he was
aware that the old man had made himself a trusted adviser to the Twentieth
Legion's young Commander.
If he were gone when Julia discovered the death of her monkey, he would
not have to face her tears. Gaius rode through the town and directly to the
gates of the fortress, exchanging salutes with the guard on duty, who knew
him well from his stint as Procurator.
"Your father said you would probably arrive before noon," said the
soldier. "You'll find him with the Legate in the Praetorium."
On the bench outside the Commander's office he saw a weary-looking
woman. She was a Briton of the dark-haired, pale-skinned type like his
mother's people; somewhere between thirty and thirty-five, he guessed,
dressed in a gown of saffron wool rather lavishly embroidered with gold.

Gaius wondered what she had done, and when the legionary on duty ushered
him into the presence of the Commander and his father, he put the question.
"Her name is Brigitta," his father answered with distaste. "She calls
herself Queen of the Demetae. When her husband died, he left his fortune in
equal shares to her and to the Emperor, and she seems to feel this gives her
the right to rule his kingdom. Sound familiar?"
Gaius licked dry lips. It was common practice for a rich man to split his
estate between his own family and the Emperor in hopes that the Imperial coheir would make sure the other heirs got their share. Agricola had done the
same thing.
The Legate looked from Gaius to his father. Clearly it did not sound
familiar to him.
"Boudicca." Gaius said succinctly. "Her husband tried the same thing, but
the Iceni had debts to some fairly prominent senators. When he died, they
moved in, and she tried to resist. She and her daughters were rather . . .badly
treated and she raised the tribe in a rebellion that nearly swept us out of this
land!" That was the specter that Macellius was seeing when he looked at the
unhappy woman sitting outside, especially since the Demetae were one of the
tribes that counted descent through the mother's line.
"Oh, that Boudicca," said the Legate. He was called Lucius Domitius
Brutus, and he seemed to Gaius rather young for such a major posting, but he
was reputed to be a good friend of the Emperor.
"That Boudicca," Macellius echoed disgustedly. "So you see, sir, why the
tribune over at Moridunum scooped her up as soon as the will was read, and
why we cannot simply carry out the terms of the will as they stand, no matter
how much they benefit the Emperor."
"On the other hand," said Gaius, "it should also be clear that this woman
must be handled like blown glass. I assure you that every native in this
country will be waiting to see what we do." A thought occurred to him. "I
don't suppose she has children?"
"A couple of daughters somewhere, I've heard," said Macellius wearily,
"but I don't know what has become of them; they are only about three or four,

worse luck, or I'd have them properly married off to a citizen. I have no
particular stomach for this business of war against women and children; but if
women will mingle in politics, what can we do? Rumor has it that she - or
those who would like to use her — have sent messages seeking alliance with
the Hibernians."
Gaius shuddered, remembering the raid on Eilan's home. "Take her to
Londinium," he suggested. "If she's sent to Rome her people will think she's a
prisoner, but if she's set up in a fine house in the city they may think she's
betrayed them. Tell her that unless she lives in Londinium she won't see a
sestercius of her husband's gold."
"It might work," Macellius said, considering. He turned to the Legate. "I
agree with my son's suggestion. You've already got a detachment ready to
strengthen the garrison at Moridunum; they can carry the news."
"She'll be a hostage then," Domitius Brutus said. This he could
understand.
As he left the office, it occurred to Gaius that the daughters, however
young, could still be a danger. The woman stirred a faint pity; she looked so
forlorn.
"Where are your little girls?" he asked in the British tongue.
"Where you will never find them, Roman, and I thank the gods," she said.
"Don't you think I know how your legionaries treat young girls?"
"Not little children!" Gaius exclaimed. "Come now; I am a father myself
with three little daughters about the age of yours. At most we would find them
suitable guardians."
"I will spare you that trouble." she said fiercely, "They are well taken care
of!"
A legionary came up and touched her on the arm. When she flinched, he
ordered, "Do come along quietly, lady. We don't wish to bind you."
She looked wildly around her, and her gaze settled on Gaius. "Where are
you taking me?"

"Only to Londinium," he said soothingly. He saw her face crumple, with
relief or disappointment he did not know, but she went quietly enough.
The legionary on guard watched her go and said to Gaius, "You'd never
think she would associate with known agitators, not to look at her now; but
when we picked her up, it was reported she'd been seen about with a
notorious rebel: Conmor, Cynric, or some such name as that. He's said to be
still in the area."
"I know him," Gaius said. The legionary stared, "You, sir?"
Gaius nodded, recalling the high-hearted boy who had pulled him out of
the boar pit. Was Cynric still in contact with Eilan? If they caught him, Gaius
could ask how he could arrange a private meeting.
"Gods," said Macellius, closing the door of the Legate's office behind him
and following Gaius down the corridor, "all this makes me feel old!"
"Don't be ridiculous," Gaius answered him.
"The Legate wants me to do something to calm things down among the
people. Use my old contacts, he says."
Perhaps Brutus was not as stupid as he looked, Gaius thought. Macellius's
ability to get cooperation from the tribes had been legendary in his day.
"But I'm tired of picking other people's chestnuts out of the fire. Maybe
I'll move to Rome. It's been a long time since I've seen the city. Maybe I
should go to Egypt where I would be warm for once."
"Don't be foolish," Gaius chided. "What would my little girls do without
their grandsire?"
"Oh, come, they hardly know I'm alive," said Macellius. But he seemed
pleased. "Of course if you had a son it would be different."
"I - well, I may have a son one of these days," Gaius broke out in a sweat.
Macellius himself had told Gaius about Eilan's pregnancy, but when he had
seen her and the baby in the hut in the forest, it was clear that the birth had

been kept secret. If Macellius did not know that Eilan had borne him a son,
Gaius did not think he should tell his father now.
Eilan dreamed that she walked beside a lake in a half-light that could have
been either dusk or dawn. A light mist hung above the waters, obscuring the
further shore; the mists were silver, and a silver sheen was on the waters;
wavelets lapped softly against the shore. It seemed that across the water
drifted singing, and out of the mists came swimming nine white swans, as fair
as the maidens of the Forest House when they saluted the moon.
Eilan had never heard anything so beautiful. She moved down to the edge
of the lake, stretching out her hands, and the swans circled slowly.
"Let me come to you, let me swim with you!" she cried, but from the
swans came the answer, "You cannot come with us; your robes and ornaments
weigh you down . . ." They began to swim away, and Eilan's heart was torn
with loss.
Eilan stripped off her heavy gown, her veils and mantle, and cast the
golden torque and armlets of the High Priestess aside. As her shadow
glimmered in the water, it was the shape of a swan. She cast herself into the
lake . . .
As the silver waters closed over her head she woke to the familiar timbers
of the Forest House in the dim light of dawn. For a few moments Eilan sat
still, rubbing her eyes. This was not the first time she had dreamed of the lake
and the swans. Each time, it seemed harder to return. She had told no one of
her trouble. She was High Priestess of Vernemeton, not some silly girl to be
frightened by an odd dream. But each time it happened the dream was more
vivid, and the role she played while waking more and more unreal.
Someone was pounding on a door. Oddly, it was the gateway to her
garden. Faintly she could hear the voice of the young priestess who guarded it
raised in protest.
"Who the mischief do you think you are? You cannot simply walk in from
nowhere and ask to see the High Priestess, certainly not at this hour."
"Forgive me," answered a deep voice. "I think of her still as my foster
sister, not the High Priestess. Ask her, please, if she will speak to me!"

Eilan threw on a shawl and hurried out on to the porch. "Cynric!" she
exclaimed. "I thought you in the North somewhere!" She stopped short.
Clinging around his neck was a small, dark-haired child of two or three;
another girl, perhaps five years old, hid behind his cloak. "Are they yours?"
He shook his head. "They belong to an unfortunate woman, and I have
come to beg you to give them shelter in the name of the Goddess."
"To give them shelter?" Eilan repeated stupidly. "But why?"
"Because they stand in need of it," Cynric returned, as if it were the most
natural thing in the world.
"What I meant was, why here? Have they no kindred to care for them? If
they are not yours, why have they become your responsibility?"
"Their mother is Brigitta, Queen of the Demetae," said Cynric uneasily.
"She tried to claim the kingdom when her husband died and is now a prisoner
of Rome. We feared her daughters would be held as hostages, or worse, if
they fell into Roman hands."
Eilan looked at the children and thought of her own son. She pitied their
mother with all her heart, but what would Ardanos say? This was one of those
times when she could have used Caillean's counsel, but the older woman had
gone down to the Summer Country to visit the Sacred Well.
"You know they are too young to claim for the Goddess."
"All I am asking is that you keep them safe and secure!" Cynric began,
but before he could say anything else there was more noise outside.
"My lady, you cannot see the Priestess now; she is with a guest."
"All the more reason I should be with her," a voice said, and Dieda came
into the garden. At the sight of Cynric she cried out, and he turned hastily to
see her. She had been told about his activities when she returned from Eriu,
but this was the first time she had seen him.
"The children are not mine!" he exclaimed as the color left her face and

then flamed back again. "Queen Brigitta sent them here for sanctuary."
"They should be taken to the House of Maidens, then," said Dieda,
mastering herself, and held out her hand. But her eyes were still on Cynric.
"Wait," said Eilan. "I must think. The Forest House cannot afford to
entangle itself in anything political."
"Without the consent of the Romans?" Cynric said scornfully.
"It is easy for you to jeer," Eilan began, "but you must remember that we
exist by sufferance of those Romans you are so ready to dismiss. We should at
least consult with the Arch-Druid before we commit ourselves to something
that might look like support for a rebellion."
"With Ardanos?" Cynric spat. "Why not with the Legate in Deva himself?
Maybe we should go to the Governor of Britain and ask his leave."
"Cynric, I have risked a great deal for you and your cause," Eilan
reminded him soberly. "But I cannot risk the Forest House by taking in
political fugitives without Ardanos's leave." A quick word sent her attendant
running down the path towards the nearby house that had been built for the
Arch-Druid.
Cynric said, "Eilan, do you know the fate to which you will be
abandoning these girls?"
"Do you?" she snapped. "Why are you so sure Ardanos will refuse?"
"Regarding what?" said a new voice, and they all turned, Eilan frowning,
Cynric flushed with anger, and Dieda pale with some emotion Eilan could not
name. "Your woman encountered me just outside," Ardanos explained.
Eilan pointed to the children.
"There is nothing I can do for Brigitta," Ardanos said when she was done.
"She was warned about what would happen if she claimed the right to rule.
But she will not be harshly treated; even the Romans would not make that
mistake twice in one century. As for the girls, I do not know. They could be
trouble, later on."

"But not yet," said Eilan decisively. "And I will not hold children
responsible for their parents' crimes. Senara and Lia can tend them. If we give
them new names and treat them like any other children they should be safe
enough for a time. No one will think anything of it." She smiled bitterly.
"After all, I have a reputation for sheltering motherless children!"
"I suppose so," said Ardanos dubiously. "But Cynric had better get well
away. For where he is, I have noticed, trouble follows." He glared at the
young man, and Dieda went pale. "The Romans may not care about the girls,
but they will certainly be looking for you!"
"If they try to interfere with me they may find more trouble than they
bargained for." Cynric said fiercely.
Eilan sighed, thinking that rather than a raven, he should have been called
a stormy petrel. But she knew better than to argue with Cynric, or with Dieda.
All she could do was to try and keep the peace a little longer. Sometimes it
seemed as if the whole weight of Britain lay on her shoulders - and that all her
kin were conspiring to keep it there.
Senara was summoned to take the children to their new quarters, and
Eilan went on to her duties, leaving Dieda and Cynric to make their farewells.
Later that afternoon, she heard weeping in the shed where they dried the
herbs. It was Dieda.
The other woman started up, her eyes blazing, then seemed to deflate
when she saw who it was. Although their relationship was no longer close, at
least Dieda felt no need to dissemble. But Eilan knew better than to try to
touch her or offer comfort.
"What is it?" she said.
Dieda scrubbed at her eyes with the corner of her veil, making them even
redder. "He asked me to go with him —"
"And you refused." Eilan kept her voice deliberately neutral.
"To live the life of an outlaw, always skulking in the forest, afraid of every
sound, always wondering if tomorrow I would see him marched off in chains

or slain by Roman swords? I could not do it, Eilan! Here at least I have my
music, and work to do that I believe in. How could I go?"
"Did you tell him so?"
Dieda nodded. "He said that if I felt that way I could not truly love him;
that I was betraying our cause. . .He said that he needed me . . ."
I'm sure he did, the idiot, thought Eilan, and never wondered whether she
needs him at all!
"It is your fault!" Dieda exclaimed. "If it were not for you, I would have
married him long ago. Then perhaps he would never have become an
outlaw!"
With an effort, Eilan stopped herself from pointing out that Dieda had
sworn the vows of a priestess of her own free will. Even when Eilan returned
to the Forest House after Gawen's birth, she could have gone to Cynric
instead of to Eriu. The poor girl did not want logic, she needed someone to
blame.
"And now all I can think of is the way he looked at me! It may be months
or even years before I know how he is, or what is happening to him! At least
if I were with him I would know!" Dieda wailed.
"I don't suppose you care one way or another for my approval," Eilan said
softly. "Whatever you think of my choices, you know that I have learned to
live with them. But I too have wept in the darkness, wondering whether I did
the right thing. Dieda, you may never be sure - all you can do is the work that
is given to you, and hope that the Goddess will explain the reason for it all
some day."
Dieda's face was turned away, but it seemed to Eilan that her sobs were
diminishing.
"I will tell the maidens that you are ill and cannot take them tonight for
the singing," she went on. "No doubt they will be glad of a holiday."
It seemed to Eilan that the problem of Brigitta's children had been solved,
but only a few days later, just before the evening meal, her attendant told her

that a Roman sought audience.
Gaius leapt to mind but a second thought told her he would never dare
come here. "Find out his name and business," she said evenly.
In a few moments the girl returned. "Lady, it is Macellius Severus who
begs the favor of a word with you." She added, "He used to be the Camp
Prefect of Deva —"
"I know who he is." Lhiannon had received him once or twice, but
Macellius was now retired. What, in the name of all the gods, could he want
with her? The only way to find out was to ask. "Tell him to come in," she
directed. She straightened her gown and after a moment's thought drew her
veil down over her face.
Presently Huw shouldered through the entrance with another man behind
him. Gaius's father . . .the grandfather of her son . . .From behind the veil
Eilan eyed him curiously. She had never seen him before, and yet she would
have known him anywhere. Overlapping visions showed her the weathered
features of the old man and the strong lines of nose and brow that had been
repeated in his son, and were just beginning to emerge from the childish
curves in the face of her own.
Huw took up position beside the door and Macellius came to a halt before
her. He drew himself up and bowed, and Eilan knew suddenly where Gaius
had got his pride.
"My lady." He used the Roman term, Domina, but his British was quite
good otherwise. "It is very kind of you to receive me —"
"Not at all," she replied. "What can I do for you?" She supposed it had to
do with one of the approaching festivals as it had when he had waited upon
Lhiannon.
Macellius cleared his throat. "I understand that you have given sanctuary
to the daughters of the Demetan Queen —"
Suddenly Eilan was very glad that she had put on the veil. "If that were
true," she said slowly, desperately wishing that Ardanos or Caillean, were
here to help her, "why would it matter to you?"

"If it were so," he echoed, "we would want to know why."
The words of Cynric came into her mind. "Because it was told to me that
they stood in need of it. Can you think of any better reason?"
"I cannot," he answered her, "and yet their mother is a rebel who
threatened to raise the whole West against Rome. But Rome has been
merciful. Brigitta has been sent in protective custody to Londinium, and will
not be harmed. Nor have we demanded death for her kin."
The little ones will be glad to know their mother is safe, thought Eilan,
remembering how unnaturally silent they had been. But why? Was it possible
that Macellius desired peace between Rome and the Britons as much as she?
"If this is true I am glad to hear it," she said, "but what do you want of
me?"
"I should think it would be obvious lady. These girls must not become a
rallying point for some future uprising. Brigitta herself is not important, but in
times of tension, any pretext will serve."
She said, "I think you may rest easy on that point; if they were among the
maidens of the Forest House no political use would be made of them."
"Not even when they are grown?" he asked. "How do we know that they
will not be given to men who will try to rule the Demetae by right of marriage
to the Queen?"
He was right to wonder she thought. It was exactly the sort of thing that
Cynric would try. "How would you avoid it?"
"The best way is to have them fostered in loyal Roman homes; and' when
they are grown, find them good solid husbands with Roman sympathies."
"And that is all that would happen to them in Roman hands?"
"That is all," Macellius replied. "My lady, you cannot believe that we
make war on babes and little children?"

She was silent. That is exactly what I have been brought up to believe.
"Is it your will that we shall always be paying for atrocities committed by
others? On the sacred island, for instance?" said Macellius, as if he could hear
what she was thinking.
That is what Cynric believes, but the decision is mine. And it is I whom the
Goddess must tell what to do. For a few moments longer Eilan was silent,
seeking the inner stillness in which she could hear.
"It is not," she said, "but I would lose the trust of my own people if I
appeared too eager to believe you. I have heard Brigitta's daughters are both
still too young for anyone to think of marriage. They have been through a
great deal. Surely it would be more merciful to let them stay wherever they
are a few months, or even a year, until the furor has died down. By then
everyone will know how you have treated their mother. Passions will have
cooled, and there will be less outcry if people learn they are in your hands."
"And will they then be given to us?" Macellius said, frowning.
"If all is as you say, I swear by the gods of my tribe that they will." Eilan
set her hand upon the torque around her neck. "Prepare to receive them in
your house in Deva at the Feast of the Maiden next year."
His face lightened, and Eilan's breath caught as she saw on his lined face
Gawen's flickering smile. If only she could tell him who she was, and show
him his grandson, safe and strong!
"I believe you," Macellius said. "I can only hope that the Legate will
believe me"
"Vernemeton is hostage for my honesty," she gestured around her. "If I
betray it, we are within easy grasp of his hand."
He said, "Lady, I would kiss yours; but your guard is eyeing me roost
suspiciously."
"You cannot do that," she said, "but I accept your good will, my lord."
"And I yours," Macellius said, and bowed once more.

When he had gone, Eilan sat for a time in silence, wondering if she had
betrayed her people or saved them. Was it for this that the gods had worked to
bring her here? Was it for this she had been born?
Caillean returned from the Summer Country late the next day, looking
tired, but elated. When the older woman had bathed, Eilan sent Senara to ask
if she would take her evening meal by Eilan's fire.
"How that child has grown!" Caillean commented as Senara went out to
fetch the meal. "It seems just yesterday she came here, and now she is the
same age as you were when I first met you, and almost as beautiful!"
With some surprise Eilan realized that Senara was indeed a young woman,
old enough for vows; one day soon she should be pledged as a priestess.
There had been no word from the girl's Roman relatives for years, and she
had no reason to think there would be any objection. But for this at least there
was no hurry.
"And what have you been doing this bright sunny day, my dear child?"
Caillean asked as Senara set the food down.
A strange look passed over the girl's face. "I walked by that little house in
the forest. Did you know, a hermit has come to live there?"
"Indeed, we gave our permission. He is a strange old man from
somewhere in the South, Christian, is he not?"
"He is," Senara answered with that same strange look. "He has been kind
to me."
Caillean frowned. Eilan knew that she would say it was not suitable for a
priestess of the Forest House to be alone with a man, no matter how staid or
elderly. But after all, the girl was not sworn to them; besides, she had heard
somewhere that Christian priests swore themselves to chastity. In any case,
Eilan thought wryly, she herself was no one to question a young girl's
modesty.
"My mother was a Christian," Senara said. "May I have your permission
to visit this priest and take him some food from our kitchen? I would like to

learn more about what my mother believed."
"I do not see why not," Eilan answered. "That all the gods are one God is
a part of our most ancient teachings. Go, and learn which face of Him the
Christians see . . ."
They ate for a time in silence.
"Something has happened," said Eilan finally, watching Caillean's face as
she stared into the flames.
"Perhaps —" Caillean answered her. "But I am not entirely sure what it
means. The Tor is very powerful, and the lake . . ." she shook her head. "I
promise that when I understand what I felt there, you will know. In the
meantime —" her eyes lost their softness as she looked up at Eilan. "I am told
that something has happened here as well. Dieda says you had a visitor."
"Visitors, rather; but I assume you were speaking of Cynric."
"I meant Macellius Severus," Caillean said. "What did you think of him?"
Eilan thought, I could have wished for him as my father-in-law. But she
could not, after all, say that to Caillean. She compromised by saying, "He
seems both kindly and fatherly."
"That is how the Romans take more and more of our world," said
Caillean. "I would rather they were all evil without compromise. When even
you can think well of Macellius, who will rebel?"
"Why should we rebel against them? You speak like Cynric."
"I could do worse," said Caillean.
"I do not see how," Eilan said resentfully. "Even if we must have a Roman
peace, what is wrong with that? Peace is certainly better than war however it
comes."
"Even a peace without honor? A peace in which everything that makes life
worth living has been taken away?"

"The Romans can be honorable —" Eilan began, but Caillean interrupted.
"I would have thought you the last person to say so!" Her voice trailed off
into an appalled silence, as if she had realized that whatever she said could
only make it worse.
But I do say so, thought Eilan, feeling her flush of shame die away.
Gaius's mother married Macellius to bring peace, and I let Gains marry a
Roman girl for the same reason. She wondered what sort of person his Roman
wife was, and whether she had made him happy. Not all women sought peace,
she knew, remembering Boudicca, who had started a rebellion, and
Cartimandua, who betrayed Caractacus, and Brigitta, whose daughters she
was sheltering, but she had made her decision, and she would stand by it.
"Cynric is wrong," she said finally. "What makes life worth living is not
the glory that warriors sing of, but tended cattle and tilled fields and happy
children around the fire. I know that the Goddess can be as terrible as a sowbear when her cubs are threatened, but I think She would rather see us
building and growing than killing each other. Isn't that why we have tried to
recover the ancient ways of healing here?"
She looked up at last and met Caillean's dark eyes, and was startled to see
that they held appeal.
"I have told you the reasons I have to hate men and fear what they can
do," the older priestess said softly. "It is very hard sometimes for me to
believe in life; it would be so much easier to go down fighting. There are
times when you make me ashamed. But when I looked into the Sacred Well, it
seemed to me that it overflowed in a hundred little rivulets that sank into the
ground and carried its healing power throughout the land. And then, for a
little while, I did believe."
"We must do something about that well," said Eilan softly, taking
Caillean's hand and, like an echo, she seemed to hear the singing of the
swans.
The next time Gaius was in Deva he called upon his father. Over a cup of
wine, the talk came round to Brigitta of the Demetae. "Did you ever find her
daughters?" asked Gaius.

"In a manner of speaking," his father replied. "I know where they are, and
you will never guess where it is."
"I thought you were going to find them Roman foster parents."
"I will, when the time comes, but for now I think that the Priestess of the
Oracles is the best guardian they could have." As Gaius gaped, his father went
on. "She is a young woman, and I feared she would sympathize with young
hot-heads like Cynric, whom, I tell you plainly, I would hang if we could lay
hands on him, but she was surprisingly reasonable. As you might guess I have
had an informant there for years, a servant of the priestesses, but this is the
first time I have seen the Priestess myself."
"What did she look like?" Gaius's voice cracked, but Macellius did not
appear to notice.
"She was veiled," he said. "But between us we worked it out that she'll
keep the girls until tensions have eased, and then turn them over to us to be
fostered in Roman homes, and contracted to Roman husbands; I think even
Brigitta will be inclined to agree to this, if it is put to her. And I mean to put it
to her. I feared that some of the agitators around her would make the girls the
cause of another holy war, which, I need hardly tell you, would go hard with
us, after Domitian's losses on the frontier."
He paused, and looked hard at his son. "I wonder sometimes if I made the
right choices for you, lad. I thought Vespasian would live longer; he was a
good Emperor, and would have seen to your career. After all our planning,
you are living on your lands like a British chieftain after all. Even your
marriage to Julia —" he broke off. "Can you forgive me?"
Gaius stared at him. "I did not know there was anything to forgive. I have
made a life for myself here, and this is my home. Regarding my career, well,
there is plenty of time."
No Emperor lives for ever, he thought, remembering what Malleus had
said in his last letter, but even to his father he would not say that aloud. When
he thought of Rome he remembered crowds and filth and the detested toga.
He might have liked a little more sun here in Britain; but he felt little desire
for southern climes.

And as for his lack of a male heir, he wondered if this was the time to tell
Macellius about Eilan's son. Was it really she whom his father had seen? It
was a great relief to know that she could be so moderate. Even if he could not
see her; he knew that she was safe and well. It was not that he did not love his
daughters, and Gaius knew that Licinius loved all the children. But Roman
law counted only male children. It might not be fair, for in effect he would be
disenfranchising little Cella, but the law was the law, like it or not.
In the end it seemed safer to say nothing. What remained unspoken — and
he had found this out the hard way - he need never regret.

Twenty-Six

Caillean woke, shaking, to the gray light of early dawn. It was only a
dream. But the images were still vivid, more real, even now, than the curtains
of her bed and the breathing of the other women near by. She sat up and stuck
her feet into slippers, and then, shivering, took her shawl down from its hook
and wrapped it around her.
But the warm wool did not comfort her. When she closed her eyes she
could still see the expanse of silver water where white mists wreathed and
swirled. Eilan stood on the other side, but with each moment the waters grew
wider, as if a strong current were carrying her away. It was the emotion that
went with the images that terrified her, the overwhelming surge of anguish
and loss.
It is only my own fears speaking, she told herself, a dream that will
disappear with the dawn. Not all dreams were prescient. She got up and drank
some water from the flask.
In the end, a grey veil of cloud had swirled between her and Eilan, cutting
her off from the world. Death is like that . . .The thought would not go away.
The ordinary fantasies of sleep dissipated like the mist of morning when one
awakened. A great dream — a dream of power - became ever more distinct as
one puzzled over it. It could not be ignored.
As the other women began to stir, Caillean realized she could not stay
here to face their curious eyes. Perhaps in the garden she could find the
serenity she needed to deal with this. But one thing was clear, she must tell
Eilan.

That year the Beltane celebrations had ushered in a bounteous summer,
and the woods around the Forest House were vivid with flowers. Eilan had
allowed herself to be persuaded to go out to gather herbs with Miellyn, and
Lia and the children had come along. Beneath the trees the creamy primroses
and bluebells still flourished, but golden buttercups were already beginning to
star the meadows, and white hawthorn hung heavy on the bough.
Gawen gleefully showed off his knowledge of the forest to Brigitta's two
girls, who hung on every word, wide-eyed and admiring. Eilan smiled,
remembering how she and Dieda had followed Cynric about when they were
small. Listening to their laughter, she realized how much Gawen had missed
having other children to play with, and knew that it was not only the girls who
would soon be leaving her. Gawen would have to be fostered out soon.
It was noon before they returned, flushed and chattering and crowned with
flowers. "Caillean is waiting for you in the garden," said Eilidh as Eilan came
in. "She has been sitting there all morning. She would not even come in to eat
breakfast, but she assures us that nothing is wrong."
Frowning, Eilan passed on into the garden without removing her widebrimmed straw hat, for the day was warm. Caillean was sitting on a bench by
the rosemary bed, motionless as if she were meditating, but at Eilan's step she
opened her eyes.
"Caillean, what is it?"
The other woman looked up, and Eilan flinched at the utter calm in those
dark eyes. "How many years now have we known one another?" Caillean
asked.
Eilan tried to reckon it up in memory; they had met when Mairi's younger
child was born. But in truth it seemed longer, and there were times when she
remembered those odd glimpses of knowledge that had come to her and
thought that they had been sisters in more lives than one.
"Sixteen years, I think," she said at last, doubtfully. It had been near to
winter then; but no, it could not be, for the wild Hibernians were raiding, and
it was certain they would not sail if they were afraid of being caught by winter
storms. It had not been snow, but rain, she remembered. That had been a bad

spring. And she had come to the Forest House as a novice priestess the
summer that followed.
'Has it been so long? You are right. Mairi's child is nearly old enough to
be wed, and Gawen is eleven winters old."
Eilan nodded, remembering with sudden vividness how Caillean? I visited
her in her exile in the hut in the forest, and how the
woman had held her hands and sponged her brow while the child was
being born. She had thought those memories would never fade or dim; now
they were like a dream long gone by. The work that she and Caillean were
doing in the Forest House seemed far more vivid now.
"And now we have two of Brigitta's daughters within the House," Caillean
said thoughtfully. "But within a year they will go to the Romans to be
fostered."
Eilan said, sighing, "I hate to think Brigitta should lose her children."
"I would waste no sympathy on her," Caillean answered her. "I doubt she
lost any sleep over what it would do to her children when she let Cynric
persuade her into plotting rebellion."
Eilan knew this was most likely true; but as a mother she remembered her
anguish when Ardanos had taken Gawen away. "Why do you speak of these
things now?" she asked. "I cannot believe you have waited here all morning
just to count over old memories as a Roman moneylender counts his gold!"
Caillean sighed. "There is something I must say to you, and I know not
how to say it. So I speak of all manner of meaningless things. Eilan, I have
had such warning as they say comes to each priestess before her death. No, I
cannot explain —"
Eilan felt cold congealing around her heart, despite the warmth of the sun.
"What do you mean, a warning? Are you in pain? Perhaps Miellyn knows
some herbs —"
Caillean returned quietly. "I have had a dream, and I think it means that
this life will soon end."

Caillean, dying? Stunned, all Eilan could find to say aloud was, "But
how?"
Caillean replied quietly, "Truly, I know not how to tell you; perhaps it is
something one can understand only when it comes."
Oh aye, Eilan thought. It is true: I too am a priestess, even if not a very
good one. In Caillean's presence she remembered that, though she often
doubted it at other times. Since her last meeting with Cynric she had been
most aware of herself as a pawn in his combat with the Romans, as with
Ardanos she was aware above all else of the way he wished to use her to keep
the peace with Rome. For the past few seasons the tribes had been quiet, but
she heard tales of troubles among the Romans. Cynric would be quick to take
advantage of any weakness if the Romans should rebel against their Emperor.
Would Gaius join such a rebellion? Had he ever cared for her for her own
sake?
But with Caillean, from the first moment she had met her, Eilan was
above all and only a priestess. When she was with her, Eilan felt that the
Goddess might still have some use for her. As deeply as she had loved Gaius
she could not help remembering that he had not stood by her. But Caillean
had always been there.
She looked at her sister-priestess helplessly, and thought suddenly, We
have been through this before, and I watched her die in pain.
Suddenly Eilan was angry. If she could do nothing about it, why did
Caillean want to harrow her feelings by telling her? She looked at the other
woman almost with hostility, and saw a flicker of emotion in Caillean's dark
eyes, like a hidden current in a pool. Knowledge came to her suddenly. She
too is afraid.
She took a deep breath, and the power of the Goddess that Caillean could
awaken in her stirred suddenly.
"As High Priestess of Vernemeton, I command you - tell me your dream!"
Caillean's eyes widened, but in a few moments the tale was spilling out of
her. Eilan listened with eyes closed, seeing the images as Caillean described

them. And soon it seemed to her as if she could see them before the other
woman spoke, as if it were her own dream that Caillean was telling, and when
Caillean fell silent, she herself continued with the story of her own dream of
the swans.
"We will be parted," she said finally, opening her eyes. "Whether by death
or some other force I do not know, but it is like death to think of losing you,
Caillean."
"But if not by death, what then?" the older woman asked.
Eilan frowned, remembering the gleam of silver waters beneath the
clouds. "The Summer Country," she said suddenly. "Surely that is the place
we both saw in our dreams. You must go there, Caillean, and take a dozen of
the maidens with you. I do not know if this is to fulfill the purpose of the
Goddess or to defy it, but surely it is better to do something than to sit here
waiting for death to take you, even if what we do is wrong!"
Caillean still looked dubious, but the life had returned to her eyes.
"Ardanos will never allow it. He is the Arch-Druid, and he wants all the
priestesses here at Vernemeton, under his eye!"
Eilan looked at her and smiled. "But I am Priestess of the Oracle. Leave
Ardanos to me!"
In Midsummer Morning, the maidens of the Forest House went at dawn to
gather dew from the summer flowers. The dew had many powers, both in
increasing beauty and bestowing magic. It was said that on that day any
maiden who washed her face with the morning dew and then looked into a
clear stream could see the face of him who loved her best.
Eilan found herself wondering why the priestesses, who after all were all
under vows of chastity or intending to be so, should wish to know such
things. Did most of them cherish memories of sweethearts in the lives they
had left? She had done worse than dream about her lover. But she hoped that
the others who served the Goddess could be more single-minded than she.
Eilan heard the girls laughing as they returned from the forest, but she did
not go out to see them. As time went on, she was increasingly aware of the
need for ritual seclusion before the great festivals. She had thought it would

grow easier with time, but it seemed to her that keeping the balance between
all the forces that sought the Power of the Goddess grew harder each year.
Each time Ardanos came to whisper his instructions into her ear, she
remembered that by keeping the peace she, no less than the Arch-Druid, was
serving the Romans; and she wondered if the fact that they both worked for
what they considered to be the good of Britain could ever justify that alliance.
The door opened and Caillean came in. Even she had a wreath of red
poppies to celebrate the day. Her cheeks were flushed from the sun and she
looked healthier than she had for some time. "You are alone?"
"Who would be with me today? All of the girls in the house have gone out
to pick the midsummer flowers and Lia has taken Gawen to visit Mairi." Eilan
answered.
"That is well." Caillean sat down on a three-legged stool. "We must speak
of tonipick the midsummer flowers and Lia has taken Gawen to visit Mairi."
Eilan answered.
"That is well." Caillean sat down on a three-legged stool. "We must speak
of tonight's Oracle."
"I have been thinking of little else since I awakened!" Eilan said bitterly.
"I wish it was you who must sit here in the dark, preparing. You would have
made so much better a High Priestess than I!"
"Gods forbid; I am not such a one as could obediently do Ardanos's will."
Suddenly furious, Eilan said wrathfully, "If I am no more than a creature
of the priests, you know best who made me so."
Caillean sighed. "I thought not to criticize you, mo chridhe." The
endearment defused Eilan's anger. Caillean went on, "We are all in Her hands
and do Her will as best we can, I no less than you. You should not be angry
with me."
"I am not angry," Eilan said, not altogether truthfully, but unwilling to
quarrel with the woman to whom she owed so much. Sometimes she felt that
the weight of her debt to Caillean should crush her. "I am afraid," she went

on, "but I will tell you a thing that no one else knows. The sacred drink that is
intended to drug me is not the same as it was in Lhiannon's day. I have altered
it so that the trance is not total. I know what Ardanos is telling me to say —"
"But he always seems quite content with your words," Caillean said
frowning. "Are you still so in love with your Gaius that you intentionally
serve Rome?"
"I serve peace!" Eilan exclaimed. "It has never occurred to Ardanos that I
would disobey him, and when my answers are somewhat different from the
words I was given he thinks only that I am an imperfect vessel. But the words
of peace are not my decision. When I offered myself to the Goddess I was not
lying! Do you think the rites we do here at the Forest House are a lie?"
Caillean shook her head. "I have felt the Goddess too strongly -but -"
"Do you remember Midsummer seven years ago, when Cynric came?"
"How could I forget?" Caillean said ruefully. "I was terrified!" For a few
moments she was silent. "That was not you, I know it, but a face of the
Goddess I hope never to see again. Is it that way always?"
Eilan shrugged. "Sometimes She comes, sometimes not, and I must use
my own judgment. But every time I sit in the high seat I make the offering,
and each time I wait like this I wonder if this will be the time She will strike
me down!"
"I see," said Caillean carefully. "Forgive me if I misunderstood you when
you said you would compel Ardanos to send me south. But what will you do
about me?"
"This is the testing —" Eilan leaned forward. "For both of us. If all we
have built here is not to be a lie I must now risk both myself and you. Tonight
I shall make up the potion according to the old recipe. When the Goddess
takes me, you must ask about your dream. Everyone will hear the answer, and
we all - you, Ardanos, and I - will be bound by it, whatever it may be."
The quality of the light had altered considerably towards sunset when
outer door opened and one of Ardanos's apprentices came in; he was so young
that he had as yet only the thinnest straggle of beard.

The young Druid said deferentially, "We are ready for you, my lady."
Eilan, who was already beginning to slip into the detached meditative state
that preceded trance, rose from her chair. Eilidh and Senara lowered the heavy
ritual cloak over her shoulders and fastened it at her throat with a massive
gold chain.
The night was cool despite the season, and even in her thick cloak, Eilan
shivered as she got into her litter. From out of the darkness came two whiterobed priests, pale figures moving with measured step at her side. She knew
that they were there to guard her against even accidental injury or pressure
from the crowds, but somehow she had never been able to dismiss the thought
that they were her guards.
The thought flashed across her mind like a rabbit scuttling into the bushes:
Every priestess is a prisoner of her gods . . .
She was vaguely aware of passing through the long avenue of trees that
led to the hill. Before the mound a great fire was burning, one of many fires
on this night. Its red gleam played on the leaves of the ancient oak that grew
next to the mound. A sound of anticipation went through the crowd like a soft
sigh. She could not help remembering the first time she had heard it greet
Lhiannon. Now she stood in Lhiannon's place, and the people who watched
had as little understanding of what was really happening here as she had had
then.
Two small boys about eight or nine years old, white-robed novices of the
bards chosen for their innocence and beauty, brought forward the great golden
bowl. They had golden torques about their throats, and belts embroidered with
gold cinctured their white robes. As a ray of moonlight lanced through the
leaves of the oak tree, a twiglet of mistletoe — cut by a priest hidden in the
branches - fluttered downwards. Eilan caught it and dropped it into the bowl.
She murmured the words of blessing, and bracing herself against the
bitterness, drank the liquid down. The voices of the Druids rose in invocation;
the pressure of expectation from the people beat against her awareness. The
liquid burned in her belly; she wondered if she had got the dosage wrong,
then remembered that she had felt this way before. It came to her then that
each time poisoned her a little, and that she would die as Lhiannon had died,
though perhaps not as soon.

But the world was already dimming around her; she was scarcely aware of
falling backward into the seeress's chair, or the jolting as they carried it to the
top of the mound.
Caillean eyed the figure slumped in the high seat above her with more
than usual concern. As always, the intensity of the chanting was pushing her
towards trance as well. But there was a tension in the pulsing energies around
her that she did not understand. She turned and saw Eilan's father among the
white-robed Druids in the circle. Ardanos had said nothing. Had he even
known that Bendeigid was going to be there?
Eilan twitched in the high seat and Caillean reached for the back to steady
it. It was forbidden to touch the High Priestess when she was entranced, but
they must be prepared to catch her if she fell.
"Goddess!" she prayed, "take care of her — I do not care what happens to
me!" It seemed to her then that Eilan stilled; from the corner of her eye she
could see one white hand dangling over the edge of the chair, slender as a
child's. How could it wield such power?
"Lady of the Cauldron!" cried the people. "Silver Wheel! Great Queen!
Come to us! Great Goddess, speak to us now!"
Caillean felt the wood of the chair quiver beneath her hand. Eilan's fingers
were curling, and to Caillean's fascinated gaze the pale flesh seemed to glow.
It is true, she thought then, the Goddess is here. Slowly, the figure in the high
seat straightened, stretching as if to accommodate a mass greater than the
slight figure of the woman sitting there. Caillean felt a little chill run down
her spine.
"Behold, oh ye people, the Lady of Life has come. Let the Oracle speak!
Let the Goddess declare forth the will of the Immortals!" Ardanos cried.
"Goddess! Deliver us from those who would enslave us!" came another
voice. Bendeigid stepped forward. "Lead us to victory!"
They sounded like ravens, crying for blood and death. Eilan alone stood
between the Forest House and a people shrieking for war. Did they even know
what would happen to this country, between the Romans and their foreign

auxiliaries, if it should come to open fighting? Despite her hatred for the
Romans, Caillean wondered how any sane man or woman - or even a
Goddess - could loose war on this countryside. Had Bendeigid so soon
forgotten their home in flames, forgotten the deaths of his wife and little
daughter?
Goddess, she thought, You have given the peace of this countryside into
Eilan's hands; let her do Your will even if it may seem it is the will of the
Romans as well. . .
The figure in the chair quivered, and thrust the veil back suddenly,
surveying the throng with a face as cold and dispassionate as one of the
statues the Romans made.
"This is the shortest night," she said softly, and the murmuring people
stilled to hear. "But from this moment onward, the forces of light will be
declining. Oh ye whose pride it is to learn all secrets of earth and heaven" —
she indicated the circle of Druids with a disdainful hand - "can you not read
the signs in the world around you? The tribes have seen their day and now
grow ever weaker; thus it will be one day with the Empire of the Romans as
well. All things reach their peak and thereafter must decline."
"But is there no hope then?" asked Bendeigid. "In time, even the sun is
reborn!"
"That is true," said the still, calm voice from above him. "But not until the
darkest day has passed. Put away your swords and hang up your shields,
children of Don. Let the Roman eagles tear at each other while you till your
fields, and be patient, for Time will surely avenge your wrongs! I have read in
the mystic scrolls of the Heavens; and I tell you, the name of Rome is not
written there."
A sigh of mingled relief and disappointment swept through the crowd.
Ardanos and one of the other priests were whispering. Caillean realized
this was the only chance she might have to do what Eilan had asked.
"What then of the old wisdom? How shall Your worship be preserved in a
changing world?"

Ardanos and Bendeigid both glared at her, but the question had been
asked, and already the Goddess was turning, and Caillean trembled, utterly
certain at that moment that what looked down at her was not Eilan at all.
"Is it you, daughter of the elder race, who would truly question Me?"
came the soft answer. There was a pause, as the attention of the Goddess
appeared to go inward; then She laughed. "Ah, it is this one also who asks.
She could ask more than that of Me, but she is afraid. Such a silly child not to
understand that My will is for you all to be free." She shrugged Her shoulders
gently. "But you are children, all of you." Her gaze lifted to fix Ardanos, who
flushed and looked away, "and I will not destroy your illusions now. You are
not strong enough to bear too much reality . . ."
She extended one arm, turning the hand and flexing its fingers as if to
enjoy the movement. "The flesh is sweet." She laughed softly. "I do not
wonder that you cling to it. But as for Me, what do you suppose your puny
efforts can do to help or harm? I have been here from the beginning and so
long as the sun shines or the waters flow, I will remain. I am . . ." There was a
terrible truth in that simple statement of being, and Caillean trembled.
"But our lives flow away like the waters and are gone —" Caillean said
then. "How shall we pass what You have taught us to those who come after?"
The Goddess looked from her to Ardanos and back again.
"You already know the answer. In ages past your soul has sworn the oath,
and so has hers. Let one of you go forth," She cried. "Let one go forth to the
Summer Country, there on the shores of the lake to establish a House of
Maidens. There shall I be served, side by side with the priests of the
Nazarene. So shall My wisdom survive the days that are coming!"
Almost at once the body of the priestess, which had been tight as a strung
bow, was released; the arrow had flown, the message had been given. Eilan
slumped back in the chair, and Caillean and Miellyn moved quickly to steady
her. She was twitching and muttering, coming out of the trance.
Ardanos stood with head bowed, pondering the meaning of this Oracle
and how he could use it. Countermand it he could not - nor would he, a pious
man, wish to gainsay the direct word of the Goddess - but it was his privilege
to interpret it. After a moment his head came up. He looked directly at

Caillean, and it seemed to her that he smiled.
"The Goddess has spoken. Now let it be so. And this house shall be
founded by the servant of the Goddess; it is you, Caillean, who will go forth
to found the House of Maidens on the Tor."
Caillean stared back at him. There was triumph in his pale eyes. To
Ardanos, this decision of the Goddess was a fortuitous opportunity to achieve
something he had long desired, to part her from Eilan.
He picked up the sprig of mistletoe and shook water over the limp body of
the priestess, and all other sound was lost in a mocking jangle of silver bells.
"For someone who has been out of harness for a few years, you seem to
be keeping busy!" Gaius grinned at his father across the rolled parchments
and stacked wax tablets that littered the table. Outside, a cold, February wind
was rattling branches that were just beginning to swell with sap. Indoors, the
hypocaust warmed the tiled floors and charcoal burning in iron braziers
fought the drafts. "I hope young Brutus appreciates all you are doing for him."
"He appreciates my experience," said Macellius, "and I appreciate his
news. He's very well connected, you know, related to half the ancient families
of Rome. His father is an old friend of your patron Malleus, by the way."
"Ah." Gaius took another drink of hot spiced wine, beginning to
understand. "And what does our Legate think of the Emperor's current
policies?"
"Frankly, his letters from Rome have him terrified. His term as
Commander finishes at the end of this year, and he's wondering how to get
out of going home again! As members of the equestrian order, you and I have
one advantage: we're not required by law to reside in Rome. The Eternal City
has been extremely unhealthy for senators this year, I am told."
"Like Flavius Clemens?" Gaius asked grimly. No wonder the senators
were uneasy. If Domitian's own cousin had been executed, what were the rest
of them going to do? "Did you ever hear anything more about what he was
charged with?"
"The official accusation was atheism. But according to the rumors, the

man was a Christian who refused to burn incense to the Emperor."
"I'm sure our Dominus et Deus was highly insulted!"
Macellius smiled sourly. "The gods know those Christians are an
exasperating lot, and when the Government isn't persecuting them they
persecute each other. If Nero had only tried setting their different factions
against each other in the arena he could have saved a fortune in lions - but the
kind of adoration Domitian is demanding goes beyond all propriety!"
Gaius nodded. He had heard enough about Father Petros's preaching from
Julia to be aware of the Christian fascination with martyrdom, and of their
sectarian strife, though Julia referred to it as purging the Church of the
ungodly. But in the larger scheme of things the Christians were a minor
problem. Far more serious was the megalomania of the Emperor.
"Is he going the way of Nero, or Caligula?" he asked.
"He hasn't tried to deify his horse yet, if that's what you mean," his father
replied. "In many ways he has been a very effective Emperor; that's why he's
so dangerous. What will Rome have to fall back on when the next crazy
Emperor comes along if Domitian is allowed to destroy what remains of the
senatorial class?"
Gaius looked at his father carefully. "You're really worried about this,
aren't you?"
"It doesn't matter so much about me," said Macellius, turning his
equestrian ring back and forth on his hand. "But most of your career is still
ahead of you. With this Emperor, what chance is there for you?"
"Father . . .something's going on, isn't it? What have they asked you to
do?"
Macellius sighed and looked around the room with its painted walls and
racks of scrolls as if he were afraid it might be about to vanish. "There is a . . .
plan . . ." he said carefully, "to end the Flavian dynasty. When Domitian has
been dealt with, the senators will elect a new Emperor. For the plan to work,
the Provinces must support it. The new Governor is Domitian's man, but most
of the legionary legates are from the same kinds of families as Brutus -"

"And so they want us to support them," Gaius said baldly. "What do they
imagine the tribes will be doing while we are engaged in this Imperial
housecleaning?"
"If we promise them some concessions, they will support us . . . Queen
Brigitta's daughters will be coming to us soon, and Valerius is helping me to
find appropriate foster parents to raise them. Romans and Britons are bound
to become allies in the end. This way it may come a little sooner, that is all."
Gaius whistled soundlessly. This was sedition on a grand scale! He gulped
down the last of his wine. When he looked up again, his father was watching
him.
"Stranger things have happened," Macellius said quietly. "Depending on
how things go, there might be quite an interesting future for a Roman of the
Silure royal line!"
Gaius rode home with his head reeling from more than the mulled wine.
He had humored Julia long enough. It was now perfectly clear to him that he
must adopt his son by Eilan formally. But when he arrived home, he found
Julia could speak of nothing but her latest visit to the hermit, Father Petros.
"And he says that it is certain from Holy Writ — and from all the other
prophecies - that the world will end with the passing away of this generation,"
she told him, her eyes glowing. "With the coming of every dawn we should
think that it may not be the sun, but the world beginning to burn. And then we
shall be reunited with our loved ones. Did you know that?"
He shook his head, amazed that she, who had received a good Roman
education, could believe such stuff. But then, women were credulous, which
was probably why they could not serve in public office. He wondered if the
Christians were trading on the current anxieties about the Emperor.
"Are you going to become a follower of the Nazarene — that prophet of
slaves and renegade Jews?" he asked sharply.
"I do not see how any thinking person can possibly do anything else,"
Julia replied coolly.

Well, Gaius thought, I am obviously not a thinking person — at least not
of her kind. He only said, "And what will Licinius say?"
"He will not like it," Julia said sadly. "But this is the only thing I have
been sure of since . . .since the children died." Her eyes filled with tears.
That makes no sense, he thought, but did not say it aloud; making sense
did not seem to have comforted her very much. And indeed she looked
happier than he had seen her since Secunda's death. The image of his daughter
drowned was still behind his eyes night and day. Logical or not, he almost
envied her.
"Well, do as you will," he said resignedly. "I will not try to stop you."
She looked at him with something almost like disappointment, then
brightened. "If you had any sense of what was right, you would become a
Nazarene as well."
"My dear Julia, you have told me many times I have no sense of what is
right," he said sharply. She stared at the floor and he knew there was
something else. "What is it?"
"I do not want to say this before the children," she stammered. Gaius
laughed, took her arm and led her into another room.
"Well, what is it that you cannot say before our children, Julia?"
Again she cast her eyes on the ground. "Father Petros says that . . . as the
end of the world is so near . . ." she stammered, "it is better if all married
women - and men - take an oath of chastity."
At this, Gaius threw back his head and did laugh. "You do realize that, as
the law now stands, refusing to sleep with your husband is grounds for
divorce?"
Julia, although obviously troubled, was ready for the question.
"In the Kingdom of Heaven," she quoted, "there is neither marriage nor
giving in marriage."

"That settles it," said Gaius, laughing again, "I do not care for your
Heaven, at least not that portion of it ovet as much use in bed as a stick of
wood, I can't imagine how you think it would make any difference to me."
Her eyes were wide with surprise. "Then you will make no difficulty?"
"None, Julia; but it is only fair to tell you that if you are no longer bound
by our wedding vows, I will not hold myself bound by them either."
He realized that he was spoiling the scene she had resolved to play; he
should, he supposed, have raged or pleaded.
"I would never consider asking you to take such a vow," she said, and
then, spitefully, added, "I doubt if you would be able to keep it if you did. Do
you think I do not know why you bought that pretty slave girl last year? God
knows she is little enough use in the kitchen! With so many sins already upon
your soul —"
But Gaius had had enough. He would not discuss the state of his soul whatever she might mean by that — with her.
"For my own soul I will be myself responsible," he told her and went into
his office where he found a bed already made up for him. So she had counted
on his willingness to sleep alone, whatever else he might say.
Gaius thought briefly of celebrating his freedom by summoning the slave
girl, but he discovered he had no wish to do so. He wanted something more
than the compliance of a woman who had no choice in the matter. His mind
went to Eilan. Now at least Julia could make no objection if he wished to
adopt Gawen. How would he break the news to her?
Finally he was free to seek Eilan out once more. But the face of the Fury
he had seen at the Midsummer festival came between him and his memories,
and it was the face of the girl he had met at the hermit's the year before that
went with him into sleep at last.

Twenty- Seven

In the middle of February the storms gave way to a period of fair, clear
weather, brisk but sunny. In sheltered spots early fruit trees began to put forth
buds and the branches grew red with returning sap. The hills were melodious
with the bleating of new lambs, and the marshes resounded with the calls of
returning swans.
Eilan looked at the blue sky and realized that the time had come to keep
her word to Macellius. She was waiting in the garden when Senara answered
her summons.
"It is a fair day," Senara said, clearly wondering why Eilan had called her
away from her duties.
"It is that," Eilan agreed, "a fair bright day for performing an unwelcome
duty. But you are the only one I can ask."
"And what is that?"
"Brigitta's daughters have been here for a year now, and it is time to send
them to the Romans as I promised. They have kept their word regarding
Brigitta, and I trust them to deal kindly with the children. But it must be done
quietly, lest all the old enmity be awakened again. You are old enough to take
them to Deva, and you know the Latin tongue enough to ask your way to the
house of Macellius Severus. Will you take them there?"
"Severus?" Senara frowned. "I think I remember that name. My mother
told me once that her brother served him, and that he was a hard man, but

fair."
"That is my understanding." Eilan nodded. "The sooner the girls are in his
care, the sooner he can settle them in their new home."
"But they will grow up Romans," Senara protested then.
"Would that be so bad a thing?" Eilan smiled at her. "Your own mother
was a Roman, after all."
"That is true . . ." the girl said thoughtfully. "Sometimes I wonder about
her family, and what it was like growing up in that world. Very well," she said
at last. "I will go."
It took some time to make the children ready, for Eilan wished to make
sure that no one in the Roman town should have cause to say that the girls had
been neglected while they were among the Druids; but at last even Eilan was
satisfied, and Senara, holding a little girl by either hand, was ready to set out
for Deva.
The day was crisp but clear, and even with one child in her arms and the
other trotting at her side, Senara made good time. The children babbled
merrily, excited by the outing. When they grew tired, she tied the younger girl
in her shawl, where she soon fell asleep, and picked up the older one in her
arms. By this time she could see the straggle of houses at the edge of the city
and the stout log walls of the fortress beyond. When she reached the central
Forum, she sat down on a bench beside a fountain to rearrange her burdens
before asking her way to the house of Macellius.
Suddenly the sunlight was blotted out. Senara looked up to behold the
Roman she had met at the house of the hermit the year before. Later it seemed
altogether symbolic to her that he should stand between her and the sun; but
she did not think of that then.
"I have seen you before, haven't I?" he asked.
"At Father Petros's hut," she said, blushing. One of the children awakened
and stared at him with owlish eyes. She had not seen him at any gathering of
the small group of local Nazarenes; but then, living as she did actually within
the Forest House, she was not able to go there very often. She had gone the

first time from curiosity, and later because the Roman tongue seemed
somehow a link with her dead mother, and finally, because she found comfort
there.
The handsome Roman was still regarding her. He was younger than she
had thought at first, and she liked his smile. "Where are you bound, maiden?"
"To the house of Macellius Severus, sir; these girls are to be given into his
care -"
"Ah, so these are the children." For a moment he frowned, then the quick
smile once more lit his eyes. "We are well met, then. I am myself bound there;
may I be your guide?"
He reached out one hand, and the older girl placed her small one within it,
smiling up at him.
She looked at him a little dubiously, but he swung the child up to his
shoulder, and hearing the little girl's laughter, Senara decided that he must be
of a kindly nature after all.
"You hold her as one well used to children, sir," she-said, and though she
asked no further, he replied, "I have three daughters of my own; I am well
accustomed to little ones."
So, she thought, he is married. Is he one of us? After a moment she said,
"Tell me, sir, are you then a member of Father Petros's flock?"
"I am not," he replied, "but my wife is."
"Then, sir, your wife is my sister in Jesus, and thus kin to me."
His lips twisted rather sardonically at this, and she thought, He is too
young to smile so bitterly. Who has hurt him so?
"You are very kind to escort me," she said aloud.
"It is no trouble. Macellius is my father, you see —"
They were approaching a fine-looking house near the walls of the fortress,

white-washed and tiled in the Roman style. The Roman knocked on the gate,
and after a moment a slave pulled it open and they passed through a long
hallway into an enclosed garden.
The Roman asked, "Is my father within?"
"He is with the Legate," the man replied. "Go in and wait for him, if you
will; he should be getting back just about now."
It was in actual fact only four or five minutes till Macellius arrived.
Senara was not sorry to see him, for the younger of the children had wakened
and begun to fret. Macellius turned them both over to a buxom and kindly
slave woman who would look after them until the foster parents he had
chosen for them came. He thanked Senara, and asked her politely if she
needed an escort to return.
Senara shook her head quickly. At the Forest House they thought she had
taken the girls to relatives of their mother in the town. Returning with an
escort of Roman soldiers would have put the fat in the fire for certain. It
would have been nice, though, if the younger Severus could have escorted her
home - she thrust the thought away.
"Will I see you again?" he asked, and a little tremor of excitement ran
through her.
"Perhaps at one of the services." Then, before she could make a fool of
herself entirely, she slipped away through the door.
Julia Licinia never did anything by halves. One night in April she asked
Gaius to accompany her to an evening service in the Nazarene temple in
Deva. Though their marriage had become a polite fiction, she was still the
mistress of his household, and Gaius felt bound to support her. He had
considered divorce, but could see no point in hurting Licinius and his children
in order to marry some other Roman girl.
He was not in sufficient favor with the Emperor to make an alliance with a
family of his party, and to ally himself with the opposition could have been
dangerous. Though the elder Macellius said little, Gaius knew that the
conspiracy was growing. If the Emperor fell, all would be changed. It seemed
to Gaius better to put off worrying about his personal future until he knew

whether he had one.
Since the Nazarene temple had been, in part, purchased with the proceeds
of the jewels Julia no longer seemed to wear, Gaius was curious to see what
sort of value she had got for her money. By the time they set out they were
quite a large party; not only Gaius and Julia, but the little girls and their
nurses, and what seemed like half the household. "Why do we have to have
all these people with us?" Gaius demanded, not altogether good-naturedly. He
and his family would sleep that night at the house of Macellius, but his father
did not have room for their whole staff.
"Because they are all members of the congregation," Julia said more
pleasantly. Gaius blinked. It would never have occurred to him to question
how she managed her household, but he had not realized that her zeal had led
her quite so far. She added, "They will return to the villa when this is over. I
cannot deny them the chance to worship."
Gaius thought it was, rather, that she would not, but he thought it wiser to
say no more. The new Christian church was a largish old building near the
river that had belonged originally to an importer of wine. The reek of old
wine was overlaid by the fragrance of wax candles and early flowers were
heaped on the altar. Rather crudely painted pictures — a shepherd carrying a
lamb, a fish, some men in a boat, adorned the white-washed walls.
As they entered Julia made a cryptic sign; he was displeased to see that
Cella, Tertia and Quartilla all tried to imitate her. Had Julia converted not only
her servants but her daughters as well? He wondered if these Christians were
in the business of undermining the authority of the home.
Julia found a seat on a hard bench not too far from the door, and sat down,
surrounded by her waiting-women and her daughters. Gaius, standing behind
her, looked round to see if anyone else in the congregation was known to him.
Most of the assembled worshippers seemed to be working people of the
poorer kind, and he wondered how the snobbish Julia liked finding herself
among such folk. Then he recognized a face: the girl who had brought
Brigitta's daughters to the town. She had told him she came to the meetings
when she could get away, and he realized now that one reason he had given in
to Julia's request that he accompany her was a faint hope of seeing her.
A priest, closely shaven and wearing a long dalmatica, entered with two

boys, one of whom carried a large wooden cross and the other a candle, and a
couple of older men whom Julia had told him were deacons, one of whom
carried a heavy leather-bound book in his hand. This one was a rather soberlooking man of middle years. As he laid the book on the immense lectern, he
stumbled over a four-year-old child in the aisle; but rather than fleeing in
terror, the child laughed up at him, and the deacon bent down and hugged the
toddler with a smile that transformed his face, then handed it back to its
father, a rough-handed grimy man with a blacksmith's brawny arms.
There were prayers and invocations; the congregation was purified with
incense and water, all of it similar enough to a Roman ceremony that Gaius
did not feel too uncomfortable, though the Latin was rather less pure. Then
the priests and deacons were seated and there was a little stir of excitement as
another man came forward.
Gaius was not surprised to recognize Father Petros, looking frowsy and
bearded next to the others. He gazed at the collected worshippers with such
intensity that Gaius wondered uncharitably if the hermit suffered from poor
eyesight.
"Our Master once said, "Suffer the little children to come to me and forbid
them not; for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven." Many of you here tonight
have lost a child and you grieve; but your children, I tell you, are safe with
Jesus in Heaven, and you parents who grieve are happier than those parents
who have given their children over, living, to the service of idols. I tell you
that it would be better for these children to be safely dead, having sinned not,
than living to serve false gods!" He paused for breath and the people sighed.
They have come here to be frightened! thought Gaius cynically. They are
enjoying the thought of their own virtuous superiority!
"For the first of the great commandments is this: thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart and all thy soul; and the second of the great
commandments is this: that thou shalt honor thy father and thy mother,"
Father Petros boomed. "The question arises, then: how far can a young person
be held responsible if his guardians place him in the service of a heathen idol?
There are Fathers in our Church who have said that all, even infants in arms,
are guilty if they are present during the worship of an idol; but there others
who hold that if a child's guardians commit him to serve an idol before he
shall have arrived at an age of reason, then he should be held guiltless. My

own feeling is —"
But Gaius did not really care what the Father's own feeling was. By this
time his gaze had fixed on the far more pleasing spectacle of the girl, Senara,
who was leaning forward, absorbed in the hermit's words. He had hopelessly
lost the thread of the Father's discourse, but he had already decided that these
Christian ceremonies were too dull for his taste; no sacrifices, no roaring
exhortations, not even the drama the rites of Isis or Mithras could sometimes
provide. In fact these Christian ceremonies, all told, were duller than anything
he had ever heard except some of the Druidic philosophies.
Even with the girl's bright face to look at it seemed a long time before
Father Petros's discourse finally rambled to its end. Gaius was looking
forward to leaving, and it was with consternation that he heard that he and the
other unbaptized members of the congregation were now expected to wait
outside while the initiates participated in some kind of love-feast. His
complaints were so loud that Julia finally agreed to leave, although she
promised the nurses and serving women they might remain.
He picked up the sleeping Quartilla, and they set out for Macellius's
home. But they had hardly started when Tertia began to complain that she
wanted to be carried too. Gaius told her brusquely to behave like a big girl
and walk; her mother's health had improved but she was not yet strong
enough to carry the child, and Cella was still too small. As Tertia began to
whimper, someone moved behind them and he heard a sweet voice saying, "I
will carry your little girl."
Gaius would have refused, but the British girl had already picked up the
drowsy child, who almost instantly fell asleep in her arms.
"Indeed, she is no weight at all," said the girl, "and I am used to harder
work than this!"
"You are a true sister in Christ," exclaimed Julia. Gaius could find nothing
to add to this, and so they walked along. The women exchanged a few lowvoiced commonplaces, and Gaius found himself obscurely relieved that they
clearly did not really know each other that well. The moon, just a few nights
after full, gave them just enough light to illuminate their path. They could see
the street underfoot clearly, and many of the trees were bright with clouds of
misty white blossom.

As they pushed open the gate Macellius's steward came out to meet them
with a lamp. When Tertia began to stir, the British girl set her down and they
stood staring at one another in the sudden brilliance.
"You must stay and join us for something to eat, since you too missed the
agape," Julia declared.
"Oh, no, I cannot," the girl said shyly. "It is most kind of you, lady, but I
had not leave to come; I must get home at once, or I will be missed, and then,
even if I am not punished, I might not be able to come again."
"I will not keep you, then; that would be a poor return for your kindness,"
Julia said quickly. "Gaius will go with you. This part of the city is quiet, but
before you get out of the gates, there might be some people it would not be
safe for an honest and proper young girl to meet."
"That will not be necessary, Domina —" she began but Gaius interrupted,
"I'll go gladly; I wanted to walk a while before I go to bed, and I can return
you safely to your home."
At least he could ask her what a girl from the Forest House was doing
among Christians. The answer, he decided, might be revealing. When she
pulled her cloak — a dark plain one such as a servant girl in a respectable
home would wear - about her closely he wondered if it was because under it
she wore the dress of a priestess. Gaius took a torch; even with a moon, he
knew better than to brave the streets without one, and he felt that a good light
might reassure the girl. She kissed all of the little girls, including the drowsy
toddler in Julia's arms, and went down the steps at his side. They passed
through the silent streets without attracting any notice, but even when the last
houses were behind them his companion made no attempt to put back her
hood, even though the night was warm.
The silence seemed oppressive. "How long have you been coming to
services at the new temple?" Gaius asked finally. n, •
"Since it was built."
"And before that?"

"When I was a little girl, my mother used to take me to meetings in the
servants' quarters in the house of one of the city fathers whose steward was a
Christian."
"But you dwell in the Forest House," he said, frowning.
"It is true," she replied quietly. "Their Priestess has given me shelter there
- I am an orphan. But no oaths bind me. My father is British, exiled now, but
my mother was a Roman. She had me baptized, and when I found that Father
Petros was living near I wanted to learn more of her faith."
Gaius smiled. "And your name is Valeria!"
She blinked. It had been a long time since she had heard that name.
"That is the name my mother called me, but I have been Senara so long I
had almost forgotten it. Father Petros says it is my duty to obey my guardians,
even if they are pagans. At least in the Forest House no harm will come to
me. He says that the Druids are among the good pagans who will some day be
offered salvation; but I must not take oath to them. And the Apostle Paul
commanded slaves to obey their masters. Freedom is of the soul, but the legal
status of the body cannot be set aside, and neither can lawful oaths."
"At least they have that much sense," he muttered. "A pity they cannot
extend that reasoning to cover their duty to the Emperor!"
Senara chattered on as if she had not heard, and he wondered if her
babbling covered fear, but he was too charmed by the music of her voice to
care much about the words. She had such innocence, like Eilan's when she
was young.
"Of course they do not ask me to sin in the Forest House, and they are
good people there, but I want to be a real believer and go to Heaven. I would
be afraid to be a martyr though, and I used to be afraid they would think it
was my duty to die for my faith like one of the saints Mother told me about; I
was only a baby but I can remember - just.
"But the Government is not persecuting Christians now . . ." She
hesitated. As Gaius was searching for something to say, she went on. "Of
course, tonight, the Father was really talking about me. A few of the people in

the congregation know that I am in one of the pagan temples and they despise
me because I remain there - but Father Petros says I do not need to leave them
until I am of age."
"And then what?" he asked. "Will Valerius arrange a suitable marriage for
you?"
"Oh no. It is most likely I will enter a holy sisterhood. In Heaven, the
priests say, there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage."
"What a waste," Gaius declared. He had heard that one before. "I truly
think the priests must be mistaken."
"Oh no; for when the world ends you do not wish to be found with any sin
upon your soul."
Gaius said with absolute truthfulness, "It never occurred to me to be
concerned about my soul, nor even to ask myself whether or not I had one."
She stopped short and turned to him in the dark. "But how terrible," she
said very earnestly. "You do not want to be cast into the pit of hell, do you?"
"I find it a strange religion that would condemn folk for breeding children,
or for the act that begets them! And as for your pit of hell, surely it is as much
as a fable as Tartarus or Hades. Nothing to frighten a rational man. Do you
mean to tell me that you truly believe that is where those who offend against
Father Petros's rules will go?"
She stopped again and raised her face to him, white as a lily in the
moonlight. "But of course I do," she said. "You must think about your soul
now, before it is too late."
If anyone except a girl as pretty as this one had brought up such a subject
to Gaius, he probably would have laughed in her face. Julia's talk of such
things bored him almost to tears. Instead he answered more gently, "If you
have a care for my soul you will simply have to help me save it."
She said doubtfully, "I think Father Petros could help you a good deal
better than I can." They had reached the entrance to the avenue of oaks that
led to the Forest House, and she stopped, frowning. "I can find my way from

here; and you should certainly not come any closer. You might be seen, and
then I too would be caught and punished."
He seized her shoulders and said, half jocularly, half pleading, "Will you
let me go with my soul unsaved, then? We must meet again."
She looked troubled. "I should not say this," she said abruptly.
"But I take food to Father Petros's hermitage at noon of every day. If you
happened to be there . . . I suppose . . .we could talk then."
"Then you shall certainly save my soul, if it can be saved," Gaius replied.
He did not care a pin about his suppositious soul; but he knew he wanted to
see Senara again.
"I will never see you again —" Eilan turned abruptly away from Caillean
and stared into the garden.
"That is foolish!" exclaimed Caillean, the stab of fear those words gave
her turning to anger. "Now it is you who are having the foolish premonitions.
It was you yourself who wanted me to go!"
Eilan's thin shoulders quivered. "Not I, not I. It was the Goddess speaking
through me, and I know we must do Her will. But oh, Caillean, now that the
time conies, it is hard!"
"Hard indeed!" Caillean spat back at her. "But it is I who must leave you
and everything that I have loved. Are you sure it was the Goddess speaking
and not Ardanos whispering in your ear? He has wanted to separate us ever
since I made him let you keep your son!"
"I suppose this does please him," whispered Eilan, "but do you truly
believe it was his doing? Is everything I have tried to do here a lie?"
Caillean heard her pain and could maintain her own anger no longer. "My
dear one - my little one." She laid a hand on Eilan's shoulder and the other
woman turned into her arms. She made no sound, but her cheeks were
streaked with tears. "We must not fight like children when there is so little
time! There are moments when the power of the gods burns like the sun, and
then it grows dark and the light seems only a dream. It has always been so.

But I believe in you, my love."
"Your belief has sustained me," Eilan murmured.
"Listen," said Caillean. "This is not for ever. One day, when we are old
women together, we will laugh at our fears."
"I know that we will be together," said Eilan slowly, "but whether it is in
this life or another, that I cannot see."
"My Lady," Huw spoke from the gate, "the bearers are waiting."
"Now you must go." Eilan straightened, becoming the High Priestess
again. "We must both serve the Lady in the places where She has called us, no
matter what we feel."
"It is all right. I will return, you'll see," Caillean said gruffly, giving her a
last, swift hug and releasing her.
She went away then, knowing that if she looked back at Eilan she would
weep herself, and she must not, not before the young priestesses and the men.
It was not until the curtains of the litter closed around her that she gave way
to her tears.
She spent most of the rainy, dismal journey to the Summer Country
brooding. Her mood was not improved by the fact that they had to travel by
litter, a form of transportation that she detested.
She was accompanied by the priestesses chosen for the new
establishment. They were mostly young, and all virtual newcomers to the
Forest House who were too awed even to address her in anything but the
barest commonplaces. Caillean had little to do except to nurse her rage.
It was nearing dusk when the little procession wound through the gap in
the hills and transferred to barges to cross the shallow marshes that
surrounded the Tor. It stood stark against the fading sky, crowned with a circle
of stones, and even from here she could feel its power. The roundhouses of
the Druids clustered on its lower slopes. In the hollow beyond, she could just
make out a scattering of smaller, beehive huts that must belong to the
Christians Ardanos had allowed to settle here. A fragrance of some scented

wood, perhaps apple, hung in the air.
They were met at the foot of the hill by the young priests set to watch
there, who greeted her with many expressions of deference and good will,
although they appeared somewhat uncertain about why she had come. Despite
her anger she found herself amused by their confusion, and began reluctantly
to come to terms with the inevitable. For better or worse, the Druid priesthood
had sent her here, and even they were only instruments of the Goddess, who
had commanded her presence here in no uncertain terms.
When they reached the shrine itself, it was full dark. The priests greeted
them politely, if not cordially - but then, Caillean had hardly expected to be
welcomed. If this was exile, at least it was an honorable exile, and since she
could not alter it, she might as well make the best of it.
After the ceremonial greetings, she found her women huddled in wideeyed confusion by the bonfire. One of the young priests conducted them to a
low, thatched-roof dwelling that, as they said apologetically, was not in any
way suitable for the housing of a priestess, let alone one of her status. Still,
where to put women was not a problem they had had to deal with until now.
Since the Arch-Druid had commanded it, however, they were swift to assure
her that a suitable house would be built for their use as soon as she made their
requirements known, and such attendance as she and her women desired
should be secured for them.
By the time Caillean had made sure that all the young women were safely
bestowed in the hastily vacated dormitory which had housed the youngest
novices, and was able to seek her own bed at last, she was ready to drop from
fatigue. Though the bed and the place were strange to her, to her surprise she
slept through the night peacefully and woke while dawn was still reddening
the sky. She dressed herself without waking her women, and went out alone
into the early morning. Streaks of rosy light were just beginning to flush the
sky. The path before her led up the hill.
As the light grew, Caillean studied her surroundings carefully. To what, in
this remote country, had her destiny led her?
As the sun rose, she could see that the Tor looked out over a vast expanse
of wild country entirely surrounded by heavy mists that drifted from the great
sheet of water; they had arrived so late the night before, that she hardly

noticed, in her fatigue and exhaustion, that the final stage of the journey had
been made by barge. The wooded slopes of other islands poked their blackishgreen and forested summits through the mist. It was very silent, but as the sun
rose and Caillean studied this strange country, she heard the faint murmur of
chanting, from somewhere not very far away.
She turned; the sound came from a small structure at the very top of the
hill. She moved higher to hear it more clearly. The music was soft and slow,
the deep resonance of men's voices strange to her ears after so many years
among women. After a time she made out words in the flow of sound; it
seemed to her that they were singing in Greek.
Kyrie eleison, Criste eleison. She had heard that this was how the
Christians addressed their lord; this must be the community of refugees the
Arch-Druid had given leave to settle here. These days all sorts of strange
religions were breaking out all over the Empire.
Presently the sound faded, and she saw a little old man, stooped as if with
great old age, regarding her. She blinked, for she had not seen him approach,
and that was unusual for a priestess of her training. As she looked at him, he
dropped his eyes. He must be one of the Christian priests indeed; she had
heard that many of their priests would not look upon a strange woman.
But apparently he was allowed to talk to her. He said, in the market-Latin
that served as a dialect all over the Empire, "A good day to you, my sister.
May I ask your name? I know that you surely are not one of our catechumens,
for we have not for many years had any women among us except the
venerable ladies who came with us long ago, and you are young."
Caillean smiled a little at the thought that anyone could consider her
young, but the priest was white-haired and frail as a fallen leaf. At least in
years, he might have been her grandsire.
"I am not," she said. "I am one of those who worship the forest god. I am
called Caillean."
"Is it so?" he asked her politely. "I know something of the brothers among
the Druids, and I knew not they had women among them."
"Those who dwell here have not," she replied, "or at least not until now. I

was sent here from the Forest House in the North, to establish a House of
Maidens. I came up the hill to see to what place the gods had led me."
"You speak as one who holds some acquaintance with the truth, my sister.
Surely then you know that all the gods are one God . . ." He paused, and
Caillean completed, ". . .and all the goddesses one Goddess."
His ancient face was altogether kindly. "It is so. Those to whom our Lord
came as God's Divine Son would not see the Godhead in anything female, so
to them we speak not of the Goddess, but of Sophia, the Holy Wisdom. But
we understand that the Truth is One. So, my sister, to me it seems very fitting
that you should establish here, a shrine to the Holy Wisdom after the manner
of your people."
Caillean bowed. His face was very deeply wrinkled, but it no longer
seemed ugly, for it positively glowed with benevolence.
"What a splendid work to which to devote the remainder of this
incarnation, my sister." He smiled, then his gaze went inward. "It feels right
for you to be here, for it seems to me that we have served at the same altars
before . . ."
Not for the first time in this strange encounter, Caillean was amazed. "I
had heard that the brothers of your faith denied the truth of incarnations," she
volunteered. But what he had said was true. She did recognize him, with the
kind of certainty she had felt when she met Eilan.
"It is written that the Master himself believed," said the ancient priest, "for
He said of the Way-shower, whom men called Jochanan, that he was Elijah
reborn. It is written as well that he said there was milk for babes and meat for
strong men. Many of the babes among us, new in faith, are given such food as
is right for spiritual infants, lest they neglect to amend their lives, in the belief
that indeed the Earth shall abide for ever. Yet the Master said that this
generation shall not pass away before the Son of Man cometh; therefore am I
here, that even the folk at the end of the world shall hear and know the Truth."
Caillean said quietly, "May the truth prevail."
"Success to your mission, sister," the old man replied. "There are many
here who would welcome a pious sisterhood." He turned as if to go.

"Is it permitted to ask your name, my brother?"
"I am called Joseph, and I was a merchant of Arimathea. There are holy
ladies still living among us who looked upon the Master's face in life. They
will welcome the company of enlightened women among us."
Caillean bowed once more. She found it a strange but good omen that she
should find among these Christians who did not readily embrace women, a
better welcome than her Druid brethren had offered. Servant of the Light. .
.The title rang in her awareness from some place before memory. As the
ancient priest moved down the hill, her hands moved in a gesture of reverence
more ancient even than the Druids. If such a soul could ally himself to the
Christians, there must be some hope for them after all.
As he disappeared inside the little beehive church, Caillean found herself
smiling. She knew now that the Goddess would favor her work and that she
had indeed been sent here with good reason. She would begin this very day.
As Caillean breakfasted with the other women it occurred to her that in
this new home, where they were all far from every familiar thing, she could
not quite maintain the aloofness that Lhiannon and then Eilan had observed
within the Forest House. She made her first decision: they were not to be
served by outsiders. It was the first step in determining just how much contact
they would have with the male priesthood. An easier decision was to appoint
one of the tallest and strongest of the young novices to locate a site suitable
for a garden and to sow it as quickly as might be with as many vegetables as
practicable. Some food would, of course, be provided by the local population,
but she wished it clear from the very beginning that they would not be in any
way dependent upon the Druid priests. The priests would have not the shadow
of an excuse for claiming control over the lives of the women there.
She chose another young woman - probably the least intelligent of her
subordinates - to be in charge of the cooking and serving of the food,
promising her as much assistance as she desired. Later that day she spoke
with one of the priests, and established that a building should be completed
before the winter snow grew deep that could house four or five times their
original number. Politely, but adamantly she discarded the old priest's
suggestion that their present accommodations might suffice at least through
the present winter.

When she finally dismissed him he looked rather stunned. She suspected
that he was probably feeling like someone who had been rolled over by a
team of big horses, and felt that for the first time she could have her own will
done. It was not at all an unwelcome feeling. The Goddess was at work here
indeed, for the Lady could now make use of her talents to their fullest, and
that had never been true before.
She missed Dieda; she could have used the younger woman's help with
the maidens and in teaching them singing. But, she thought, she was better off
without hostility among her associates, especially since they would have been
thrown into such close contact. Here there was no one to protest whatever
rules she might make. She resolved to choose the woman most experienced in
singing or chanting to learn to play upon her own harp, and perhaps even
teach her the art of fashioning such instruments.
When she finally laid herself down to sleep, after an evening spent
grouping the women together for their first lesson in memorizing the
unwritten lore of the Goddess, she could hear the sweet sound of chanting
coming once more from the distant church. It was to the renewed chant of
"Kyrie eleison," that she fell into sleep, more content with the spot to which
the Goddess had led her than she had ever imagined she could be. That night
she dreamed of a shrine served by maidens, of courts and halls upon the holy
Tor, which might one day rise here. It might not be in her own lifetime; but it
would come.

Twenty-Eight

The days waxed longer after Beltane; the cattle were driven to the hill
pastures, and in the fields men tended the grain. Midsummer came, and for
the first time Ardanos did not try to instruct Eilan before the ritual regarding
the Oracle. When she saw him at the ritual, he seemed very frail. They told
her afterward that the Goddess had foretold a time of disasters and changes,
but promised peace to follow. Indeed, the whole land was full of rumors, but
no one could say from what direction the danger might come.
Eilan had meant to visit the Arch-Druid after recovering from her own
part in the ritual, but at this time of year there was much to do in the Forest
House. The days went by and still she did not find the time. In high summer,
even the maidens of the Forest House went into the fields of Vernemeton to
help with the haying. Eilan supervised those who wove linen for the priests,
and worked over the dye pots, preparing fabric for new robes, but it was
Caillean who was missed most sorely, for she had always been the most
skillful of the women at dying cloth. No law required Eilan to take her turn at
this menial work but it seemed to her that as long as she had a responsibility
for their little community, it was up to her to participate in it.
She was in the dye sheds, her sleeves rolled above the elbow and her
forearms splattered with blue dye, when a shadow fell across the doorway. A
ripple of scandalized excitement ran through the women as they realized it
was one of the young Druids, flushed and perspiring in his white robe. For
though the shed was not within the sacred precinct inside the walls, where
only the highest of the priests might enter, they were not used to seeing men.

"The High Priestess," he gasped. "Is the Lady Eilan here?" All the women
turned to look at Eilan and as the boy's flush deepened she realized that he
had never seen her without her veil. He swallowed. "Please, Lady - the ArchDruid has been taken ill. You must come!"
Eilan stopped in the doorway of Ardanos's chamber, shocked in spite of
having been warned. She heard a little gasp from Miellyn, who was attending
her, and motioned her to stand with Huw at the door. Then she sat down
beside the bed of the dying man. And indeed there could be no doubt that he
was dying. At each breath air rattled and sucked in Ardanos's chest, and she
could see the skull beneath the sallow skin. With a pang she remembered how
he had sat with Lhiannon during her illness. Even though at times she had
hated him, she hoped that his passage would be an easy one.
"He collapsed at dinner and lay unconscious until a little while ago," said
Garic, one of the older priests. "We have sent for Bendeigid."
She put back her veil and reached out to take his hand. "Ardanos," she
said softly. "Ardanos, can you hear me?"
The papery eyelids fluttered and after a moment of confusion, he focused
on her face. "Dieda," he whispered.
"Grandfather, do you not know me even now? Dieda is in the South,
testing maidens who wish to join us as priestesses. I am Eilan." She was
bitterly amused that he should still be confusing them after all these years.
His gaze focused on the ornaments she had taken the time to put on and he
sighed. "You were the right one . . .after all."
"Ardanos," she said firmly, "as High Priestess it is my duty to tell you that
you are dying. You must not depart without naming your successor. Tell us,
Arch-Druid, who shall bear the golden sickle when you are gone?"
His eyes fixed on her face. "Goddess, I did the best . . . I could," he
whispered. "The Merlin knows . . ."
"But we must know!" said the Druid who was attending him. "Who will
you choose?"

"Peace!" Ardanos said with sudden strength, as if he were ordering them
to be silent. "Peace . . ." The word whispered away on a dying gasp; the
breath rattled in the old man's throat, and then he was still.
For a moment no one moved. Then Garic reached down to take Ardanos's
pulse, waited, counting, and let the limp hand fall.
"He is gone!" he said accusingly.
"I am sorry," said Eilan. "What will you do?"
"We must summon the other members of our order," said one of the
others, already taking charge. "Go now, Lady. Your part is done. We will
inform you when the gods have led us to a decision, since they did not see fit
to inspire Ardanos with their word."
As the fifteenth summer of the Emperor Domitian's reign passed, the
weather stayed close and still, as if a storm were brewing somewhere just
over the horizon. Gaius, riding through the streets of Deva, found himself
constantly listening, waiting for thunder. And he was not the only one. The
voices of the vendors in the town grew shrill and angry; there were more
fights in the barracks and wine shops, and rumors of risings or mutinies
abounded. Even his horse seemed to have picked up the tension, prancing and
sidling nervously.
The ides of September . . .the Ides of September . . .The words beat at his
awareness every time his mount's hoofs struck the hard ground. Since
Macellius had told him the date set for the rising, sleep had eluded him. His
father believed that the tribes would support them, but Gaius was not so sure.
If the Eagles of Rome fought each other, the only victor might be the Ravens.
Was it worth the risk of a general insurrection even to unseat Domitian?
When this is over I will be happy to spend the rest of my life running my
farm, he thought as he rubbed his eyes. I was not cut out to be a conspirator.
And this was the moment that the Arch-Druid, who in his way had been a
force for stability, had chosen to die. If Gaius had believed in the Christian
hell of which Julia spoke, he would have cursed the old man to its flames for
his timing. Mithras alone knew who the Druids would choose to succeed him,
but even if his successor was friendly, it would take time to establish the kind

of understanding Ardanos had had with Macellius. But at least the news had
brought Gaius to a decision. The question of adoption no longer mattered. If
the country was about to explode in revolution he had to make sure that his
son was safe. His father's informants had confirmed that the current High
Priestess was still Eilan. Armed with an official message of condolence from
the Legate, he was going to see her.
He had dressed carefully for the occasion, in the Roman style but with a
Celtic sense of display, in a tunic of saffron linen embroidered with acanthus
leaves at the hem over dark red doeskin breeches, and a mantle of lightweight maroon wool held by a golden brooch. At least no one could expect
him to wear a toga when he was riding. But despite his fine clothes, as he
turned his mount up the avenue of trees leading to the Forest House Gaius
realized that he was nervous. He had just pulled out the first grey hairs at his
temples. Would Eilan still find him handsome?
They led him into a garden where someone shrouded in a blue veil waited
beneath a shady arbor covered with eglantine. He knew she must be the High
Priestess because the same dolt of a bodyguard who had fainted when the
cattle stampeded at Beltane all those years ago was standing near by, glaring
at him. But he found it hard to believe that this erect, veiled figure was Eilan.
"My Lady . . ." He paused, and compelled by something he did not
understand, bowed. "I have come to offer the condolences of the Legate at
Deva on the death of the Arch-Druid, your grandfather. He will be greatly
missed. He was . . ." he thought for a moment, "a remarkable man."
"Our loss is great indeed," she answered, and though her tone was
colorless, his pulse quickened. "Will you take some refreshment?"
In a few moments a maiden in the drab garb of a novice was setting down
a tray with honey cakes and a flagon of some drink made with herbs and
berries and water, he supposed, from the Sacred Well. He drank, trying to
think of something else to say and, looking down, saw that the fabric of her
veil was trembling.
"Eilan," he said in a low voice, "let me see your face. It has been too
long."
She gave a little laugh. "I was a fool. I thought it would be safe to see you

again." She shrugged then and pulled back the veil, and he saw that her eyes
were wet with tears.
Gaius blinked, for Eilan looked not older so much as more like herself, as
if the girl he had known had been only a blurred sketch of the woman she was
to become. Despite the tears and the neck that seemed too slender for the
weight of the golden torque, she looked strong. And why not? he thought then.
In her own sphere she has wielded as much power as any legionary
commander, these past years. This woman could not be the Fury who had so
frightened him. His vision blurred with old memories. He wanted to throw
himself at her feet and declare his love for her, but that lout with the spear
would be on him in a minute if he moved.
"Listen, for I do not know how long I can stay here," he said quickly.
"War is coming — not because of your grandfather's death, but because of
events in Rome. I can tell you no more, except that there will be a rising
against the Emperor. Macellius hopes the British will support us, but there is
no telling which way things will go. I must get you to a place of safety, Eilan,
you and the boy."
Eilan looked at him, and her changeable eyes went flat and hard. "Let me
be sure I understand you. Now, when the Imperium is about to tear itself
apart, you want to offer me Roman protection. After all these years! Isn't it
rather more likely that if there should be trouble during the coming weeks I
will be safer here" — she indicated the walls and the hulking figure of Huw
with a graceful wave of her hand - "than you and yours are likely to be?"
Gaius flushed. "Are you so sure your own people will never turn on you?
Your oracles have been a force for peace with Rome - and now that your
grandfather is not here, whom do you think people like Cynric will blame if
things go wrong? Can't you see that you must come with me?"
"I must . . . ?" her eyes flashed. "And what does your Roman wife say tothis fine plan? Has she tired of you after twelve years?"
"Julia has become a Christian and sworn an oath of chastity. That is
grounds enough for divorce in Roman law. I could marry you, Eilan, and we
could be together. If you will not, I can formally adopt our son!"
"So kind of you!" Eilan's face was now as red as it had been pale. She rose

to her feet suddenly and started down the path, her skirts sweeping the gravel
behind her. Gaius and Huw jumped up, both of them, it seemed to him,
equally taken aback, and followed.
At the end of the garden was a hedge, just low enough for Gaius to see
over it to a flat space between the buildings and the outer walls where several
children were playing with a sewn leather ball. After a few moments it
became clear to Gaius that one boy was the leader, a lad as leggy as a young
colt who was just beginning to grow into his bones. His curls were tawny on
top from a summer in the sun, but underneath they were dark, and as he
turned to shout to one of his team-mates, there was something so like
Macellius in his expression that it stopped Gaius's breath.
Eilan had begun to speak again, but Gaius's gaze was on the boy. His heart
was hammering so hard he thought they must hear it in Deva, but the child,
intent on his game, never looked around.
"When I bore him in that hut in the forest where were you?" Her voice,
low and furious, was pitched for his ears. "And when I fought to keep him
with me, and all these years when I watched over him in secret, never daring
to admit he was my own? He does not know I am his mother, but I have kept
him safely. Now, when he is almost come to manhood, you would step in and
take him away? I think not, Gaius Macellius Severus Siluricus!" she hissed.
"Gawen knows nothing of Rome!"
"Eilan!" he whispered. Gaius had thought what he felt for this child the
one time he had held him had been some fancy; but he could feel it again, a
longing that shook his bones. "Please!"
She turned her back and began to move back down the path. "My thanks
to you, Roman, for your sympathy," she said loudly and clearly. "It was kind
of you to come. As you say, the death of Ardanos has been a great loss. Do
take our respectful greetings back to the Legate and to your father."
Gaius saw Huw looming towards him and, still looking over his shoulder,
started to follow her. For a moment Gawen turned towards him, head tipped
back, watching the ball. Then he dashed away. Gaius let the big man shepherd
him back down the path, feeling as if all the light had gone out of the world.
Eilan had pulled her veil back down. His last sight of her was a shadow

disappearing into a dark doorway. As Gaius let his horse choose its own way
back down to the road he wondered how it could all have gone so wrong. He
had been so relieved to find Eilan was unchanged, and he had meant to tell
her he still loved her; but he realized now that she was something worse than
a Fury: a woman like the old Empresses, or Boudicca, a woman warped by
pride and power.
Abruptly a vision of Senara as he had last seen her gazing up at him
overlaid his memory of Eilan's rage. She was so good, and so innocent - as
Eilan had been when first he knew her. Eilan had never truly understood him,
but Senara was half Roman, as he was, and torn by the same conflicts and
uncertainties. If he could win her, it seemed to Gaius he would be whole once
more.
He was not yet beaten. One way or another, he would have Senara, and he
would have the boy, though all the Legions of Rome and warriors of the tribes
stood between.
Eilan spent the days after Gaius's visit in seclusion. The priestesses
thought that she was grieving for her grandfather, but although his death had
left her shocked and startled, relief rather had predominated. Her reaction to
Gaius, however, was another matter entirely. She herself had been as
surprised by her own fury as he was. She had not realized how much she had
resented his abandonment all these years. It was true that she had agreed to it,
but surely he could have tried to contact her before now! How dared he think
that he could walk in without a word of love and take her child away . . .
When her thoughts reached this point she would have to stop herself, walk
a little or spend some time in the disciplined meditation Caillean had taught
her, and try to recover her serenity. It was several days before she began
seriously to consider what he had said to her. Who, indeed, would now feel
himself privileged to instruct her in what she was to say in the name of the
Goddess? The last she had heard, the Druids were still arguing. By now it had
become clear that a new Arch-Druid would not be chosen until after
Lughnasad, so she need not worry about preparing for the festival. But by
Samaine, the new leader would be firmly seated in his power. And if it were
someone like her father, he would demand that the Goddess call the tribes to
war.
When Dieda returned to the Forest House and came to see her, Eilan

found her own offers of sympathy quickly shrugged off.
"Ardanos is no loss," said her kinswoman callously. "My father was
always in the hands of the Romans. I wonder who will give the orders to the
Oracle now?"
Ever since Gawen's birth, Eilan had felt constrained in Dieda's presence.
Still, it seemed impossible she should have no feeling whatever for her own
father. Eilan missed Caillean, who might have been able to make some sense
out of all this, more with every passing day.
Dieda was still with her when one of the girls came in to tell them that
Cynric had come. So, the Ravens are gathering, Eilan thought grimly, but she
greeted Cynric kindly as a kinsman when Huw brought him in. He looked
older than his years, she thought painfully, shaggy as a mountain pony, his
fine skin marred by old scars.
"What are you doing in this part of the country? I thought you safely away
to the North after things went wrong with Brigitta and the Demetae."
"Oh, I can come and go as I please," he said, "even under the
Commander's nose. I am too clever for them." He spoke with a kind of brittle
gaiety she found disturbing.
"The proudest beast is soonest taken in the snare of the hunter," murmured
Dieda sardonically. She pretended to care nothing for Cynric, but Eilan
thought she was not so indifferent as she seemed.
Cynric shrugged. "I might well think some god favors me more than
common; it is true that I seem to bear a charmed life. I think I could go into
Londinium and pull the Governor's beard."
"I would not try it, if I were you," Dieda said, and he returned her
laughter.
"I do not intend to try it at this moment; in another month or two it may be
a very different matter. I do not grieve at Ardanos's death; nor should you,
Eilan. He was all too eager to have all things ordered as he chose."
"He was indeed," she said honestly, though her blood ran cold as she

connected what Gaius had told her with Cynric's words.
"Good; you are honest so far," he said. "I wonder, foster sister, how far
your honesty goes."
She said warily, "I, at least, know what I want."
"Do you? And what is that, Eilan?"
"Peace!" So that my son can grow to be a man, she thought grimly. But
there was no way she could say that to Cynric. Ardanos had blighted her own
happiness, and that of Cynric and Dieda as well, but at least in the West, the
tribes had been at peace for a dozen years.
Cynric grimaced. "Peace - women think too much of it," he snorted. "You
sound like Macellius's mouthpiece; as I sometimes thought old Ardanos was.
But he is gone. Now we may have a chance to drive out these Romans.
Brigitta waits, knowing what we want of her."
"I should think Brigitta had seen enough of war," Eilan said.
"Say rather that she has seen enough of Roman justice," Cynric said
bitterly." But there are strange rumors going about these days. If the Romans
do fight each other, perhaps we can free ourselves of what they call justice.
Then every Roman home shall be laid waste as was the home of Bendeigid!"
Eilan interrupted. "Have you forgotten it was not the Romans who leveled
the home of my father and killed my mother, but the Hibernians and the wild
tribesmen of the North? The Romans themselves punished them."
"For our own homes, who but we should be responsible?" asked Cynric.
"It is for us to punish or to spare as we see fit. Are we to accept all this like
tame dogs, and let the Romans determine whom we should fight and where?"
An angry flush was building beneath the weathered skin.
Eilan said stubbornly, "However it comes, peace is a good thing."
"So you will still speak the traitorous words of Ardanos? Or are they the
words of Macellius, or perhaps of his handsome son?" he asked, sneering.

Behind him the giant bodyguard shifted weight uneasily. Eilan hardly
noticed, she was so distressed. "At least Macellius has the good of both our
peoples at heart."
"And I do not?" Cynric demanded, his eyes flashing.
"I did not say that, or anything like to it."
"But that is what you meant," he threw back at her. "I know Macellius's
cub came here. What did he say to you? With you in the high seat, it seems
we hardly need the Romans. But we shall hear such traitorous counsels no
longer. Bendeigid has been chosen as Arch-Druid - that is what I came to tell
you - and he will give you a very different set of instructions at the next
festival!"
Dieda was looking from one to the other, her face flaming. Eilan strove
for calm, knowing that Cynric was simply trying to hurt her.
"It is true that Ardanos told me what he wanted and interpreted the
Oracle's answers. But what the Goddess says while I am in trance is not my
doing. I do not declare my own will, Cynric," she said quietly.
"Are you trying to tell me the Goddess wishes for this treason?"
"Why should She not?" shouted Eilan. "She is a mother." As I am. Eilan
swallowed the words, and added angrily, "You have no right to speak so to
me!"
"I am the vengeance of the Goddess," snapped Cynric, "and I speak as I
will - and punish —"
Before Eilan could react, his lifted hand had connected with her cheek.
She cried out, and Dieda exclaimed in shock, "How dare you?"
"Cathubodva knows I dare deal this way with all Romanized traitors!"
A shadow loomed behind him. Still glaring, Cynric started to turn, Huw's
cudgel caught him in motion and his head exploded in a shower of blood and
brains. Dieda screamed, and Eilan lifted her hand but it was too late.

For a moment Cynric's body stood swaying, a surprised look on what was
left of his face. Then his body understood its death at last and he crumpled to
the floor.
Shaking, Eilan touched his wrist, knowing already, as the gush of blood
from his head slowed, that she would find no pulse. She looked up at her
guard, who was beginning to turn a little green as he stared at the blood.
"Huw - why did you do it? Why?"
"Lady . . . he hit you!"
Eilan bowed her head. Even if the offender had been Ardanos himself
Huw would have struck him. He had been taught that the Priestess was
inviolable. But Cynric's death would have to be concealed. His followers
were not many, but they were desperate. If they decide to avenge him, the
precarious unity she had built among her people would be shattered. Cynric
dead might be more dangerous than he had ever been alive.
Dieda turned away, weeping. Eilan felt that she herself was beyond tears.
"Go away, Huw," she said tiredly. "Go tell Miellyn what has happened and
ask her to send a message to the new Arch-Druid." My father . . .she thought
numbly, but she had no time now to consider the implications. "Speak to no
others," she instructed, "and when you have carried this message, forget what
has happened here today."
She got to her feet, feeling suddenly a hundred years old. "Dieda, come to
the garden. There is nothing you can do for him now." She went to comfort
the weeping woman, but Dieda jerked away.
"Is it so you reward faithfulness to our people? Then have your tame bear
kill me too."
Eilan winced. "I tried to save him. I would have willingly given my own
life —"
"Oh indeed, that's easy enough to say —" Dieda turned on her. "But you
take lives, not give them. You fed on Caillean's wisdom, and sent her into
exile when you had drained her dry. You stole my reputation, and walked
away with your honor as bright as a newborn babe's. And now you have taken

the life of the only man I ever loved! Your Roman was lucky to be rid of you!
Eilan the inviolate! Lady High and Mighty! If only they knew!"
Eilan said wearily, "None of us held a sword to your throat to bid you take
vows here, Dieda. When it was clear they had chosen me, you could have
been released, and when you went to Eriu, no force was used to bid you
return. I have said this before, but I suppose you could not hear." She tried to
speak calmly, but the other woman's words struck harder than Cynric's blow.
"I told you once to beware if ever you betrayed our people. Was Cynric
right, Eilan? Have you been working for Rome all along?"
Eilan lifted her head and, trembling, stared into that other face, so like her
own. "I swear . . .that I have served the Goddess as well as I could," she said
hoarsely, "and may the sky fall and cover me, the earth rise up to swallow me,
if I lie." She took a deep breath. "I am still High Priestess of Vernemeton. But
you may go to Caillean, or wherever else you will, if you feel that you can no
longer serve the Goddess in my company!"
Slowly Dieda began to shake her head, a sly expression that Eilan liked
even less than her rage creeping into her eyes.
"I won't leave you," she whispered. "I wouldn't leave now for the world. I
want to be here when the Goddess strikes you down!"
Senara was already waiting outside the hut in the forest when Gaius
arrived, her bright hair like a flame against the dark trees. "I see you have
come," he said softly.
Senara turned and, although she had expected him, gave a small startled
cry. "Is it you?"
"No other," he said, almost gaily, "in spite of the evil weather. I dare say
we shall have rain, and that speedily." He looked at the sky. "What, think you,
would Father Petros say to lending the shelter of his roof to a couple of
wayfarers?"
"For converts I think he would be delighted. I do not think he would do so
to pagans," she said reprovingly.

They moved inside together. The hermit's furnishings consisted of some
dilapidated benches and, against the wall, a clumsy box bed. But where, this
evening, was Father Petros? Outside the storm broke with a rattle of wind and
a slam of rain. Gaius winced, listening to the thunder.
"You see, we made it here just in time," he said. "Bellissima!"
"You must not call me so," she said timidly.
"No?" he queried, watching her carefully. "But I thought truth was one of
your Christian virtues. The Stoics say so, and even among the Druids, I have
heard, truth-telling is valued. Would you have me lie to you, then?"
"You know how to best me with words," she said crossly. "We came here
to speak of the state of your soul."
"Ah, yes; a thing that I am not yet convinced I possess."
She said, "I am no philosopher. But do not even the Stoics whom you
have mentioned, speak of that part of a man which deals with the evidence of
that which you can neither see nor feel?"
"They do; it is that which convinces me that of all women you are the
most desirable."
He knew that he was pushing the girl, but the storm, rather than relieving
the tension, seemed to have filled him with its own intensity. He had spent the
days since his meeting with Eilan in turmoil, alternately raging and in despair.
He would have taken her away and done his duty by her, but she had denied
him. Julia too had forfeited her claim to him. Surely he was free now to seek
comfort elsewhere! And when he told Senara she was beautiful, he had not
lied.
She blushed and said timidly, "It is not well done of you to speak so to
me."
"On the contrary, I think it is very well done, and you would have me
speak the truth. And for what else were you created as a woman?"
Now she was on familiar ground, having listened to many catechumens.

"Scripture tells us," she replied, "that we were created for the purpose of
giving worship to the Creator."
"How dull for him," Gaius answered. "If I were a god, I would ask more
of men than that they should spend their leisure in worshipping me."
"But it is not for the Created to question the ways of the Creator."
"Why not?" Gaius pursued.
"Is there anything better to do than worship God?" she demanded, raising
her eyes to his. Flushed, like this, she looked still more beautiful.
Certainly there is, Gaius thought, and I would rather be doing it with you.
If there was a god, he had created women's beauty, and Gaius could not
believe he would condemn any man for appreciating it. But it was not yet
time to say so.
"Tell me, then about this Creator."
"Almost every faith - except perhaps that of Rome who worship only their
Emperor who is all evil - speaks of a Creator. It was He who made all things
that were made, and He placed us here to worship Him."
"Properly speaking, it is the genius of the Emperor that we honor, the
divine spark that guides him, and through him, the Empire, not the man. That
is why those who will not burn incense are prosecuted as traitors."
"There may have been good Emperors, though some of the priests would
not believe it," Senara conceded. "But even you will own that Nero, who
burned so many Christians in his arena, was an evil one."
"I will grant you Nero," Gaius said, "and Caligula. And there are those in
Rome who feel that Domitian in his hubris has gone too far. When that
happens, those who made a man Emperor have the right to replace him." And
soon, he thought, shivering. September was passing quickly.
"You are very proud of being a Roman," she said then. "I do not know
very much about my mother's family and have always wondered what it
would have been like to be raised that way. Were you born in Rome?"

He grinned at her. "Indeed not; I am half British, just as you are. My
mother was a royal woman of the Silures. She died when I was very young,
bearing my little sister."
"Ah, how sad for you." Her eyes suddenly overflowed; he had not noticed
that they were so blue. "What did you do then?"
"I stayed with my father," Gaius told her. "I was his only son, so he had
me well educated by tutors, and taught to read Latin and Greek; then I went
into the Legions. There is really nothing more to tell."
"And were there no women in your life?"
He could see her fighting this purely worldly curiosity; but he thought it a
good sign that she wanted to know.
"My father arranged my marriage with Julia when I was very young," he
said carefully. One day she would have to know about Eilan and their son, but
not yet. "And as you may know, my wife has taken a vow of chastity, which
means I am alone," he said sadly. Outside, the thunder crashed.
She said, "I should not say this, and I am certain Father Petros would not
approve, but that seems not fair dealing. I know that a vow of chastity is
supposed to be the best of all ways to live, but when she has pledged herself
to you —"
"If you were married to me, would you take such a vow?"
She flushed again, but said seriously, "I would not. The learned Paulus
wrote that those who were married should continue in that state, and those
who were not married should not marry."
"If I had married you, you would have taken your vows more seriously
than Julia," he said softly.
"I could never be untrue to a vow to you."
"And you have not taken vows in the Forest House?" She was still looking
at the floor, but Gaius moved a little closer, feeling the blood run faster

beneath his skin.
"I have not," she said. "They have all been very kind to me, and asked
very little, but I cannot serve their Goddess without giving up my Roman
heritage. I will have to decide soon."
"There is another alternative." His voice grew hoarse as he took in the
sweet scent of her hair, but he kept it low. "Julia has forfeited her rights as my
wife by her vow of chastity, and we were married by Roman, not by Christian
rites. I would marry you, Senara — or Valeria, as your mother called you.
Your uncle Valerius is a good man; he would be happy if I were to take you
away from here."
He heard her breath catch. She was like some bright bird hovering almost
within reach of his hand, like Eilan when she came to him at Beltane so many
years ago. But Eilan and Julia had rejected him; they were shadows, banished
by the living reality of this girl who stood so close to him now.
"If only it could be," she whispered. "Where would we go?"
"To Londinium, or even to Rome. Great changes are coming. I can tell
you no more, but there is nothing we might not do, together, if you would
come with me!"
Not to touch her then seemed the hardest thing he had ever done, for he
was mad now with uncertainty and need. But he knew that if he did he would
lose her. Senara looked up and he faced her, letting the ardor that filled him
glow in his eyes.
She did not flee. Trembling, she said softly, "I wish I knew what to do."
Be mine, he said silently. Help me to raise my son! Surely, she would
accept Gawen. That was why he needed her, after all, and not some wealthy
Roman maiden who would despise Gawen's British blood. It was for the sake
of the boy . . .
Now, at last, Gaius dared caress her; she did not pull away, but he felt her
tremble at his touch. Afraid to frighten her, he lifted his hands.
"Oh, what shall I do? God help me," she whispered, turning her head so

that her cheek lay against his hand.
"I think," he whispered into her ear, "that it must be your God who has
brought us together."
"God grant you are right."
"I will go to your uncle and get his authority to take you from the Forest
House. Be ready to leave when I come for you," he said. "By the time the next
moon has waned you will be on your way to Londinium with me."
Once again, with a great effort, he did not touch her. He had his reward
when she shyly stood on tiptoe and whispered, "My brother, let us exchange
the kiss of peace."
"Ah, Valeria, it is not the kiss of peace I want from you," he whispered
into her fine-spun hair. "And some day you will know it."
She broke away from him; and with a new wisdom - or guile — he let her
go. Just in time, for in the next moment a step sounded, and the hermit, Father
Petros entered. Senara, he was surprised to see, greeted the hermit without a
blush. Had all women that trick of hiding their feelings on the instant? He
remembered with what swiftness Eilan, too, had been able to conceal her
emotions.
She said, "Rejoice, Father. Gaius Macellius has promised to take me from
the Druid temple and find me a new home, perhaps even in Rome."
Father Petros looked sharply at Gaius; he was not as naive as the girl.
Gaius said, "Senara has been trying to show me, Good Father, why I ought to
become one of your congregation."
"And will you do so?" The priest regarded him suspiciously.
Gaius said quietly, "She has certainly been most persuasive."
Father Petros positively glowed. "I will welcome you to my flock as a
son," he said fulsomely. "You will set a fine example for the others of your
class."

Indeed, thought Gaius, a Roman nobleman with my connections would be
a good catch for this fisher of men. So much for the idea that Christians were
no respecters of persons. But there must be some good in it, to have attracted
a girl like Senara.

Twenty-Nine

Eilan! Eilan! The Emperor is dead!" Senara burst through the door, then
stopped short, trying to assume the dignity with which the High Priestess of
Vernemeton should be approached.
Smiling, Eilan set her spindle on the little table beside her and invited the
girl to sit down. With Caillean gone, Miellyn suffering from one of her
periodic bouts of depression, and Eilidh busy supervising the maidens, she
found herself depending more and more on Senara for company. Dieda had
not spoken to her since Cynric died. At least they had managed to bury him
without arousing comment. Two of the Druids had come by night and taken
the body to the ancient mound on the Hill of the Maidens. Perhaps Cynric's
death had been without honor, but he had a hero's burial.
"The man that brings us fresh eggs heard the news in Deva," said Senara,
her eyes wide with excitement. "He was assassinated a week ago, just before
the Equinox, and the world from Caledonia to Parthia is buzzing like an
overturned hive! Some say that a senator will be the next Emperor, and others
think one of the Legions will elevate their Commander to the purple. More
likely still, several will claim it and there will be civil war!"
"What is happening in Deva?" Eilan asked when she could get a word in.
"The men of the Twentieth are uneasy, but so far they have stayed quiet.
The Commander has ordered a great feast for them, with unlimited wine and
beer. Lady Eilan, what do you think will happen now?"
Eilan sighed. "No doubt the Roman Commander is hoping that they will

all get very drunk, and awaken too sick to make trouble for anyone." If they
were lucky that was how it would go. If the drink sent the legionaries righting
mad instead, there was no knowing what they might do.
Senara giggled and shook her head. "I meant about the Emperor. Do you
think the senators will take power and Rome will go back to being a Republic
again?"
Eilan stared at her, wondering why the child was worrying about events in
Rome. Of course she was half Roman, like Gaius, but she had never seemed
much concerned about that side of her heritage.
"I am a great deal more concerned about what is going to happen in
Britannia," she said grimly. "Cynric was not the only one who would see this
as a golden opportunity to raise the tribes, and then we could have a civil war
here, too!"
My father, for instance, she thought with an inner shudder. What in the
name of the Goddess was she to do when he began making demands on her
with both the power of the Arch-Druid and a father's authority? Once more
she wished desperately that she could discuss this with Caillean.
Senara's eyes widened. "What should we do?"
"There is something you can do," Eilan said thoughtfully. "Take the new
lengths of linen over to the house of the Druids - you are not under vows yet,
and they will not think it odd. Ask, in all innocence, if they have heard the
news, and let me know what they say."
Senara gave her a conspiratorial grin and jumped to her feet. In another
moment she was gone, leaving Eilan to envy her energy.
"What indeed should I do? she wondered then. Perhaps she ought to have
taken Gaius up on his offer, but from the sound of it, he must have problems
of his own by now. The existence of Gawen had been Ardanos's weapon
against her. She had thought that with her grandfather dead, she would be
free, but though her father did not know her secret, Dieda did. How long, she
wondered, before Dieda's hatred gave the new Arch-Druid a power over her
he would not hesitate to use? Unless, of course, he killed her out of hand?

She rested her head in her hands, feeling the beginnings of the headache
that had troubled her increasingly during the past few days. How can I deal
with this? Goddess help me now!
One day, when they all knew why she had done what she had -when all
this land was at peace and there was neither Roman nor Briton - ah, then she
might be forgiven! She shook her head in anguish, seeing nowhere to turn.
And at that moment, pain like a bolt from heaven lanced through her
temple. From what seemed a very great distance, the thought came, But I
shall be long dead by then . . . Then consciousness fled.
When Eilan came to herself she was slumped over her table. She felt
curiously drained and at peace, but with an inner certainty she knew that
something had changed. She had always been aware that some of the herbs in
the sacred drink she used before giving the Oracle could dangerously thin the
blood, and sometimes cause a weakness in the brain. Perhaps that was what
was happening now.
"When it comes to you," Caillean had told her once, "you will know." A
lingering death like Lhiannon's was unusual. Old Latis had said once that
most of the High Priestesses died suddenly. But not, Eilan suspected now,
without warning.
Is this my warning? she wondered. But my work will not be finished.
"It is finished." Awareness came once more, as in trance when the
Goddess spoke to her.
But who should succeed her at her work, declare the Oracles in her stead?
She must not leave matters in confusion as Ardanos had done.
"It does not matter." With the words came calm. The Goddess had spoken.
What was to come was in Her hands, and not Eilan's concern any more. If she
died, it would be a bolt of mercy, not of vengeance, that would strike her
down. Caillean had been correct. The Druids had no right to declare how the
priestesses should live. What mattered was that she try her best to do the
Lady's will.
In autumn the mists rose thick above the marshes of the Summer Country

and wreathed around the Tor. On such mornings, when Caillean made the
climb to the standing stones that crowned it for her morning meditation, it
seemed as if the Tor were an island indeed and she was gazing out over a
rolling grey sea. But as the year drew on toward Samaine, she found herself
thinking quite obsessively of Eilan.
At first, she dismissed these thoughts, knowing it was not good for Eilan
to cling to her; nor for herself to be distracted. But as the days darkened, the
other woman's face appeared in her visions with a frequency she could not
dismiss. Eilan had grave need of her, and it was perilous to ignore such
messages.
At last came a morning when she woke with words ringing in her ears:
"Here where we stand in darkness and under the shadow of death we call on
Thee, O Mother, Sisters and more than Sisters . . ."
And she knew that by oaths which she and Eilan had sworn together, not
only as priestesses of the Sacred Grove, but from life to life before that, she
was bound to go to her.
But it was not until two weeks before Samaine that she was able to
arrange matters so that she could go back to the Forest House. One advantage
of her position in the new temple, she thought, was that it was taken for
granted that whatever she chose to do was well done; her every act was
assumed to be directly inspired by the will of the Goddess, as Eilan's was at
Vernemeton. The drawback, of course, was that she was responsible for
seeing that all her duties would be taken care of while she was gone.
A scant three days would bring her to Vernemeton. She would much rather
have travelled in the simplicity of men's clothing and afoot, but the temple
was not yet ready for that; not this year at least. So she resigned herself to
travelling with her formal litter and all the regalia of a priestess. An escort of
two young priests went with her. They treated her with as much deference as
if they had been her grandsons; which was not particularly surprising,
Caillean thought, for both were young enough.
As they wound through the marshes below the Tor, it began to rain;
Caillean knew that this would slow her progress, and fretted, but there was
nothing to be done. It had been raining off and on since the Equinox, as if the
heavens were weeping for the dead Emperor, and no one, however gifted with

magic, had ever been able to control the British weather.
Two days' journey brought them to Aquae Sulis, and from there a Roman
road led northward to Glevum. To her surprise, it was in considerable
disrepair; the recent rains had left it pitted and the stones all awry. There were
great ruts in the gravel and she was glad they did not have to drive a chariot or
even a farm cart with oxen over such a road.
She had almost fallen asleep when, from the depths of the forest which
edged the road, a number of men came running; dirty and rough-looking, in
tattered and filthy garments. Bacaudae, thought Caillean, a rabble of runaway
slaves and criminals who plagued many parts of the Empire. She had heard of
them, but never encountered any before. The unrest following the death of the
Emperor must have encouraged them.
"Stand aside, fellows," demanded one of her escort. "We bear a great
priestess."
"That ain't nothing to us," said one of the bandits, jeering. "What can she
do? Throw fire at us, maybe? There's a stall at every market with a juggler
who can do that same trick."
Caillean had indeed been regretting that there was no fire within the litter,
but these fellows were clearly more sophisticated than the Irish raiders she
had once frightened that way. She climbed out of the litter and said to the
young priest, "What is the delay?"
He was still sputtering with indignation. "These — these fellows —" he
began. Caillean regarded them calmly; then reached into the little pouch at her
waist. She still - she realized it only afterwards -had not completely taken in
what was happening. For so many years the Romans had kept the roads quiet,
the danger did not seem real.
She took out the little purse tied at her waist and said with distant
courtesy, "Charity is a duty to the gods. Here, fellow," and she handed him a
denarius. He gazed at it for a moment, then guffawed.
"We don't want your charity, lady," he remarked, with an odd, exaggerated
courtesy. "But you can start by giving us that little purse —"

Then, finally, Caillean realized what they dared to want from her.
Amazement gave way to outrage. With suddenly heightened senses, she felt
the energy in the clouds above her and its resonance within her. In that
moment she knew she had some power over the weather after all. She lifted
her hands and saw a blur as the bandit, who had sensed his danger, struck out
with his cudgel. Lightning flared, blanking out vision, and as the thunder
boomed, the sky fell on her head and the world disappeared.
It was many hours before she became conscious again.
In the days that followed that first pain, Eilan tried to accept the will of
the gods. But although she could believe that the Goddess would watch over
Vernemeton and her people, she still feared for her child. She could have
trusted Gawen to Caillean. But Caillean -at her work at the far end of the
country - was not there. Dieda was kin to the boy, but since the death of
Cynric she was the last person to whom Eilan could entrust him. Lia, she
knew, would die for her nursling, but she was only a poor woman with no
place to go. Perhaps Mairi might be willing to take the child, but Gawen
would not be safe even with her if their father should learn his identity.
If she only knew how long she had . . .But no matter how Eilan framed the
question, the forces that had warned of her own death remained so obstinately
silent that if it had not been for the occasional throb of pain in her brow, the
whole thing might have been some morbid product of her own imagination.
All she could do was to spend as much time as she dared with the boy.
Gawen had just gone off to his dinner when Senara came in to light the
lamps. As usual, Huw was a silent presence by the door. For so many years
she had thought him about as much protection as an unhatched chicken, but
he had been lethal enough. Seeing him reminded her of the unhealed pain of
Cynric's death.
"You go too, and get yourself some dinner," she ordered. "Senara will
remain with me until you return."
Senara moved slowly around the room with flint and steel, and the clay
lamps — of Roman make even here — flared into life one by one. It was only
when the girl had stood for several minutes staring at the last of them that
Eilan asked, "What is it, child. Are you unwell?"

"Oh, Eilan!" Senara caught her breath on a sob.
Eilan took a seat on one of the benches. "Come here, child," she said
gently. As Senara approached, she saw the girl's face was wet. "Why, my
love, what is it? You know me well enough to know that whatever it is, you
needn't be afraid to tell me."
Bright drops shone on Senara's cheeks. "You're so good to me, you've
always been so good . . .and I'm not worth it," she said, choking, and fell at
Eilan's feet, crying helplessly.
"Oh, my dear," Eilan soothed, "you mustn't cry; I'm not strong enough for
this. Whatever it is, it can't be that bad." She reached out and gently pulled the
girl to her feet. "Come, sit here beside me."
Senara's weeping diminished a little, but instead of taking a place at
Eilan's side she began to pace the room. At last she said, her voice half
choked with weeping, "I hardly know how to tell you."
And all at once, Eilan knew what ailed the girl. She said "You've come to
tell me you don't wish to be sworn as a priestess in the Forest House."
Senara looked up, the bright drops still making glistening tracks down her
cheeks in the lamplight. "That's part of it," she whispered, "the least part." She
struggled for words. "I'm not worthy to be here at all; I'm not fit; if you knew,
you'd cast me out of here -"
You aren't worthy! Eilan thought. Oh, if you only knew! And then, aloud,
she repeated what Caillean had once said to her. "Perhaps in the sight of the
Goddess, none of us is truly worthy. Try to stop crying, my dear, and tell me
what ails you."
Senara calmed a little, though she still could not meet Eilan's eyes. Eilan
recalled standing like this before Lhiannon, so many years ago. But surely she
wronged the girl; Senara had been spending her time with the Christians, and
they were even more concerned with chastity than the women of Vernemeton.
"I . . . I have met a man . . .and he wants me to go away with him," she
said baldly at last.

Eilan caught Senara in her arms. "Ah, my poor child," she whispered.
"But you are still free to leave us and even to marry if you wish. You were
brought here so young. It was never really intended that you should take vows
among us; but that was so long ago now that most of us had forgotten. Tell me
about it. Where did you meet this man? Who is he? I have no objection if you
want to marry, but I care for you as much as any mother, and I would like to
be sure you are choosing well."
Senara stared at her, hardly understanding that not only was Eilan not
angry, but that the older woman would set her free. "I met him at Father
Petros's hermitage. He is a Roman, a friend of my uncle Valerius —"
She stopped at the sound of a man's voice. "Senara?" answered one of the
newer girls from the other side of the door, "I think you will find her in there."
I will have to speak to that child, thought Eilan. That is no way to
announce visitors, especially a man. Senara, recalling that with Huw gone, it
was her business to protect the High Priestess, took up position between her
and the door. A man came through it and, as he closed it behind him, Eilan
saw all the color drain out of Senara's face and then flood into it again.
"This man . . ." she faltered. "He has come for me . . ."
She moved aside, and in the flickering, deceptive lamplight Eilan saw his
face.
"Gaius . . ." she whispered. Surely this was some nightmare born of a
fevered imagination. She shut her eyes, but when she opened them he was
still there, staring in stupefaction from her to Senara.
Senara took a step towards him. "Gaius!" she cried. "I did not expect you
so soon! Has my uncle given his permission for you to marry me?"
Gaius stared wildly around him. "You foolish girl, what are you doing
here?"
Eilan felt as if the flame of the lamps had ignited in her breast. Slowly she
rose to her feet. "What are you doing here?" She turned to Senara. "Are you
trying to tell me that Gaius Macellius Severus is the man you love?"

"He is. Why, what is wrong?" Senara stared at Eilan in confusion.
Eilan turned on Gaius. "You tell her what is wrong," she commanded.
"Tell her all the truth - if you are still capable of it."
"What truth?" demanded Senara, her voice cracking. "I know that he has a
Roman wife who has refused to honor her marriage vows. Of course he will
divorce her before he marries me . . ."
"Of course he will," Eilan said in a terrible voice. "So, Gaius, she knows
about the little daughters that you will be abandoning. Does she know about
our son as well?"
"Your son?" Stricken, Senara looked back and forth between Gaius and
Eilan. "Tell me this is not true," she said to Gaius, pleading. Her voice caught
in her throat.
"You do not understand," Gaius muttered.
"Understand," Senara repeated brokenly. "I wanted to save you, and you
have nearly ruined me! I understand that I have been a fool!"
As she turned from him, the door swung wide and the giant Huw thrust
into the room, cudgel upraised. But after the death of Cynric he had been
severely chastised, and he did not want to make the same mistake again.
"Lady," he mumbled, "they said a man was here. I heard shouting. What shall
I do?"
Eilan stared at Gaius, thinking that if the danger were not so real he would
have looked ridiculous standing there. But perhaps to be caught in this
situation was the worst punishment a proud Roman could have endured. After
a long moment Eilan lifted her hand to signal Huw to stand still. "Go," she
said fiercely to Gaius. "Go, or he will knock out your brains. To Senara she
added, "Go with him, if you wish - while I can still protect you."
Senara stared at Gaius for a moment and then flung her arms around
Eilan. "Oh, I would not," she cried, "not for the world and everything in it
would I go with him now!"
Eilan, startled, tightened her arms around the girl, then she turned upon

Gaius.
"Get out of here," she said in a low voice. "Get out or I will let Huw do
his worst." Then, losing her control, she cried, "Get out of here, or I will kill
you myself!"
Gaius did not stay to argue. He pushed through the door curtain, and it
flapped shut behind him.
Gaius sat in the Blue Eagle taverna and called out to the proprietor to
bring him a new flagon of sour Gaullish wine. He had been drinking for most
of the past three days, moving from one wine shop to another as he outwore
his welcome. The tavern keepers knew who he was, and his father.
Eventually, they would be paid.
At times Gaius wondered if he had been missed, but he supposed
Macellius must think he had gone home to the villa, and Julia would think he
was still with his father in the town. Mostly, he wondered how much wine he
would have to drink before the pain went away.
He had stayed in Deva at first because of the political situation, and then
because he did not want to confront Licinius and inform him that he was
about to abandon Julia and the useless daughters she had borne him. In tardy
fairness, he supposed that Licinius, doting father though he was, might be
willing to remonstrate with Julia. Sonless himself, he would not want Julia
divorced for the same reason. But if Licinius had persuaded his daughter to
honor her conjugal obligations, Gaius would not be able to marry Senara, and
the thought of her had been a warmth that could keep his fears about the
future at bay.
Not that it mattered any more, he thought, feeling the cool fire of the wine
going down. Senara didn't love him. Julia didn't love him. And Eilan —
especially Eilan - didn't love him at all. He shuddered, remembering the face
of the Fury once more when she had ordered him away.
The door to the taverna was flung open and another bunch of legionaries
crashed in. The Commander must be wondering by now if he had
miscalculated, thought Gaius sourly. The feast he had offered had done no
more than weaken military discipline. If this had been Rome, the Emperor
would have been emptying the treasury to give the men circuses, but a little

bear-baiting was all this godforsaken province could provide. It wasn't nearly
enough to distract them, and the soldiers seemed to be getting wilder with
every day.
But nobody paid any attention to the lone man getting quietly drunk in the
corner, and that was all that mattered to Gaius right now. He sighed, and
reached for the flagon again.
A hand closed around his wrist. He looked up blearily, and blinked to see
Valerius standing there. "By Mercury, man, you've led me a chase!" Valerius
stood back to look at him and made a face. "Thank the gods your father can't
see you now!"
"Does he know - ?" Gaius began.
"Are you crazy? I care about his feelings, even if you do not. One of the
men told me he'd seen you. What possessed you to get drunk now? Never
mind that," he said as Gaius started to protest. "First, my lad, we've got to get
you out of here!"
Gaius was still protesting when Valerius hauled him into the street and
across the town to the bathhouse. But it was not until he had been shoved into
the cold pool that Gaius began to sober up enough to understand what was
said to him.
"Tell me," Valerius said as he came up, sputtering, "is my niece Valeria
still in the Forest House?"
Gaius nodded. "I went there, but she . . . changed her mind, wouldn't come
with me." Events were coming back to him. He had given Valerius an
expurgated version of the situation and gained his permission to marry Senara
- that gave the man some rights - but why was he so upset about it now?
"Listen," said Valerius quickly. "You're not the only one who's been
drinking. Last night I was with some of the legionaries attached to the
Quaestor's office - their names don't matter - who were speculating about the
priestesses at Vernemeton. And one of them said, "It's not as if the women
there were anything like real Vestals; they're just barbarian women like any
others." I protested, but it finally came to a wager that they could carry off
one of the sacred virgins there, and it wouldn't be sacrilege."

Gaius picked up a towel and began to rub himself furiously, trying to
understand.
"Come into the hot room," said Valerius, offering his arm. "You'll sweat
the poisons out faster." When they were settled, gasping as the hot steam hit
them, the secretary continued. "I thought it was the sort of silly bet that
drunken men make - no more than words born of wine, and nothing to worry
about - till this morning, when three of the men turned up missing at muster.
One of my drinking companions of the night before told me that they had left
Deva this morning to try and win the bet."
"The centurion . . ." Gaius's head was pounding, but he was becoming
able to think once more.
". .. has more than enough on his hands without this, and so do the
tribunes. Discipline has gone to hell since the assassination. You and your
father know the British better than anyone. What do you think will happen if
some of our men are discovered raping a native priestess? Boudicca's
rebellion will be nothing to it, and we're in no condition to respond!"
"Yes . . . of course," said Gaius. "I will go. Do you know exactly when
they left? Have you any idea which way they took?"
"None whatever, I'm sorry to say," Valerius replied. "I suppose I could ask
around."
"No, there's not enough time. I'll have to go home for clothes." He rubbed
his eyes.
"I have them," said Valerius. "I had an idea you might need a change."
"My father was right," muttered Gaius, "you do think of everything."
He let the slaves dry and shave him, and forced himself to eat something.
He had been a fool, he thought bitterly, trying to drown his sorrows in wine
when the world was falling to pieces around him. Somewhere during the
process of returning to sanity he had realized that tomorrow must be Samaine.
Half the tribesmen in the West would be converging on Vernemeton for the
festival. It didn't matter what Eilan and Senara thought of him. His blood ran

cold at the thought of their danger if a war started there.
"I'll get your niece to safety," he told Valerius as he prepared to ride out of
Deva. And Eilan, and the boy . . .and if they still hate me they can tell me
about it on the way home. He folded back his cloak to free his arms, and
patted the last thing he had borrowed from Valerius — a sword.
Not all the years since the coming of the Romans - not all the years since
the building of the great Temple of the Sun on the plain, could have been
longer to Eilan than the next two days. The night before the Samaine festival
seemed to last a thousand years. She had sent Senara away hours ago. As the
lights burned down, it seemed to her that the growing shadows were engulfing
her own spirit as well.
This must have been what was meant when the warning had come to her;
death had waited within her heart and spirit like a
seed; it seemed now to expand through her body like an unfolding flower.
Her heart pounded as if it would break through walls of bone. Even when her
child was born she had felt no such pain. But whether the pain was of the
body or of the mind and spirit she could not tell.
When she dozed, her dreams were chaotic; she saw Caillean surrounded
by evil men. Then the priestess raised her arms to heaven, lightning flared,
and when Eilan could see again, her attackers were stretched lifeless on the
ground. But Caillean was lying still as well, and Eilan could not tell if she
lived.
She came to herself, shaking, her cheeks wet with tears. Had that been a
true seeing? Caillean ought to be safe on the holy Tor with her priestesses.
But if she was not, then what hope was there in the world?
Toward morning, Eilan crept into the room where Lia had put Gawen to
bed. Huw, barefoot, padded softly at her heels. For almost the first time since
she had taken up her duties as High Priestess, she found herself resenting the
big man, as if Huw was taking up air which she needed for her own breath.
She remembered a horror story she had heard in the House of Maidens;
how a Priestess of the past had been attacked by her own guard, and given
him over to the priests to be put to death. For the first time, she could

understand how that woman, desperate for a little human warmth, could have
reached out to the only thing human within her reach, and how her appeal
might have been misunderstood. Shuddering, she turned to Huw and told him
to wait at the door.
Ah, gods, she thought, if only Caillean were here - or Lhiannon - or even
my mother - or anyone so that I were not so desperately alone. But there was
no one. In her mind even Senara, for all her weeping and denial, was a foe.
And her father? He was the greatest of her enemies.
She looked long on Gawen's sleeping face. It seemed impossible that the
pounding of her heart should not be loud enough to awaken him. Had this big
boy actually been so small that he could lie in his father's two hands? He had
grown from something smaller than the seed of a flower, engendered in that
moment in the forest when her last defenses had gone down before Gaius's
need. And yet at the time she had been triumphant, certain that this was a
sacred thing.
And Gawen was beautiful. How, out of such sorrow could such beauty be
born? She scanned again the childish features, and the long body with hands
and feet just a bit too big, discerning within them the promise of the man he
could become. She could not see that he resembled Gaius all that much. Once,
that had disappointed her, but at least now she would not have to suppress a
flicker of hatred whenever she glimpsed his father in his eyes.
But he was Gaius's son; and because of him, she had been willing to let
Gaius marry the daughter of a Roman official. Only now, it seemed, he was
going to divorce Julia and renounce all his promises for the sake of Senara,
who might as well have been her own little sister. Senara, who was younger,
and apparently to Gaius, more beautiful.
At Eilan's waist hung the curved dagger she had been given when she
became a priestess. She fingered it for a moment. So often, at the rites, she
had used it to draw the ritual drop of blood for the cauldron of prophecy.
There, at the wrist where she could see the pounding of the blood, one stroke,
hard and deep, would end all her troubles, at least for this lifetime. Why
should she wait for the fate that the Goddess had promised her? But if she
took her life, what would become of Gawen?
Deliberately Eilan took the sickle and returned it to the small sheath at her

waist. In the faltering light of the lamp her face must have shown something
she had not intended, for Huw rushed forward.
"Lady?"
"We will go back to my rooms now, and then you must bring Senara to
me."
It was not long before he returned with the girl in tow. Senara's dress was
wrinkled; her eyes were hot and her cheeks smeared as if she had been crying.
She saw Eilan and cried out, "Lady, forgive me; not for the world —"
"Be quiet," Eilan said. "I haven't the strength for any more of this. I have
had a warning of death; it is a gift of the Goddess that the High Priestess shall
know her time." She drew breath, and Senara, seeing the little dagger loose in
its sheath at her waist, went white beneath her tears.
"That cannot be true," she said desperately. "It is written in the holy books
that no man knows what a day may bring forth —"
"Silence," Eilan said tiredly. "There is something very important that I
must say to you. If I am wrong, it will not matter whether you believe me, but
if I am right, there is something I must ask."
"Of me? Anything," Senara said submissively.
Eilan drew a long breath. "You heard me say that Gaius and I had a son.
Gawen is that child. I want you to marry Gaius and take his son away with
you. Promise me" - her voice, which had been perfectly steady when she
spoke of her own death, broke - "promise me only that you will be good to
him."
"Oh no," Senara cried out. "I would not now marry Gaius Severus if he
were the only man on the face of the earth."
"You promised to do as I asked," Eilan said quietly. "Is this how you keep
your word?"
Senara looked up, and again her eyes spilled over. She said, "I want only
to do what is right. If you think -" She stopped, breathing hard. "If God has

chosen to take you, I suppose it is His business, but you must not lay hands on
your own life, Eilan!"
Eilan drew all her dignity about her like a cloak as she said, "It does not
really matter to me whether you believe it or not. But if you will not help me,
Senara, then you may go."
Senara trembled. "I will not leave you alone in this state."
"Then for Gaius's sake, take care of his boy."
"It is for the boy's sake I tell you that you must live," Senara entreated.
"You have a child, however that came about, and your life is not your own.
Gawen is a beautiful boy. You must live to see him grown. And Gaius —"
"Ah, don't speak of him, I beg you —"
"My Lady," said Senara, shaking, "I tell you, Gaius still cares for you and
for his son."
"He has forgotten me."
"I am sure he has not," Senara insisted. "Let me remind him of what is due
to the mother of his son. Let me speak to him of his duty as a father, and as a
Roman. I am sure that would reach his better nature even if nothing else could
do so."
Was it possible? Could Senara actually do that? And would she?
"I believe the warning that the Goddess sent me," she said finally, "but if I
live through Samaine, you may try. But before you do so, you must get
Gawen to safety. I am afraid of what may happen at the festival. Tomorrow no, tonight," she corrected herself, for it was nearly dawn, "leave the Forest
House. Take Gawen to your Father Petros in the forest. No one will think to
look for you there!"

Thirty

When Caillean recovered her senses, she knew that she must have been
unconscious for some time, for her gown was soaked through. What had
wakened her was the sound of a farm cart jolting over the ruts and pits of the
road. In the cart were four or five men well armed with cudgels, and a couple
of hefty guards walked a few paces ahead with torches. Had they frightened
her attackers away? Something must have, for she had not been violated after
her assailant struck her down.
Caillean managed to pull herself upright, though the effort made her feel
as if the top of her head would fall off. Sprawled around her she could see
bodies, and a stink of burnt flesh reached her even through the rain.
One of the men with the torches saw her and quavered, "Be you a ghost,
lady? Don't hurt us . . ."
"I give you my word I am no ghost," Caillean said as steadily as she
could, "but a priestess from the temple in the Summer Country, left here after
an attack by bandits."
Now she could see her litter, turned on its side, the two young priests
lying beside it, their throats cut, their golden torques plundered, staring up
emptily at the sky. Caillean regarded them with dismay.
And then she looked at the blackened corpses around her and realized that
where she had been powerless the gods at least had not. She would rather
have saved the young men, but at least they had been avenged.

"Where were you a-going, lady?" asked the farmer from his perch in the
driver's seat of the cart.
She controlled her voice with an effort, turning away from the dead men.
"To the Forest House near Deva."
"Ah, that explains it then; I understand there's still one of the Legions left
there, and the roads are patrolled. These days, no one puts his nose outside his
own door around here without a couple of bodyguards. It will be a good thing
when we have a new Emperor, and can get some protection again."
Caillean blinked, for the man spoke the British tongue like a native. It was
a measure of the degree to which Britain had become Roman that the native
folk should regret the lack of an Emperor.
"I see they killed your bodyguard, lady," said the man driving the cart.
"Did you have slaves to carry your litter? You don't any more - no doubt
they've taken to their heels." He drew up in the road beside her and stopped,
staring at the bodies of the Bacaudae. He looked at her again and made an
ancient sign of reverence.
"My Lady — I see that the gods watch over you. We're bound the other
way, but we'll take you to the next village, where you can get litter bearers
and guards."
He helped her up into the cart and wrapped her in a dry blanket. Some of
his men lifted the bodies of the young priests into the wagon. Caillean,
huddled in her cloak and the farmer's rough blanket, reflected miserably that
from now on she would be getting the best of whatever these folk could offer
her, but no power on earth could bring her to the Forest House before
Samaine.
Gaius was surprised to find the road south from Deva crowded with other
travelers. It took him a moment to remember that they must be going down to
the festival. But the glances he got as he rode by were not friendly, and after a
time he felt it wiser to turn off the road and take a path through the hills so
that he could come at the Forest House from the direction of Father Petros's
hermitage.
A cold wind was rattling the bare branches like bones, though for the

moment it had ceased to rain. Samaine was the feast of the dead; the Romans
considered it a day of ill omen. Well, he thought, it was certainly that for him.
But he did not consider turning back. He had fallen into a fatalistic mood he
remembered from his days with the Legions; the grim acceptance men find
sometimes before battle, when survival is less important than honor. He was
not sure he had any left, after the last few days, but he would redeem what he
could, no matter what it cost.
As he rode, the beauty in the autumn woods moved him despite, or
perhaps because of his grim mood. Gaius realized then that in the past year or
so he had learned to love this land. Whoever triumphed in the current conflict,
he would not go back to Rome.
Hard as he tried to fulfill Macellius's ambitions, he had never completely
belonged in his father's world, yet he was far too Roman to feel anything but
an impostor among the tribes. But the trees did not despise him as a barbarian
or the stones hate him as a conqueror. In the peace of the forest, Gaius was at
home.
He saw smoke rising from Father Petros's hut, and thought for a moment
of going in. But the place made him remember Senara. Gaius did not think he
could bear that memory, and he was certain he would not be able to keep his
temper if the priest came out with any of his holy platitudes.
He supposed that his errant legionaries would be hiding somewhere until
nightfall. He tethered his mount loosely enough so that it could pull free if he
did not return soon and began to make his way carefully around the building,
keeping to the woods that edged the cleared land.
Dusk was falling before he saw movement in the bushes ahead of him.
Cautious as a cat, he moved forward. Two soldiers were crouched in the lee of
some hazels. They had been dicing to pass the time, and now they were
arguing about whether or not to light a fire.
"Flavius Macro!" Gaius snapped in his best tone of command.
Automatically, the man came to attention, then looked wildly around him.
"Who is it —" the second soldier had his hand on his sword. Gaius trod
loudly on a branch to warn him and moved into the last of the light.

"It's, why it's Gaius Macellius," said Macro. "Sir, what are you doing
here?"
"I should think it is rather my place to ask that of you," said Gaius,
releasing his breath. "They know in Deva that you are gone. What do you
think will happen if they find out you came here?"
The man's face turned gray-white. "You wouldn't tell them, would you,
sir?"
Gaius pretended to hesitate long enough for the men to shudder, then
shrugged. "Well, I'm not your officer. If you head back now you shouldn't get
into too much trouble, not with all that's going on in the town."
"Sir, we can't do that," said the other man. "Longus is still in there."
Gaius felt his heart sink. "You can't help him by staying here," he said
evenly. "Go on, that's an order. I'll do what I can for your friend."
His tension eased a little as he heard them crashing off through the trees,
but even one legionary was too many if found where he had no business to be.
Moving as if he were leading a patrol back on the border, Gaius slipped
across the open space to the wall. There should be a back gate somewhere the wall was intended more as a symbol of separation than an actual defense.
His hand touched the latch, and then he was easing into the open space where
he had seen his son playing ball. Senara had chattered a great deal about her
life here. The big building in front of him must be the House of Maidens.
There was a dark patch behind the kitchen that looked like a good place to
watch from. He crept towards it.
Someone else had thought so too. As he knelt, he touched bare skin.
Someone yelped and there was a brief struggle before Gaius got the fellow
pinned with a hand over his mouth.
"Longus?" he whispered. His captive nodded vigorously. "Your wager is
off. Your companions have gone home, and if you know what's good for you
you'll follow them." Longus sighed, then nodded again, and Gaius let him go.
But as the man crossed the yard, a door opened and lamplight spilled across
the ground. Longus froze like a trapped hare. "Run, you fool!" Gaius hissed

from the shadows.
Longus scrambled over the gate, but suddenly the place was alive with
men in white robes. Druid priests! thought Gaius. What were they doing here?
His hiding place would be revealed in a moment, for they were bringing
torches. He began to edge around the building. Somebody swore in British
behind him and he whirled, instinctively drawing his sword.
The man screamed as the blade went in and the others came pelting
towards him. Gaius fought as well as he could, and he supposed he must have
done some damage, from the brutality with which they clubbed and kicked
him after superior numbers had finally brought him down.
"Well, Daughter, are you ready for the festival?" Bendeigid, arrayed in the
ceremonial bull-hide cloak and the golden ornaments of the Arch-Druid over
his white woolen gown, looked magnificent, but Eilan's heart sank as she
returned his salutation.
"I am ready," she said quietly. The maidens had come as they did before
every festival to prepare her. For the last time, her heart cried as they bathed
her and set the sacred wreath of vervain on her brow. At least she would go
the Goddess cleansed and sanctified.
For a moment he leaned on his staff, looking at her. Then he gestured to
the priests and her women to leave them.
"Listen, child, there is no longer any need to dissemble. They have told
me how Ardanos used to come to you, and the tricks he used to bind your
will. I am sorry I accused you of betraying us before."
Eilan kept her gaze lowered, afraid he would see the anger in her eyes.
For thirteen years she had been High Priestess, mistress of the Forest House,
the most respected woman in the land. Why was he talking as if she were still
a child? But this was the loving father who had once said he would rather see
her drowned than a Roman's bride. She could not afford to antagonize him; in
the confusion, it had been afternoon before Senara and Lia had been able to
leave the Forest House with Gawen. She had to buy time for them to get well
away.
In the same neutral tone, she asked, "What do you want of me?"

"The Romans are tearing each other to pieces." He grinned wolfishly.
"There will never be a better time for us to rise against them. This is the
season of slaughter, when the doors open between the worlds. Let us call on
Cathubodva, let us raise the spirits of our dead against them. Raise the tribes
against Rome, Daughter, summon them to war!"
Eilan repressed a shiver. Much as she had resented Ardanos, her
grandfather had been a subtle man, never so blinded by his own dreams that
he could not be talked round if he saw something else that would serve. Her
father was far more dangerous, because he would sacrifice all else to his
inflexible ideals. Yet all she had to do to stay safe was to agree with him.
Then she felt the familiar throbbing in her temple, and remembered that
whatever she did would not be for long.
"Father," she began, "Ardanos interpreted my answers as it pleased him,
and I suppose that you will do the same, but you do not understand about the
sacred trance and how the Goddess comes."
She heard a tumult outside and realized that he was no longer listening.
The door crashed open, and priests with tangled hair and blood on their robes
pushed through the crowd, dragging something that had been a man.
"What is this?" Eilan put all the hauteur a dozen years had taught her into
her tone and the babble stilled.
"An intruder, Lady," said one of the priests. "We found him outside the
House of Maidens. There was another man, but he got away."
"He killed Dinan!"
"He must have been after one of the priestesses!"
"But which one?"
This time it was the Arch-Druid who brought silence by striking the floor
with his staff. "Who are you, fellow, and what were you doing here?"
Eilan shut her eyes, hoping no one would notice that the man's ripped
tunic was made from good Roman cloth. Even grimed with blood and dust

she knew Gaius, but perhaps no one else would, if she made no sign. Did he
come here for Senara, she wondered, or for his son?
"Don't you recognize him, Lord Druid?" Dieda pushed her way forward.
Eilan winced at the edge in her laughter. "Well, perhaps he is not so handsome
now. Your men have netted a fine pig for our feasting. If you look, you will
see the scar of the boar pit on his shoulder there."
Bendeigid should have been your father, thought Eilan hysterically, and
Ardanos mine! They pulled the prisoner's head up and for a moment he met
her appalled gaze, then the sense left his eyes once more.
"You!" Bendeigid's voice held mingled astonishment and fury. "Have you
not done enough damage to me and mine that you should trouble us now?"
Suddenly his expression changed. "Well, you shall do so no longer. Dieda,
show my men where they can bathe him and tend his wounds, but by no
means unbind him. Garic and Vedras" - he pointed to the two most senior
Druids — "we must talk. The rest of you, leave us alone!"
The priests dragged Gaius away and the room emptied. Eilan sat back in
her chair, wondering whether the pain in her belly was an echo of the
throbbing in her head, or fear.
"I see that you know the man," said Vedras, the elder of the two Druids
who had remained, "Who is he?"
"His name is Gaius Macellius Severus the younger," snarled Bendeigid.
"The Prefect's son!" exclaimed Garic. "Do you think he came for one of
the priestesses as they say?"
"It does not matter why he came," said Vedras. "We must get him out of
here. The Red-cloaks would deny our right to punish
even an ordinary legionary. The gods alone know what they will do to us
for laying hands on a chieftain's son!"
"Indeed," Bendeigid smiled craftily. "But I do not believe his own people
know where he has gone. And no one here knows his name or even that he is
a Roman but Dieda and ourselves."

"Then you mean to kill him secretly?"
"Not secretly." Bendeigid's gaze burned like a flame. "Do not you
understand? For such a man as this to deliver himself into our hands is a sign
from the gods. Let his death at least serve some purpose. We will never find a
more noble offering!"
He turned to Garic. "Go tell the men who are guarding the prisoner to
dress him in the finest robe you can find."
Eilan felt a chill lift the hair on her arms. An image of the Year-King
walking through the Beltane fair came to her, garlanded and clad in an
embroidered tunic.
"And if the Romans learn of it?" asked Vedras.
"It is true, their wrath will be terrible," said the Arch-Druid triumphantly.
"So terrible that even those who call for peace now will have no choice but to
follow us to war!"
For a long moment the other Druid looked at him. Then he nodded, and
followed Garic out the door.
"Did Gaius come with your knowledge, Eilan?" Bendeigid asked when
they were alone. "Have you been seeing this monster all along?"
"I have not," she whispered, "by the Goddess I swear it!"
"I suppose it does not matter whether I believe you," the Arch-Druid
muttered. "All truth will be tested at the Samaine fire."
"Behold, the holy priestess comes, the sacred herbs are in her crown" the
priests were singing, but tonight there were more verses to their hymn, with
different words.

"War! War! Let British woods A warrior bear for every
tree;

As ravening wolves attack the sheep So shall we make
the Romans flee!"
Gaius groaned, but the prick of a spear kept him moving. If only that bitch
Dieda had not identified him! Macellius would grieve when he heard of the
death of his son; but he would be shamed when the manner of it was known.
How could he have blundered so badly, provoking the very incident he had
hoped to prevent? He had not even succeeded in saving those he loved. The
only ray of hope in all this was that he had not seen Senara anywhere, or the
boy.
The road up the Hill of the Maidens had never seemed so steep before. He
much preferred the last time he had come up here, he thought grimly, with a
weapon in his hand and a detachment of cavalry behind him! The
embroidered robe rasped his abrasions, and the sacred garland pricked his
brow. They had cleaned him up and given him a drink that cleared his head,
but Gaius had no illusions about what was in store for him.
From the top of the hill he could see the glow of a great bonfire.
Memories of a time before he had entered his father's world were returning
with frightening clarity. The Silures had sacrificed one of their own princes in
those last days before the Romans crushed them utterly. The man had been
one of his uncles, with the royal dragons tattooed on his arms. Gaius's mother
had tried to hide her half-Roman child, but he had seen them take the YearKing away. He had been smiling, believing his death would help his people.
And what is it, he wondered then, that I will be dying for?
Then they were on the hilltop. A ring of priests surrounded them; beyond,
Gaius saw a sea of faces, grim or gleeful as they listened to the Druids' song.
Was Eilan glad or sorry to see him here? He wished he could see her face
behind the veil.
Eilan stood beside her father with Dieda and two other priestesses behind
her. For the first time he wondered if she also was a prisoner. She had rejected
him. It seemed to him that he should be glad of her downfall, but even his
own danger had not filled him with such fear as the thought of hers.
"Destroy them all! Avenge our shame! Now let the slaughter be begun! In

ranks the Roman troops shall fall As by the scythe the corn is mown!"
The singing ended and the drums grew silent, but a murmur swept through
the people and Gaius knew this was only a pause in the storm.
"Children of Don!" the Arch-Druid cried. "It is Samaine Eve! This is a
time of changes! The new year is beginning, and a new era for this land! Let
the changing of the seasons sweep away the Romans who have blighted
Britannia! Tonight we shall gladden the gods of war with a sacrifice. But we
must purge our ranks of all offenders. Traitor," he turned to Gaius, "we can
make your death hard or easy. Tell us what you came to Vernemeton to do!"
"Kill me, if you will, but ask no foolish questions!" Gaius said hoarsely. "I
will say only that I meant no harm to any here." Perhaps he had not lived
well, but at least he could die with dignity.
"You were in the sacred precinct, where no men but the Druids may come.
Have you seduced one of our maidens? Which of them did you come to carry
away?"
Gaius shook his head and gasped as a spearpoint pressed into his side.
There was a sensation of warmth and he felt blood trickling down.
"Was it Rhian, Tanais, Bethoc?" the litany went on. For each name they
cut him again. Once he tried to drive himself upon the spearpoint, but his
captors knew their business and held him still. Loss of blood and the illtreatment he had already endured were making him dizzy. Soon, he thought, I
will pass out and it will not matter what they do to me.
"Senara . . ."
At the name, Gaius jerked involuntarily. In the next moment he tried to
conceal his reaction, but no one was watching him. Eilan had stepped forward
and thrown back her veil.
"Stop!" she said clearly. "I can tell you who the Roman came for. It was
I!"
What is she saying? Gaius stared at her in horror. Then he understood that
she must be trying to protect Senara, and perhaps the child. In that moment

she had an unearthly beauty. In comparison, Senara's unformed prettiness was
a star paled by the full moon's majesty. As had happened sometimes in the
moment before battle, Gaius saw his own heart with a terrible clarity. He
cared about Senara, but his desire for her had not been love. In the younger
woman he had only been trying to recover Eilan as she had been when he first
knew her, the maiden that time and his own mistakes had put forever beyond
his grasp.
In the shocked silence, the only sound was the crackling of the fire. For a
moment some powerful emotion contorted the Arch-Druid's features, then he
mastered it and turned from Eilan to Gaius.
"For your sake and hers, on your honor I ask you to tell me if this is true."
True . . .For a moment the word had no meaning. Torn between Rome and
Britannia, he did not even know who he was himself. How could he know
whom he loved? Slowly Gaius straightened and met Eilan's clear gaze. Her
eyes seemed to be asking him a question. At that, all the tension went out of
him in a long sigh. "It is true," he said softly. "I have always loved Eilan."
For a moment Eilan closed her eyes, dizzied by a tide of joy. Gaius had
understood her, but he had not spoken only for the sake of Senara. She had
seen such a look - such an expression of wonder — on his face once only,
when he held her in his arms on that Beltane so long ago.
"Have you betrayed us all along then?" Bendeigid hissed, bending close to
her ear. "Were you lying when you swore to me that he had not touched you?
Or did it begin later, when you were a sworn virgin of the temple? Has he
been teaching you Roman lies along with his love-talk, and treason with his
caresses? Did you lie with him in the sacred precincts, or in the Sacred
Grove?"
She could feel her father's fury, but she seemed to see him through a wall
of Roman glass. In the end it had all become so simple. She was living under
sentence of death already, and had faced its terrors. Now that the time was
come, she was not afraid at all.
"I lay with the Sacred King once only," she said calmly, "as was my right,
at the Beltane fires . . ."

"What do you mean?" Miellyn exclaimed behind her. "It was Dieda who
had to be sent away - it was Dieda who had a child!"
"It was not!" The shocked echo of speculation ceased as Dieda hurried to
the Arch-Druid's side. "They made me agree to the deception. I took her place
while she went away to have the baby, and when she returned, they exiled me!
She has queened it over the Forest House ever since as if she were as chaste
as the moon, but it was all a lie!"
"But I always served the Goddess, not the Romans!" Eilan cried, her
composure cracking at the threat to her child. She saw fury replacing the
questions in Bendeigid's eyes as he turned on her. The people crowed closer,
trying to hear; voices rose in query or condemnation. Rumors of trouble
among the Romans had made them like tinder that any spark could set aflame.
If she appealed to them, would she set in motion the very catastrophe she had
suffered so to avoid?
"Why should I believe you, bitch?" snarled her father. "Your whole life
has been a lie!"
He lifted his hand to strike her. A bulky form burst through the line of
Druids; Huw, with his cudgel upraised to defend her one last time. But more
priests were running between them. Before Huw could reach Bendeigid,
bronze blades flared in the firelight, came away a deeper crimson and stabbed
once more. Again the Druids struck, and again, and Huw, still struggling
towards her, fell without a cry.
Huw would have attacked the Arch-Druid himself, if he had threatened me
. . .Eilan thought numbly, and in the end, he had.
"Take him away," Bendeigid was breathing hard. "He was a fool."
Abruptly he turned, and grasped Eilan by the arm. "If you had been true, I
would have asked you to invoke the Goddess to bless us. But instead, you
shall be Her sacrifice!"
Why should that frighten me? My life has been one long offering, thought
Eilan as her father dragged her across the circle to stand at Gaius's side. There
was a mutter from the people at that. Some of those who had heard the
accusations wanted her blood immediately, others thought it sacrilege to lay
hands on the High Priestess, whatever her crime.

"Eilan, can you forgive me?" Gaius said in a low voice. "I was never
worthy of your love. You wanted me to be your Sacred King, but I am only an
ordinary man . . ."
She turned to look at him, and found a nobility in his bruised face that had
never been there before. She wished that she could take him in her arms, but
the priests were holding her and she realized that he did not need it; she no
longer saw the lost child that before had always waited in his eyes. He met
her gaze without flinching, at peace with himself at last.
"I see a god in you," Eilan answered fiercely. "I see a spirit that will never
die. We did what was required of us, and if we did not do as well as we would
have wished, the Lady's purpose was accomplished all the same. Surely it will
be given to us to walk together in the Summerland for a time before we come
back again."
"You have called him a Sacred King," said Bendeigid hoarsely, "and as
such he shall die."
Slowly she saw the stern acceptance that had upheld Gaius deepen to a
kind of wonder. He continued to gaze at her as they slipped the noose around
his neck and began to tighten it. But before the sword went in beneath his
ribs, his eyes had lost focus, fixed for ever on something beyond the world.
The blood was still pumping from his breast when they carried him to the fire.
"Tell me, Priestess, what omens do you read in this sacrifice?" Eilan
turned her gaze from the flames to her father, and something in her face made
him take a step backwards, though she had not moved.
"I see royal blood that sanctifies the ground," she said in a still voice. "In
this man the seed of Rome and Britannia was mingled, and you have bound it
for ever to the land by giving him to the sacred fire."
Eilan took a deep breath. Her head was pounding so that she could hardly
see, but it no longer mattered. The final thing she had desired to see in this
world was the glory in Gaius's eyes. There was a roaring in her ears. She felt
the surge of trance taking her though she had not tasted the sacred herbs, and
heard a voice that was not her own ring out.

"Hear me, ye men of the Cornovii and the Ordovices and all you others of
the tribes, for this is the last time a priestess shall prophesy from this sacred
hill. Hide your swords, oh warriors, and put away your spears, for not until
the ninth generation has been born and died shall the Roman Eagles depart.
And when they have flown, those who bear your blood and theirs together
shall be left to defend the land!"
"You are lying! You must be lying!" Bendeigid's voice cracked. "You
betrayed your oaths!"
Eilan felt herself falling back into her body; pain stabbed her temple, but
she shook her head. "I did not, for Gaius was the Year-King. You yourself
have made it so, and thus my love for him was no sin!"
Bendeigid swayed, his face contorting with the agony of a man who sees
all his certainties crumbling. "If what you say is truth," he cried, "let the
Goddess show us a sign before I give you living to the fire!"
Even as he spoke, it seemed to Eilan that a great thunder crashed through
her head; startled by the weight of it, she felt herself slip to her knees. Her
father reached out, but she was sliding down a long tunnel away from him.
Her heartbeat was a fading drum; then it ceased suddenly, and she was free.
So the Goddess struck me down after all, Eilan thought with an odd
clarity. But it was Her mercy, not Her wrath!
Far below she could see people bending over her motionless body. This
was the ending that had awaited her since she had lain in Gaius's arms, but
she had delayed it long enough to build a bridge between her people and his.
Two of the Druids were holding her father upright; he was still shouting, but
the people were turning from him with frightened faces, beginning to stream
away down the hill.
She saw the priests lifting the flesh she had abandoned and carrying it to
the pyre on which Gaius was already burning. Then she turned away from
that lesser light to the radiance that was opening before her, brighter than the
fire, more lovely than the moon.

Epilogue
CAILLEAN SPEAKS

When I arrived at the Forest House the following evening, all the Samaine
fires had burned out and only ashes remained. It took some time to find
anyone who could give me a coherent account of what had happened. Miellyn
had not been seen; some people thought she had died trying to shield Eilan.
Eilidh had been killed in the fighting that followed the sacrifice. Dieda was
dead also; she lay in the sanctuary, and it was clear that she had fallen by her
own hand.
There was certainly no sense to be got from Bendeigid and, except for
those Druids who had stayed to tend him, the priesthood had scattered. So,
thank the gods, had the warriors who had gathered for the festival. But I
found that the folk who remained were eager to obey me, for I was the closest
thing they had to a High Priestess now.
I moved through the tumult, giving orders with a calm that astonished me,
for I dared not give way to a grief that might prove measureless. Yet there had
to be some meaning to all this; a life -or a death — must not be wasted.
The following day I was awakened by the news that a party of Romans
had requested an interview with the High Priestess. I went out and saw
Macellius Severus with his secretary behind him and another man whom they
said was the father of Gaius's Roman wife, sitting their horses under a
weeping autumn sky. I was impressed by the fact that he had come here
without a detachment of soldiers to back him. But then his son had been brave

enough too, at the end.
It was hard to face Macellius, knowing the answer to the question he did
not quite dare to ask me, and realizing that I could never tell him how his boy
had died. By now the most amazing rumors were flying about the
countryside. Gaius had died as a
British Year-King, and though some thought he was a Roman, the only
people who knew his name had a powerful reason for keeping silence.
Disorganized the Romans might be, but they still had the force to drown
the countryside in blood if they found proof that a Roman officer had been
sacrificed on that hill. But of course there was no body, only a pile of ashes
mingled with the embers of the Samaine fire.
As they were leaving, Macellius turned to me, and I saw that hope was not
quite dead in his eyes. "There was a boy living in the Forest House," he said.
"They called him Gawen. I believe he is . . . my grandson. Can you tell me
where he is now?"
This time, at least, I could answer truthfully that I did not know, for
Gawen had not been seen since Samaine Eve, the day that his nurse and
Senara had also disappeared.
For it was not until the third day afterward that Senara came creeping
back, her young face haggard with tears, followed by a lanky lad who looked
about him with troubled eyes.
"She died for my sake," Senara sobbed when we told her what had
happened to Eilan. "She condemned herself to save me - and her child."
My throat was aching, but I forced myself to speak calmly. "Then her
sacrifice must not be wasted. Will you take the vows and serve the Goddess in
her place, now that she is gone?"
"I cannot, I cannot," wailed Senara. "It would be a sin, for I am a
Nazarene. Father Petros is moving into Deva. He will let me stay in his
hermitage, and I will spend the rest of my days in prayer!"
I blinked, for suddenly it seemed to me that I could see that small house in

the forest surrounded by many others. In time, I thought, more female hermits
would gather around her. And what I saw then has indeed come to pass, for
this was one of the first of the pious sisterhoods that now serve the people as
the Forest House did then; but that was many years in the future. Did Eilan
foresee it? Either way, the younger woman had played her part. Senara might
refuse to become High Priestess of Vernemeton, but in a sense she was still
Eilan's heir.
"Will you take Gawen to his grandfather?" Senara asked. "I cannot keep
him with me once I have taken Christian vows."
Which one? I wondered wryly, and then I realized that I was unwilling to
surrender the boy to either of those old men, both still prisoned by the hatred
of a dying past.
"Gawen . . ." I looked at him, and saw a creature neither Roman nor
Briton, neither boy nor man, standing on the threshold of possibility. In the
end, Eilan had died so that this child might live in a new world. "I am going
back to the Summer Country, where the mists roll around the vale that they
call Afallon. Will you come with me?"
"Is that the Summerland?" he asked. "They tell me my mother has gone
there."
"Not quite." My eyes filled. "But close to it, some would say."
He looked around him and shivered, and I thought how hard it must be for
him, not yet really knowing what he had lost. Almost as hard as it was for me,
who understood all too well.
Then he looked up at me, and I saw a spirit that resembled neither
grandfather, nor his parents either, looking out of his eyes.
"Very well. I will come with you to Afallon."
Here at the heart of the Summer Country I sometimes wonder why of all
who played such a part in this story, I alone have been spared. I know that I
am only beginning to see the great design in all of this. Can it be that Eilan's
child, who represents two great strains which have gone into the making of
our people, will be the founder of a line from which their savior shall one day

spring?
I have not been told. I have not even the counsel of the Merlin, although
Eilan said once that he had spoken to her of her destiny. There must be some
pattern. I know only that it is from the Eagle and the Dragon, not the Raven of
vengeance, that a defender shall come for our land, and perhaps the Merlin
will take flesh to aid that hero in his day . . .
Here in the Summer Country, where the ringstones shadow the mighty Tor
and the promise of power remains, I await the outcome of the tale.

