DED ICAT ION

FOR	LIZ	DARHANSOFF



CONTENTS

COVER
T ITLE	PAGE
DED ICAT ION
AUTHORS ’	NOTE

PART	ONE

PART	TWO

PART	THREE

PART	FOUR

PART	FIVE

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CAST	OF	CHARACTERS
GLOSSARY
ABOUT	THE	AUTHORS
ALSO	BY	NEAL	STEPHENSON
ALSO	BY	N ICOLE	GALLAND
COPYR IGHT
ABOUT	THE	PUBL ISHER



AUTHORS ’	NOTE

To	the	reader:

For	your	convenience	we	have	included	a	list	of	characters	as	well	as	a	glossary	of
acronyms	and	 terms	 that	 are	unique	 to	 the	D.O.D.O.	world.	Because	 the	 lists
contain	many	spoilers,	we	have	placed	them	at	the	back	of	the	book.

N.	S.	and	N.	G.



PART
ONE



Diachronicle	
(PREAMBLE,	JULY	1851 )

MY	NAME	IS	MELISANDE	STOKES	and	this	is	my	story.	I	am	writing	in	July	1851
(Common	 Era,	 or—let’s	 face	 it—Anno	Domini)	 in	 the	 guest	 chamber	 of	 a
middle-class	home	in	Kensington,	London,	England.	But	I	am	not	a	native	of
this	place	or	time.	In	fact,	I	am	quite	fucking	desperate	to	get	out	of	here.

But	 you	 already	 knew	 that.	 Because	when	 I’m	 done	writing	 this	 thing—
which,	for	reasons	that	will	soon	become	clear,	I’m	calling	Diachronicle—I	am
going	 to	 take	 it	 to	 the	 very	 discreet	 private	 offices	 of	 the	 Fugger	 Bank,
Threadneedle	Street,	lock	it	up	in	a	safe	deposit	box,	and	hand	it	over	to	the
most	powerful	banker	in	London,	who	is	going	to	seal	it	in	a	vault,	not	to	be
opened	 for	more	 than	 one	 hundred	 and	 sixty	 years.	The	 Fuggers,	 above	 all
people	in	this	world,	understand	the	dangers	of	Diachronic	Shear.	They	know
that	 to	 open	 the	 box	 and	 read	 the	 document	 sooner	would	 be	 to	 trigger	 a
catastrophe	that	would	wipe	London’s	financial	district	off	the	map	and	leave	a
smoking	crater	in	its	place.

Actually,	it	would	be	much	worse	than	a	smoking	crater	.	.	.	but	a	smoking
crater	is	how	history	would	describe	it,	once	the	surviving	witnesses	had	been
sent	off	to	the	madhouse.

I’m	writing	with	a	steel-nibbed	dip	pen,	model	number	137B,	from	Hughes
&	 Sons	 Ltd.	 of	 Birmingham.	 I	 requested	 the	 Extra	 Fine	Tip,	 partly	 to	 save
money	on	paper,	 and	partly	 so	 that	 I	 could	 jab	my	 thumb	with	 it	 and	draw
blood.	 The	 brown	 smear	 across	 the	 top	 of	 this	 page	 can	 be	 tested	 in	 any
twenty-first-century	DNA	 lab.	Compare	 the	 results	 to	what	 is	on	 file	 in	my
personnel	 record	 at	DODO	HQ	and	you	will	 know	 that	 I	 am	 a	woman	of
your	era,	writing	in	the	middle	of	the	nineteenth	century.

I	intend	to	write	everything	that	explains	how	I	came	to	be	here,	no	matter
how	 far-fetched	 or	 hallucinatory	 it	 may	 sound.	 To	 quote	 Peter	 Gabriel,	 a
singer/songwriter	who	will	be	born	ninety-nine	years	from	now:	This	will	be
my	testimony.



I	 DO	 ATTEST	 that	 I	 am	 here	 against	 my	 will,	 having	 been	 Sent	 here	 from
September	 8,	 1850,	 and	 from	 the	 city	 of	 San	 Francisco,	California	 (the	 day
before	California	was	granted	statehood).

I	do	attest	that	I	belong	in	Boston,	Massachusetts,	in	the	first	quarter	of	the
twenty-first	 century.	 There,	 and	 then,	 I	 am	 part	 of	 the	 Department	 of
Diachronic	Operations:	a	black-budget	arm	of	 the	United	States	government
that	has	gone	rather	badly	off	the	rails	due	to	internal	treachery.

In	the	time	in	which	I	write	this,	1851,	magic	is	waning.	The	research	that
DODO	paid	me	to	perform	indicates	that	magic	will	cease	to	exist	at	the	end
of	this	month	(July	28).	When	that	happens,	I	will	be	trapped	here	in	a	post-
magic	world	 for	 the	 rest	 of	my	days.	The	only	way	 anyone	will	 ever	know
what	became	of	me	is	through	this	deposition.	While	I	have	managed	to	land
myself	 in	 comfortable	 (by	 1851	 standards)	 quarters	 with	 access	 to	 pen,	 ink,
leisure	 time,	 and	 privacy,	 it	 has	 been	 at	 the	 expense	 of	 freedom;	 my	 hosts
would	 not	 consider	 allowing	 me	 out	 of	 the	 house	 alone	 for	 an	 evening
constitutional,	let	alone	to	seek	out	witches	who	might	help	me.

One	comment	before	I	begin.	 If	anyone	 from	DODO	ever	reads	 this,	 for
the	 love	 of	God	 please	 add	 corset-makers	 to	 the	 list	 of	 abettors	we	 need	 to
recruit	 in	any	Victorian	DTAPs.	Corsets	are	 intended	to	be	custom-made	to
conform	to	the	actual	shape	of	a	lady’s	body,	and	it’s	uncomfortable	to	have	to
borrow	one	or	buy	one	“off	the	rack,”	although	servants	and	poorer	women
generally	do	that	(but	do	not	lace	them	tightly,	as	they	must	engage	in	manual
labor).	Being	here	entirely	on	charity,	I	prefer	not	to	ask	my	hosts	to	extend
credit	for	a	custom-fit	one,	but	wearing	this	one	(borrowed	from	my	hostess)
is	 just	 awful.	 It	makes	 a	Renaissance	 bodice	 feel	 like	 a	 bikini,	 I’m	not	 even
kidding.

Diachronicle
DAY	33	 (LATE	AUGUST,	YEAR	0)



In	which	I	meet	Tristan	Lyons	and	immediately	agree	to	get	into	more
trouble	than	I	could	possibly	realize	at	the	time

I	 MET	 TRISTAN	 LYONS	 IN	 the	 hallway	 outside	 the	 faculty	 offices	 of	 the
Department	of	Ancient	and	Classical	Linguistics	at	Harvard	University.	I	was	a
lecturer,	 which	 means	 that	 I	 was	 given	 the	 most	 unpopular	 teaching
assignments	with	no	opportunity	for	university-supported	research	and	no	real
job	security.

On	 this	 particular	 afternoon,	 as	 I	was	walking	 down	 the	 hallway,	 I	 heard
voices	 raised	within	 the	office	of	Dr.	Roger	Blevins,	Department	Chair.	His
door	was	slightly	ajar.	Usually	it	gaped	open,	so	that	anyone	walking	by	might
glance	 at	his	 ego-wall,	upon	which	hung	every	degree,	honor,	 and	 accolade
he’d	ever	collected,	honestly	or	otherwise.	When	not	yawning	thus,	the	door
was	tightly	closed,	advising	“Do	Not	Disturb”	in	48-point	Lucida	Blackletter
to	make	sure	we	all	understood	how	exclusive	his	company	was.

But	here	it	was,	uncharacteristically	a	quarter	open.	Intrigued,	I	glanced	in,
just	 as	 a	 clean-cut	man	was	making	 a	 decisive	 exit,	 looking	 back	 at	 Blevins
with	an	expression	 somewhere	between	disgust	 and	bemusement.	His	biceps
smacked	 into	 my	 shoulder	 as	 he	 ploughed	 into	 me	 with	 enough	 force	 to
throw	me	off	balance.	I	pivoted	backward	and	 landed	sprawled	on	the	 floor.
He	 retreated	 instinctively,	 his	 backpack	 smacking	 into	 the	 doorjamb	with	 a
hard	 thump.	From	within	 the	office,	Blevins’s	voice	was	hurling	a	 stream	of
invective.

“Apologies,”	the	man	said	at	once,	turning	red.	He	was	about	my	age.	He
slipped	out	into	the	hallway	and	began	to	reach	toward	me	to	help	me	up.

The	door	swung	farther	open,	quite	forcefully—right	into	my	shin.	I	made
a	noise	of	pained	protest	and	the	pompous	voice	from	within	the	room	went
silent.

Blevins—thick	grey	hair	perfectly	immobile,	dressed	as	if	he	expected	at	any
moment	 to	 be	 sworn	 in	 to	 give	 expert	 testimony—emerged	 from	his	 office
and	 peered	 down	 at	 me	 disapprovingly.	 “What	 are	 you	 doing	 there?”	 he
asked,	as	if	he’d	caught	me	spying.

“My	 fault,	 I’m	 sorry,	miss,”	 said	 the	 young	man,	 again	 holding	 his	 hand
toward	me.

Blevins	grabbed	the	edge	of	 the	door	and	began	pulling	 it	closed.	“Watch
where	you’re	going,”	he	said	to	me.	“If	you’d	been	in	the	middle	of	 the	hall



you’d	have	avoided	a	collision.	Please	collect	yourself	and	move	on.”
He	gave	 the	young	man	 a	 look	 I	 could	not	make	out	 from	where	 I	was,

then	turned	back	into	his	office,	closing	the	door	hard	behind	him.
After	a	second	of	stunned	silence,	the	young	man	extended	his	hand	closer

to	me	 and	 I	 took	 it,	with	 a	 nod	of	 thanks,	 to	 rise.	We	were	 standing	 quite
close	to	each	other.

“I	am	.	.	.”	he	began	again.	“I	am	so	very	sorry—”
“It’s	fine,”	I	said.	“If	you’ve	annoyed	Roger	Blevins,	how	bad	can	you	be?”
At	that	he	looked	startled—as	if	he’d	come	from	someplace	where	speaking

ill	of	the	brass	simply	wasn’t	done.	We	kept	staring	at	each	other.	It	seemed	a
perfectly	normal	thing	to	do.	He	was	nice	to	look	at	in	an	ROTC	sort	of	way,
and	his	expression	implied	he	didn’t	mind	looking	at	me	either,	although	I	am
not	the	sort	the	ROTC	boys	ever	took	an	interest	in.

Suddenly	he	held	out	his	hand.	“Tristan	Lyons,”	he	said.
“Melisande	Stokes,”	I	rejoined.
“You’re	in	the	Ancient	and	Classical	Linguistics	Department?”
“I	am,”	I	said.	“I’m	an	exploited	and	downtrodden	humanities	lecturer.”
Once	again,	that	startled,	wary	look.	“I’m	treating	you	to	coffee,”	he	said.
That	was	presumptuous,	but	I	was	so	pleased	with	him	for	upsetting	Blevins

that	it	would	have	been	churlish	to	turn	him	down.
He	wanted	to	take	me	to	the	Apostolic	Café	in	Central	Square,	which	was

perhaps	 ten	 minutes	 by	 foot	 down	 Mass	 Ave.	 It	 was	 that	 time	 of	 year	 in
Boston	 when	 the	 summer	 feels	 definitely	 over,	 and	 the	 city’s	 seventy-odd
colleges	 and	 universities	 are	 coming	 back	 to	 life.	 Streets	were	 jammed	with
parental	minivans	 from	 all	 over	 the	Northeast,	 moving	 their	 kids	 into	 their
apartments	and	dorm	rooms.	Sidewalks	were	clogged	with	discarded	sofas	and
other	 dump-bound	 furniture.	Add	 that	 to	 the	 city’s	 baseline	 traffic—people,
cars,	bikes,	 the	T—and	 it	was	all	very	 loud	and	bustling.	He	used	 that	as	 an
excuse	to	cup	my	elbow	in	one	hand,	keeping	me	close	to	him	as	we	walked.
Presumptuous.	As	was	the	very	idea	that	you	could	walk	two	abreast	in	such	a
crowded	place.	But	he	kept	making	a	path	through	the	crowd	with	expectant
looks	and	crisp	apologies.	Definitely	not	from	around	here.

“Can	you	hear	me	clearly?”	he	said	almost	directly	into	my	ear,	my	being
half	a	step	ahead	of	him.	I	nodded.	“Let	me	tell	you	a	couple	of	things	while
we’re	walking.	By	the	time	we	get	to	the	café,	if	you	think	I’m	a	creep	or	a
nutcase,	just	tell	me,	and	I’ll	simply	buy	you	a	coffee	and	be	on	my	way.	But	if
you	 don’t	 think	 I’m	 a	 creep	 or	 a	 nutcase,	 then	we’re	 going	 to	 have	 a	 very



serious	conversation	that	could	take	hours.	Do	you	have	dinner	plans?”
In	the	society	I	inhabit	currently,	such	an	approach	would	be	considered	so

outrageous	 that	when	 I	 think	 on	 it,	 it	 is	 hard	 to	 believe	 I	 did	 not	 instantly
excuse	myself	and	walk	away	from	him.	On	the	contrary,	at	the	time	I	found
his	awkward	inappropriateness,	his	bluntness,	rather	compelling.	And	I	confess,
I	was	curious	to	hear	what	he	had	to	say.

“I	might,”	I	said.	(Confession:	I	did	not.)
“All	 right,	 listen,”	 he	 began.	 “I	 work	 for	 a	 shadowy	 government	 entity,

you’ve	 never	 heard	 of	 it,	 and	 if	 you	 try	 to	 Google	 it,	 you	 won’t	 find	 any
reference	to	it,	not	even	from	conspiracy-theory	nuts.”

“Conspiracy-theory	 nuts	 are	 the	 only	 ones	 who	 would	 use	 a	 term	 like
‘shadowy	government	entity,’”	I	pointed	out.

“That’s	 why	 I	 use	 it,”	 he	 retorted.	 “I	 don’t	 want	 anyone	 to	 take	 me
seriously,	 it	 would	 get	 in	 the	 way	 of	 my	 efficiency	 if	 people	 were	 paying
attention	to	me.	Here’s	what	we	need.	Tell	me	if	you’re	interested.	We	have	a
bunch	of	 very	old	 documents—cuneiform,	 in	one	 case—and	we	need	 them
translated,	at	least	roughly,	by	the	same	person.	You’ll	be	paid	very	well.	But	I
can’t	 tell	 you	where	we	 got	 the	 documents,	 or	 how	we	 got	 them,	 or	why
we’re	 interested	 in	 them.	And	 you	 cannot	 ever	 tell	 anyone	 about	 this.	You
can’t	even	say	to	your	friends,	 ‘Oh,	yeah,	I	did	some	classified	translating	for
the	 government.’	 Even	 if	 we	 publish	 your	 translation	 of	 it,	 you	 can’t	 take
ownership	 of	 it.	 If	 you	 learn	 something	 extraordinary	 from	 translating	 the
material,	 you	 can’t	 share	 it	 with	 the	 world.	 You’re	 a	 cog	 in	 a	 piece	 of
machinery.	 An	 anonymous	 cog.	 You’d	 have	 to	 agree	 to	 that	 before	 I	 say
another	word.”

“That’s	why	Blevins	threw	you	out,”	I	said.
“Yes,	he’s	strongly	committed	to	academic	freedom.”
Dear	reader,	give	me	credit	 for	not	going	LOL	on	mocking	him.	“No	he

isn’t.”
This	startled	Tristan,	who	looked	at	me	like	a	puppy	after	you’ve	stepped	on

his	tail.	On	second	thought,	given	his	ROTC	bearing,	let’s	make	that	a	mature
German	shepherd.

“He	was	pissed	off	that	he’d	never	get	any	glory	or	royalties,”	I	explained.
“But	he	knew	he	couldn’t	say	that.	So,	academic	freedom	or	whatever.”

Tristan	seemed	to	actually	think	about	this	as	we	crossed	Temple	Street.	His
type	are	trained	to	respect	authority.	Blevins	was	nothing	if	not	authoritative.
So,	this	was	a	little	test.	Was	his	straight-arrow	brain	going	to	explode?



Through	all	the	bustle,	in	the	golden	light	of	early	autumn,	I	could	see	the
entrance	to	the	Central	Square	T	stop.	“What’s	your	position?”	he	asked	me.

“On	academic	freedom?	Or	getting	paid?”
“You	haven’t	kicked	me	to	the	curb	yet,”	he	said.	“So,	I	guess	we’re	talking

about	the	latter.”
“Depends	on	the	paycheck.”
He	named	an	amount	that	was	twice	my	annual	salary,	with	the	caveat	“.	.	.

once	you	convince	me	you’re	the	right	person	for	the	job.”
“What	will	the	translations	be	used	for?”
“Classified.”
I	tried	to	think	of	reasons	not	to	pursue	this	lucrative	diversion.	“Could	they

somehow	 be	 justification	 for	 unethical	 actions,	 or	 physical	 violence,	 on	 the
part	of	your	shadowy	government	entity?”

“Classified.”
“That’s	a	yes,	then,”	I	said.	“Or	at	least	a	possibly.	You’d	have	just	said	no

otherwise.”
“That	amount	I	just	mentioned?	It’s	for	a	six-month	contract.	Renewable	by

mutual	agreement.	Benefits	negotiable.	Are	we	having	coffee	together	or	not?”
We	were	nearing	the	turn	to	the	Apostolic	Café.

“No	 harm	 in	 coffee,”	 I	 said.	 Stalling	 for	 time,	 trying	 to	 wrap	 my	 head
around	the	math:	 four	 times	my	current	 take-home	pay,	which	would	never
include	 benefits.	 Not	 to	 mention	 that	 I’d	 be	 trading	 up	 in	 the	 supervisor
department.

We	 entered	 the	 café,	 a	 beautiful	 old	 desanctified	 brick	 church	with	 high
vaulted	 ceilings,	 stained	 glass	 windows,	 and	 incongruously	 modern	 wood
tables	and	chairs	sprinkled	across	the	marble	floor.	There	was	a	state-of-the-art
espresso	 station	 to	 one	 side	 and—most	 disconcertingly,	 as	 much	 as	 I’d
overcome	 my	 upbringing—a	 counter	 set	 just	 about	 where	 the	 altar	 would
once	have	been,	and	a	complete	wet	bar	curving	around	the	inner	wall	of	the
apse.	The	place	had	only	recently	opened	but	was	already	very	popular	with
the	techno-geek	crowd	from	both	Harvard	and	MIT.	It	was	my	first	time	in.	I
felt	a	brief	pang	of	envy	that	there	weren’t	enough	linguists	in	Cambridge	to
warrant	a	designated	polyglot-hangout	as	lovely	as	this.

“What’s	your	pleasure?”	asked	the	barista,	a	young	Asian-American	woman
with	 interesting	piercings,	 tattoos	 in	place	of	eyebrows,	and	a	demeanor	 that
blended	I’m	sooo	interesting	and	this	job	sucks	with	I	have	a	really	cool	secret	life	and
this	job	is	an	awesome	front.	Her	nametag	read	“Julie	Lee:	Professional	聪明的驴



子•双簧管”	(which	I	understood,	roughly,	as	“Smart-ass	Oboist”).
We	ordered	drinks—Tristan,	black	coffee;	myself,	something	I	would	never

normally	 have,	 a	 complicated	 something-latte-something	 with	 lots	 of
buzzwords	 I	 picked	out	 at	 random	 from	 the	menu	over	 the	bar,	 and	which
prompted	a	brief	smirk	from	our	barista.	The	agents	of	shadowy	government
entities,	 I	 reasoned,	were	 likely	 to	 be	 trained	 in	 psychological	 evaluation	 of
potential	recruits,	and	I	did	not	want	him	getting	an	accurate	read	on	me	until
I	 decided	whether	 or	 not	 I	wished	 to	 pursue	 his	 offer.	 (Also	 he	was	 rather
handsome,	 which	 made	 me	 jittery	 a	 bit,	 so	 I	 decided	 to	 hide	 behind	 an
affected	eccentricity.)	The	result	being	that	he	sat	down	with	a	lovely-smelling
cup	of	dark	roast	and	I	sat	down	with	something	almost	undrinkable.

“You	 ordered	 that	 to	 try	 to	 throw	me	 off	 the	 scent,	 in	 case	 I	was	 doing
some	sort	of	ninja	psych-eval	of	you,”	he	said	casually,	as	if	just	trying	the	idea
on	for	size.	“Ironically,	that	tells	me	more	about	you	than	if	you’d	just	ordered
your	usual.”

I	must	 have	 looked	 shocked,	 because	 he	 grinned	with	 almost	 savage	 self-
satisfaction.	 There	 was	 something	 disturbingly	 thrilling	 about	 being	 seen	 so
thoroughly,	so	quickly,	and	so	stealthily.	I	felt	myself	flush.

“How?”	I	demanded.	“How	did	you	do	that?”
He	leaned	in	toward	me,	large,	strong	hands	clasped	before	him	on	the	café

table.	“Melisande	Stokes—may	I	call	you	Mel?”	I	nodded.	“Mel.”	He	cleared
his	throat	in	a	very	official-sounding,	preparatory	manner.	“If	we’re	going	to
pursue	 this,”	he	 said,	 “there	 are	 three	parts	 to	 it.	 First,	 before	 anything	 else,
you	have	to	sign	the	nondisclosure	form.	Then	I	need	you	to	do	some	sample
translations	 so	we	can	get	 a	 sense	of	your	work,	 and	 then	we	have	 to	 run	a
background	check	on	you.”

“How	long	will	all	that	take?”	I	asked.
Four	times	my	salary.	With	possible	dental.
And	no	Blevins.
He	 had	 set	 his	 backpack	 on	 a	 chair	 beside	 him.	 Now	 he	 patted	 it.

“Nondisclosure	 form	 is	 right	here.	 If	you	 sign	 it	now,	 I	can	 text	your	name
and	 social	 to	DC.”	He	 paused	 then,	 and	 reconsidered.	 “Never	mind.	 They
already	know	your	social.	Point	is,	they’ll	have	finished	the	background	check
before	you’re	done	choking	down	whatever	the	hell	it	is	you	ordered.	So	it’s
just	how	long	it	takes	you	to	translate	the	test	samples	and	have	our	guys	look
over	your	translations.	But”—he	waved	a	warning	finger	at	me—“no	fooling
around	here.	Once	you	sign	the	form,	you’re	committing	to	do	this.	Unless	we



reject	 you.	 You	 can’t	 reject	 us.	 You’re	 stuck	 with	 me,	 for	 six	 months
minimum,	 as	 soon	 as	 you	 sign	 the	 form.	Got	 it?	No	half-assedness	 on	 your
part.	So	maybe	we	just	talk	tonight	and	then	you	take	the	form	with	you	and
give	it	to	me	tomorrow	when	you’ve	had	a	chance	to	sleep	on	it.”

“Where	would	I	find	you	tomorrow?”	I	asked.
“Classified,”	he	said.	“I’d	find	you.”
“I	don’t	like	being	stalked.	I’d	better	sign	it	now,”	I	said.
He	stared	at	me	a	moment.	It	wasn’t	quite	like	that	first	moment,	when	we

had	 stared	 and	 it	 had	 felt	 so	 strangely	normal.	This	 felt	 charged.	But	 I	wasn’t
exactly	 sure	why.	I	would	 like	to	 think	I	was	 simply	delighted	to	be	ridding
myself	of	Blevins	and	quadrupling	my	income	all	in	one	go.	But	if	I	am	honest
with	 myself	 I	 confess	 there	 was	 a	 definite	 pleasure	 in	 being	 Chosen	 by
someone	with	such	agreeable	features.

“Right,”	 he	 said,	 after	 we	 had	 been	 staring	 for	 a	 couple	 of	 heartbeats.
“Here.”	He	reached	for	his	bag.

I	read	the	form,	which	said	precisely	what	Tristan	had	described,	making	it
at	once	boilerplate	and	singular.	I	held	out	my	hand,	and	Tristan	offered	me	a
government-issue	 ballpoint	 pen.	 A	 far	 cry	 from	 the	 slightly	 blood-smeared
Hughes	 &	 Sons	 Ltd.	 model	 number	 137B,	 Extra	 Fine,	 with	 which	 I	 am
writing	this.

As	I	signed	the	form,	he	leaned	in	closer	to	me	and	said	quietly,	sounding
delighted	with	himself,	“I	have	some	of	the	cuneiform	in	my	bag	if	you	want
to	take	a	look	at	it.”

I	 believe	 I	 gaped	 at	 that.	 “You’re	 carrying	 a	 cuneiform	 artifact	 around	 in
your	backpack!?”

He	shrugged.	“If	it	could	survive	the	fall	of	Ugarit	.	.	.”	There	was	a	boyish
gleam	in	his	eye.	He	was	showing	off	now.	“Want	to	see	it?”

I	nodded	mutely.	He	opened	his	bag	and	drew	out	a	lump	of	clay,	roughly
the	 size	 and	 shape	 of	 a	 Big	 Mac.	 So	 that’s	 what	 had	 banged	 against	 the
doorjamb	 of	 Blevins’s	 office.	 Marked	 into	 it	 in	 tiny,	 neat	 rows	 .	 .	 .	 was
cuneiform	 text.	 Tristan	 handled	 it	 as	 if	 it	 were	 a	 football.	 I	 stared	 at	 it	 for	 a
moment,	 disoriented	 by	 seeing	 something	 I	 had	 only	 encountered	 while
wearing	 gloves	 in	 the	workroom	 of	 a	museum,	 now	 casually	 sitting	 on	 the
table	 next	 to	 my	 coffee-like	 beverage.	 I	 was	 almost	 afraid	 to	 touch	 it;	 that
seemed	disrespectful.	But	within	moments	I	had	tossed	such	a	delicate	thought
aside,	and	my	fingers	were	caressing	it.	I	studied	the	script.

“This	 isn’t	 Ugaritic,”	 I	 said.	 “It’s	 Hittite.	 There	 are	 some	 Akkadian-style



markings.”
He	looked	pleased.	“Nice,”	he	said.	“Can	you	read	it?”
“Not	 offhand,”	 I	 said	 patiently.	 Some	 people	 have	 a	 very	 romanticized

notion	of	what	it	means	to	be	a	polyglot.	But	not	wanting	to	appear	lacking,	I
added	quickly,	“The	light	in	here	is	too	low,	it	will	be	hard	to	make	out	the
forms.”

“Soon	 enough,”	 he	 said,	 and	 pushed	 it	 back	 into	 his	 bag	 with	 the	 same
casual	roughness.	Once	it	was	out	of	sight	I	began	to	wonder	if	I’d	really	seen
it.

Tristan	 reached	 back	 into	 the	 bag	 and	 pulled	 out	 something	 else	 now:	 a
sheaf	of	papers.	He	pushed	 them	across	 the	 table	 to	me.	“You	 still	have	 the
pen,”	he	said.	“Want	to	get	started	on	these?”

I	looked	at	the	papers.	There	were	seven	blocks	of	writing,	almost	none	of
them	in	the	Roman	alphabet—even	the	Old	Latin	passage	used	Etruscan.	At	a
glance	 I	 also	 recognized	biblical	Hebrew	and	classical	Greek.	The	Hebrew	 I
knew	best,	so	I	looked	more	closely	at	this	one.

And	 blinked	 several	 times	 to	make	 sure	 I	 was	 not	 imagining	what	 I	 was
seeing.	 I	 took	a	 look	at	 the	Greek	and	 then	 the	Latin	 to	make	 sure.	Then	 I
looked	up	at	Tristan.	“I	already	know	what	all	of	these	say.”

“You’ve	taken	this	test	before?”	he	asked,	surprised.
“No,”	I	said	tartly.	“I	created	it.”	At	his	confused	look,	I	explained:	“I	chose

these	specific	 samples	and	I	wrote	the	translation	key	against	which	to	check
the	 students’	work.”	 I	 felt	my	cheeks	grow	hot.	“I	did	 it	 as	 a	project	under
Blevins	when	I	was	a	graduate	student.”

“He	sold	it	to	us,”	Tristan	said	simply.	“For	a	lot	of	money.”
“It	was	for	a	graduate	seminar	on	syntax	patterns,”	I	said.
“Mel,”	 he	 said,	 “he	 sold	 it	 to	 us.	 There	 was	 never	 a	 graduate	 seminar	 on

syntax	 patterns.	 We—that	 is,	 people	 high	 up	 in	 my	 shadowy	 government
entity—have	been	working	with	him	for	a	long	time.	We	have	 contracts	with
him.”

“I	would	happily	sign	that	nondisclosure	form	seventeen	times	over,”	I	said,
“to	 express	 the	 depth	 of	 my	 sentiments	 toward	 Roger	 Blevins	 at	 this
moment.”

Julie	 Lee,	 Professional	 Smart-ass	 Oboist,	 swept	 by	 us,	 bussing	 our	 cups
without	asking,	as	Tristan’s	phone	made	a	noise	and	he	glanced	down	at	 the
screen.

He	typed	something	into	the	phone	and	then	pocketed	it.	“I	just	told	them



you	passed	with	flying	colors,”	he	said,	“and	they	just	told	me	you	passed	the
background	check.”

“Of	course	I	passed	the	background	check,”	I	said.	“What	do	you	take	me
for?”

“You’re	hired.”
“Thank	you,”	I	said,	“but	whoever	they	are,	please	let	them	know	I’m	the

creator	of	the	test	I	just	passed.”
He	shook	his	head	no.	“Then	we	get	into	an	IP	inquiry	with	the	university

and	 things	 get	messy	 and	 public,	 and	 shadowy	 government	 entities	 can’t	 go
there.	 Sorry.	 If	 this	 project	 falls	 apart,	 though,	 feel	 free	 to	 take	 it	 up	 with
Blevins.”	His	phone	beeped	again	and	he	checked	the	new	incoming	message.
“Meanwhile,	let’s	get	to	work.”	He	pocketed	the	phone	and	held	out	his	hand
for	me	to	 shake.	“You	have	an	agreeably	uninteresting	existence.	Let’s	 see	 if
we	can	change	that.”

Diachronicle	
DAYS	34–56	 (SEPTEMBER,	YEAR	0)

In	which	magic	is	brought	to	my	attention

TRISTAN	 DETERMINED	 TO	 BEGIN	 the	 translations	 immediately—that	 very
evening—and	so	he	ordered	carry-out	Chinese,	asked	for	my	address,	and	said
that	he	would	show	up	in	an	hour	with	the	first	of	several	documents.	I	was,
please	know,	outraged	that	he	was	driving	around	with	ancient	artifacts	in	the
backseat	of	his	beat-up	Jeep.

At	 that	 time,	 I	 dwelt	 alone	 in	 a	 one-bedroom	 walk-up	 flat	 in	 North
Cambridge	(without	being	considered	a	spinster	or	a	 loose	woman,	as	would
be	 the	 case	 in	 my	 current	 environment).	 It	 was	 walking	 distance	 from	 the



Porter	 Square	T	 stop	 and	 an	 easy	 bicycle	 ride	 down	Massachusetts	Avenue,
cutting	through	Harvard	Yard,	to	the	department	(although	I	would	no	longer
be	making	that	ride).	Tristan	appeared	punctually	with	bags	of	Chinese	and	a
six-pack	of	Old	Tearsheet	Best	Bitter,	which	 as	 I	was	 to	 learn	was	 the	only
beer	 he	 would	 consider	 drinking.	 He	 casually	 commandeered	 the
living/dining/cooking	 area,	 placing	 the	 food	 on	 the	 counter,	 far	 from	 the
coffee	 table,	where	 he	 laid	 out	 four	 documents	 and	 the	 cuneiform	 tablet,	 a
notepad,	 and	 several	 pens.	 He	 looked	 around	 the	 space,	 zeroed	 in	 on	 my
personal	 reference	 library,	 pulled	 out	 four	 dictionaries,	 and	 set	 them	 on	 the
table.

“Let’s	eat	first,”	he	said.	“I’m	starving.”
For	the	first	time,	we	made	small	talk.	It	was	only	brief,	for	he	eats	too	fast,

although	I	did	not	comment	on	it	that	first	time.	Tristan	had	studied	physics	at
West	Point	but	ended	up	assigned	 to	 the	Military	 Intelligence	branch	of	 the
Army,	 which—in	 roundabout	 ways	 he	 constantly	 deflected	 with	 the	 term
“classified”—led	to	his	recruitment	by	his	“shadowy	government	entity.”

For	 my	 part,	 since	 nothing	 was	 classified,	 I	 divulged	 the	 source	 of	 my
polyglot	 tendencies,	 that	 being:	 my	 agnostic	 parents	 having	 been	 raised
Catholic	and	Jewish,	my	two	sets	of	grandparents	competed	for	my	faith	from
my	earliest	years.	At	the	age	of	seven	I	proposed	to	my	Catholic	grandparents
that	I	 learn	to	read	the	New	Testament	in	Latin,	in	lieu	of	attending	Sunday
school.	 Thinking	 I	 would	 never	 attain	 this,	 they	 agreed—and	 I	 was
functionally	 fluent	 in	 classical	 Latin	within	 six	months.	 Emboldened	 by	 this,
shortly	before	my	 thirteenth	birthday	 I	 similarly	evaded	being	bat	mitzvahed
by	 testing	 out	 at	 college	 level	 for	 classical	Hebrew.	My	 Jewish	 grandparents
offered	to	fund	one	semester	of	university	education	per	each	ancient	language
I	mastered	 at	 college	 level.	That	was	 how	 I	 afforded	my	 first	 three	 years	 of
school.

Tristan	was	very	pleased	with	this	 story—almost	as	pleased	with	himself	as
with	me,	as	 if	patting	himself	on	the	back	for	having	chosen	such	a	prodigy.
When	 we	 finished	 our	 meal,	 he	 collected	 the	 disposable	 containers,	 rinsed
them,	and	packed	them	neatly	back	in	their	bag.	“All	right,	let’s	start!”	he	said,
and	we	moved	to	the	couch	so	I	might	examine	the	documents.

In	 addition	 to	 the	 cuneiform	 tablet	 there	 was	 something	 in	 Guānhuà
(Middle	Mandarin)	on	rice	paper,	about	five	hundred	years	old—Tristan	to	his
credit	at	least	knew	to	handle	this	with	gloves	on.	There	was	also,	on	vellum,	a
piece	written	in	a	mixture	of	medieval	French	and	Latin,	I	would	say	at	least



eight	 hundred	 years	 old.	 (It	 was	 fucking	 insane	 to	 see	 these	 things	 sitting
casually	 on	my	 coffee	 table.)	 Finally	 there	was	 a	 fragment	 of	 a	 journal,	 this
written	in	Russian	on	paper	that	looked	positively	brand-new	in	comparison,
and	was	 dated	 1847.	The	 librarian	 in	me	noticed	 that	 all	 of	 them	had	 been
marked	with	the	same	stamp—a	somewhat	ill-defined	family	crest,	surrounded
by	 blurry	words	 in	 a	 blend	 of	 Latin	 and	 Italian.	 They	 had,	 in	 other	words,
been	acquired	by	a	library	or	a	private	collection,	and	been	duly	stamped	and
cataloged	at	some	point.

As	he	had	warned,	Tristan	would	not	tell	me	where	he	had	obtained	these
artifacts,	 nor	why	 it	was	 such	 a	 (seemingly)	 random	collection.	After	 several
hours	with	them,	however,	I	saw	the	common	theme	.	.	.	although	it	was	hard
to	believe	what	I	was	reading.

In	 short,	 each	 of	 these	 documents	 referred	 to	 magic—yes,	 magic—as
casually	 as	 a	 court	document	 refers	 to	 the	 law,	or	 a	doctor’s	 report	 refers	 to
medical	tests.	Not	magician-trick	magic,	but	magic	as	we	know	it	from	myths
and	fairy	tales:	an	inexplicable	and	supernatural	force	employed	by	witches—
for	 they	 were,	 per	 these	 documents,	 all	 women.	 I	 don’t	 mean	 the	 belief	 in
magic,	 or	 a	mere	weakness	 for	magical	 thinking.	 I	mean	 the	writer	 of	 each
document	was	discussing	a	situation	in	which	magic	was	a	fact	of	life.

For	 example,	 the	 cuneiform	 tablet	 was	 a	 declaration	 laying	 down	what	 a
witch	at	the	royal	court	of	Kahta	was	due	in	recompense	for	her	services,	and
regulated	 the	 uses	 of	 magic	 that	 courtiers	 were	 allowed	 to	 ask	 of	 her.	 The
Latin/French	one	was	written	by	the	Abbess	of	Chaalis	regarding	the	struggles
that	one	of	her	nuns	 faced,	trying	but	 failing	to	renounce	her	magic	powers,
and	 the	 abbess	 wondered	 if	 she	 herself	 was	 to	 blame,	 as	 she	 was	 not	 truly
wholehearted	 in	her	own	prayers	 for	 the	 sister	 to	be	 relieved	of	her	powers,
since	those	powers	often	made	life	easier	at	the	abbey.	The	Guānhuà	took	a
little	more	work—I	had	but	a	cursory	relationship	to	Asian	language	groups	by
then.	It	was	itself	a	recipe	from	the	provinces	for	a	dish	involving	various	hard-
to-find	 aromatic	 herbs,	 as	 described	 to	 the	writer	 (a	 circuit-riding	Mandarin
magistrate)	 by	 self-reported	 witches	 (whose	 activities	 were	 referred	 to	 as	 a
footnote	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 recipe).	 Finally,	 the	 nineteenth-century	Russian
was	written	by	a	self-identified	(aging)	witch	and	lamented	the	fading	powers
of	her	sister	witches	and	herself.	This	one	also	made	a	passing	reference	to	the
desirability	of	finding	certain	herbs.

These	were	rough,	almost	off-the-cuff	translations.	When	I	had	finished	the
fourth	one,	there	was	a	silence	between	us	for	a	moment.	Then	Tristan	gave



me	a	disarmingly	sly	grin,	and	spoke:
“What	if	I	told	you	we	had	more	than	a	thousand	such	documents.	All	eras,

from	six	continents.”
“All	bearing	this	family	crest?”	I	asked,	pointing	to	the	blurry	stamp.
“That	is	the	core	of	the	collection.	Others	we	collected	on	our	own.”
“Well,	that	would	challenge	certain	assumptions	about	the	nature	of	reality

that	I	did	not	even	know	I	had.”
“We	want	 you	 to	 translate	 all	 of	 them	 and	 extract	 the	 common	 core	 of

data,”	said	Tristan.
I	looked	at	him.	“I	assume	there’s	a	military	purpose.”
“Classified,”	he	said.
“If	I	have	a	context	for	translating,	I	can	do	a	better	job	of	it,”	I	protested.
“My	 shadowy	 government	 entity	 has	 been	 collecting	 documents	 of	 this

nature	for	many	years.”
“By	what	means?”	I	sputtered,	both	fascinated	and	dismayed	to	learn	that	a

well-funded	 black	 ops	 organization	 was	 competing	 against	 academic
researchers	in	such	a	manner.	That	sure	explained	a	few	things.

“The	 core	 of	 the	 collection,	 as	 you’ve	 been	 noticing,	 is	 from	 a	 private
library	in	Italy.”

“The	WIMF.”
“Beg	pardon?”
“The	Weird	Italian	Mother	Fucker,”	I	said.
“Yeah.	We	acquired	it	some	time	ago.”	His	face	twitched	and	he	broke	eye

contact.	 “That’s	 not	 true.	 I	was	 just	 being	 polite.	We	 stole	 it.	 Before	 other
people	could	 steal	 it.	Long	story.	Anyway,	 it	gave	us	plenty	of	 leads	 that	we
could	follow	to	acquire	more	in	the	same	vein.	By	all	means	fair	and	foul.	We
now	feel	we	have	a	critical	mass	that,	upon	translation,	might	yield	a	sense	of
what	precisely	‘magic’	was,	how	it	worked,	and	why	there	are	no	references	to
it	anywhere	after	the	mid-1800s.”

“And	you	wish	to	have	this	information	for	some	kind	of	military	purpose,”
I	pressed.

“We	wish	 to	have	one	person	do	all	 the	 translations,”	Tristan	 said,	 firmly
not	answering	my	query.	“For	three	reasons.	First,	budget.	Second,	the	fewer
eyes,	the	safer.	Third	and	most	important,	if	the	same	person	processes	all	the
material,	there	is	a	greater	chance	of	gleaning	subtle	consistencies	or	patterns.”

“And	you	are	interested	in	those	consistencies	or	patterns	why,	exactly?”
“The	 current	 hypothesis,”	 Tristan	 continued	 as	 before—that	 is,	 without



actually	answering	me—“is	that	perhaps	there	was	a	worldwide	epidemic	of	a
virus	that	affected	only	witches,	and	magic	was	literally	killed	off.	I	don’t	think
that’s	it,	but	I	need	to	know	more	before	I	offer	an	alternate	hypothesis.	I	have
my	suspicions,	though.”

“Which	are	classified,	right?”
“Whether	or	not	they	are	classified	is	classified.”
The	documents	were	many,	but	brief;	most	were	fragmentary.	Within	three

weeks,	 working	 alone	 at	 my	 coffee	 table,	 I	 had	 produced	 at	 least	 rough
translations	of	the	first	batch	of	material.	During	that	time	I	also	gave	notice,
apologized	to	my	students	for	abandoning	them	before	they’d	even	gotten	to
know	 me,	 moved	 out	 of	 my	 Harvard	 office,	 and	 managed	 to	 reassure	 my
parents	that	I	was	still	working,	without	telling	them	exactly	what	it	was	I	was
doing.	Meanwhile,	 Tristan	 was	 in	 communication	 with	me	 at	 least	 twice	 a
day,	usually	appearing	in	person,	occasionally	calling	and	talking	to	me	in	the
most	oblique	terms.	Never	did	we	email	or	text;	he	did	not	want	anything	said
between	 us	 to	 be	 on	 record.	 There	was	 something	 rather	 swashbuckling,	 if
unsettling,	about	the	need	for	such	secrecy.	I	had	no	idea	what	he	did	with	the
rest	of	his	time.	(Naturally,	I	asked.	You	can	guess	what	his	answer	was.)

Our	dynamic	was	 singular,	unprecedented	 in	my	 life	certainly.	 It	was	as	 if
we	had	always	been	working	together,	and	yet	there	was	an	undercurrent	of
something	else,	a	kind	of	charge	 that	only	comes	at	 the	beginning	of	 things.
Neither	of	us	 ever	 acted	on	 it—and	while	 I	 am	 the	 sort	who	 rarely	 acts	on
such	 things,	 he	 is	 (while	 extremely	 disciplined	 and	 upright)	 the	 sort	 who
immediately	acts	on	such	things.	So	I	attributed	the	buzz	to	the	excitement	of	a
shared	 endeavor.	The	 intellectual	 intimacy	of	 it	was	 far	more	 satisfying	 than
any	date	 I’d	ever	been	on.	 If	Tristan	had	a	 lover,	 she	wasn’t	getting	 the	 real
goods.	I	was.

At	the	end	of	the	three	weeks,	when	he	came	to	my	apartment	to	receive
the	last	(or	so	I	innocently	thought)	of	my	translations,	Tristan	glanced	around
until	he	saw	my	coatrack.	He	studied	it	a	moment,	then	took	my	raincoat	off
of	its	peg.	It	was	late	September	by	this	point	and	the	weather	was	starting	to
turn.

“Come	on,	we’re	going	to	talk	at	the	office,”	he	said.	“I’ll	buy	you	dinner.”
“There’s	an	office?”	I	said.	“I	assumed	your	shadowy	government	entity	had

you	working	out	of	your	car.”
“It’s	near	Central	Square.	Carlton	Street,	about	fifteen	minutes’	walk	from

the	Apostolic	Café.	How’s	Chinese	sound?”



“Depends	on	the	dialect.”
“Ha,”	he	said	without	smiling.	“Linguist	humor.	Pretty	 lame,	Stokes.”	He

held	my	coat	out.	I	reached	for	it.	He	shook	his	head	and	glanced	down	at	it.
Giving	me	 to	 understand	 that	 he	was	 not	 handing	 it	 to	me,	 but	 offering	 to
help	me	put	 it	 on—a	gesture	much	more	 common	 in	1851	London	 than	 it
was	 in	 that	 time	 and	 place.	 Some	 low-grade	 physical	 comedy	 ensued	 as	 I
turned	my	back	on	him	and	tried	to	find	the	armholes	with	my	hands.	What	a
weirdo.

Carlton	 Street	was	 the	 poor	 stepchild	 in	 an	 extended	 family	 of	 alleys	 and
byways	 near	MIT,	where	 scores	 of	 biotech	 companies	 fledged.	Most	 of	 the
neighborhood	had	been	rebranded	into	slick	office	complexes,	with	landscaped
parks,	 mini-campuses,	 double-helix-themed	 architectural	 flourishes,	 and
abstract	 steel	 sculptures	 abounding.	Tristan’s	 building,	 however,	 had	 not	 yet
been	reclaimed.	It	was	utterly	without	character:	a	block-long	two-story	mid-
twentieth-century	building	thrown	together	of	tilt-up	concrete	slabs	painted	a
dingy	grey	that	somehow	managed	to	clash	with	the	sidewalk.	There	were	a
few	graffiti	tags.	The	windows	were	without	adornment,	all	of	them	outfitted
with	vertical	vinyl	blinds,	all	dusty	and	askew.	There	was	no	roster	of	tenants,
no	signs	or	logos,	no	indication	at	all	of	what	was	within.

Laden	 with	 bags	 of	 Chinese	 food	 and	 beer,	 we	 approached	 the	 glass
entrance	door	at	dusk.	This	building	was	one	of	the	few	places	on	earth	that
not	 even	 twilight	 could	 improve	 upon.	 Tristan	 slapped	 his	 wallet	 against	 a
black	plate	 set	 into	 the	wall,	 and	 the	door	 lock	clicked,	 releasing.	 Inside,	we
moved	 between	 buzzing	 fluorescent	 lights	 and	 matted	 industrial	 carpeting,
down	a	corridor	past	 several	windowless	doors—slabs	of	wood,	dirty	around
the	 knobs,	 blazoned	with	 signs	 bearing	 names	 of	what	 I	 assumed	were	 tech
start-ups.	 Some	of	 these	had	 actual	 logos,	 some	 just	 cutesy	names	printed	 in
block	letters,	and	one	was	just	a	domain	name	scrawled	on	a	sticky	note.	We
walked	the	entire	length	of	the	building	and	came	to	a	door	next	to	a	stairwell.
Its	 only	distinguishing	 feature	was	 a	 crude	Magic	Marker	drawing	of	 a	 bird,
seen	in	profile,	drawn	on	the	back	of	a	Chinese	menu	blue-taped	to	the	wood.
The	bird	was	somewhat	comical,	with	a	prominent	beak	and	big	feet.

“Dodo?”	I	guessed.
Tristan	made	no	answer.	He	was	unlocking	the	door.
“I’ll	 take	 that	 as	 a	yes—you’d	have	 jumped	all	over	me	 if	 I’d	guessed	 the

wrong	species.”
He	 gave	 me	 an	 inscrutable	 raised-eyebrow	 look	 over	 his	 shoulder	 as	 he



pushed	the	door	open	and	reached	for	the	 light	switch.	“You	have	a	gift	 for
caricature,”	I	told	him	as	I	followed	him	in.

“DODO	welcomes	you,”	he	said.
“Department	of	.	.	.	something?”
“Of	something	classified.”
The	room	was	at	most	ten	feet	by	fifteen	feet.	Two	desks	were	shoved	into

opposite	corners,	each	with	a	flat-panel	monitor	and	keyboard.	The	walls	were
lined	with	an	assortment	of	used	IKEA	bookshelves	that	I	suspected	he’d	pulled
out	of	Dumpsters	a	few	weeks	ago,	and	a	couple	of	tall	skinny	safes	of	the	type
used	 to	 store	 rifles	 and	 shotguns.	 Perched	 on	 top	 of	 these	 were	 military-
looking	 souvenirs	 that	 I	 assumed	 dated	 from	 some	 earlier	 phase	 of	 Tristan’s
career.	The	 shelves	were	 filled	with	 ancient	 books	 and	 artifacts	 I	 recognized
very	 well.	 In	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 room	 was	 a	 long	 table.	 Beneath	 it	 was	 a
bedroll:	 just	a	yoga	mat	wrapped	around	a	pillow	and	secured	with	a	bungee
cord.

I	pointed	at	the	bedroll.	“How	long	have	you—”
“I	shower	at	the	gym	if	that’s	your	worry.”	He	pointed	to	the	closer	of	the

two	desks,	by	the	door.	“This	one	will	be	yours.”
“Oh,”	I	said,	not	sure	what	else	to	say.	“Do	you	have	.	.	.	guns	in	here?”
“Would	that	be	a	problem	for	you?”	he	inquired,	setting	the	Chinese	food

on	 the	 table	 in	 the	middle.	 “If	 so,	 I	 need	 to	 know	 sooner	 rather	 than	 later
because—”

“How	much	firepower	were	you	expecting	to	need?”
“Oh,	 you	 noticed	 the	 gun	 safes?”	 he	 asked,	 tracking	my	 gaze.	 “No.”	 he

turned	to	one	of	 them	and	punched	a	 series	of	digits	onto	the	keypad	on	its
front.	It	beeped,	and	he	swung	the	door	open	to	reveal	that	it	was	stuffed	from
top	to	bottom	with	documents.	“I	keep	the	most	sensitive	material	in	these.”

My	gaze	had	wandered	to	my	desk.	I	was	looking	at	the	flat-panel	display,
which	was	 showing	 a	 few	 lines	 of	 green	 text	 on	 a	 black	 background,	 and	 a
blinking	cursor	where	 it	was	 apparently	 expecting	me	 to	 type	 something	 in.
“Where	did	you	get	these	computers?	A	garage	sale	from	1975?”

“They	 are	 running	 a	 secure	 operating	 system	 you’ve	 never	 heard	 of,”	 he
explained.	“It’s	called	Shiny	Hat.”

“Shiny	Hat.”
“Yes.	The	most	clinically	paranoid	operating	system	in	the	world.	Since	you

have	an	overdeveloped	sense	of	irony,	Stokes,	you	might	like	to	know	that	we
acquired	 it	 from	 hackers	 who	 were	 specifically	 worried	 about	 being



eavesdropped	on	by	shadowy	government	entities.	Now	they	work	for	us.”
“Have	 they	 got	 the	memo	 about	 the	 invention	 of	 the	 computer	mouse?

Because	I	don’t	see	one	on	my	desk.”
“Graphical	user	interfaces	introduce	security	holes	that	can	be	exploited	by

black	hat	hackers.	Shiny	Hat	is	safe	against	that	kind	of	malware,	but	the	user
interface	is	.	.	.	spartan.	I’ll	bring	you	up	to	speed.”

His	desk	was	crowded	with	copies	of	everything	I	had	been	translating	for
him	over	the	past	weeks.	My	notes	were	marked	up	with	colored-pencil	notes
of	his	own.	He	transferred	some	of	those	to	the	central	table	while	I	set	up	the
Chinese	food.	He	read	over	my	day’s	work	as	we	ate.

Then	we	reviewed	all	the	material	to	date.	It	took	us	until	sunrise.
In	all	the	documents	I’d	deciphered,	there	was	almost	no	useful	information

to	be	gleaned	regarding	the	“how”	of	magic,	which	is	what	I	assumed	Tristan’s
bosses	had	been	hoping	for.	We	discovered	some	examples	of	magic,	in	that	we
learned	 what	 was	 valued	 by	 both	 the	 witches	 themselves	 and	 those	 who
employed	 them.	 Of	 highest	 value	 was	 what	 Tristan	 called	 psy-ops
(psychological	 operations—mind	 control,	 essentially)	 and	 shape-shifting
(themselves	 or	 others).	 This	 was	 considered	 a	 weapon	 of	 considerable
significance,	whether	it	meant	turning	oneself	into	a	lion	or	turning	an	enemy
into	a	lower	form	of	life.	In	homage	to	Monty	Python,	we	employed	“newt”
as	shorthand.	Of	middling	value	was	the	transubstantiation	of	materials	and	the
animating	of	inanimate	objects.	Of	low	value	was	space/time-shifting,	such	as
teleportation,	which	was	viewed	as	a	laborious	leisure-time	diversion	across	all
witch	 populations.	 Much	 of	 what	 I	 had	 associated	 with	 “magic”	 in	 my
bookish	youth	was	disappointingly	 absent—there	were	 few	 references	 to	 the
mastering	 of	 natural	 forces,	 for	 instance.	 And	 there	 was	 absolutely	 nothing
about	the	mechanics	of	making	any	of	it	happen.

We	 did,	 however,	 glean	 something	 significant	 about	magic’s	 decline,	 and
this	is	what	led	to	our	next	stage	of	inquiry.



Diachronicle	
DAYS	57–221	 (WINTER,	YEAR	0)

In	which	Tristan	determines	to	fix	magic

AT	 DAWN,	 TRISTAN	 DROVE	 ME	 home	 to	 collect	my	 library,	 which	 had	 been
taking	up	a	significant	section	of	my	living	room	since	I’d	moved	out	of	my
faculty	office.	He	plied	me	with	coffee	and	croissants	until	I	felt	able	to	start	a
new	day	without	having	completed	 the	previous	one.	Back	 at	 the	office,	he
smiled	 broadly	 and	 presented	 me	 with	 the	 combination	 to	 one	 of	 the	 gun
safes.	It	was	full	of	photocopies	of	manuscripts,	documents,	and	artifacts	I	had
not	yet	 seen.	“At	 the	 rate	you’ve	been	working,	 this	box	will	probably	 take
you	about	a	month.”

“I	had	no	idea	there	was	this	much	still	to	do,”	I	said.
He	 was	 pulling	 documents	 out	 of	 the	 safe,	 arranging	 them	 on	 the	 table.

“Why	would	 I	hire	you	 for	 a	 six-month	contract	 if	 I	only	had	one	month’s
work	 for	 you?	 There’s	 a	 lot	more	where	 this	 came	 from.	 But	 it	 should	 be
easier	 now	 that	 we’ve	 sketched	 out	 the	 general	 picture.	 You	 know	 what
you’re	looking	for	now.”

“I	still	don’t	know	why	I’m	looking	for	it,”	I	said.
“You	know	that’s	classified,”	he	 said,	almost	paternal.	“Have	a	 seat.	Want

some	more	coffee?	Working	on	a	shoestring	budget	here,	but	I	can	spring	for
Dunkin’	Donuts.”

“DODO,”	I	said.	“Department	of	.	.	.	Donuts?”
“Do	you	like	sprinkles?”	he	asked.
While	 he	 got	 donuts,	 I	 unpacked	 my	 dictionaries	 and	 lexica	 and	 got	 to

work.

IF	 MY	 TRANSLATIONS	 were	 to	 be	 believed,	 at	 the	 start	 of	 the	 Scientific
Revolution	 (Copernicus	 in	 the	 1540s,	 etc.),	 magic	 was	 a	 ubiquitous	 and
powerful	 force	 in	 human	 affairs,	 and	witches	 were	 both	 revered	 and	 feared
members	 of	 most	 societies	 every	 bit	 as	 much	 as	 military	 leaders	 or	 priest-



mystics	 (although	 they	were	 rarely	written	 about,	 their	work	 being	 so	often
the	 equivalent	 of	 “classified”).	However,	 once	 the	Renaissance	 gave	way	 to
the	 Enlightenment,	 magic	 became	 less	 omnipresent	 and	 less	 powerful,
especially	in	institutions	of	learning	and	government.	Judging	by	the	hundreds
of	 references	 in	 the	 texts,	 it	 paled	 increasingly	 through	 the	 Industrial
Revolution—remaining	 most	 potent	 in	 artistic	 circles	 and	 least	 potent	 in
philosophical	ones	(these	two	populations	diverging	after	many	generations	of
entwining),	 more	 potent	 in	 societies	 not	 blessed	 with	 booming
industrialization,	and	slightly	more	potent	too	in	Islamic	cultures—and	then	it
vanished	altogether	in	the	nineteenth	century.	The	latest	text	was	dated	from
July	1851.	DODO	had	not	been	able	to	find	any	references	to	magic	after	that,
except	as	something	that	“once	was	but	is	no	more.”

I	translated	the	box	of	photocopied	documents	in	less	time	than	Tristan	had
anticipated,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 letup.	 I	 began	 to	 dream	 in	 dead	 languages	 as
ancient	 books,	 scrolls,	 and	 tablets	 kept	 coming,	 delivered	 to	 the	 drab	 office
building	almost	every	morning	by	unidentified	couriers	in	unmarked	vehicles.
Department	of—Dusty	Objects?	There	were	plenty	of	documents	 in	English
or	 modern	 Western	 languages—mostly	 these	 were	 transcripts	 of	 early
anthropologists	interviewing	the	elders	of	indigenous	peoples.	I	translated	the
ones	that	Tristan	couldn’t	read	for	himself,	and	he	built	a	database.	Reader,	if
you	 don’t	 know	what	 a	 database	 is,	 rest	 assured	 that	 an	 explanation	 of	 the
concept	would	in	no	way	increase	your	enjoyment	in	reading	this	account.	If
you	do	know,	you	will	thank	me	for	sparing	you	the	details.	A	dreary	enough
task	 even	with	modern	user	 interfaces,	 it	was	 a	mind-numbing	 death	march
when	 implemented	 on	 Shiny	 Hat.	 Tristan	 had	 to	 write	 little	 computer
programs	to	automate	some	of	the	data	entry	tasks.

One	of	the	things	we	kept	track	of	was	the	provenance	of	each	document:
Had	 it	come	 from	the	Library	of	Congress?	Was	 it	 simply	downloaded	 from
the	Internet?	Or	was	it	a	rare,	perhaps	unique	original?	Did	it	bear	any	stamps
or	markings	from	library	collections?	In	that	vein,	a	disproportionate	number
had	that	mysterious	stamp	on	the	title	page,	an	image	I’d	come	to	know	well:
the	 coat	 of	 arms	 of	 some	 aristocratic	 family,	 with	 extra	 bits	 of	 decorative
gingerbread	 all	 around	 it.	 Lacking	 any	 other	 information,	 I	 just	 entered	 this
into	the	database	with	the	code	WIMF.	Quite	a	few	of	the	WIMF	documents
bore	older	stamps	from	no	less	than	the	Vatican	Library,	raising	the	question	of
whether	the	WIMF	had	stolen	them?	Or	borrowed	them	and	never	brought
them	back?	Tristan	wasn’t	talking.



Almost	 as	 fast	 as	 they	 could	 be	 translated,	 more	 books	 showed	 up.	 We
would	empty	out	a	new	crate	and	then	 fill	 it	 right	up	again	with	books	 that
had	already	been	translated,	and	the	bland	couriers	would	haul	them	away.	To
where?	Many	of	 the	boxes	were	stenciled	with	a	 logo	I	did	not	recognize	at
the	time,	but	which	I	now	know	to	be	a	modernized,	streamlined	version	of
the	 brand	 used	 since	 time	 immemorial	 by	 the	 banking	 family	 known	 as	 the
Fuggers.

This	phase	ate	up	most	of	my	six-month	contract,	as	a	fierce	New	England
winter	yielded	muddily	to	spring.	Other	tenants	in	the	building—scruffy	start-
up	companies,	mostly—failed	or	got	 funded	and	moved	out.	Whenever	they
did,	Tristan	made	a	couple	of	phone	calls	and	ended	up	with	a	key	to	the	space
they’d	just	vacated.	In	this	way,	DODO’s	footprint	in	the	building	expanded.
We	inherited	cheap	plastic	chairs,	duffed-up	coffeemakers,	and	crumpled	filing
cabinets	 from	 the	 former	 neighbors.	 Clean-cut	 technicians	 showed	 up	 in
unmarked	 cars	 and	 put	 card	 readers	 on	 all	 the	 doors,	 expanding	 and	 sealing
what	 Tristan	 called	 “the	 perimeter.”	 The	 database	 grew	 like	 a	 dust	 bunny
under	the	bed.	Tristan	thought	of	ways	to	query	it,	to	search	for	patterns.	We
printed	things	out,	stuck	them	to	the	walls,	tore	them	down	and	did	it	again,
stretched	 colored	 yarn	 between	 pushpins.	We	went	 down	 blind	 alleys,	 then
backed	 out	 of	 them;	 we	 constructed	 huge	 Jenga	 towers	 of	 speculation	 and
then,	almost	gleefully,	knocked	them	over.

But	 there	was	never	 any	doubt	 as	 to	 the	gist:	 some	manner	of	cause-and-
effect	 relationship	 existed	 between	 the	 rise	 of	 scientific	 knowledge	 and	 the
decline	of	magic.	The	two	could	not	comfortably	coexist.	To	the	extent	that
the	database	could	be	cajoled	into	spitting	out	actual	numbers,	it	was	clear	that
magic	had	declined	gradually	but	steadily	starting	in	the	middle	of	the	1600s.	It
was	still	holding	its	own	in	the	opening	decades	of	the	1800s,	but	plunged	into
a	 nosedive	 during	 the	 1830s.	 From	 then	 through	 the	 1840s,	magic	 declined
precipitously.	 As	 our	 store	 of	 documents—many	 written	 by	 witches
themselves—grew	 to	 fill	 a	 phalanx	 of	 used	 filing	 cabinets	 and	 gun	 safes	 that
Tristan	 scored	on	Craigslist,	we	were	 able	 to	 track	 the	decline	 from	year	 to
year,	and	then	from	month	to	month.	These	poor	women	expressed	shock	at
the	 dwindling	 of	 their	 powers,	 in	 some	 cases	mentioning	 specific	 spells	 that
had	worked	a	few	weeks	ago	but	no	longer	had	effect.

As	it	turns	out,	in	1851—the	year	in	which	I	find	myself	as	I	scribble	these
words—all	 of	 the	world’s	 technologies	were	 brought	 together	 for	 the	Great
Exhibition	at	the	newly	constructed,	magnificent	Crystal	Palace	in	Hyde	Park,



London.	 Tristan’s	 hypothesis	 therefore	 held	 that	 this	 coming	 together,	 this
conscious	 concentration	 of	 technological	 advancement	 all	 in	 one	 point	 of
space-time,	had	dampened	magic	 to	 the	point	where	 it	 fizzled	out	 for	good.
Like	a	doused	fire,	it	had	no	power	to	re-kindle	itself	once	extinguished.

The	causal	 relationship	between	 the	 two	eluded	us	 for	a	 time.	 I	 suggested
that	magic’s	flourishing	required	people	to	believe	in	it,	but	Tristan	dismissed
this	mentality	as	belonging	more	to	children’s	literature	than	to	reality.	He	was
certain	there	was	a	mechanical	or	physical	causality,	that	there	was	something
about	 the	 technological	 worldview,	 or	 technology	 itself,	 that	 somehow
“jammed	 the	 frequencies”	magic	used.	We	both	began	 to	 read	whatever	we
could	 about	 the	 Great	 Exhibition	 in	 the	 hopes	 that	 it	 might	 illuminate
something.

(You	 may	 notice	 that	 I	 was	 exceeding	 by	 far	 my	 responsibilities	 as	 a
translator.	Translating,	 especially	 of	 obscure	 texts	written	 in	 extinct	 tongues,
often	resembles	the	solving	of	a	riddle.	Here	was	a	riddle	to	put	all	others	to
shame!	Tristan’s	enthusiasm	was	infectious	and	I	could	not	divest	myself	from
it.	Having	no	other	responsibilities,	I	became	as	preoccupied	with	his	project
as	he	was	himself.)

Per	Tristan’s	suggestions,	I	took	out	stacks	of	books	from	Widener	Library
(Harvard	had	not	 figured	out	yet	 that	 I’d	quit—I	 suppose	Blevins	wanted	 to
hide	the	fact	lest	it	reflect	poorly	on	him).	These	included	tomes	on	everything
from	heliography	 to	Queen	Victoria’s	private	 life	 to	Baruch	Spinoza’s	 sexual
proclivities	 to	Frederick	Bakewell	 to	 the	Tempest	Prognosticator	 to	Strouhal
numbers.	 I	 would	 bring	 these	 to	 Tristan,	 and	 we	 would	 divide	 our	 time
between	perusing	them	and	Internet	searches.

We	soon	knew	more	about	the	Great	Exhibition	and	its	thirteen-thousand-
odd	exhibits	than	Prince	Albert	ever	did.	We	knew	more	about	its	showcase,
the	Crystal	Palace,	than	even	Joseph	Paxton,	the	gardener	who’d	designed	the
fucking	 blessed	 thing.	 We	 learned	 little	 that	 was	 helpful.	 However,	 one
evening	 in	 March,	 as	 I	 sat	 on	 the	 consignment-store	 couch	 I’d	 insisted	 on
bringing	in	to	spruce	up	the	place,	and	Tristan	lolled	on	the	rug	(provenance
ditto)	beside	a	 low	table	with	a	beer,	each	of	us	bleary-eyed	 from	reading,	 I
encountered	 a	 passage	 in	 an	 obscure	 booklet	 entitled	 Arresting	 and	 Alluring
Astronomical	Anecdotes,	published	in	1897.	Here	I	learned	that	while	the	Great
Exhibition	of	 1851	was	 in	process	 (it	 lasted	 for	 several	months),	 an	 event	of
relative	 interest	 occurred	 elsewhere	 in	Europe,	 to	be	precise,	 in	Königsberg,
Prussia:	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 history,	 a	 solar	 eclipse	 was	 successfully



photographed.
I	 read	 this	 statement	aloud.	 It	 set	Tristan	on	 fire	with	excitement.	He	had

already	 suspected	 that	 photography	 in	 particular,	 of	 all	 technological
developments,	 was	 the	 likeliest	 to	 have	 somehow	 impeded	 magic.	 Now,
somehow,	he	was	certain.	It	took	me	a	while	to	calm	him	down	to	the	point
where	he	could	explain	himself.

“I’ll	 be	 honest	 with	 you:	 as	 a	 physicist,	 I	 am	 a	 hack,”	 he	 admitted.	 “I
majored	in	it,	yes,	but	I	was	never	employed	in	that	capacity.	But	if	you	cut
me	 I	 still	 bleed	 physicist	 blood.	 I’ll	 go	 to	my	 grave	 believing	 that,	 if	magic
existed,	there’s	a	scientific	explanation	for	it.”

“That	sounds	like	a	contradiction	to	me,”	I	said,	“since	our	whole	working
hypothesis	is	that	science	broke	it	somehow.”

He	 held	 up	 a	 hand.	 “Work	 with	 me	 here.	 Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 of	 the
many-worlds	interpretation	of	quantum	mechanics?”

“Only	 in	cocktail	party	discourse	 that	would	make	you	roll	your	eyes	and
heave	deep	sighs.”

“Well,	 there	 are	 certain	 experiments	where	 the	 results	 only	make	 sense	 if
the	 system	 that’s	 being	observed	actually	 exists	 in	more	 than	 one	 state	 until	 the
moment	when	the	scientist	makes	the	observation.”

“Is	this	Schrödinger’s	cat?	Because	even	I	have	heard	of	that.”
“That’s	the	classic	example.	It’s	just	a	thought	experiment,	by	the	way.	No

one	ever	actually	did	it.”
“That’s	good.	PETA	would	be	all	over	them.”
“Do	you	know	what	it	is?”	Without	waiting	for	me	to	answer,	Tristan	went

on:	“You	put	a	cat	in	a	sealed	box.	There’s	a	device	inside	of	the	box	that	is
capable	of	killing	the	cat,	by	breaking	open	a	vial	of	poison	gas	or	something.
That	 device	 is	 triggered	 by	 some	 random	 event	 generator,	 like	 a	 sample	 of
some	radioactive	material	that	either	decays—producing	a	bit	of	radiation—or
doesn’t.	 You	 close	 the	 lid.	 The	 cat	 and	 the	 poison	 gas	 and	 the	 radioactive
sample	 become	 a	 sealed	 system—you	 cannot	 predict	 or	 know	 what	 has
happened.”

“You	don’t	know	if	the	cat	is	alive	or	dead,”	I	said.
“It’s	 not	 just	 that	 you	 don’t.	 You	 can’t.	 There	 is	 literally	 no	 way	 of

knowing,”	Tristan	said.	“Now,	in	a	classical	physics	way	of	thinking,	it’s	either
one	or	the	other.	The	cat	is	either	alive	or	dead	for	real.	You	just	don’t	happen
to	know	which.	But	in	a	quantum	physics	way	of	thinking,	the	cat	really	is	both
alive	and	dead.	 It	exists	 in	 two	mutually	 incompatible	 states	at	 the	 same	 time.



Not	until	you	open	the	lid	and	look	inside	does	the	wave	function	collapse.”
“Whoa,	whoa,	you	had	me	until	the	very	end!”	I	protested.	“When	did	we

start	talking	about—what	did	you	call	it?	A	wave	function?	And	how	does	that
—whatever	it	is—collapse?”

“My	bad,”	he	 said.	 “It’s	 just	 physicist	 lingo	 for	what	 I	was	 saying.	 If	 you
were	to	express	the	Schrödinger’s	cat	experiment	mathematically,	you’d	write
down	an	equation	 that	 is	 called	a	wave	 function.	That	 function	has	multiple
terms	that	are	superimposed—it’s	not	just	one	thing.”

“Multiple	terms,”	I	repeated	bleakly.
“Yeah.	A	term	here	means	a	fragment	of	math—it	is	to	an	equation	what	a

phrase	is	to	a	sentence.”
“So	you’re	saying	there	is	one	term	for	‘cat	is	alive’	and	another	for	‘cat	is

dead’?	Is	that	what	you	mean	in	this	usage?”
“Yes,	O	linguist.”
“And	when	you	say	they	are	superimposed—”
“Mathematically	 it	 just	means	 that	 they	are	 sort	of	added	 to	each	other	 to

make	a	combined	picture	of	the	system.”
“Until	it	‘collapses’	or	whatever.”
He	 nodded.	 “Multiple	 terms	 superimposed	 is	 a	 quantum	 thing.	 It	 is	 the

essence	of	quantum	mechanics.	But	there	is	this	interesting	fact,	which	is	that
that	kind	of	math	only	works—it	only	provides	an	accurate	description	of	the
system—until	you	open	the	lid	and	look	inside.	At	that	point,	you	see	a	 live
cat	or	a	dead	cat.	Period.	It	has	become	a	classical	system.”

“Department	of	.	.	.	Deadly	Observations?”	I	asked.
He	rolled	his	eyes.
“Anyway,	that’s	what	you	mean	by	the	collapse	of	the	wave	function.”
“Yes,	 it’s	 just	 physicist-speak	 for	 the	 thing	 that	 happens	 when	 all	 of	 the

superimposed	 terms—the	 descriptions	 of	 different	 possible	 realities—resolve
into	a	single,	classical	outcome	that	our	brains	can	understand.”

“Our	scientific,	rational	brains,	you	mean,”	I	corrected	him.
A	look	of	mild	satisfaction	came	onto	his	face.	“Exactly.”
“But	now	we’ve	circled	back	to	my	theory!”	I	complained.
He	looked	mildly	confused.	“Which	theory	is	that?”
“The	 one	 that	 belongs	 more	 to	 children’s	 literature	 than	 to	 reality—

remember?”
“Oh,	yeah.	People	have	to	believe	in	magic.”
“Yes!”



“That’s	not	exactly	what	I’m	saying,”	he	said.	“Yes,	human	consciousness	is
in	 the	 loop.	But	hear	me	out.	 If	you	buy	 the	many-worlds	 interpretation	of
quantum	mechanics,	 it	means	 that	all	possible	outcomes	are	 really	happening
somewhere.”

“There’s	one	world	with	a	live	cat	and	another	with	a	dead	cat.”
“Exactly.	 No	 kidding.	 Complete,	 fully	 independent	 realities	 that	 are	 the

same	except	 that	 in	one	of	 them,	 the	 cat’s	 dead,	 and	 in	 the	other,	 it’s	 alive.
And	 the	 quantum	 superposition?	 That	 just	 means	 that	 the	 scientist	 standing
there	with	his	hand	on	the	lid	of	the	box	is	at	a	fork	in	the	road.	Both	paths—
both	worlds—are	open	 to	him.	He	could	 shunt	 into	one,	or	 the	other.	And
when	he	hauls	the	lid	open,	the	decision	gets	made.	He	is	now	in	one	world
or	the	other	and	there’s	no	going	back.”

“Okay,”	 I	 said.	 Not	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 I	 agree	 with	 you	 but	 of	 I	 am	 paying
attention.

“The	scientist	can’t	control	which	path	he	or	she	takes,”	Tristan	continued.
I	saw	that	he	was	trolling	me—waiting	for	me	to	pick	up	the	bait.
No,	it	was	more	than	that.	He	wanted	me	to	mention	a	possibility	that	he

could	think	about,	but	never	say	out	loud—because	he	was	all	Mr.	Science.
So	I	did.	“Let’s	switch	it	up	a	little,	then,”	I	said.	“And	swap	out	the	white

lab	coat	and	the	clipboard	for,	I	don’t	know,	a	pointy	black	hat	and	a	broom.
And	 lose	 a	 pronoun.	 If	 she	 did	 somehow	 have	 the	 ability	 to	 choose	 which
world	she	was	going	to	be	shunted	to	when	she	opened	the	lid—if	she	could
control	the	outcome—”

“It	would	look	like	magic.”
“What	do	you	mean	‘look	like’?	It	would	be	magic.”
“Just	saying,”	Tristan	said,	“that	it’s	about	choosing	possible	outcomes	that

already	 exist—slipstreaming	 between	 closely	 related	 alternate	 realities—as
opposed	to	bringing	those	realities	into	existence.”

“But	that’s	a	distinction	without	a	difference.”
“As	 far	 as	 normal	 observers	 are	 concerned?	 People	 who	 haven’t	 studied

quantum	physics?	Sure,”	he	agreed.
“Put	it	however	you	like,”	I	said.	“A	witch	may	summon	the	desired	effect

from	 a	 parallel-slash-simultaneous	 reality.	 Thus	 the	 historical	 references	 of
witches’	magic	as	‘summoning’—that	is	quite	literally	what	they	were	doing.”

“My	 hypothesis,”	 Tristan	 said—pronouncing	 the	 word	 with	 exaggerated
care,	 since	 he	 had	 a	 few	 Old	 Tearsheet	 Best	 Bitters	 in	 him—“is	 that
photography	 disables	 this	 summoning,	 as	 you	 called	 it.	 Photography	 breaks



magic	 by	 embalming	 a	 specific	 moment—one	 version	 of	 reality—into	 a
recorded	 image.	 Once	 that	 moment	 is	 so	 recorded,	 then	 all	 other	 possible
versions	 of	 that	 moment	 are	 excluded	 from	 the	 world	 that	 contains	 that
photograph.”

“I	 get	 it,”	 I	 said.	 “There	 is	 no	 wiggle	 room	 left	 in	 which	 to	 function
magically.”

He	nodded.	He	 seemed	 relieved	 to	have	got	 all	 of	 this	off	his	 chest.	And
that	I	hadn’t	laughed	him	out	of	the	room.

“You’ve	been	thinking	about	this	for	a	while,”	I	said.
He	nodded.
“But	 it	wasn’t	until	we	saw	the	daguerreotype	of	 the	solar	eclipse	that	 the

penny	dropped.”
“That’s	right.”
“That	was	only	about	the	bazillionth	daguerreotype	ever	made,”	I	pointed

out.	 “People	 had	 been	 taking	 photographs	 for	 sixteen	 years	 by	 that	 point.
What’s	so	special	about	that	one?”

“The	scope	of	it,	I	think,”	Tristan	said.	“The	number	of	minds,	and	worlds,
affected.	 If	 I’m	 Louis	 Daguerre	 screwing	 around	 in	 my	 lab	 in	 Paris,	 taking
pictures	of	whatever	is	handy,	then	I’ve	collapsed	the	waveform,	yes.	But	only
inasmuch	 as	 it	 encompasses	my	brain	 and	 a	 few	 little	objects	 in	my	 lab.	 If	 I
show	 the	 daguerreotype	 to	 my	 wife	 or	 my	 friend,	 then	 the	 effect—the
collapsing	of	 the	waveform—spreads	 to	them	as	well.	And	we	can	guess	 that
witches	 who	 live	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 might	 sense	 a	 dampening	 of	 their
magical	abilities,	without	understanding	why.	But	the	total	eclipse	of	the	sun
on	 July	 28,	 1851,	was	 probably	witnessed	 by	more	 human	 beings	 than	 any
other	event	in	the	history	of	the	world	up	to	that	point.”

“Of	course,”	I	said.	“Everyone	in	Europe	could	see	it—”
“Just	by	looking	up	into	the	sky.	Hundreds	of	millions	of	people,	Mel.	That

event	captured	more	eyeballs,	at	 the	 same	moment,	 than	any	Beyoncé	video
on	 YouTube.	 And	 to	 the	 extent	 that	 it	 was	 frozen,	 embalmed,	 on	 a
daguerreotype,	well—”

I	was	nodding.	“If	previous	uses	of	photography	had	dampened	magic,	then
this	was	like	dumping	the	Atlantic	Ocean	on	it.”

He	nodded.	“When	the	shutter	opened	to	capture	that	first	perfect	image	of
the	eclipse,	magic	ceased	to	function	across	all	human	societies.”

We	back-checked	the	dates	of	all	documents	from	1851.	Indeed:	there	were
three	 from	 the	 first	 half	 of	 the	 year	 (two	English,	 one	 Italian).	There	was	 a



fragment	of	one	in	late	July	(Hungarian).	There	were	none	after	July	28,	the
date	of	the	eclipse.	None.

“That’s	it,”	muttered	Tristan,	preoccupied,	getting	to	his	feet.	He	rested	his
hands	on	his	desk	and	stared	absently	at	the	wall.

“Yes,”	I	said.	I	felt	deflated.	Although	he’d	never	told	me	why	DODO	was
so	interested	in	understanding	magic,	common	sense	screamed	it	was	because
they	wanted	 to	 be	 able	 to	 do	 it.	 Department	 of	 Doing	 the	Occult?	Which
clearly	could	never	happen:	“There’s	no	getting	rid	of	photography,	so	there’s
no	bringing	magic	back.”

Tristan	 froze	 and,	 after	 a	 beat,	 jerked	 his	 head	 in	 my	 direction.	 “You’re
right,”	he	said,	staring.	“That’s	it.	Where	there	is	no	photography,	there	could
still	be	magic.”

“That’s	not	quite	what	I	said.”
He	began	to	pace	the	office.	We	had	made	it	somewhat	larger	by	knocking

out	 walls	 that	 separated	 it	 from	 adjoining	 spaces,	 but	 this	 still	 required
following	a	figure-eightish	path	between	piles	of	books,	artifacts,	freestanding
gun	safes,	to-be-recycled	beer	bottles,	and	still-unexplained	high-tech	military
gear.	“How	do	we	get	 rid	of	photography,”	he	murmured,	more	 to	himself
than	to	me.

“We	cannot	‘get	rid	of	photography.’”
“No,	it’s	definitely	possible,”	he	insisted,	eyes	unfocused	as	he	paced.	“I	just

have	to	figure	out	how	it’s	done.”
“What	do	you	mean,	how	it’s	done?”
He	shook	his	head,	grimacing,	dismissing	me.	“I’m	not	seeing	something,”

he	said.	“What	am	I	missing?”
“You’re	 missing	 the	 part	 where	 photography	 became	 ubiquitous	 and	 all

magic	went	away	forever.”
He	turned	to	look	at	me,	his	eyes	focused	now,	and	bright.	“No,”	he	said,

almost	scolding	me.	“It’s	not	a	lost	cause.”
That	was	not	the	tone	of	hypothesis	or	theory;	that	was	the	tone	of	either

faith	or	knowledge.	I	felt	a	shiver	run	down	my	spine.
“I	realize	there	are	a	lot	of	things	you	can’t	tell	me,”	I	said,	“but	whatever	it

specifically	is	you’re	not	telling	me	at	this	precise	moment	.	.	.	 fucking	tell	me.
Otherwise	I’m	useless.”

His	 gaze	went	 fuzzy	 again	 as	 he	 engaged	 in	 some	 brief	mental	 soliloquy.
Then	he	nodded.	“I	can’t	tell	you	much,”	he	said.	“But	I	can	tell	you	that	we
know	it’s	possible.”



“.	.	.	we?”
“DODO,”	he	confirmed.	“There’s	evidence.	That’s	all	I	can	say.”
“Wow,”	I	said,	feeling	pathetically	inarticulate	for	a	linguist.	“Good	God.”
“Yes.	 It’s	 a	 thing,”	 he	 said.	 “It’s	 real.	 There’s	 just”—he	made	 a	 frustrated

reaching	 gesture—“there’s	 a	missing	 piece.	 And	 I’m	 so	 close.	 It’s	 got	 to	 be
photography,	 that	makes	 sense,	 it	 aligns	chronologically,	 it	 aligns	with	magic
failing	slightly	earlier	in	societies	that	valued	and	used	the	photographic	image,
and	lingering	just	a	little	in	cultures	that	didn’t,	like	Islam	and	aboriginal	tribes.
That’s	 got	 to	 be	 it.	 There	 has	 to	 be	 some	 way	 to	 make	 photography	 not
happen.”

“But	 the	 existence	 of	 cloud	 technology,	 cell	 phones,	 video	 surveillance,
means	photography	is	literally	everywhere.”

“I	 don’t	 need	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it	 everywhere,”	 Tristan	 said	 impatiently.	 “Just
within	one	manageable	space.”	He	stopped	short,	in	the	middle	of	the	room,
and	 looked	 around	 through	 narrowed,	 thoughtful	 eyes	 as	 if	 at	 invisible
colleagues.	“Okay,	that’s	part	of	it.	A	controlled	environment.	If	we	can	create
an	 environment	 in	which	 photography	 not	 only	 does	 not	 happen,	 but	 could
not	happen,	then	perhaps	magic	could	exist	within	that	space.”

“And	you	guys,	you	DODOs,	think	someone’s	already	doing	that?”
He	nodded	slowly.	“If	they	can	do	it,	we	can	do	it.	We	just	have	to	figure

out	how.”	For	a	moment	he	was	gone,	 lost	completely	in	thought,	even	the
alertness	 of	 the	 trained	 soldier	 distracted	 by	 the	 intense	 introspection	 of	 the
thinker.	“Let’s	break	it	down,”	he	said.	“First:	photography	collapses	the	wave
function	of	light.”

“Yes.	Or	so	you	told	me.	So	I’m	just	going	to	sit	here	and	say	yes.”
“So,”	 he	 continued,	 “if	we	 can	 interfere	with	 that	 collapse—”	And	 then

seeing	the	stupid	look	on	my	face,	tried,	“If	we	can	keep	the	quantum	balls	in
the	air—”

“Like,	by	not	opening	the	lid	of	the	box?”
“What	box?”
“The	box	with	the	cat	in	it.	Schrödinger’s	cat.”
He	gave	a	 little	 shake	of	 the	head.	“That’s	 just	a	 thought	experiment.	But

you’re	onto	something,”	he	said.
I	knew	perfectly	well	that	it	was	a	thought	experiment.	But	that	could	wait.

It	 felt	 like	we	were	 on	 the	 trail	 of	 something.	And	 I	was	 fascinated—and	 a
little	 alarmed—by	 the	 subtext,	which	 seemed	 to	be	 that	 this	wasn’t	 all	 just	 a
dry	 academic	 research	 project,	 but	 something	 akin	 to	 an	 active	 military



campaign.	 Someone,	 somewhere	 in	 the	 world	 was	 doing	 magic.	 The
government	of	the	United	States	didn’t	know	how—or	perhaps	even	who.	 It
was	 a	 Sputnik	 moment:	 someone	 else	 had	 stolen	 a	 march	 on	 us.	 Tristan’s
shadowy	government	entity	had	obviously	been	thrown	together	in	a	panicky
effort	to	catch	up.

Tristan	 settled	 back	 down,	 and	 muttered	 buzzwords	 (“collapse	 of	 wave
function,”	 “quantum	 entanglement”).	 I	 typed	 them	 into	 Google,	 while
Tristan,	hunched	over	his	Shiny	Hat	terminal,	used	other	search	engines	only
available	to	people	working	for	shadowy	government	entities.	An	initial	search
for	 “quantum	 wave	 function”	 yielded	 four	 hundred	 thousand	 responses	 (it
went	up	to	three	million	without	the	quotes)	and	advanced	searches—adding
“collapse,”	 etc.—had	brought	 it	 down	 to	 about	 thirty-five	 thousand.	Mostly
what	 came	 up	 were	 YouTube	 videos	 of	 geeky-looking	 high	 school	 kids
attempting	experiments	in	their	parents’	cellars,	often	with	refrigerators	or	the
remnants	of	darkroom	chemicals,	 frequently	 resulting	 in	 small	but	 interesting
explosions.	 There	 were	 also	 a	 kajillion	 academic	 papers	 that	 Tristan,	 the
undergraduate	 physicist,	 dismissed	 by	 their	 titles	 alone.	We	 added	more	 and
more	modifying	 terms	 to	 focus	 the	 search.	 In	 this	way,	 several	hours	passed.
No	dice.

We	stopped	for	dinner	(take-out	Indian—actual	Indian	food,	not	the	insipid
so-called	‘curry’	now	coming	into	fashion	here	in	Victorian	London	thanks	to
the	East	India	Company’s	running	riot	over	the	Punjab).	We	then	continued
the	 search	 all	 evening;	 I	 biked	 home,	 slept,	 and	 biked	 back,	 and	 we	 kept
searching.	 Late	 morning,	 we	 paused	 long	 enough	 to	 take	 a	 walk	 along	 the
Charles,	as	being	cramped	in	that	small	dingy	office	so	long	was	crazy-making.
For	 most	 of	 the	 walk,	 Tristan	 continued	 to	 brainstorm	 in	 a	 soliloquy	 that
further	convinced	me	he	was	both	brilliant	and	a	pretty	bad	listener.

Back	at	his	office	after	the	walk,	he	ransacked	the	fridge	for	some	leftovers
that	hadn’t	gone	bad,	while	I	returned	to	my	desk	to	scroll	through	the	results
of	 yet	 another	 highly	 modified	 Google	 search.	 As	 long	 as	 Tristan	 wasn’t
looking	over	my	shoulder,	I	tried	something:	I	searched	on	“Schrödinger’s	cat
experiment”	 and	 then	 began	 adding	 in	 other	 terms	 to	 narrow	 it	 down.	 I
excluded	 “thought	 experiment”	 and	 its	 German	 equivalent,
Gedankenexperiment.	 I	 threw	out	 anything	 that	 included	 such	phrases	 as	“will
shock	 you!”	 and	 “you	 won’t	 believe	 what	 happened	 next!”	 I	 skewed	 the
search	in	favor	of	words	like	“actual,”	“practical,”	and	“real-world.”

Reader,	you	won’t	believe	what	happened	next.	A	single	response	came	up.



“Rejected	 patent	 application,”	 I	 read	 aloud	 to	 Tristan.	 “Someone	 from
MIT	applied	 for	a	patent	 for	 .	 .	 .	hang	on	 .	 .	 .”	My	eyes	 skimmed	over	 the
legalese	and	bureaucratese	(two	languages	I	had	never	mastered),	until	I	found
something	descriptive	to	read.	“Something	he	calls	a	cavity,	intended	to	quote
‘jam	enemy	nations’	surveillance	systems	by	maintaining	a	feline	test	subject	in
an	indeterminate	state	of	existence.’	Unquote.”

I	 heard	 the	 microwave	 shut	 down.	 “I	 can’t	 hear	 a	 thing	 when	 this	 is
running,”	Tristan	said.	He	turned	to	look	at	me.	“I	could	have	sworn	you	just
said	something	about	a	feline	test	subject.”

I	 looked	 him	 in	 the	 eye	 and	 nodded.	 “It’s	 called	 the	Ontic	Decoherence
Cavity.	 ODEC.	 Proposed	 by	 Professor	 Frank	 Oda.	 Kind	 of	 a	 narcissist,	 I
guess.”

“How	do	you	figure?”
“He	named	it	after	himself.	Oda—ODEC.”
“I’m	not	so	sure.	‘Ontic’	means—”
“I	know	what	it	means.”
“Something	to	do	with	knowledge.	Decoherence,	as	I	am	sure	you	are	well

aware,	means	its	negation.	Something	about	this	cavity	prevents	the	formation
of	 definite	 knowledge.	 So,	 it	 lines	up	pretty	well	with	what	we	 are	 looking
for.”

“Cool!”	 I	 exclaimed,	 and	 began	 Googling	 Frank	 Oda.	 “Let’s	 figure	 out
where	he	lives	and—”

“But	it’s	a	joke,”	Tristan	said	flatly.	“The	guy	is	a	troll.	Oh,	a	scientifically
sophisticated	troll.	Making	a	very	clever	in-joke.	But	a	troll	nonetheless.”

“What	makes	you	so	sure?”
“The	 part	 about	 the	 feline	 test	 subject.	 Mel,	 this	 is	 just	 a	 prank.	 A	 fake

patent	application	that	this	guy	put	on	the	Internet	for	the	lulz.	He	slipped	it
past	some	dipshit	patent	examiner	who	didn’t	know	physics,	had	never	heard
of	Schrödinger’s	cat.	Any	physicist	who	stumbles	across	it	will	get	a	belly	laugh
out	of	it	and	move	on.	But	we	need	to	confine	ourselves	to	serious—”

He	stopped	to	read	the	screen	of	my	laptop,	which	I	had	swiveled	around	to
aim	in	his	direction.

It	was	 a	 thirty-year-old	 article	 I	had	dredged	up	 from	 the	 archives	of	The
Howler,	 an	 alternative	weekly	newspaper,	 now	defunct,	 but	once	 a	 common
sight	on	the	streets	of	Boston	and	Cambridge.	Known	for	its	leftist	politics	and
muckraking	 fervor.	 The	 article	 featured	 two	 photographs.	 On	 the	 left,	 a
middle-aged	 Asian-American	 man,	 captured	 by	 a	 sidewalk	 paparazzo	 as	 he



took	 out	 the	 garbage.	 On	 the	 right,	 a	 stock	 photograph	 of	 a	 wire	 mesh
enclosure	in	some	animal	shelter,	housing	a	menagerie	of	stray	cats.

CAT’S	OUT	OF	THE	BAG,	PROFESSOR	ODA!
MIT	professor	denies	cruelty	to	animals,	but	accepts	early	retirement.

Tristan	licked	curry	from	his	fingers,	reached	for	the	trackpad,	and	zoomed
the	image	on	the	left.	“Empty	boxes,	old	newspapers,	a	milk	jug,	and	a	wine
bottle.”

“You’re	identifying	the	contents	of	the	garbage	bag?”
“No	dead	cats.	Or	live	ones.”
“Maybe	it’s	a	Schrödinger’s	Hefty	bag.”	I	spun	the	computer	back	around

to	 face	me,	 and	Tristan	 scampered	 around	 the	 table	 so	 that	he	 could	 read	 it
over	my	shoulder.	Parsing	the	story	wasn’t	easy	given	the	amount	of	tabloid-
style	innuendo	and	leaps	of	inference,	combined	with	the	heavy	presumption
that	Frank	Oda	was	 guilty	of	 something.	But	 the	bottom	 line	 seemed	 to	be
this:	Professor	Frank	Oda,	 a	 theoretical	 physicist	 at	MIT,	had,	 three	decades
ago,	gone	off	the	reservation	and	started	attempting	to	do	experimental	physics.

It	had	started	with	what	seemed	like	a	gag:	a	prop,	for	use	in	undergraduate
physics	lectures,	consisting	of	a	box	with	an	actual	cat	in	it,	and	a	mockup	of
the	 apparatus	envisioned	 in	 the	Schrödinger’s	 cat	Gedankenexperiment.	 So	 far,
so	 good.	 A	 fine	 way	 to	 liven	 up	 an	 otherwise	 dry	 lecture.	 No	 cats	 were
harmed;	the	cat-killing	mechanism	was	obviously	fake,	just	a	glass	bottle	with	a
skull	and	crossbones	painted	on	it	and	a	Rube	Goldberg	contraption	involving
a	 rat	 trap	 and	 a	 Geiger	 counter.	 But	 if	 the	 story	 was	 to	 be	 believed,	 the
construction	 of	 this	 device	 had	 caused	 Oda	 to	 become	 obsessed	 with	 the
underlying	 concept.	 Which	 was	 very	 real—foundational	 to	 quantum
mechanics,	and	not	disputed	by	anyone.

“Holy	 fuck,”	 Tristan	 exclaimed.	 Which	 for	 him,	 clean-cut	 West	 Pointer
that	he	was,	was	a	mickle	oath.	We	were	on	page	three	now.	“He	actually	did
it.”

“No	way,	they	must	have	got	something	wrong.”
Tristan	pointed	to	a	phrase	in	the	middle	of	the	screen.

Records	 obtained	 by	The	Howler	 from	 the	 Somerville	 Animal	 Shelter
indicate	that	Dr.	Oda	“adopted”	no	fewer	than	six	cats	from	the	facility
over	a	span	of	three	months	in	spring	of	last	year.	This	coincides	with	a
formal	 request	 made	 by	 MIT	 authorities	 that	 Oda	 remove	 “all



apparatus	involving	living	test	subjects”	from	his	on-campus	laboratory.
According	to	a	former	graduate	student	interviewed	by	The	Howler,	who
requested	anonymity	for	fear	of	possible	professional	repercussions,	Dr.
Oda	complied	with	the	request	by	relocating	the	ODEC	project	to	the
basement	of	the	Cambridge	home	that	he	shares	with	his	wife,	Rebecca
East.

“Maybe	Rebecca’s	a	cat	lover,”	I	said.
“Then	why	were	 the	 cats	 being	kept	 in	his	 lab	 at	MIT	until	 they	kicked

him	out?”
“There’s	gotta	be	an	explanation.”
“Keep	scrolling.”

Contacted	 at	 his	 home	 by	 a	 reporter	 from	The	Howler,	 the	 disgraced
mad	 scientist	 denied	 all	 wrongdoing.	 “This	 was	 never	 about	 the	 cat
being	alive	or	dead,”	he	insisted,	repeating	a	claim	he	had	also	made	in
internal	MIT	documents	obtained	by	The	Howler.	 “Killing	 the	cat	 isn’t
of	 the	 essence.	 The	 point	 is	 that	 the	 cat	 is	 in	 either	 one	 state,	 or
another.	 I	 was	 experimenting	 with	 other	 states—non-fatal,	 non-
painful.”	 Pressed	 by	 the	 reporter	 to	 provide	 specific	 examples,	 Oda
seemed	flustered	and	became	inarticulate—which	is	consistent	with	the
claim	made	by	anonymous	sources	in	his	neighborhood	that	he	has,	in
recent	 years,	 exhibited	 signs	 of	 mental	 impairment	 consistent	 with
senile	dementia.	“I	don’t	know,	how	many	states	is	it	possible	for	a	cat
to	 be	 in?	 Asleep	 or	 awake.	 Sitting	 down	 or	 standing	 up.	 Purring	 or
meowing.	Any	of	them	is	as	good	as	alive	or	dead	for	purposes	of	the
experiment.”	Asked	why	 an	 equivalent	 experiment	 couldn’t	 have	 been
performed	 on	 a	 non-living	 subject,	 Oda	 shook	 his	 head
condescendingly.	 “The	 test	 subject	 must	 contain	 living,	 active	 brain
tissue,”	 he	 said.	 “That’s	 how	 the	 apparatus	works.”	 The	 interview	was
cut	short	at	that	point	by	Oda’s	wife,	Rebecca	East,	who	emerged	from
their	 house—a	 colonial-era	 dwelling	 on	 a	 tree-lined	 street	 near	 the
Harvard	campus—brandishing	a	broom	at	the	reporter.	Ms.	East,	who
appeared	 upset,	 insisted	 that	 none	 of	 the	 cats	 had	 been	 mistreated,
adding	 that	 the	 shelter	 from	which	 they	 had	 been	 adopted	was	 a	 so-
called	“kill	shelter,”	meaning	that	all	of	the	animals	had	been	earmarked
for	 euthanasia	 anyway.	The	Howler’s	 reporter,	 fearing	 for	 her	 personal



safety,	 fled	 from	 the	 premises	 and	 later	 filed	 a	 report	 with	 the
Cambridge	 Police	Department.	 The	 subsequent	 criminal	 investigation
was	terminated	when	Ms.	East	claimed	to	the	investigating	officer	that
she	had	been	using	the	broom	to	sweep	vegetable	debris	from	her	front
walk.

“Off	with	their	heads!”	I	exclaimed.	Tristan	had	already	tired	of	reading	the
article	and	begun	searching	Oda’s	background	using	his	top-secret	equivalent
of	Google.	 “That’s	 pretty	 old	 history,	 Stokes,”	 he	 said,	without	 looking	up.
“And	not	even	accurate.	Let	it	go.”	He	kept	reading.	“Check	it	out—this	guy
also	worked	for	DARPA,	and	what	he	did	there	was—”

“What’s	DARPA?”	I	asked.
Tristan	looked	appalled.	“Wow,”	he	said,	almost	thoughtfully.	“Wow.	You

really	aren’t	up	to	speed,	are	you?”
“I	study	dead	languages	for	a	living,”	I	said.	“That’s	why	you	hired	me.	Why

should	I	be	up	 to	 speed	on	your	 line	of	work?	How’s	your	Serbo-Croatian?
What’s	your	position	on	the	relationship	between	Oscan	and	Marrucinian?”

He	gave	me	an	amused	look.	“Wouldn’t	have	pegged	you	as	pissy,	Stokes,”
he	said.	“Okay.	DARPA.	Defense	Advanced	Research	Projects	Agency.”

“Ah.	The	 stealth	bomber	guys.	The	ones	who	develop	clever	ways	 to	kill
people.”

“They’ve	 developed	 all	 kinds	 of	 things,”	 said	 Tristan	 breezily.	 “Not	 just
weapons.	Night-vision	 technology,	GPS	 satellites.	Surely	 somebody	 living	 in
Boston	can	appreciate	GPS.”

“I	bike	everywhere,”	I	said	in	a	superior	tone.	“I	read	maps.	I	don’t	rely	on
Big	Brother	to	tell	me	where	to	go.”

Abruptly,	he	sobered.	“If	you’re	going	to	get	anti-establishment	on	me,	this
won’t	work.	The	 first	 thing	 you	 learned	 about	me	was	 that	 I	work	 for	 the
government,	and	the	second	thing	you	learned	was	that	I	went	to	West	Point.
Eighty-six	the	attitude.”

Taken	aback	by	this	sudden	intensity,	I	held	my	hands	up	briefly.	“Fine,”	I
said	in	a	conciliatory	tone.	“DARPA.”

“And	even	after	his	forced	retirement	from	MIT,	he	kept	on	doing	work—
serious	work—for	them.”

“Did	it	involve	cats?”
“Classified.	But	my	point	is	that	the	accusation	of	senile	dementia	is	reckless,

unfounded.	He	turned	in	good	work	as	recently	as”—he	paged	to	the	bottom



of	a	screen—“four	years	ago.”
“The	patent	application	said	something	about	jamming	foreign	surveillance

devices.”
“When	DARPA	signs	your	paychecks,”	he	said,	“everything	you	do	relates

to	 national	 defense.	 Frank	Oda	was	 trying	 to	 create	 a	 defensive	 technology
involving	the	sort	of	science	we’re	interested	in.	But	.	.	.	the	patent	application
was	rejected.”

“What	do	you	think	he	meant	by	this	line	.	.	.”	I	scrolled	back	in	the	Howler
article.	“The	test	subject	must	contain	living,	active	brain	tissue?”

“Something	to	do	with	how	the	ODEC	works,	I	guess.”
“I	find	it	mildly	unsettling.”
“Maybe	 we	 should	 just	 ask	 him.”	 Tristan	 typed	 something	 into	 the

computer.	As	he	read	the	result,	his	eyes	went	wide,	as	they	usually	did	when
he	was	pleasantly	surprised	by	something.

“Stokes,”	he	said.	“He’s	still	around.	Right	here	in	Cambridge.”
“That’s	convenient,”	I	said.	“What	address?”
By	way	of	an	answer,	he	swiveled	his	screen	around	so	I	could	see	the	map

he’d	Googled	up.
I	almost	choked	on	my	saag	paneer.	“It’s	right	down	Mass	Ave	from	where

I	live!”	I	said.	“We	could	walk	there	from	here	in	less	than	half	an	hour.”
Tristan	 grinned	 and	 reached	 for	his	 pocket.	 “We	 can	 call	 even	 faster	 than

that.”	He	punched	a	number	into	his	phone,	reading	off	the	computer	screen.
As	 it	connected	and	began	 to	ring	on	 the	other	end,	he	gave	me	a	 sideways
grin,	 like	 a	 child	 about	 to	 be	 awarded	 a	 prize	 for	 solving	 a	 riddle.	 I	 smiled
back.

But	 the	 moment	 wore	 on	 and	 his	 smile	 faded	 until	 finally	 he	 hung	 up.
“Huh.	No	answer.”	He	 looked	 at	his	phone	 as	 if	 it	had	 insulted	him.	“Not
even	an	answering	machine.	That’s	weird.	Nobody	does	that	these	days.”

“Maybe	he’s	a	Luddite,”	I	said.
“An	 MIT	 physics	 professor	 who	 tried	 to	 patent	 groundbreaking

technological	inventions	is	a	Luddite?”
“He	 was	 rebuffed,”	 I	 pointed	 out.	 “He	 overreacted	 and	 now	 he’s	 a

Luddite.”
“Lunchtime’s	 over,”	 said	 Tristan,	 standing	 and	 reaching	 for	 his	 Yankees

sweatshirt.	“We’re	going	for	a	visit.”



THE	 ODAS	 LIVED	 on	 a	 street	 of	 grand	 houses,	 most	 of	 which,	 judging	 by
appearance,	had	been	built	in	the	late	1800s.	But	theirs	stuck	out	like	a	pilgrim
at	a	White	House	dinner.	A	plain,	gable-roofed	three-story,	it	was	older	than
the	others	by	well	over	a	hundred	years.	Its	garden	outshone	every	other	yard
on	the	street.	It	was	full	of	flowers	and	herbs	and	ornamental	shrubbery,	with
the	efficient	use	of	space	associated	with	Japanese	gardening.

We	rang	the	bell.	The	door	was	answered	by	an	older	woman.	Caucasian,
not	Japanese.	In	fact,	downright	WASPy,	including	her	reception	of	us.

“Rebecca	East,	I	presume,”	Tristan	said,	holding	out	his	hand.
“Rebecca	East-Oda,”	 she	 corrected	him.	She	was	 in	her	 seventies,	with	 a

salt-and-pepper	bob	and	Laura	Ashley	sweater,	and	she	was	the	epitome	of	a
particular	 New	 England	 Congregationalist	 bloodline	 that	 manages	 to
simultaneously	 suggest	 cool,	 contained	 patrician	 and	 indefatigable	 peasant
stock.	The	kind	of	woman	who	could	pleasantly	instruct	you	to	fuck	off,	dear,
and	you	immediately	would	because	you’d	just	hate	to	disappoint	her.

Luckily	she	did	not	explicitly	request	us	to	do	so.	Tristan	explained	that	we
were	here	 to	 talk	 to	 the	professor	 about	 an	old	project	of	his	 from	his	MIT
days.	She	pursed	her	lips	uncertainly.	“It’s	important,”	said	Tristan.

“Frank	does	not	like	to	talk	shop	much	in	his	retirement,”	she	said.
“We	won’t	take	long,	and	he’ll	be	glad	we	came,”	said	Tristan.
She	gave	him	a	wary	look.	“He’s	napping	at	present,	why	don’t	you	come

back	tomorrow.”
Tristan	opened	his	mouth	again,	but	I	clutched	his	arm,	dug	my	fingernails

into	his	wrist,	and	spoke	over	him:
“Please	 pardon	our	 rudeness,	 but	we	would	be	deeply	 indebted	 to	 you	 if

Oda-sensei	would	consider	giving	us	a	moment	of	his	time.”
She	 studied	 me	 with	 guarded	 amusement.	 Then	 her	 eyes	 flicked

meaningfully	at	Tristan—as	 if	making	sure	he	noticed	that	I	was	the	one	she
was	 responding	 to—before	 looking	 at	 me	 again	 to	 say,	 “I	 will	 see	 if	 he’s
awake.”

When	she	was	gone	I	glanced	up	at	Tristan.	“When	speaking	Japanese,”	I
said,	“it	is	impossible	to	grovel	too	much	or	too	often.”

“She’s	not	Japanese,”	he	grunted	dismissively.
“I	just	demonstrated	to	her	that	I	understand	her	husband’s	culture,”	I	said.

Goodness	 how	 I	 appreciated	 being	 the	 more	 informed	 one,	 for	 a	 change.
“Which	suggests	we	will	be	respectful,	which	is	obviously	important	to	her	or
she	wouldn’t	have	deflected	you	to	start	with.”



“Women	make	everything	so	complicated,”	Tristan	said	in	mock	dismay.
“If	 you’re	 going	 to	 get	 sexist	 on	me,	 this	won’t	work,”	 I	 said.	 “The	 first

thing	you	learned	about	me	is	that	I	am	a	woman.	Eighty-six	that	attitude.”
“You’re	all	right,	Stokes,”	he	said,	and	roughed	up	my	hair	as	if	I	were	his

kid	 sister.	 I	 smacked	his	hand	away.	Before	 the	roughhousing	could	progress
any	 further,	 we	 heard	 Rebecca	 East-Oda’s	 clogs	 clunking	 back	 down	 the
stairway.

Diachronicle	
DAY	221	 (EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	we	meet	Dr.	Oda.	And	his	wife.

SHE	LET	US	INTO	THE	house,	which	had	the	subtle	smell	of	old	wood	and	old
wool—as	I	used	to	imagine	Victorian	homes	smelled	in	Victorian	times,	before
I	was	recently	alerted	to	the	painful	truth	that	actually,	at	least	here	in	London,
they	 stink	 of	 whale	 oil,	 patchouli	 (woven	 into	 shawls	 to	 keep	worms	 from
eating	 the	 fabric	 in	 transit),	 and	 backed-up	 sewers.	 I	 am	 now	 convinced
everyone	here	goes	to	church	for	the	incense.

But	to	our	story:	Rebecca	diverted	us	immediately	to	the	front	room	on	the
right,	which	had	been	a	formal	dining	room	back	in	the	day	but	was	now	her
husband’s	 study.	 The	 double-hung	 windows	 let	 in	 plenty	 of	 light;	 the	 two
inner	walls	were	lined	with	bookshelves	(except	where	the	fireplace	was),	most
of	 them	 packed	with	 piles	 of	 papers,	 journals,	 and	 folders	 in	 no	 discernible
order.	 Dr.	 Frank	 Oda,	 seated	 at	 a	 desk	 that	 faced	 toward	 the	 street,	 was	 a
slender,	 cheerful,	 absentminded-looking	 Japanese-American	 gentleman.
Rebecca	introduced	us	and	offered	to	serve	us	tea,	in	a	tone	suggesting	she’d
be	 perfectly	 happy	 if	 we	 weren’t	 staying	 long	 enough	 to	 drink	 it.	 Tristan,



socially	tone-deaf,	accepted	her	offer.
The	professor,	smiling,	 invited	us	to	sit	on	a	couple	of	Harvard	chairs	that

faced	 his	 desk,	 hastening	 to	 remove	 tattered	 copies	 of	 Anna	 Karenina	 and
Geometric	Perspectives	on	Gauge	Theories	(Dr.	Frank	Oda,	ed.)	from	one	of	them.
We	 sat,	 and	 Tristan	 immediately	 launched	 into	 an	 explanation	 of	 what	 we
were	trying	to	do	(although	not	why	we	were	trying	to	do	it)	and	how	we	had
encountered	his	rejected	patent	application	online.	Professor	Oda’s	expression
settled	into	thoughtfulness.

“Rather	 than	 inventing	 the	wheel,	we	thought	we’d	ask	you	 if	you	could
explain	your	work	to	us,	and	why	it	did	or	didn’t	work,”	said	Tristan.

Oda	gave	him	a	considering	look.	“You’re	not	with	DARPA,	are	you?”
“No,”	 I	 said	 quickly,	 reassuringly.	 “This	 is	 a	 different	 kind	 of	 project

altogether.	I’m	a	linguist,”	I	offered,	as	proof	of	how	benign	we	were.
He	 shook	 his	 head,	 frowning.	 “I	 do	 not	 understand	 the	 point	 of	 your

research,	then,”	he	said.
Tristan	 smiled	 that	 Boy	 Scout	 smile	 of	 his.	 “I’d	 need	 you	 to	 sign	 a

nondisclosure	 agreement	 before	 I	 can	 tell	 you	 any	 more	 about	 what	 we’re
doing.	 I	was	hoping	 this	 could	 just	 be	 a	 casual	 conversation	 about	what	you
were	doing.”

Oda	 smiled	back.	“I	 should	 share	 information	with	 somebody	who	won’t
share	information	with	me?”

Tristan	upped	his	smile	to	Eagle	Scout.	“You’re	not	willing	to	talk	physics
with	a	fellow	physicist	in	the	name	of	science?”

“If	it	is	applied	physics,	he	would	like	to	know	what	it’s	being	applied	to,”
said	Rebecca	East-Oda	from	the	study	door.

The	 professor	 smiled	 at	 her.	 It	 was	 such	 a	 sweet	 smile.	 “It’s	 all	 right,
Rebecca,”	 he	 said.	 “They’re	 kids.	 They’re	 curious.	 I	 like	 curious.	 And	 if
you’re	here	to	ask,	let’s	make	it	Darjeeling.”	She	nodded	and	left;	he	returned
his	gaze	 to	Tristan.	“As	you	must	have	 read	 in	 the	patent	 application,	 I	was
trying	 to	 interrupt	 the	 collapse	 of	 the	 wave	 function—specifically	 in	 living
neurological	tissue.”

“Brains,”	Tristan	translated.
“Cat	brains,”	I	added.
Oda	got	a	here	we	go	again	look,	and	drew	breath.
“We’re	not	from	PETA,”	I	assured	him.
Tristan	threw	me	a	look.
“We	totally	get	it	that	you	weren’t	killing	the	cats,”	I	went	on.



“The	cats	that	you	saved	from	the	kill	shelter,”	Tristan	concluded.
Right	on	cue,	a	black	cat	jumped	up	into	Oda’s	lap	and	settled	in	for	a	long

purr.
“I	 was	 wondering,”	 I	 ventured,	 “why	 cats?	 Could	 you	 have	 done	 the

experiment	on	worm	brains,	for	example?”
“Yes,”	Oda	said,	“but	 it	would	have	been	difficult	 to	gauge	the	outcome,

because	it’s	hard	to	know	what	a	worm	is	thinking.	With	a	cat,	you	are	rarely
in	doubt.”

“Ah.	Well,	in	that	case,	why	not	just	use	a	human	subject?”
“Because	of	the	Helsinki	Declaration!”	Tristan	scoffed.
Oda	nodded.	“Partly	that.	But	even	if	there	were	no	regulations	on	use	of

human	subjects,	I	would	have	been	stymied	by	physical	limitations.”
For	the	first	time	since	Tristan	had	become	energized	about	the	solar	eclipse

photographs,	 he	 looked	 a	 little	 deflated.	 “The	 ODEC	 won’t	 work	 on	 a
human?”	he	asked	almost	plaintively.

“Oh,	it	would	work,”	Oda	said,	“if	you	could	fit	a	human	into	it.”
The	relief	in	Tristan’s	voice	was	obvious.	“So	you	would	just	need	to	make

a	bigger	one.”
Oda	held	back	before	answering,	giving	Tristan’s	face	a	careful	study,	with

occasional	glances	 at	me.	“If	 you	wanted	 to	use	 it	 on	a	human,”	he	 said,	“then
yes.	But	this	was	impossible	at	the	time.”

“Your	lab	space	wasn’t	big	enough?”	I	asked.
“It	was	plenty	big,”	Oda	returned,	“but	that	wasn’t	the	problem.”
My	colleague	was	back	to	being	Sad	Tristan.	“What	was	the	problem,	Dr.

Oda?”
“Maybe	 it’s	 easy	 if	 I	 just	 show	 you,”	Oda	 said,	 standing	 up	 abruptly	 and

spilling	the	cat	onto	the	rug.	He	was	a	slight	man,	hardly	taller	than	I.	“I	have
it	in	the	basement.”

“You	have	what	in	the	basement?”	I	asked.
“The	 ODEC.	 Rebecca	 wanted	 me	 to	 throw	 it	 out,	 but	 I	 have	 a	 .	 .	 .

bittersweet	sentimental	attachment	to	it,	and	it	doesn’t	take	up	much	space.”
He	 began	 leading	 us	 toward	 a	 narrow	 door	 beneath	 the	 stairway.

“Rebecca,”	he	called	out.	“I’m	taking	them	down	to	see	the	ODEC.”
No	answer,	 just	 some	 indistinct	clacking	of	dishware.	He	gave	us	a	 rueful

smile.	 “She	 doesn’t	 approve,”	 he	 said	 in	 a	 conspiratorial	 voice.	 “But	 she’s
making	us	tea	all	the	same.”

The	cramped	wooden	steps	down	to	the	basement	were	nestled	underneath



the	hall	stairs	to	the	second	floor.	He	switched	on	a	light,	and	the	three	of	us
slowly	descended.

The	 basement	 was	 wonderful:	 low	 ceiling,	 thick	 stone	 walls	 with	 small
transom	windows,	 and	a	pounded-earth	 floor,	very	musty	 in	 a	way	 that	 said
this	is	an	authentic	old	house	(although	of	course	I	now	know	most	houses	smell
that	way	almost	as	soon	as	they’re	built,	in	any	time	period	but	the	modern).
Near	 the	 hatch	 stairs	 to	 the	 yard	 lay	 a	 tangle	 of	 wood	 and	 wicker	 lawn
furniture,	with	satellite	baskets	of	 sandbox	toys,	 suggesting	grandchildren.	To
the	other	 side	of	 the	 steps	was	 the	 furnace,	 and	other	 systems-viscera	of	 the
house.	 Along	 almost	 every	 wall	 were	 shelving	 units	 on	 which	 were	 neatly
stacked	 old	 apple	 crates,	 labeled	 and	 color-coded.	 Tristan	 at	 once	 began	 to
read	 these,	 muttering	 his	 findings	 aloud.	 There	 was	 a	 very	 orderly	 garden
worktable	and	grow	lights	in	the	corner	nearest	to	the	hatch.	“Rebecca’s	the
gardener,”	 the	 professor	 said	 in	 an	 affectionate	 voice.	 He	 gestured	 around.
“This	house	is	architecturally	interesting	because	it	has	an	unusually	deep	cellar
for	its	time.”

“Is	that	so?”	I	asked	politely,	while	Tristan	kept	scanning	the	crates	for	the
ODEC.

Oda	nodded,	looking	almost	tickled.	“Becca	is	the	one	officially	qualified	to
give	the	tour,	but	after	fifty	years	I	guess	I	know	the	spiel.	The	whole	area,	for
blocks	around,	was	a	 farm	back	 in	 the	colonial	era.	The	 farmhouse	was	 torn
down	 a	 few	decades	 ago,	 there’s	 a	 gas	 station	 in	 its	 place	 now	down	 at	 the
corner	 of	Mass	 Ave.	 This	 house	 we’re	 in	 was	 built	 for	 the	 farm	manager’s
family,	when	 the	 estate	was	 large	 and	 prosperous,	 and	we	 think	 he	 dug	 the
cellar	so	deep	to	hide	extra	food,	all	the	end-of-year	gleanings	from	the	field.
It	 was	 a	 stop	 on	 the	 Underground	 Railroad.	 Rebecca’s	 family	 were
abolitionists—but	the	farm	owner,	in	the	big	house,	was	not.”

“Her	 family’s	 been	 in	 the	 house	 since	 before	 the	 Civil	 War?”	 I	 asked,
surprised.	 Tristan	 continued	 to	 eye	 the	 neat	 storage	 stacks,	 looking	 for	 the
ODEC.

Oda	nodded.	“It	was	built	 for	her	 ancestor,	 Jeremiah	East,	 that	 very	 farm
manager.	And	Jeremiah’s	great-something-grandmother	was—”

“Is	 that	 it?”	 asked	Tristan,	 pointing	 to	 the	 far	 corner	beyond	 the	 furnace.
God	he	could	be	rude.

“Yes,”	said	Oda,	not	minding,	and	led	us	toward	it.
In	 the	corner,	under	a	heavy	canvas	 tarp	peppered	with	mouse	droppings,

was	a	large	rectangular	object.	Oda	dragged	the	tarp	aside	and	it	folded	stiffly



onto	itself	as	it	fell	to	the	floor.
The	ODEC	was	a	little	larger	than	I’d	expected;	as	advertised,	the	interior

volume	could	just	accommodate	a	cat,	but	the	apparatus	constructed	around	it
made	it	as	big	as	a	clothes	washer.	The	cat	box	itself—plywood,	and	covered
with	 slabs	 of	 pink	 insulation	 foam	 from	 the	 home	 improvement	 store—was
suspended	by	a	web	of	 thin,	 taut	cords	 inside	of	a	 somewhat	 larger	 fiberglass
tub.	This	was	in	turn	surrounded	by	more	pink	foam	insulation.	All	of	it	was
hung	 from,	 and	 supported	 by,	 a	 sort	 of	 exoskeleton	 of	 slotted	 angle	 irons.
Wires	were	coming	out	of	it	all	over	the	place:	thick,	round	black	cables	like
the	ones	that	the	cable	guy	staples	to	your	house,	hair-thin	copper	wires	coiled
millions	 of	 times	 around	 hidden	 cores	 to	 make	 what	 I	 guessed	 were
electromagnets,	 medium-sized	 wires	 with	 colored	 insulation,	 flat	 rainbow
ribbons,	 tubular	braids,	bare	copper	 that	had	gone	greenish-brown	with	age,
and	power	cords	with	two-prong	plugs	at	the	end,	their	plastic	insulation	now
stiff	and	cracked.

On	a	shelf	beneath	the	cat	enclosure	rested	a	plastic	box	that	looked	like	the
CPU	 of	 an	 old	 desktop	 computer,	 except	 that	 instead	 of	 beige	 it	 was	 an
intense	purple	color.

“Silicon	Graphics	Indigo,”	Tristan	said,	reading	the	logos	on	its	front.
“An	awesome	machine,”	Oda	said,	“before	you	were	born.	Fastest	thing	I

could	get	at	the	time.”
The	entire	thing	was	mounted	on	rubber-wheeled	casters.	When	Oda	tried

to	pull	it	away	from	the	wall,	these	made	noises	suggesting	they	hadn’t	moved
in	 a	 long	 time.	 “May	 I,	 sir?”	Tristan	 offered,	 and	 then	 put	 his	 considerably
broader	back	 into	 it.	The	ODEC	creaked	and	squeaked	 its	way	out	 into	 the
middle	 of	 the	 room,	 leaving	 a	 trail	 of	mouse	 turds,	 dust	 bunnies,	 and	 dead
spiders	across	the	floor.	I	was	now	looking	at	the	back	of	it.	From	here	it	was
obvious	that	Oda	had	opened	up	the	back	of	the	Silicon	Graphics	workstation
and	routed	a	number	of	cables	into	it.

A	miniature	Manhattan	of	electrical	stuff	covered	the	top.	Oda	pushed,	and
this	chittered	out	of	the	way	on	ball-bearing	drawer	slides,	revealing	the	foam-
clad	lid	of	the	fiberglass	tub.	Oda	picked	this	up	and	handed	it	to	Tristan,	who
found	a	patch	of	bare	stone	wall	to	lean	it	against.	Exposed	in	the	middle	was
the	lid	of	the	inner	plywood	box.	Oda	reverentially	unhooked	the	simple	clasp
holding	 it	down.	He	paused	a	moment,	 smiling	to	himself.	 I	wondered	how
long	it	had	been	since	he’d	last	opened	it.

Then	he	lifted	the	lid,	hinged	on	the	far	side.	A	pair	of	little	chains	kept	it



from	flopping	back.	I	don’t	know	what	I	had	been	anticipating,	but	it	was	no
clumsy	contraption.	The	box	itself	was	plywood,	but	it	was	lined	on	the	inside
with	thin	sheets	of	green	plastic,	scribed	all	over	with	fine	copper	traces	that	I
recognized	as	circuit	boards.	In	some	places,	 little	electronic	components	had
been	soldered	to	these,	projecting	out	into	the	airspace	within	the	box,	but	in
others,	 the	copper	 tracery	 itself	 seemed	 to	be	what	mattered.	The	 linguist	 in
me	 couldn’t	 help	 fancying	 a	 connection	 between	 these	 fine	whorls	 of	metal
and	the	interlaced	figures	in	old	Irish	manuscripts.	Neat	holes	had	been	drilled
through	the	plywood	in	many	places	to	allow	wires	to	pass	through	and	make
connections	with	these	circuit	boards.	In	many	cases,	these	coincided	with	the
massive	 coils	 of	 copper	wire	mounted	 outside	 the	 box.	 I	 now	 began	 to	 see
these	as	being	aimed	inward,	like	science-fiction	weapons.

Aimed,	that	is,	at	the	cat	inside	the	box.	For	resting	on	the	box’s	floor	was	a
flat	circular	pillow	upholstered	in	red	velvet	that	had	become	permeated	with
cat	hair	down	to	 the	molecular	 level.	A	 tiny	 saucer	of	 spun	 stainless	 steel	 sat
next	to	it,	a	thin	disk	of	brown	residue	congealed	in	its	bottom.	I	needed	no
forensic	analysis	to	know	that	it	had	once	contained	cream.

Tristan	 had	 a	 look	 on	 his	 face	 as	 if	 all	 this	 was	 exactly	 what	 he’d	 been
expecting.	I	confess,	it	mystified	me.

“Call	 me	 stupid,”	 I	 said,	 “but	 I	 don’t	 understand	 the	 connection	 to
photography.”

“Photography?”	 Oda	 asked,	 puzzled.	 As	 if	 I	 had	 just	 wandered	 into	 the
wrong	eccentric	professor’s	basement.

“There’s	 a	 connection,”	Tristan	 reassured	 him.	 “I	 give	 you	my	word	 I’ll
explain	it—once	you	have	completed	certain	paperwork	that,	I	regret	to	say,	is
mandatory.	 In	 the	meantime,	 I	wonder	 if	 you	 could	 explain	 the	ODEC	 to
us.”

Oda-sensei	shrugged.	“In	a	nutshell,”	he	said,	now	entirely	immersed	in	the
science	of	 the	moment,	 “here	 is	 the	premise.	You	 insert	 living	nerve	 tissue.
You	 close	 the	 lid,	 creating	 a	 sealed	 environment.	 You	 pump	 in	 the	 liquid
helium	.	.	.”

“Wait,	 wait!”	 Tristan	 protested.	 “This	 is	 the	 first	 you’ve	 mentioned
cryogenics.”

“You	freeze	the	cat?”	I	exclaimed,	aghast.
“No,	no,”	Oda	scolded	us.	“That	would	just	be	mean.	See	for	yourself,	the

box	itself	is	super-insulated!	And	it	has	its	own	air	supply,	enough	to	keep	a	cat
alive	for	an	hour.”	He	was	directing	my	attention	to	the	thick	foam	mounted



to	 the	 outer	 surface	 of	 the	 plywood.	Then	 he	moved	 his	 hand	 a	 couple	 of
inches	 outward	 and	 patted	 the	 inner	 surface	 of	 the	 enclosing	 fiberglass	 tub.
“The	inner	box	is	completely	surrounded	by	a	bath	of	liquid	helium,	chilled	to
a	few	Kelvins	above	absolute	zero.”

“Cold	enough,”	Tristan	hazarded,	“to	form	a	Bose-Einstein	condensate?”
“I	love	it	when	you	talk	dirty,”	Oda	said,	so	perfectly	deadpan	that	I	did	a

double	take.	“Yes,	we	begin	by	isolating	the	subject—”
“Within	a	jacket	of	matter	that	all	exists	in	the	same	quantum	state,”	Tristan

said.
“You’re	completing	each	other’s	sentences.	Great,”	I	said.
“I’ll	explain	later,”	Tristan	returned.
“Conveniently,	the	low	temperature	also	brings	some	of	the	coils	down	to

the	 point	 where	 they	 become	 superconductors,”	 Oda	 added,	 tapping	 a
fingertip	 against	 some	of	 the	 things	 that	 I	 had	 identified	 as	 big	magnets.	 “A
continuously	recirculating	and	self-reinforcing	current	pattern	establishes	itself
in	these.	Its	state	can	be	read	continuously	by	analog-to-digital	converters	at	a
sampling	rate	of	about	a	megahertz.	Which	we	used	to	think	was	fast.”

“So	you’re	reading	the	cat’s	mind?”
“Not	 so	much	 that,”	Oda	 said,	 “as	 looking	 for	 the	 signatures	 of	 nascent

wave	collapse	events.”
Tristan	stood	frozen	for	a	few	moments,	then	shaped	his	hand	into	a	blade

and	 whooshed	 it	 past	 his	 head.	 Good,	 I	 thought.	 Have	 a	 taste	 of	 what	 I’m
experiencing.

“I	lost	you?”	Oda	inquired.
“Yes,	sir.”
“I’m	messing	around	with	renormalization.”
“Oh.”
“That’s	what	determines	what	 the	wave	function	is	most	 likely	 to	collapse

into.	By	messing	around	with	it,	I	can	alter	the	probabilities.”
“You	can	do	magic,”	I	blurted.
“Sort	of,”	Oda	said.	Then,	in	a	curious,	polite	tone,	he	asked,	“Is	that	what

you’re	here	to	talk	about?	Magic?”
“Classified,”	 Tristan	 said,	 and	 gave	me	 the	 stink-eye.	 Then	 he	 turned	 to

Oda.	“Under	normal	circumstances	we	can	make	educated	guesses	about	what
is	likely	to	happen	when	the	wave	function	collapses.	You’re	screwing	around
with	that.”

Oda	 nodded	 ruefully.	 “But	 only	 sometimes.	 And	 I	 can’t	 account	 for	 the



variations.	That’s	why	the	patent	was	rejected.	Why	DARPA	didn’t	renew	my
grant.”

“What’s	the	computer	doing?”	Tristan	asked.
Oda	 sighed.	“Not	enough,	unfortunately.	As	 I	 said,	 it	was	 a	 fine	machine

for	its	time.	Even	so—despite	a	lot	of	code	optimization—it	wasn’t	up	to	the
job,	even	when	it	was	running	flat-out.”

“So	it’s	of	the	essence.	It’s	not	just	a	data	logger.”
“It	 is	 very	 much	 in	 the	 control	 loop,”	 Oda	 said.	 Glancing	 at	 me,	 he

explained:	 “For	 the	ODEC	 to	work,	 it	 has	 to	 take	 in	 sensor	 data,	 perform
certain	calculations	that	are	highly	non-trivial,	and	make	decisions	about	how
to	alter	the	current	flowing	through	the	coils.	It	has	to	do	so	quickly,	or	else
the	whole	project	fails.	And	it	wasn’t	quick	enough.”

“What	are	the	specs	on	that	Indigo?”	Tristan	asked.
Oda	sighed.	“I	don’t	even	want	to	tell	you.”
“Why	not?”
“Because	you’re	going	to	laugh.”
“I	won’t	laugh.”
“One	processor;	175	megahertz;	512	megabytes	of	RAM.”
Tristan	laughed.
“I	told	you,”	Oda	said.
Tristan	 stood	 there	 a	 moment,	 eyeing	 the	 contraption.	 “With	 modern

computers	.	.	.	or	a	cluster	of	them	.	.	.	some	GPUs	cranking	the	numbers	.	.	.
faster	clocks	.	.	.	all	of	your	problems	on	that	front	would	be	solved.”

“Possibly,”	said	Oda	with	a	nod.	“But	I	had	neither	the	funds	nor	the	space
for	 that,	and	the	Howler	 article	pretty	much	made	me	a	 laughingstock	 in	 the
academic	community,	so	I’ll	never	get	funding	again.”

“Sorry	to	hear	that,”	I	said,	“especially	if	the	theory	is	sound.”
“No	one	 funds	 theories.	They	 fund	 results,”	 said	Oda.	 “The	 results	were

not	reliably	reproducible.	Using	cats	was	a	mistake;	the	premise	was	very	easy
to	mock	among	lay	people.”

“What	if	you	were	given	the	funding	to	rebuild	this	the	way	I	just	described
it,	room-sized?”	Tristan	said.

Oda	 gave	 him	 a	 cautious,	 wise-old-man	 smile.	 “Scaling	 issues	 would
become	huge.	The	 amount	of	 computational	power	 required	goes	up	 as	 the
square	of	the	cavity’s	volume.”

Tristan	 made	 a	 quick	 mental	 calculation.	 “So,	 as	 the	 sixth	 power	 of	 the
box’s	size.	That’s	okay.	We’ll	make	it	a	small	room.	Moore’s	law	will	take	care



of	the	rest.”
“Don’t	even	suggest	this	in	Rebecca’s	hearing	or	she	will	chase	you	out	of

the	house	with	her	 gardening	 shears.	 It	was	 a	 very	 draining	 and	humiliating
period.	She	would	never	endure	it	being	brought	back	to	life.”

“This	would	all	happen	under	a	cloak	of	secrecy.	The	Howler	would	never
hear	about	it.	Nobody	would.”

Oda	pondered	it.
“If	Rebecca	said	yes?”	I	asked.
Oda	 shrugged.	 “It	 was	 my	 pet	 project,	 of	 course	 I	 would	 love	 to	 see	 it

work.	And	 I	 tend	 to	 say	yes	 to	 things.	But	 I	would	want	 to	know	why	you
were	pursuing	this.”

“I	can	tell	you	all	about	it	as	soon	as	you	sign	a	nondisclosure	form,”	Tristan
said.

Oda	 smiled	 to	 himself	 a	moment,	 then	 returned	 his	 attention	 to	 Tristan.
“Well,	 then	you	must	ask	Becca	 to	 sign	 the	 form	as	well,”	he	 said.	“I	could
not	keep	this	from	her.”

“Go	 on	 upstairs	 and	 work	 on	 that,	 Stokes,”	 said	 Tristan,	 without	 even
looking	at	me.	“I	want	to	talk	shop	with	the	professor	for	a	few	minutes.”

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

MARCH	6

Temperature	 today	about	43F,	 fair	 and	dry,	with	 slight	breeze	 from	 the
west.	Barometer	steady.

Snowdrops	 blooming.	 Crocuses	 will	 bud	 soon,	 Buddleia	 just	 cut	 back,
Hellebore	 has	 just	 come	 up.	 Witchhazel	 blooming	 and	 lilacs	 have	 tight
buds.	 Planted	 the	 first	 of	 the	 basil,	 peppers,	 and	 tomatoes	 inside	 (under
the	grow	lights)	and	harvested	the	last	of	the	kale.	Harvested	the	parsnips,
sweeter	for	enduring	the	hard	winter.

Strange	event	today.	Frank	received	visitors,	a	couple	named	Tristan	and
Melisande	who	somehow	happened	upon	his	old	ODEC	patent	application
from	 DARPA,	 something	 I	 would	 just	 as	 soon	 forget	 ever	 existed.	 They



appeared	at	the	door	without	warning	this	afternoon.	He	is	clearly	military,
has	 the	 energy	 of	 a	 Labrador	 retriever	 (thinking	 in	 particular	 of	 the	 one
Uncle	Victor	trained	for	duck	hunting).	She	milder,	more	reserved,	better-
spoken	than	he.

Frank	received	them	in	his	current	study,	the	dining	room.	(Melisande
was	 charmed	 that	 although	 that	 chandelier	 was	 wired	 for	 electric	 lights
about	 a	 century	 ago,	 and	 outfitted	 for	 gas	 light	 before	 that,	 it	 can	 still	 be
lowered	 by	 a	 pulley	 system	 from	 the	 days	 of	 candle-lighting.	 Tristan	was
not	 as	 charmed,	 because	 the	 chandelier	 wasn’t	 the	 duck	 he	 was	 here	 to
hunt.)

They	told	Frank	they	believe	 that	 they	know	why	the	patent	application
failed	 and	 that	 furthermore,	 they	 know	how	 to	 rectify	 this—that,	with	his
assistance,	they	can	actually	create	an	ODEC	that	will	successfully	suppress
the	collapse	of	 the	wave	 function.	 I	was	not	 sure	how	 I	 felt	 about	hearing
this,	remembering	the	stress	and	bother	that	went	 into	our	 last	go-round
with	this	enterprise.	Frank	said	they	would	have	to	convince	me.	Melisande
was	tasked	with	doing	this.	I	could	tell	from	the	way	she	approached	me	in
the	kitchen	that	she	did	not	expect	to	succeed.	She	was	surprised.

I	 will	 support	 Frank	 in	 anything	 he	 does	 and	 any	 decision	 he	makes.
Since	he	did	not	immediately	say	no	to	them,	it	means	he	is	excited	by	the
prospect	of	being	vindicated	all	these	years	later.	I	truly	wish	he	wasn’t.	But
he	is.	And	I	understand	that.	To	make	a	short	story	shorter,	we	both	signed
a	nondisclosure	agreement,	and	they	joined	us	for	tea.

Then	things	got	quite	strange.
They	 shared	 something	 preposterous,	 which	 is	 hard	 for	 me	 to	 write

down	without	 shaking	my	head.	They	claim	 to	be	 interested	 in	 the	ODEC
not	for	its	defensive	capabilities,	but	because	they	believe	it	can	be	used	to
perform	acts	of—I	 cannot	write	 this	 steadily—magic.	Not	sleight-of-hand;
not	wishful	 thinking.	Sorcery.	They	are	sincere	about	 this.	She	attempted
to	validate	the	claim	by	citing	ancient	documents	she	has	been	translating.
He	 gave	 a	 passing	 technical	 explanation,	 which	 I	 admit	 sounded	 as
plausible	as	anything	else	re:	quantum	theory,	but	that’s	not	saying	much,
is	it?

But	Tristan	played	the	winning	card	re:	Frank’s	mental	constitution:	he
said	that	ultimately	it	should	not	matter	if	we	believed	about	the	magic	or
not,	we	should	sign	on	to	this	for	the	sake	of	the	science	itself.	That	is	like
offering	 catnip	 to	 a	 cat.	Of	 course	Frank	 said	he	would	 assist	however	he



could.
They’d	 explained	 why	 magic	 is	 no	 longer	 possible	 today,	 and	 further,

why,	 even	 were	 magic	 to	 become	 possible	 (within	 the	 ODEC),	 it	 would
require	the	application	of	specific	people	(“witches”)	who	could	“perform
magic.”	So	naturally,	I	asked	them	who	they	were	expecting	to	“perform”	it.
It	 was	 the	 only	 time	 I	 saw	 them	 at	 a	 loss:	 this	most	 obvious	 and	 basic	 of
concerns	had	never	crossed	their	minds.

I	 don’t	 know	 who	 they	 are,	 or	 where	 their	 funding	 comes	 from—it
definitely	isn’t	MIT	this	time.	God	forbid	MIT	even	suspect	he’s	tinkering
with	this	nonsense.

Diachronicle	
DAY	221	 (CONTD. ;	EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	we	divide	to	conquer

REBECCA	 EAST-ODA	 SERVED	 TEA	 LIKE	 a	 proper	New	England	matriarch—not
mugs	 with	 teabags,	 but	 loose-leaf	 tea	 steeped	 in	 and	 poured	 from	 a	 china
teapot	 into	 teacups	 resting	 on	 saucers,	with	 rock	 sugar	 on	 sticks	 and	 a	 little
porcelain	 pitcher	 of	milk,	 all	 set	 out	 on	 a	wicker	 tray.	 She	 also	 presented	 a
plate	of	biscuits	both	ginger	and	savory,	which	of	course	at	the	time	I’d	have
called	cookies	and	crackers.	I	spirited	these	to	my	side	of	the	tea	table	so	that
Tristan	would	not	swallow	them	whole.

For	early	March	in	New	England,	it	was	uncharacteristically	gorgeous,	and
crisp	 afternoon	 sunlight	 streamed	 at	 a	 low	 angle	 through	 the	 bay	 transom
windows,	 hitting	 the	 dangling	 crystals	 of	 the	 fancy	old	 chandelier	 that	 hung
incongruously	 above	 us	 all,	 throwing	 dozens	 of	 little	 rainbows	 around	 the
walls.

“So	 we	 have	 this	 space.	 Not	 far	 away	 from	 here	 actually,”	 Tristan	 was



saying,	and	on	reflex	glanced	around	for	sweets.
“Have	 some	 more	 tea,”	 Rebecca	 offered	 Tristan,	 who	 of	 course	 had

downed	his	almost	instantly.	She	held	out	her	hand	for	his	teacup	and	saucer.
He	gave	it	to	her	with	a	nod	of	thanks,	but	then	his	attention	returned	to

Frank	Oda,	talking	amps	and	circuitry	requirements—
“How	does	he	take	it?”	Rebecca	asked	me.
How	 odd	 that	 she	 assumed	 I’d	 know	 this.	 “Based	 on	 his	 dietary	 habits,

probably	milk	and	sugar,”	I	said.
“All	 right	 then,”	 said	Tristan,	 staring	 fixedly	 at	 a	blank	place	on	 the	wall.

“The	 human-rated	 ODEC	 has	 to	 be	 built	 .	 .	 .	 this	 becomes	 a	 four-part
strategy.”	 (I	 had	 not	 realized	 he’d	 fashioned	 even	 a	 three-part	 strategy.)	He
held	up	a	fist	and	stuck	out	his	thumb:	“One,	extensive	modifications	to	our
building.”

“Hang	on,”	I	said,	“it’s	not	DODO’s	building!”
“What	is	DODO?”	Rebecca	asked.
“Department	of	Diabolical	Obscurantism,”	I	guessed.
Tristan	 was	 still	 frozen	 in	 midsentence,	 like	 a	 video	 when	 you	 hit	 the

“pause”	button,	 thumb	 in	 the	air,	gazing	at	me	patiently	while	he	chewed	a
biscuit	 he	 had	 somehow	 snagged	 from	 my	 side	 of	 the	 table.	 “Anyway,”	 I
continued,	“you	can’t	just	modify	someone	else’s	building	.	.	.	can	you?”

“We	will	acquire	the	building,”	he	announced.	Then	he	extended	his	index
finger.	 “Two,	 design	 of	 the	 human-rated	 ODEC.	 Three,	 its	 construction.
Four,	 find	 somebody	 who	 can	 do	 magic.”	 He	 looked	 around	 at	 us.
“Conveniently,	 there’s	 four	 of	 us.	 Professor,	 you	 work	 up	 a	 design,	 then
oversee	the	construction.	My	bosses	can	fly	up	some	fellows	from	DC	to	work
with	 us,	 Stokes	 and	 I	 will	 help—you	 can	 manage	 a	 screw	 gun,	 can’t	 you,
Stokes?”	This	was	a	 throwaway,	almost	rhetorical,	question;	he	did	not	even
glance	at	me.

Oda	nodded,	 his	 face	 still	 but	 radiant.	 I	 could	 see	 him	 restraining	 himself
from	glancing	 at	 his	wife.	Her	 face	was	 also	 still,	 but	 not	 so	 radiant.	 “We’ll
need	people	with	expertise	in	bulk	cryogenics.”

“NASA,”	Tristan	said	dismissively.	“Those	guys	don’t	have	enough	to	do.
Then	 there’s	 procuring	 and	 installing	 all	 the	hardware.	We	can	get	 as	much
computational	muscle	 as	we	need	 from	cheap	off-the-shelf	 hardware.	Weird
fabrication	 can	 be	 sourced	 from	 Los	 Alamos.	 Witches	 is	 you,	 Stokes.	 Ask
around	at	New	Agey	places.	Yoga	 studios	or	whatever.	That	 should	be	easy
enough,	and	you	look	the	part.”



“What	does	that	mean?”	I	demanded.
“Grad	student.	Primary	demographic	for	magical	thinking.”
“Tristan.	 It’s	 the	 twenty-first	 century.	Get	 a	 clue.	 I	will	 look	 for	witches

online.”
He	was	already	shaking	his	head.	“No.	You	can’t	leave	a	paper	or	electronic

trail.	You	have	 to	 show	up	 somewhere	witchy	 in	 person	 and	 ask	 questions,
without	giving	them	any	information	about	yourself.”	Before	I	could	respond
he	turned	to	Rebecca.	“Wanna	help	Stokes	find	a	witch?”

Rebecca	 said,	 “No.”	 She	 said	 it	 politely,	 calmly	 stroking	 a	 calico	 cat	 that
was	curled	placidly	on	her	lap.	It	was	clear	that	she	would	not	be	changing	her
mind	about	it.

“You’re	 the	 one	 who	 gets	 credit	 for	 thinking	 of	 it,”	 he	 said,	 almost	 (by
Tristan	standards)	cajoling.

“I	 am	 here	 for	 Frank,”	 she	 said.	 “I’m	 not	 a	 soldier	 in	 your	 army,	 Mr.
Lyons.”

“All	 right	 then,”	 Tristan	 said,	 after	 a	 pause.	 He	 suddenly	 brightened,
grinned	at	me.	“Stokes,	you	own	witches.”

“What	 the	 hell,	 Tristan.	How	 does	 one	 find	 a	witch,	 anyhow?	Not	 in	 a
yoga	 studio,	 that’s	 for	 sure.	 Nobody’s	 been	 able	 to	 do	 magic	 for	 about	 a
hundred	and	seventy-five	years,	so	what	does	that	even	mean,	for	somebody	to
‘be	a	witch’?”

“In	Japan,	still	today,	there	are	tsukimono-suji,”	said	Oda,	as	casually	as	if	he
were	discussing	lunch.	“Witch	families.	Witchcraft	is	considered	hereditary—
matrilineal—and	I	don’t	know	what	kind	of	magic	they	claim	to	do,	but	the
witch	 identity	 remains.”	 He	 grinned	 slightly.	 “Maybe	 if	 you	 find	 the
descendant	of	a	witch,	you’ve	found	a	witch	waiting	for	her	broomstick.”

“Very	funny,”	said	Rebecca.	When	Tristan	and	I	turned	curious	eyes	upon
her,	she	explained	in	a	desultory	tone,	“An	ancestress	of	mine	was	hanged	in
the	Salem	witch	trials.	Frank	finds	that	exotic.”

“Salem	doesn’t	 count,”	 I	 said.	 “That	was	mass	hysteria	 induced	by	 ergot-
tainted	rye.”

“Correct,”	 said	 Rebecca	 in	 a	 so-there	 tone,	 her	 eyes	 darting	 toward	 her
husband.

“But	Salem	is	the	epicenter	of	modern	American	witchiness,”	said	Tristan.
“That’s	 a	 bunch	 of	 commercial	 tourist-trap	 nonsense,	 and	 anyhow,	 what

would	I	be	looking	for?”	I	asked	again.
“If	 there	 really	 were	 witches,”	 Oda-sensei	 suggested,	 “maybe	 there	 are



people	today	who	know	they	were	descended	from	them,	and	who	continue
some	of	the	ritual	elements	even	if	the	magic	isn’t	active.	That	is	probably	the
case	with	the	tsukimono-suji.”

“We	can	work	with	that,”	said	Tristan.	“Stokes,	get	on	it.”
“Salem	won’t	 have	 any	 witch-descendants	 because—as	 I	 just	 said—Salem

never	had	witches	to	start	with,”	I	insisted.	“If	we’re	looking	for	witch-spawn,
we	should	check	out	someplace	like	New	Orleans.”

Tristan	 considered	 this.	 “Go	 poke	 around	 Salem	 first.	 If	 you	 don’t	 find
anything,	maybe	I’ll	send	you	to	New	Orleans.”

Crikey,	 that	 was	 easy.	 And	 a	 perk	 I’d	 never	 get	 under	 Blevins!	 “Is	 this
taxpayer-funded?”	I	asked.	“No	judgment.	Just	curious.”

“Classified,”	he	said,	and	gave	me	a	wink.

Diachronicle	
DAYS	222–244	 (MARCH,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	there	are	constructive	developments

TRISTAN	 LATER	 MODIFIED	 HIS	 PLAN,	 deciding	 not	 to	 send	me	witch-hunting
until	 we	 had	 a	 feasible	 chamber	 in	 which	 to	 put	 our	 witch.	 As	 there	 was
nothing	 to	 occupy	me,	 and	 I’d	 let	 slip	 that	 I	 had	 taken	 (one	 semester-long)
shop	class	in	high	school,	he	declared	me	his	aide-de-camp	for	the	campaign	of
Office	Reform	that	was	to	come.

During	the	next	few	weeks	the	office,	as	I	had	known	it,	rapidly	ceased	to
exist.	 Even	 before	 taking	 ownership	 of	 the	 building,	 Tristan	 had,	 with
sledgehammer	and	Sawzall,	wrought	changes	on	it	that,	at	the	time,	had	struck
me	as	quite	material.	He	had	perfected	the	art	of	gazing	thoughtfully	at	a	wall
between	office	suites,	casting	his	gaze	hither	and	yon,	and	blithely	announcing



that	it	was	not	load-bearing	and	hence	a	candidate	for	being	knocked	out.	In
this	manner	 the	 original	DODO	office	 had	 tripled	 its	 square	 footage	 during
the	time	I	had	been	working	there,	with	several	of	its	walls	already	marked	for
death	whenever	the	neighboring	start-ups	went	“Tango	Uniform.”

“Department	of	Demolishing	Offices”	was	 all	 I	 could	 say	 the	next	 time	 I
went	to	the	building	after	our	teatime	strategy	session	at	the	Odas’	house.	Less
than	twenty-four	hours	had	passed,	but	Tristan	appeared	to	have	spent	most	of
them	walking	freely	through	the	building	with	a	can	of	fluorescent	green	spray
paint	marking	doors,	walls,	 and	other	 impedimenta	with	 the	word	DEMO	or,
when	he	ran	low	on	spray	paint,	with	a	simple	X.	In	the	center	of	the	building
was	a	large	conference	room,	meant	to	be	shared	by	all	of	the	tenants.	Tristan
had	 hurled	 the	 conference	 table	 against	 the	 wall,	 Xed	 it,	 and	 then	 spray-
painted	a	huge	rectangle	directly	onto	the	industrial-carpeted	floor	and	filled	it
in	 with	 the	 inevitable	 X.	 Young,	 lavishly	 bearded	 tech	 entrepreneurs	 were
trudging	 forlornly	 down	 the	 hallways,	 laden	with	 computers,	 printers,	 high-
end	coffeemakers,	and	foosball	tables.	Like	digital	Okies	they	loaded	their	stuff
into	their	Scions	or	Ryder	trucks	and	rumbled	off	into	the	unforgiving	Boston
commercial	real	estate	market.

“So	you’re	going	to,	uh,	remove	basically	the	entire	floor	of	the	conference
room?”	I	inquired.

“The	conference	room	will	cease	 to	exist,”	he	said.	“DODO	is	not	about
meetings.	Not	about	PowerPoints.”

“I	never	imagined	otherwise,”	I	said.
He	had	lost	focus	on	me	and	was	now	looking	over	my	shoulder	at	a	wall,

which	 currently	 supported	 a	 large	 flat-screen	monitor.	 Something	 about	 the
look	on	his	face	told	me	where	this	was	going.	“Not	load-bearing?”	I	guessed,
glancing	back	over	my	shoulder.	He	sidestepped	by	me,	raised	his	can	of	acid
green	paint	like	the	Statue	of	Liberty’s	torch,	stood	up	on	tiptoe,	and	sprayed	a
dripping,	diagonal	 slash	across	 the	entirety	of	 the	wall,	passing	directly	across
the	 monitor	 screen	 en	 route.	 As	 he	 completed	 the	 other	 leg	 of	 the	 X	 he
explained,	“Between	the	loading	dock	and	here	we	need	to	clear	a	path	for	the
tanks.”

“You	seem	a	little	preoccupied,”	I	said,	“and	I	don’t	want	to	elbow	in	on
your	 painting.	 I’ll	 just	 take	 all	 the	 translation	 notes	 back	 to	 my	 apartment
before	you	paint	them	green.”

“Remember	to	maintain—”	he	began.
“—operational	security,”	I	ended.	“Not	to	worry.”	I	found	my	way	to	the



part	of	the	building	where	it	had	all	started.	Oda	was	there,	perched	on	a	large
blue	yoga	ball	 before	 the	 largest	 computer	monitor	 I	had	ever	 seen,	peering
intently	 at	 some	 tiny	 widget	 in	 the	 user	 interface	 of	 what	 I	 guessed	 was	 a
computer-aided	design	program.	Next	to	him	was	the	cell	phone	Tristan	had
bought	for	him	(his	first)	and	a	bowl	of	foamy	green	Japanese	tea.	Matcha.	Still
steaming	and	filling	the	room	with	a	fresh	but	bitter	fragrance.	It	had	to	have
been	made	 only	 seconds	 ago.	A	 faucet	 gushed	 briefly	 down	 the	 hall,	 in	 the
ladies’	room,	and	I	guess	Rebecca	was	here	washing	up.	I	snapped	a	couple	of
file	folders	marked	UNCLASSIFIED:	TRANSLATIONS	out	of	a	cabinet	and	went	to
find	 her.	 She	 had	 spread	 all	 of	 her	matcha-making	whisks	 and	 paraphernalia
out	on	the	counter.

“Herbs,”	I	said.
She	looked	up	and	gazed	at	me	in	the	mirror.
“Just	a	thought,”	I	added.
“What	about	them?”
“Witches	were	obsessed	with	them.”
“It	is	a	familiar	stereotype,”	she	pointed	out,	and	returned	her	attention	to

drying	her	matcha	gear.
“One	based	on	reality.	All	of	our	research	points	to	it.”	I	rattled	the	folders

in	the	air,	as	if	this	would	lend	authority	to	my	words.	“I	thought	of	it	when
the	fragrance	of	that	tea	filled	my	nostrils.	Powerful	stuff,	fragrances.”

“Yes,”	she	said	drily,	“so	perhaps	you	should	be	recruiting	the	descendants
of	 famous	 perfumers,	 or	 incense-makers,	 rather	 than	 those	 of	 famous	 non-
witches	hanged	in	Salem.”

Taking	the	hint,	I	used	the	facilities	and	moved	on.	As	I	was	walking	back
to	my	apartment,	folders	tucked	under	my	arm,	I	had	time	to	ponder	Tristan’s
statement	we	need	to	clear	a	path	for	the	tanks.	Given	his	military	background,	my
mind	 had	 immediately	 flashed	 up	 an	 image	 of	 a	 column	 of	 huge	 armored
military	 vehicles	 thundering	 through	 the	 building.	 But	 of	 course	 he	 didn’t
mean	 that	 kind	 of	 tank.	 He	 meant	 a	 large	 vessel	 for	 holding	 fluids.	 To	 be
specific,	for	holding	liquid	helium.

When	 I	 returned	 to	 the	 building	 the	 next	 day,	my	 keycard	 didn’t	 work.
This	was	due	to	the	disappearance	of	the	entire	keycard-reading	machine.	In
its	 stead	was	 a	 contraption,	 apparently	 some	kind	of	 eyeball	 scanner.	 I	went
around	back	and	pounded	on	 the	 loading	dock	door	until	Tristan	 let	me	 in.
“New	perimeter	security,”	he	explained.	“Max	will	get	you	squared	away.”

“Who’s	Max?”



Tristan	 was	 leading	 me	 down	 a	 broad	 open	 corridor	 that	 had	 been
sledgehammered	through	the	building	overnight.	It	terminated	in	the	ruins	of
the	conference	room.	A	huge	square	hole,	perhaps	fifteen	feet	on	a	side,	had
been	 cut	 through	 the	 floor,	 and	 yellow	 caution	 tape	 strung	 up	 around	 it	 to
prevent	people	from	falling	through	into	the	cellar.	Hard	at	work	down	there
were	 what	 appeared	 to	 be	 the	 offspring	 of	 a	 Benetton	 ad	 and	 a	 UPS
commercial:	 four	attractive,	buff	young	men	in	nondescript	brown	uniforms,
one	African-American,	one	Asian	(Korean?),	one	Hispanic,	one	with	a	Persian
aspect,	 all	 impeccably	 kitted	 out	with	 eye	 and	 ear	 protection.	Two	of	 them
were	framing	in	a	wall	with	steel	studs,	and	the	other	two	were	wrestling	with
cables.	Tristan	hailed	them	and	they	paused	in	their	labors	to	greet	me	briefly.
To	a	man,	each	identified	himself	as	Max.

“What,	do	they	row	for	the	DODO	crew	team?”	I	asked,	when	they	had
returned	to	their	work.

“Classified,”	Tristan	 said.	When	 I	made	 a	 face,	 he	 added	 quietly,	 “Don’t
talk	shop	in	front	of	them.	They	know	it’s	a	physics	experiment	but	they	don’t
know	about	 the	magic.”	Then	he	nodded	 at	 a	work	party	of	Hispanic	men
busy	heaving	shattered	drywall	and	rolls	of	nasty	old	carpet	 into	huge	rolling
bins	 for	 disposal.	 “And	 those	 guys	 are	 from	 the	 sidewalk	 in	 front	 of	Home
Depot.	If	my	higher-ups	knew	.	.	.”	He	shook	his	head.

I	was	busy	gazing	at	my	colleague	in	a	somewhat	new	light.	Until	I	saw	him
in	command	of	people	and	a	place,	there	had	been,	truth	be	told,	no	evidence
that	 Tristan	 Lyons	wasn’t	merely	 a	 convincing	 psychopath	 renting	 a	 tawdry
room	 in	 an	 obsolete	 office	 building	 for	 unsavory	 purposes	 that	 could	 have
endangered	 my	 life.	 The	 possibility	 had	 never	 entered	 my	 mind,	 but	 in
retrospect,	it	really	should	have.	I’d	been	a	sucker	for	both	the	smile	and	the
paycheck.	I	still	consider	it	pure	dumb	luck	that	my	trust	had	been	well	placed.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

MARCH	29

Temperature	49F,	sunny,	mild,	very	still.	Barometer	steady.



Lettuce	 coming	 along	 nicely;	 yesterday,	 planted	 peppers,	 Swiss	 chard,
radishes.	Weathervane	needs	fixing.

Working	 on	 the	 native-herb	 garden	 in	 the	 front	 corner	 of	 the	 yard.
Already	 thriving:	 thyme,	 hyssop,	 spearmint,	 lemon	 balm,	 fennel,
chamomile,	marjoram.	Must	add:	 lavender,	ambrosia,	valerian,	mugwort,
pennyroyal,	gillyflower,	and	(when	it’s	warmer)	sweet	basil.	Might	take	out
the	Japanese	moss	to	make	room,	and	bring	Mei’s	bonsai	indoors,	now	that
Frank	has	lost	interest.

They	are	continuing	with	the	ODEC,	on	a	magnitude	I	can	barely	fathom.
Frank	is	happily	preoccupied	with	something	I	cannot	believe	will	actually
ever	come	to	anything,	but	it	is	good	to	see	him	absorbed	in	work.

Diachronicle	
DAYS	245–290	 (SPRING,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	constructive	developments	continue

I	BEGAN	TO	HELP	THE	Maxes	and	Tristan	complete	construction	of	the	ODEC
under	 Oda-sensei’s	 guidance.	 The	 memory,	 now,	 of	 such	 tomboyishness,
freedom	of	movement,	 the	 liberty	of	a	day	 innocently	alone	with	unmarried
young	men,	and	above	all,	the	virtue	of	labor—these	things	make	me	almost
pant	with	 longing	 today,	 as	 I	 sit	here	breathing	 the	 fumes	 from	 this	 stinking
whale	 oil	 lamp	 in	 my	 whale-bone	 corset	 (very	 difficult	 to	 believe	 Victoria
Regina	is	about	to	rule	over	half	the	planet	dressed	like	this.	Just	saying.).

As	I	had	guessed,	the	“tanks”	Tristan	had	referred	to	were	industrial	vessels
made	to	contain	thousands	of	gallons	within	their	fiberglass	walls.	There	were
two	of	 them,	an	 inner	nested	within	an	outer,	with	a	 few	 inches’	 separation
between	 them.	We	 had	 to	 cover	 both	 of	 them	with	 insulation	 to	 keep	 the
liquid	 helium	 from	boiling	 away.	This	was	 a	 combination	 of	 four-by-eight-



foot	slabs	of	pink	foam	from	Home	Depot,	and	some	kind	of	weird	brew	that
you	would	mix	up	 in	 a	 bucket	 by	 stirring	 two	different	 chemicals	 together.
Then	it	would	expand	enormously	as	it	foamed	up	and	stick	to	everything	like
Krazy	Glue	before	it	hardened.

After	it	had	been	clad	in	its	insulating	jacket,	the	outer	tank	just	fit	through
the	hole	cut	through	the	floor	of	the	former	conference	room,	and	rested	on
the	cellar	floor	below,	its	upper	part	projecting	up	into	the	ground	floor.	Here
the	Maxes	cut	a	rectangular	hatch	through	it,	and	a	matching	one	through	the
inner	tank	several	 inches	away.	They	fiberglassed	the	two	rectangles	 together
to	form	a	hollow	door	capable	of	being	filled	with	liquid	helium,	and	likewise
sealed	the	jambs.	Meanwhile,	expensive-looking	stuff	kept	showing	up	at	the
loading	dock.	I	didn’t	need	a	West	Point	physics	degree	to	understand	that	this
was	cryogenics	equipment.

Though	 the	 new	 ODEC	 (the	 Mark	 II)	 was	 much	 bigger	 than	 Professor
Oda’s	 cat-sized	Mark	 I,	 it	was	 recognizably	 the	 same	machine.	 Instead	of	 an
inner	plywood	box	with	a	cat	bed	and	a	cream	saucer,	this	one	had	that	inner
tank,	which	was	just	 large	enough	for	one	person	to	sit	 in	a	chair,	or	two	to
stand	upright.	Much	of	its	volume	was	spoken	for	by	what	Tristan	referred	to,
somewhat	unnervingly,	as	“life	support	stuff.”	I	made	a	mental	note	to	ask	him
about	that	later.	Its	walls,	for	the	time	being,	were	just	bare	fiberglass,	as	it	had
come	 from	 the	 factory.	 If	 the	Mark	 I	 was	 any	 guide,	 however,	 those	walls
would	soon	be	lined	with	circuit	boards.	I	had	overheard	enough	snatches	of
conversation	 between	 Oda	 and	 Tristan	 to	 know	 that	 these	 were	 being
produced	offsite	and	that	some	were	already	inbound,	plastered	with	tracking
numbers	that	Rebecca	was	checking	several	 times	a	day.	When	they	showed
up,	 and	 when	 the	 Maxes	 installed	 them,	 they	 would	 be	 connected	 to	 the
inevitable	web	of	cables,	which	would	be	routed	under	the	floor	and	then	up
into	the	server	room.	This	was	being	bolted	together	and	brought	online	by	a
trio	of	bearded	men	who	all	politely	introduced	themselves	as	Vladimir.

Once	 the	 Vladimirs	 had	 bolted	 the	 vertical	 racks	 into	 the	 floor,	 they
devoted	whole	days	to	opening	cardboard	boxes,	which	had	been	piling	up	in
ziggurats	on	the	loading	docks,	and	extricating	black	slabs,	approximately	the
size	 and	 shape	 of	 pizza	 boxes,	 and	 slamming	 them	 into	 rails	 on	 those	 racks.
Each	of	them,	I	was	assured,	contained	sixteen	computers,	each	of	which	was	a
bazillion	times	more	powerful	than	the	single,	forlorn	Indigo	that	had	served	as
the	brains	of	the	Mark	I.	The	Vladimirs	were	nothing	if	not	friendly.	I	got	the
sense	 that	 this	would	be	my	 last	opportunity	 to	have	anything	 like	a	normal



conversation	 with	 them.	 Once	 all	 of	 these	 pizza	 box	 servers	 were	 up	 and
running,	 they	 would	 revert	 to	 their	 natural	 behavior	 patterns.	 For	 now,
working	on	 their	knees	with	 screwdrivers,	performing	 tasks	well	below	their
pay	grade,	they	were	just	happy	to	have	someone	to	talk	to.	And	talk	they	did,
with	a	kind	of	messianic	zeal,	about	the	awesomeness	of	the	cluster	they	were
assembling.	One	of	them,	whom	I’d	mentally	renamed	Longbeard,	actually	did
have	 an	 Eastern	 European	 accent.	 I	 got	 the	 impression	 from	 stray	 remarks
dropped	 here	 and	 there	 that	 he’d	 had	 a	 hand	 in	 the	 creation	 of	 the	 uber-
paranoid	Shiny	Hat	operating	system	that	had	been	the	bane	of	my	existence
these	six	months.	Perhaps	he	was	the	ur-Vlad.

I	was	drawn	into	the	mindless	but	satisfying	activity	of	flattening	boxes	and
stuffing	plastic	packing	material	into	garbage	bags.	On	a	trip	to	the	Dumpsters,
I	noted	that	it	was	dark.	Perhaps	we	would	knock	off	soon.	But	the	Vladimirs
had	 just	 ordered	 another	 round	 of	 quadruple-shot	 espresso	 drinks	 from	 the
Apostolic	Café,	and	Tristan	announced	that	he	and	the	Maxes	were	going	to
pull	an	all-nighter	and	leak-check	the	entire	chamber	so	that	it	could	be	test-
filled	in	the	morning.	Frank	Oda	kindly	gave	me	a	lift	home.	I	wondered	what
Rebecca	made	of	all	this,	but	suspected	this	was	perhaps	a	delicate	subject,	so
refrained	from	asking.

It	was	strange	spending	an	evening	in	my	own	apartment.	I’d	anticipated	a
sense	 of	 relief,	 but	 the	 solitude	 was	 almost	 disorienting.	 I	 heated	 up	 some
leftovers,	 settled	 down	with	my	 laptop,	 and	 checked	my	 email	 for	 the	 first
time	in	days.	I	had	three	notifications	from	Facebook.

I	usually	forgot	about	Facebook;	I	checked	in	about	once	a	month.	I	logged
in	now,	to	see	that	my	account	had	three	“friend	requests.”	One	was	from	my
mother,	one	was	a	nearly	pornographic	image	of	an	attractive	young	Chinese
man	whose	name	translated	to	“Jade	Dagger,”	and	one	was	a	woman	named
Erszebet	 Karpathy	 whose	 picture	 appeared	 to	 be	 a	 state-issued	 ID	 of	 an
octogenarian	 drag	 queen.	 I	 accepted	 my	 mother’s	 request,	 disregarded	 the
other	two	as	spam,	sent	my	mother	a	perfunctory	“Welcome	to	the	Twenty-
First	Century”	post,	and	checked	my	wall.

There	was	a	message	posted	on	it	from	Erszebet	Karpathy,	dated	three	days
earlier.	“I	am	still	waiting!	Let	me	know	when	you	are	ready	to	begin.”

Odd.
I	scrolled	down.	The	next	most	recent	post	on	my	page	was	also	from	this

Erszebet	 Karpathy,	 ten	 days	 earlier:	 “I	 am	 waiting	 for	 all	 to	 be	 placed	 in
readiness.”



Next	was	a	 request	 from	one	of	my	 former	 students	 to	play	 some	kind	of
dumb	social	media	game.

Then	another	post	 from	Erszebet	Karpathy,	 this	one	 from	nearly	a	month
earlier:	“Melisande,	is	it	time	yet?	You	said	April	or	May	of	this	year.”

That	was	unnerving.	Who	was	Erszebet	Karpathy?	I	went	to	her	“About”
page,	 to	 find	 it	 blank.	 Occasionally	 I	 accepted	 private	 students,	 usually
interested	in	Bible	studies,	who	wished	to	parse	something	in	Aramaic.	But	it
had	been	at	least	a	year	since	I’d	fielded	any	requests.	Tired	from	a	long	day,	I
closed	the	laptop	and	went	to	sleep	without	even	finishing	dinner.

The	next	morning,	when	I	opened	my	laptop	again	to	check	the	New	York
Times	 headlines,	 I	 was	 still	 logged	 in	 to	 Facebook,	 and	 there	 was	 a	 new
message	from	the	Karpathy	chick:	“Melisande.	I	see	that	you	have	been	active
on	Facebook	within	 the	past	12	hours,	 so	I	KNOW	you	are	receiving	 these
messages.	 Contact	 me	 and	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 where	 to	 collect	 me.”	 She	 had
changed	 her	 profile	 picture:	 now	 it	 was	 a	 “vintage”-looking,	 sepia-toned
portrait	of	a	matron	in	Edwardian	costume,	the	kind	of	photo	you	dress	for	at
Ye	Olde	County	Faire.

If	 life	 had	 not	 become	 so	 exceptionally	 peculiar	 over	 the	 past	 month,	 I
would	simply	have	blocked	her.	Instead,	chewing	on	my	lower	lip,	I	sent	her	a
private	message:	“Who	are	you	and	what	do	you	want?”

Before	I	could	even	log	out,	I	received	a	response:	“Come	and	get	me.	Elm
House,	420	Common	Street,	Belmont.	Do	not	make	me	wait	any	longer.	Do
you	have	any	idea	how	much	I	have	suffered?”

I	stared	at	this	statement,	flummoxed.
“I	know	you	are	online,”	came	a	new	message.	“There	is	a	little	green	light

next	to	your	name.	Come	at	once.	I	shall	be	waiting	near	the	front	desk	with
my	luggage.”

After	an	unsettled	moment,	I	typed	back,	“What	are	you	expecting	of	me?”
“That	you	will	help	me	to	do	magic	once	again.	As	you	promised.”
Thirty	 seconds	 later,	 laptop	under	my	arm,	 I	was	dashing	out	 the	door	 to

get	to	Tristan.



Diachronicle	
DAY	290

In	which	adjustments	are	made

I	 SPRINTED	 INTO	 THE	 BASEMENT	 office	 ready	 to	 thrust	my	 Facebook	 page	 at
Tristan.	But	he	and	the	assembled	Maxes,	all	bleary-eyed	yet	full	of	pep,	were
cheering	the	results	of	the	overnight	test,	which	had	apparently	found	no	leaks.
Frank	Oda	(radiant)	and	his	wife,	Rebecca	(stoic),	were	also	present,	creating
yet	another	mound	of	empty	boxes	and	packing	material	as	they	uncrated	the
newly	arrived	circuit	boards.

“Tristan,	I	found—!”	I	began,	but	he	was	moving	so	quickly	as	to	resemble
an	animated	character,	without	the	least	interest	in	anything	I	had	to	say.	He
seemed	to	be	headed	for	the	server	room,	so	I	darted	past	him,	executed	a	180,
and	blocked	his	path.	“I	found	a	woman	who	says	she	can	do	magic.	That	is,
she	 found	 me,”	 I	 clarified,	 seeing	 his	 eyes	 go	 wide	 with	 wonder.	 “On
Facebook.	We	haven’t	met	in	person.”

Tristan	frowned.	“Oh	God,	not	some	social	media	thing,	Stokes.	Please	tell
me	you	didn’t	put	out	a	call	for	witches.”

“Of	course	not,”	 I	 snapped.	“I	 signed	a	nondisclosure	 form,	 I	know	what
that	means.	Give	me	 some	 credit,	Lyons.	 She	 sent	me	 a	message	 out	 of	 the
blue,	saying	she	was	waiting	for	me	so	she	could	do	magic.”

He	blinked.	“Strange.”
I	reached	for	my	messenger	bag.	“I’ve	got	it	right—”
He	held	up	a	hand,	shook	his	head.	“Stokes.	I	forbid	you	to	communicate

with	 this	 person,	 whoever	 she	 is,	 over	 social	 media	 channels.	 It	 is	 totally
insecure.	You	have	got	to	go	about	this	systematically—not	by	sitting	around
your	apartment	waiting	to	get	friended	by	supernatural	trolls.”

“Well,	 now	 that	 we’ve	 ruled	 out	 the	 use	 of	 the	 Internet	 and	 all	 other
modern	communications	devices,”	 I	 said,	“what	 systematic	 approach	do	you
recommend	for	responding	to	the	only	lead	we	have?”

“Don’t	 do	 anything	 till	we	have	 a	 chance	 to	hack	 into	Facebook	 and	get
this	person’s	real	identity	for	a	background	check.	Leave	your	laptop	with	the



Vladimirs.”
“And	what	do	I	systematically	do	in	the	meanwhile?”
“Go	to	Salem.”
“We’ve	been	over	this.	There	never	were	any	actual	witches	in	Salem.	Even

the	Puritans	ended	up	admitting	as	much.”
“Back	 in	 the	 day,	 yes.	 That’s	 true,”	 Tristan	 said	 agreeably.	 “But	 now,

because	of	its	reputation	as	a	witchy	place,	it	is	a	magnet	for	people	like	that.”
“And	you	know	this	how?”
“I	drove	through	it	once.	There	was	witch	shit	all	over	the	place.”
“Good.	Now	I	understand	what	you	mean	by	systematic.”
“Try	 to	 see	 it	 through	 the	eyes	of	my	higher-ups,”	he	 suggested.	“Salem.

Witches.	Go.	Get	on	it.	See	if	you	can	find	a	witch,	or	a	witch’s	descendant,
or	a	witch’s	DNA	or	something,	just	so	I	can	tell	them	it’s	being	worked	on.
I’ve	 got	 to	 work	 my	 contacts	 at	 Lawrence	 Livermore,	 they’re	 hoarding
helium.”

“Of	course,”	I	said,	and	wished	for	a	brief,	exhausted	moment	that	he	had
asked	me	to	translate	Tartessian,	or	something	simple	like	that.

Feeling	like	a	dolt	before	I’d	even	departed,	I	borrowed	Tristan’s	Jeep	and
drove	up	Route	1	to	Salem,	about	an	hour	away.	In	that	vehicle,	on	that	road,
this	was	like	being	beaten	with	sacks	of	gravel.

Like	 many	 New	 England	 towns	 with	 something	 of	 historical	 note	 to
recommend	 it,	 Salem	was	 a	bizarre	 combination	of	well-preserved,	beautiful
old	 buildings	 and	 ugly	 commercial	 developments.	 The	 commercial
developments	 were	 winning,	 however.	 Ignoring	 the	 various	 signs	 for	 the
Salem	Witch	Museum,	the	Salem	Witch	House,	the	Salem	Witch	Village,	the
Salem	Witch	Day	Spa,	 and	 so	on,	 I	 found	 a	parking	 spot	on	 a	broad	 street,
marveled	 at	 how	 cheap	 the	 parking	was,	 and	walked	 into	 the	 older	 part	 of
town.	 I	 have	 no	 words	 to	 describe	 how	 unenthusiastic	 I	 felt	 about	 this
assignment.	Three	and	a	quarter	centuries	after	nineteen	innocent	people	were
hanged	for	no	reason,	a	bunch	of	New	Age	types	whose	concept	of	witchcraft
had	 zero	 in	 common	 with	 the	 seventeenth-century	 concept	 of	 witchcraft
decided	 to	 set	 up	 shop	 right	 by	 the	 graves	 of	 the	 victims.	What	 the	 fuck.	 I
have	no	tolerance	for	sloppy	logic	like	that.

Just	so	I	could	tell	Tristan	I’d	done	it,	I	walked	into	a	couple	of	occult	shops
that	 I	 found	 along	 a	 pedestrian	 stretch	 of	 Essex	 Street,	 then	 fled	 before	 the
incense	overwhelmed	me.

There’s	 another	 context-is-everything	 moment,	 because	 now	 I	 live	 for



incense—if	I	really	am	to	be	stuck	permanently	in	1850s	London,	I	might	have
to	become	an	Anglican	nun.	God,	I	hope	it	doesn’t	come	to	that.

In	 the	end,	 though,	 the	 scholar	 in	me	won	out,	and	I	ended	up	visiting	a
few	 of	 the	 legitimate	 historical	 sites	 in	 the	 Salem	 area.	 The	 name	 of	 Mary
Estey—one	 of	 the	 victims	 of	 the	 witch	 hysteria—kept	 jumping	 out	 at	 me.
Rebecca	East,	Frank’s	wife,	had	mentioned	that	 she	was	a	descendant	of	 this
family,	the	spelling	having	changed	and	the	final	syllable	having	been	dropped
from	the	surname	at	some	point	in	the	intervening	three	centuries.	In	typical
WASP	 style,	 Rebecca	 underplayed	 its	 significance,	 pointing	 out	 that	 the
families	of	 that	 era	had	been	enormous	 and	 that,	 if	 you	did	 the	math,	 every
second	or	third	white	person	you	encountered	on	the	streets	of	America	was
probably	descended	from	someone	who	had	lived	in	Salem.	But	I	felt	that	the
least	I	could	do	was	pay	my	respects.

Then,	suddenly	feeling	as	though	it	was	late	in	the	day	and	that	I	must	be
missing	 important	developments,	 I	 got	back	 in	 the	 Jeep	 and	 fought	my	way
back	 through	 late	 afternoon	 traffic	 to	 the	 office.	 I	 can’t	 say	 I	 mourned	my
failure	overmuch,	as	it	meant	I’d	get	a	free	trip	to	New	Orleans	out	of	it,	and
that	would	rock	be	most	excellent.

I	 DROVE	 BACK	 to	 the	 office	 late	 in	 the	 day	 to	 find	Tristan	 collapsed	 on	 the
couch	 from	 exhaustion.	 I	 began	 to	 make	 coffee	 in	 one	 of	 the	 high-tech
machines	we	had	pillaged	from	a	departing	tech	start-up.	While	it	gurgled	and
hissed,	I	idly	and	out	of	habit	took	my	phone	out	and	glanced	at	it.	There	was
a	banner	notification	from	Facebook	Messenger.

“I	 will	 wait	 in	 the	 lobby,”	 said	 a	 private	 message	 from	 the	 Hungarian
woman,	with	a	9:04	a.m.	time	stamp	on	it.

“Oh	God,”	 I	 said	out	 loud.	How	could	 I	have	gone	 the	whole	day	with
hardly	a	thought	of	her?

A	mechanical	chime	sounded	as	an	instant	message	sprang	up.	“I	waited	the
ENTIRE	DAY.	Where	were	you?”	She	had	changed	her	profile	picture	again,
this	time	to	an	artsy-looking	purple	blur.

I	went	 to	 the	couch	and	nudged	Tristan.	Deep	asleep,	he	almost	 instantly
awoke	 and	 leapt	 to	 his	 feet,	 shoving	 me	 sideways	 without	 registering	 my
identity,	glancing	around	for	an	assailant.

“It’s	just	me,”	I	said	with	irritation.	“Calm	down.”
“You	startled	me,”	he	said,	as	if	I	should	have	known	better.



I	gestured	to	my	phone.	“Take	a	look	at	this.”
Even	as	I	showed	him	her	comments,	our	exchange,	and	her	blank	“About”

page,	 several	 more	 prompts	 popped	 up	 on	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 screen	 with
mechanical	chimes,	as	Miss	Karpathy	informed	me	she	could	see	I	was	online
and	why	was	I	not	answering?

Tristan	considered	the	screen	a	moment.	“The	Vladimirs	have	been	all	over
this.	 Intriguing-slash-disturbing-in-the-extreme.	 Tell	 her	 you’ll	 speak	 to	 her
tomorrow.	Today’s	got	to	be	about	the	dry	run.”

I	tapped	in,	“Sorry.	Will	be	with	you	tomorrow	evening.”
Immediately	the	response:	“Why	the	delay?”
“Technical	difficulties,”	I	typed.
“With	the	ODEC?”	she	typed	back	instantly.
I	 looked	 at	 Tristan.	 “Jesus,”	 he	 said	 under	 his	 breath.	 “Who	 is	 she?”	He

moved	closer	to	the	screen	and	nudged	my	shoulder	with	his.	“Tell	her	you
can’t	 discuss	 it	 online,”	 he	 whispered,	 as	 if	 worried	 of	 being	 overheard	 by
somebody.	I	typed	this	in,	and	a	response	came	back:

“Will	you	come	with	your	Mr.	Tristan	Lyons?”	she	typed	back.	“I	wish	to
meet	him.”

I	looked	up	over	my	shoulder	at	my	Mr.	Tristan	Lyons.	He	nodded,	staring
at	the	screen.

“We	could	go	now,”	I	suggested.
He	shook	his	head.	“We	don’t	know	what	we’re	getting	into.	Tell	her	yes,

I’ll	come	with	you.	But	tomorrow.”
“With	Mr.	Tristan	Lyons,”	I	typed.	“Tomorrow	evening.”
“Come	 before	 6	 p.m.	 or	 it	will	 be	 harder	 to	 leave	 because	 of	 the	Night

Guard.”
We	both	 continued	 to	 stare	 at	 the	 screen	 for	 a	moment	 in	 silence.	Then

Tristan	reached	out	and	gently	took	the	phone	from	my	hand,	tossed	it	on	to
the	couch.

“Can’t	wait	to	hear	the	explanation,”	he	said,	sounding	weary.	Then,	with	a
tired	grin	down	at	me:	“Funny	how	she	called	me	your	Mr.	Tristan	Lyons.”

I	felt	my	face	flush.	“Maybe	she’s	dealt	with	another	Tristan	Lyons,”	I	said.
“Surely	the	multiverse	contains	more	than	one.	The	coffee’s	ready.”

“Good,”	he	said,	“because	so	is	the	ODEC.”
During	my	sojourn	to	Salem,	the	crew	had	mounted	all	of	the	circuit	boards

to	 the	walls	 of	 the	 inner	 cavity	 and	 also	 bolted	 in	 the	 electromagnets;	 these
were	mounted	to	a	sturdy	framework	of	steel	angle	irons	that	had	been	welded



together	around	 the	external	 tank.	Black	melted	areas	on	 the	 floor	 suggested
that	welding	sparks	had	set	the	occasional	odd	fire	to	the	carpet;	 larger	burns
were	surrounded	by	penumbras	of	powder	that	had	apparently	been	shot	out
of	the	various	fire	extinguishers,	which	now	lay	scattered	around	the	floor	like
empty	beer	bottles	after	a	frat	party.	As	Tristan	led	me	in,	he	absentmindedly
nudged	these	out	of	the	way	with	his	foot,	cautioning	me	to	watch	my	step.

“Did	your	friends	come	through	with	the	liquid	helium?”	I	asked.	Certainly
the	first	time	in	my	life	I	had	uttered	that	sentence.

“They	will.”
“That’s	a	no?”
“We’re	testing	it	with	liquid	nitrogen.	Much	cheaper.”
As	 if	 on	 cue,	 the	 persistent,	 infuriating	 beep-beep-beep	 of	 a	 truck’s	 backup

alarm	sounded	 from	the	 street;	we	could	hear	 it	 through	 the	 roll-up	door	at
the	loading	dock.

“Woo	hoo	hoo!”	Tristan	shouted.	“LN2!	Up	and	at	’em,	folks!”	He	strode
down	 the	 tank	 right-of-way	 to	 the	 loading	 dock	 and	 hit	 the	 button	 that
opened	 the	 dock	 door.	 A	 semi-trailer	 rig	 consisting	 largely	 of	 a	 large	white
sausage-shaped	 tank	 was	 backing	 down	 the	 ramp	 from	 the	 street,	 scattering
nests	of	rats	and	pissing	off	seagulls.	Suddenly	there	were	weary-looking	Maxes
and	Vladimirs	all	over	the	place.	In	block	letters	that	could	be	seen	from	space,
the	 truck	was	 labeled	 LIQUID	NITROGEN.	Ah,	 of	 course:	 liquid	 nitrogen,	 aka
LN2.	 After	 Tristan’s	 brief,	 disgustingly	 cheerful	 exchange	 with	 the	 driver,
hoses	were	connected	between	his	 truck	and	 some	 storage	 tanks	 that,	 in	my
absence,	 had	 been	 crudely	 bolted	 into	 the	 concrete	 walls	 of	 the	 building.
Impressive	 whining	 noises	 came	 from	 a	 thing	 that,	 I	 was	 informed,	 was	 a
cryogenic	 pump.	 When	 the	 LN2	 first	 hit	 the	 warm	 innards	 of	 the	 storage
tanks,	there	was	an	amount	of	hissing	that	defied	description,	unless	you	have
ever	heard	all	of	the	bacon	in	Iowa	being	dropped	onto	a	red-hot	griddle	the
size	of	Delaware.	With	 that	was	 a	 concomitant	 amount	of	milky,	 chilly	 fog.
Tristan	grabbed	me	by	 the	arm	and	dragged	me	out	of	 the	building.	“Non-
toxic,”	he	assured	me,	“but—”

“But	I	need	oxygen.”
“Yeah.	I	knew	I	liked	you,	Stokes.”
“Is	this	why	the	ODEC	contains	life	support	equipment?”
He	shrugged	modestly.	“There	are	certain	failure	modes,”	he	said,	“such	as

freezing	to	death	and	asphyxiating,	that	come	naturally	to	mind	when	we	are
getting	 ready	 to	 lock	 human	 subjects	 in	 a	 sealed	 chamber	 completely



surrounded	 by	 cryogenic	 fluids	 chilled	 to	 within	 four	 degrees	 of	 absolute
zero.”

That	initial	spasm	of	hissing	and	fog	production	was	because	the	walls	of	the
tank	 were	 at	 room	 temperature.	 Once	 they	 had	 been	 chilled	 down,	 the
pumping	of	 the	LN2	continued	with	no	more	drama	than	 if	 it	had	been	tap
water.	The	 fog	dissipated	and	Tristan	made	a	decision,	which	I	assumed	was
science-based,	 that	 it	was	 safe	 to	go	back	 inside.	 I	 followed	him	through	the
loading	dock	doors,	past	the	tanks,	and	all	the	way	to	the	door	of	the	ODEC,
which	now	stood	ajar.	I	took	a	small	step	up	to	stand	on	its	threshold,	and	had
a	look	around.

Every	 square	 inch	 of	 the	 cavity’s	 interior	 surfaces,	 including	 its	 floor	 and
ceiling,	had	now	been	tiled	with	circuit	boards:	plates	of	green	plastic	covered
with	 fine	 traceries	 of	 orange-red	 copper	 and	 studded	 with	 electronic
components.	 Most	 of	 these	 were	 the	 tiny	 black	 rectangles	 of	 integrated
circuits,	but	there	were	also	LEDs	blinking	in	a	range	of	colors.	Dangling	from
the	ceiling	by	their	hoses	was	a	pair	of	oxygen	masks—part	of	the	life	support
equipment,	 clearly:	 should	 helium	 leak	 into	 the	 cavity	 and	 displace	 the
breathable	air,	 its	occupants	could	pull	 these	down	and	strap	them	over	their
faces.	(I	was	never	a	hard-science	chick,	but	my	high	school	chemistry	teacher
near	enough	resembled	Orlando	Bloom	that	I	had	diligently	aced	the	class.)

Still	 balanced	 on	 the	 raised	 threshold,	 I	 turned	 around	 to	 look	 out	 the
ODEC	door	into	the	space	surrounding	the	chamber.	Where	the	head	of	the
conference	 table	 had	 formerly	 stood	 was	 a	 control	 console,	 attached	 to	 the
ODEC	by	 a	 large	plastic	 pipe,	 channeling	 gouts	 of	 cables.	Above	 it,	 a	 cable
ladder	from	the	server	room	disgorged	a	waterfall	of	Ethernet	cables	and	fiber-
optic	lines.	Seated	at	the	console,	running	through	some	kind	of	checklist	on
an	 iPad,	 was	 the	 probably-Korean	Max.	Oda-sensei	 and	 his	 wife,	Rebecca,
were	watching	over	his	shoulder.

“Wow,”	I	said	from	the	threshold.
“Right?”	 chirped	Tristan	happily.	 Somewhat	unnecessarily,	 he	 extended	 a

hand	to	assist	me	back	down	to	the	floor.	“The	professor	is	giddy.	Tell	him	he
should	throw	the	switch.”

“It	 is	your	project,”	Oda-sensei	 said	peaceably,	 sipping	coffee	 from	a	blue
thermos.	“The	honor	should	be	yours.”

“It	 was	 your	 project	 first!	We’ve	 been	 arguing	 about	 this	 all	 week,”	 said
Tristan	to	me	with	a	grin.	“You	call	it,	Stokes.”

I	 called	 it	 in	 favor	 of	Oda,	 and	Tristan	 saluted	 him	with	 a	 flourish	more



Renaissance	 than	military.	Tristan	 then	closed	 the	ODEC	door	and	engaged
several	massive	mechanical	latches.

With	 a	 childish,	 nervous	 smile,	 Oda-sensei	 handed	 off	 the	 thermos	 to
Rebecca,	then	responded	to	Tristan	with	a	gesture	something	between	a	nod
and	a	bow.	Console	Max	stood	up,	stepped	back	from	the	console,	and	made	a
similar	gesture,	 inviting	him	to	sit	down.	Oda,	with	a	 little	don’t	mind	 if	 I	do
smile,	 took	 the	 Seat	 of	 Authority	 behind	 the	 console	 and	 pulled	 on	 a
communications	headset.

There	was	one	moment	of	potent,	expectant	stillness.	What	a	thrill	this	must
be	for	him,	I	remember	thinking.	I	was	desperately	curious.	The	enormousness
of	it	far	exceeded	my	urgency	to	discuss	Erszebet	Karpathy.

“Exterior	vent	ports	open,”	Oda	intoned.
I	had	no	 idea	what	he	was	 talking	about	until	 I	heard	 the	 familiar	 rumble

and	 groan	 of	 the	 loading	 dock	 door	 being	 hauled	 up.	 “Check,”	 shouted	 a
Max.	 He	 was	 echoed	 by	 another	Max	 who	 had	 just	 opened	 the	 door	 that
fronted	the	street.

“Atmospheric	exchange	augmentation	systems	to	full	power,”	Oda	said.
Tristan	darted	over	to	a	white	plastic	window	fan—one	of	a	pallet	 load	of

such	 that	we	had	acquired	 from	Home	Depot—and	turned	 it	on	 full	blast.	 I
saw	now	that	several	more	were	scattered	around	the	room.	Feeling	a	desire	to
be	part	of	this	momentous	occasion,	I	turned	on	all	that	were	in	reach.

“Check!”	Tristan	 called,	when	 all	 of	 them	were	 spinning.	 I	 could	 hear	 a
much	 larger,	 industrial-sized	 fan	 humming	 out	 by	 the	 loading	 dock,	 and
another	“Check!”	from	that	quarter.

“Burst	disks	 and	pressure	 relief	valves	 are	all	green,”	 said	Oda,	glancing	at
his	display.	“Initiating	cryogenic	 chill-down	 sequence	 in	 three	 .	 .	 .	 two	 .	 .	 .
one	.	.	.”

Cryogenic	pumps	began	to	hum,	and	a	few	seconds	later	we	heard	the	sizzle
and	 hiss	 of	 liquid	 nitrogen	 coming	 into	 contact	 with	 room-temperature
plumbing.	 The	 idea	 was	 simple	 enough,	 now	 that	 I	 understood	 what	 was
happening:	we	needed	 to	 pump	 the	LN2	 from	 the	 big	 storage	 tanks	 by	 the
loading	dock,	through	piping	that	the	Maxes	had	installed,	to	the	gap	between
the	ODEC’s	 inner	 and	outer	vessels.	But	 since	 the	plumbing	and	 the	vessels
alike	were	 currently	warmer	 than	 the	 boiling	 point	 of	 LN2,	 the	 liquid	was
going	to	boil	off	at	first,	until	everything	got	chilled	down.	As	before,	clouds
of	 milky,	 chilly	 fog	 spilled	 out	 of	 valves	 all	 over	 the	 facility.	 But	 the
“atmospheric	 exchange	 augmentation	 systems”	 did	 a	 good	 job	 of	 pushing	 it



out	 the	 “exterior	 vent	 ports.”	 Outside	 of	 these—as	 we	 could	 all	 tell	 by
checking	surveillance	monitors	that	had	been	racked	up	on	the	half-shattered
remnant	 of	 a	 nearby	wall—several	 Lukes	were	 standing	 guard	 to	make	 sure
that	random	people	didn’t	just	wander	in	off	the	street.	The	Lukes	had	begun
showing	up	a	couple	of	days	ago;	they	were	big,	beefy,	taciturn,	and	dressed	in
rent-a-cop	 uniforms	 devoid	 of	 insignia.	 They	 seemed	 to	 think	 Tristan	 was
cool.

The	 cryogenic	 drama	 lessened	 as	 (one	 inferred)	 the	 plumbing	 and	 vessels
became	super-cold,	and	then	we	could	hear	the	fluid	level	rising	between	the
ODEC’s	 inner	and	outer	walls.	Oda	had	purchased	a	 large	number	of	cheap
digital	 thermometers	 from	 Home	 Depot	 and	 duct-taped	 them	 all	 over	 the
place,	 and	 it	was	 fun,	 for	 a	while,	 to	 see	 their	 readings	plummet	 into	 triple-
digit	negative	numbers.

“How	much	farther?”	I	asked	Tristan,	during	a	lull.
“To	what?”	he	inquired.
“To	absolute	zero.”
He	shook	his	head.	“Not	going	there	today.”
“I	thought	that	was	the	whole	point.”
“Don’t	pout.	This	is	a	dry	run.	With	LN2.	Which	costs	less	than	milk.	If	it

works	we’ll	source	the	liquid	helium	and	do	it	for	real.”
“Vessel	 is	 full.	 Hatch	 is	 full.	 Both	 holding	 steady,”	 Oda	 announced.

“Confirming	criticality	in	lower	magnet	ring.”
“Criticality?	Sounds	very	MLA,”	I	said.
“MLA?”
“Modern	Language	Association.”
Tristan	 sighed.	 “He	 just	means	 that	 the	magnets	 in	 the	 bottom-most	 ring

have	now	been	 cold	 enough,	 long	 enough,	 that	 they	have	dropped	 through
their	 TC—their	 critical	 temperature—and	 become	 superconducting.”	 He
seemed	mildly	offended	by	my	quip.

“Ah,	so	that’s	the	purpose	of	the	dry	run,”	I	said.
“Yeah.	Until	all	of	the	magnet	rings	go	superconducting,	we	can’t	even	turn

the	ODEC	on	in	any	meaningful	sense	of	the	word.”
This	at	least	gave	me	something	to	watch.	The	vessels,	of	course,	had	filled

from	 the	bottom	up,	 and	 so	 the	magnets	 on	 the	bottom	had	 spent	 a	 longer
time	 exposed	 to	 cryogenic	 temperatures.	 From	 bottom	 to	 top,	 there	 were
thirty-two	distinct	rings	of	little	magnets,	each	of	which	completely	encircled
the	cavity—the	ODEC’s	 inner	vessel.	The	rings	were	 stacked	one	above	 the



next,	spanning	the	full	height	of	the	cavity.	The	Maxes	had	mounted	an	LED
on	each	ring.	It	was	red	when	the	magnets	were	warm,	but	turned	blue	when
they	had	gone	 superconducting.	Over	 the	course	of	 a	 couple	of	minutes	we
enjoyed	the	simple	but	weirdly	exciting	spectacle	of	watching	that	column	of
LEDs	turn	from	red	to	blue,	from	the	bottom	to	the	top.

“We	have	full	criticality,”	Oda	announced	when	the	uppermost	one	turned
blue.

I	 had	 found	 myself	 standing	 next	 to	 Rebecca.	 On	 an	 impulse,	 I	 turned
toward	her	and	raised	my	hand,	palm	 facing	out.	Startled	by	 the	movement,
she	swiveled	her	head	to	place	me	under	her	blue-eyed	gaze.	It	was	like	staring
into	a	couple	of	those	LEDs.

It	occurred	to	me	that	she	might	not	recognize	the	gesture.	“High	five?”	I
said	weakly.	She	looked	away	as	if	hoping	that	the	whole	regrettable	incident
could	be	forgotten.

Meanwhile	 her	 husband	was	 busy.	 “Internal	 sensor	 calibration	matrix	 has
been	 computed	 and	 flashed	 to	 embedded	 firmware.	 Ready	 to	 boot	 the
renormalization	feedback	loop,	Vladimirs?”

“Check!”	shouted	a	Vladimir	from	the	server	room.
“Booting	 it,”	 Oda	 said,	 and	 reached	 out	 toward	 one	 of	 the	 very	 few

mechanical	switches	on	the	console.	It	was	military	hardware,	eBayed	(Tristan
boasted)	 from	 some	 collector	 of	 Cold	 War	 electrical	 components.	 It	 had	 a
protective	cover	that	had	to	be	flipped	up	out	of	the	way	to	provide	access	to
the	switch	itself,	imbuing	it	with	more	ceremony.

I	 nearly	 suffered	 a	 heart	 attack	 after	Oda	 snapped	 the	 switch	 to	 “on”:	 an
alarm	Klaxon	began	to	sound	and	it	happened	to	be	mounted	directly	above
my	head.	I	jammed	my	hands	over	my	ears	and	pivoted	away	from	it;	Rebecca
was	 doing	 the	 same,	 in	 mirror	 image.	 At	 the	 same	 time	 the	 room	 lights
dimmed,	flickered,	and	went	out,	prompting	battery-powered	red	emergency
lights	to	switch	on.	I	tripped	over	a	discarded	fire	extinguisher	and	staggered	a
couple	of	 paces,	 finally	 breaking	my	 fall	 by	 colliding	with	 a	 rolling	 coatrack
that	had	been	 set	up	 to	one	 side	of	 the	 console.	This	had	been	 stocked,	 for
some	reason,	with	a	row	of	snowmobile	suits	in	various	sizes	and	colors.	They
were	soft,	and	cushioned	my	fall	as	I	knocked	the	whole	thing	over	and	went
down	onto	the	floor.	It	must	have	made	a	loud	noise.	No	one	noticed	because
of	the	Klaxon.

Tristan	 was	 either	 a	 perfect	 gentleman	 or	 no	 gentleman	 at	 all.	 At	 the
moment	he	was	too	fascinated	by	goings-on	surrounding	the	ODEC	to	know



that	 I	had	 taken	a	pratfall.	Probably	 just	 as	well.	 I	 clambered	 to	my	 feet	 and
reached	into	my	pocket,	where	I’d	got	in	the	habit	of	stowing	a	pair	of	foam
earplugs.	Recently	 I	 had	 been	 using	 them	when	 operating	 power	 saws,	 but
they	were	just	what	I	needed	now.

Tristan	signaled	Oda	to	switch	the	power	off.	The	Klaxon	went	silent.	The
room	 lights	 flickered	 back—this	 took	 a	 few	 moments,	 since	 one	 of	 the
Vladimirs	 had	 to	 run	 to	 the	 electrical	 panel	 and	 flip	 a	 number	 of	 circuit
breakers	back	on.	The	collective	excitement	of	 the	room	palpably	dissipated.
So	much	drama,	so	many	sound	and	visual	effects,	for—what?

“Anything?”	Tristan	inquired.
“The	data	loggers	inside	the	cavity	all	went	dead.	Completely	zorched,	as	far

as	 I	 can	 tell,”	Oda	 said.	 The	words	 sounded	 like	 bad	 news	 but	 his	 tone	 of
voice	implied	fascination.

“So	we	don’t	even	know	if	anything	happened	in	there.”
“Something	 friggin’	 happened,”	 insisted	 the	 most	 long-bearded	 of	 the

Vladimirs,	who	had	just	stormed	in	from	the	server	room.	“While	that	thing
was	on,	we	ran	a	ridiculous	amount	of	data	through	our	servers.”

“How	much?”	I	asked.
He	 looked	 exasperated.	 “Enough	 that	 I	 could	 make	 up	 some	 kind	 of

strained	 analogy	 involving	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 Library	 of	 Congress	 and	 the
number	of	pixels	 in	all	of	the	Lord	of	 the	Rings	movies	put	together	and	how
many	phone	calls	 the	NSA	intercepts	 in	a	single	day	and	you	would	be	 like,
‘Holy	shit,	that’s	a	lot.’”

“Holy	shit,	that’s	a	lot!”	I	exclaimed	dutifully.
“And	as	to	the	amount	of	computational	processing	performed	on	that	data,

using	Professor	Oda’s	algorithms—well—same	basic	story.”
“Fantastic,”	I	purred.
“I	believe	you,”	Tristan	said,	“it’s	just	that	we	don’t	appear	to	have	any	data

on	what	actually	happened	in	there.”
“Confirmed,”	 Oda	 said.	 “The	 renormalization	 loop	 appears	 to	 interfere

with	normal	functioning	of	the	sensor	package	we	left	inside.”
“That’s	exactly	as	it	should	be—right?”	I	said.
“Could	 be,”	 Tristan	 said,	 “or	 could	 be	 it	 just	 went	 on	 the	 fritz.	We	 are

blind	in	there.	No	real	way	to	know	if	it’s	working.”
“Maybe	if	we	had	a	cat,”	the	professor	said.
“Maybe	if	we	go	inside,”	 said	Tristan.	Rebecca	made	a	disapproving	sound

under	her	breath	as	the	Maxes	and	Vladimirs	made	anticipatory	sounds	under



theirs.
Oda	shook	his	head.	“A	cat	is	one	thing.	But	I’m	not	going	in	there.”
“I’ll	go,”	said	Tristan.
“It’s	your	funeral,”	muttered	Rebecca,	as	if	to	herself,	and	paced	away	from

the	console	table.
Tristan	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 her,	 and	 then	 at	 Oda.	 “Does	 she	 mean	 that

literally?”	And	to	Rebecca:	“Do	you	mean	that	literally?”
Oda	answered	before	 she	could.	“It	won’t	kill	you.	But	 .	 .	 .	you	will	not

enjoy	it.	The	cat	certainly	didn’t.”
Tristan	waved	this	away	dismissively.	“As	 long	as	 it’s	not	 lethal,	I’m	going

in.”	And	then	with	an	inviting	grin:	“Want	to	come	with	me,	Stokes?”
Flattered	 as	 I	 was	 that	 he	 considered	me	 a	 peer	 in	 this	 undertaking,	 and

eager	as	 I	was	 to	know	what	would	come	of	 it,	 I	 thought	of	 the	cat.	“Next
time,”	I	said.

“Internal	temp	of	the	cavity?”	Tristan	asked.
“Twenty-three	below	zero,	Celsius,	and	holding,”	reported	Console	Max.
“Gotta	 get	 better	 insulation,”	Tristan	muttered.	He	pivoted	 and	made	 for

the	rolling	coatrack,	which	was	still	all	kinds	of	messy	on	the	floor.	I	stiffened,
awaiting	 a	 reprimand,	 but	 he	 didn’t	 even	 seem	 to	 notice	 that	 it	 had	 been
knocked	over.	He	found	the	end	of	the	pile	where	the	larger	snowmobile	suits
had	ended	up,	pulled	one	out,	 and	 stepped	 into	 it.	“We	still	go?	Everything
nominal?”

Half	 a	 dozen	 different	Maxes	 and	 Vladimirs	 hollered	 out	 “Check!”	 from
various	parts	of	the	building.

Tristan	zipped	up	the	suit.	In	a	side	pocket	he	found	a	balaclava,	which	he
pulled	 on	 over	 his	 head.	 I	 helped	 him	 yank	 it	 around	 until	 his	 eyes	 were
shining	out	from	the	oval	hole.	He	gave	me	a	wink	and	then	pulled	on	a	pair
of	bulky	mittens	while	striding	toward	the	ODEC	door.	Oda	hauled	it	open
for	him,	then	appeared	to	regret	this	gesture	as	the	cold	burned	his	hand.

Tristan	 stepped	over	 the	 threshold,	 displacing	 a	 column	of	 air	 that	 turned
cloudy	as	it	spilled	out	into	the	room.

A	torso	flew	out	and	did	an	end-over-end	bounce	across	the	floor,	shedding
batteries	and	thumb	drives.	It	was	the	upper	half	of	a	store	mannequin	that	we
had	instrumented	with	sensors.	Tristan	had	tossed	it	out.

Having	thus	made	room	for	himself,	Tristan	sat	down	on	the	wooden	stool
we’d	put	in	there	to	support	the	mannequin.	Providing	a	bit	of	padding	under
his	 bum	 was	 the	 cat-hair-saturated	 cushion	 from	 the	 Mark	 I;	 Rebecca	 had



moved	 it	 to	 the	Mark	 II	 to	 supply	 a	 feeling	 of	 continuity.	He	 reached	 out,
pawed	at	the	door,	and	closed	it	behind	him.	The	Maxes	exchanged	expectant
glances.	Rebecca	rubbed	the	space	between	her	eyebrows	and	paced	silently.
Oda-sensei	 resumed	 his	 position	 at	 the	 control	 panel.	 He	 reached	 out	 and
flipped	up	the	protective	cover	on	the	switch.	Rebecca	stuck	her	fingers	in	her
ears.

For	a	few	moments	we	all	stood	at	rigid	attention,	our	eyes	on	Oda’s	finger.
Then	he	 flicked	 the	 switch.	Again	 the	 lights	went	out	and	 the	Klaxon	came
on.	 He	 checked	 his	 wristwatch	 and	 let	 the	 machine	 run	 for	 fifteen	 long
seconds.	Then	he	flicked	the	switch	back	off	and	gently	replaced	the	cover.

Tristan	walked	out	of	the	ODEC,	pulling	off	the	balaclava	and	shaking	his
head	as	if	he	had	swimmer’s	ear.	He	saw	all	of	our	party	staring	at	him,	and	he
stared	back	a	moment,	frowning.	“That	was	unpleasant,”	he	reported	gruffly.
“Like	being	in	a	Russian	disco.	But	that’s	all.”

“I’m	glad	you’re	all	right,”	I	said.	“But	.	.	.”	And	I	thought	better	of	saying
more.

“But	 it	would	have	been	cooler	 if	 you	had	 to	carry	me	out	 strapped	 to	 a
back	board.	I	know,”	Tristan	said	ruefully.	“Vladimir?	Got	anything	for	me?”

The	Vladimir	with	 red	 hair	was	 strolling	 carefully	 into	 the	 space,	 kicking
fire	extinguishers	and	empty	Red	Bull	cans	out	of	his	way	while	studying	an
iPad.	 “Preliminary	 diagnostics	 suggest	 a	 large	 number	 of	 wedged	 processes.
Probably	a	bug	we	can	fix	overnight.”

“What	does	that	mean?”
“The	ODEC	was	running	at	maybe	one	percent	efficiency.”
“Sounds	like	you	have	a	long	night	ahead	of	you,	then,”	Tristan	said.

Diachronicle	
DAY	291



In	which	we	become	decoherent

WHEN	I	ARRIVED	THE	NEXT	morning,	Frank	Oda	was	already	there,	and	with
him—arms	 crossed,	 slightly	 pacing—Rebecca.	 Two	 of	 the	 Vladimirs	 were
lying	 on	 the	 server	 room	 floor	 asleep.	 Longbeard	 was	 in	 our	 little	 kitchen,
supporting	himself	on	his	elbows	and	gazing	fixedly	into	a	cup	of	coffee.

On	 Tristan’s	 cue	 we	 all	 resumed	 the	 places	 we	 had	 occupied	 for	 the
previous	day’s	 failed	experiment.	The	vessels	had	 remained	 filled	with	 liquid
nitrogen	 overnight,	 so	 there	was	 no	 need	 to	 repeat	 the	 chill-down	 process.
Tristan	 donned	his	 snowmobile	 suit—it	would	 be	 just	 about	 freezing	 in	 the
chamber	itself—and	gave	us	all	a	grin	and	a	thumbs-up	signal,	before	walking
into	the	ODEC	and	closing	the	door	behind	himself.

Oda-sensei	 seated	himself	at	 the	console	and	ran	 through	the	checks,	 then
flipped	 the	 switch.	 Someone	 had	 zip-tied	 a	 blanket	 over	 the	 Klaxon	 to
dampen	 the	 volume.	 The	 surge	 of	 electricity	 sent	 shivers	 down	 my	 spine.
Something	was	about	to	happen	now.	I’d	no	idea	what,	but	I	knew	that	it	was
history	in	the	making,	and	I	was	present	for	it	and	not	grading	papers,	and	that
was	extremely	satisfying.

For	fifteen	seconds,	Oda	watched,	frozen,	and	we	all	watched	him.	Then	he
shut	 it	 down.	 In	 the	 silence	 that	 followed	 we	 could	 hear	 the	 Vladimirs
celebrating.

Tristan	 exited	 the	 ODEC	 clutching	 the	 sides	 of	 his	 head	 and	 staggering
drunkenly	in	his	snowsuit.	On	instinct	I	moved	toward	him	to	steady	him,	but
he	veered	away	from	me	and	collapsed,	kneeling,	to	the	floor,	looking	dazed.

“Yeah,	we’re,	um,	we’re	getting,	eh,	closer,”	he	said	in	a	distracted	voice,
peeling	off	the	balaclava,	and	then	yawned.	He	looked	up	at	Oda-sensei.	“Did
I	fall	asleep?	How	long	was	I	there	for?”

“Fifteen	seconds,”	said	the	professor,	surprised.
Tristan	shook	his	head	and	slapped	his	cheek	a	few	times.	“Well,	we’re	onto

something,	 then—whatever	 happened	 to	 me	 the	 first	 time,	 lots	 more	 of	 it
happened	this	time.”	He	grimaced	and	tried	to	shake	it	off.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda



MAY	15

Temperature	66F,	bright	sun.	Barometer	falling.
Peppers	and	chard	germinated.	Lilies	of	the	valley	in	full	bloom.	Lilacs	at

peak.	Swapped	out	storm	windows	for	screens	(finally).
Work	 on	 the	 new	 ODEC	 continues,	 and	 has	 become	 the	 sole	 topic	 of

discourse	in	the	house.	Frank	is	just	as	obsessed	as	he	was	the	first	time.	I
read	over	my	diary	from	back	then,	and	must	remind	myself	that	this	time
at	 least	he	 is	working	with	a	willing	and	supportive	cohort	 (besides	me,	 I
mean).	Jury	still	out	 for	me	re:	Tristan.	Prefer	Melisande	but	she’s	not	 in
charge.	(Not	clear	if	their	relationship	is	personal	or	just	professional.	Not
sure	they’re	clear	either.)

The	schedule	has	been	extended	by	two	days	to	accommodate	upgrades
to	 the	 software,	 and	 improvements	 to	 the	 building’s	 electrical	 service.
Whomever	Tristan	works	for	takes	him	seriously;	Frank	faced	endless	red
tape	whenever	he	requisitioned	extension	cords,	for	heaven’s	sake.

Two	concerns	regarding	this	project,	besides	the	obvious	reservations.
First:	Tristan	insists	on	being	inside	the	ODEC	while	it	is	in	operation.

He	can’t	understand	how	 that	makes	him	the	observed,	not	 the	observer.
Uncle	Victor’s	Labrador	retriever	is	in	charge.

Second:	Frank—satisfied	to	be	working	on	the	physics—turns	a	blind	eye
to	the	supposed	application.	Magic.	There	are	Powers	That	Be	who	take	the
Magic	 premise	 seriously	 enough	 to	 buy	 Tristan	 a	 building	 and	 send	 him
tanker	 trucks	 of	 liquid	 helium	without	 any	 paperwork.	Hard	 to	 reconcile
this	with	common	sense.	Frank	heedless.

Also,	Mel	 is	concerned	about	a	woman	who	contacted	her	claiming	she
can	do	magic.	T&M’s	rendezvous	with	this	woman	has	been	delayed	several
times,	 and	 the	 woman	 is	 becoming	 verbally	 abusive.	 This	 does	 not	 stop
them	 from	 intending	 to	meet	 her,	 which	 will	 possibly	 happen	 tomorrow
after	the	next	ODEC	go-round.



Diachronicle	
DAY	294

In	which	we	become	even	more	decoherent

TWO	 DAYS	 LATER,	 WHEN	 THE	 liquid	 helium	 showed	 up	 in	 the	 unmarked
stainless	 steel	 tanker	 truck,	 Tristan	 velcroed	 and	 zipped	 himself	 into	 a
snowmobile	 suit,	 gave	 us	 the	 thumbs-up,	 and	 stepped	 up	 into	 the	 ODEC,
where,	just	for	safety’s	sake,	he	pulled	on	an	oxygen	mask.	Apparently	liquid
helium	was	adept	at	finding	and	seeping	through	the	tiniest	leaks,	so	the	cavity
might	 fill	 up	 with	 helium	 and	 asphyxiate	 him	 before	 he	 knew	 it	 was
happening.	Once	 again,	Oda	walked	 around	 the	 building	 going	 through	his
checklist,	and	took	his	place	before	the	console.	By	now,	our	expectancy	was
tempered	by	experience.

Liquid	 helium,	 as	 I	 now	 knew,	was	 fifty	 times	 as	 expensive	 as	 the	 liquid
nitrogen	we	had	been	using,	and	a	lot	colder.	Nitrogen	became	a	liquid	at	77
degrees	above	absolute	zero	(the	point	at	which	atoms	would	stop	moving,	if
such	a	state	could	be	reached),	but	to	do	the	same	trick	with	helium	you	had
to	 chill	 it	 all	 the	 way	 down	 to	 a	 mere	 4	 degrees.	 By	 the	 standards	 of	 the
normal	 human	world,	 it	 was	 a	 distinction	without	 a	 difference—both	were
very,	 very	 cold.	 But	 to	 scientists	 like	Oda,	 there	 was	 a	 world	 of	 difference
between	 4	 degrees	 and	 77.	 The	 liquid	 helium	 jacketing	 the	 ODEC	would
have	radically	different	properties	 from	LN2—properties	explainable	 in	terms
of	 Bose-Einstein	 statistics,	 an	 advanced	 concept	 in	 quantum	 mechanics	 that
Tristan	barely	understood	 and	 I	 couldn’t	make	 sense	of	 at	 all.	The	 gist	 of	 it
seemed	 to	 be	 that	 the	 liquid	 helium	 would	 cloak	 the	 inner	 cavity	 of	 the
ODEC	 inside	 a	 seamless	 jacket	 of	 matter,	 all	 of	 which	 was	 in	 the	 same
quantum	state.	This	was	 supposed	 to	have	 some	effect	of	 isolating	 the	cavity
from	 the	 rest	of	 the	universe	quantum-mechanically,	 and	greatly	 intensifying
its	effects.

Cold	 as	 they	were,	 the	plumbing	 and	 the	vessels	were	 still	 boiling	hot	by
liquid	helium	standards,	and	so	after	the	LN2	had	been	pumped	out	we	had	to
go	 through	 another	 cycle	 of	 “atmospheric	 exchange	 augmentation”	 out	 the



“exterior	 vent	 ports”	 before	 the	 system	 settled	 down.	 The	 digital
thermometers	began	to	read	dramatically	lower	temperatures.

Once	the	system	had	stabilized	at	4	degrees	above	absolute	zero—negative
269	degrees	Celsius—Oda	flipped	the	switch.	This	time	he	let	the	system	run
for	only	five	seconds	before	turning	it	back	off.

Tristan	 stumbled	 out	 of	 the	 ODEC,	 tugging	 convulsively	 at	 the	 oxygen
mask.	The	balaclava	came	off	with	it.	He	was	ashen-faced,	and	looked	as	if	he
might	 be	 sick.	 He	 stumbled	 dizzily	 and	 then	 collapsed	 to	 his	 knees	 barely
beyond	the	threshold	of	the	chamber.

“Tristan!”	I	cried,	as	Oda	knelt	down	to	help	him,	but	Tristan	pushed	him
away	and	looked	around	at	us	all,	dazed	and	yet	wild-eyed.

“Where	am	I?”	he	asked.	“Is	this	a	dream	or	are	we	really	here?”
“We’re	really	here,”	said	Oda	gently.
“Are	 we	 in	 Boston?”	 asked	 Tristan,	 and	 groaned.	 “God,	 what	 a	 terrible

headache.	Where’s	Mom?”
I	looked	at	Oda	in	alarm.	“Give	him	a	moment,”	he	said	reassuringly.
“What	just	happened	to	him?”	I	demanded,	not	reassured.
“I	think	he’s	just	very	disoriented.”
“Isn’t	 it	 five	 minutes	 ago?”	 said	 Tristan.	 “Don’t	 I	 have	 to	 go	 into	 the

ODEC	before	we	can	have	this	conversation?”
“Somebody	get	him	a	glass	of	water,”	said	Oda	to	the	room	in	general.	And

then	gently:	“Tristan,	close	your	eyes	for	a	few	moments,	you’ll	be	fine.”
Oda	gestured	me	 to	 step	 away,	 and	 I	 followed	him,	but	my	 concern	 and

attention	remained	on	Tristan.	He	was	now	very	still,	glancing	around	at	his
surroundings	with	eyes	only,	as	 if	 trying	to	avoid	vertigo.	It	 seemed	horribly
wrong	for	Tristan	Lyons	to	be	so	vulnerable.

“Is	this	what	happened	to	the	cat?”	I	demanded	of	Oda.
“Well,	you	can’t	have	a	conversation	with	a	cat.	When	I’d	open	the	cavity,

he	would	 leap	 out	 in	 full	 Halloween	mode.	 But	 I’d	 leave	 him,	 come	 back
down	an	hour	 later,	and	he’d	be	fast	asleep.	When	he	woke	up,	you’d	think
nothing	 had	 happened.	 I	 repeated	 the	 experiment	 a	 few	 times,	 and	 the	 cat
never	 seemed	 to	 remember	what	he	was	 about	 to	be	 subjected	 to.	But	 then
Rebecca	saw	and	made	me	stop.”

Journal	Entry	of



Rebecca	East-Oda
MAY	18

Temperature	about	64F,	moist,	no	breeze.	Barometer	rising.
Flowers	and	vegetables	fending	for	themselves	due	to	ODEC	activity.
To	 begin,	 this	 morning	 the	 new	 ODEC	 was	 “successful,”	 insofar	 as

Tristan	came	out	of	it	in	the	same	state	the	cat	once	used	to	come	out	of	the
old	ODEC.	Melisande	kept	her	head	better	than	I	did	when	I	first	saw	the
cat,	but	was	clearly	concerned.	The	following	conversation,	more	or	less:

FRANK:	 I	 predict	 Tristan	 will	 be	 fine	 shortly.	 But	 I	 don’t	 think	 we	 should
allow	 anyone	 to	 go	 into	 the	 ODEC	 until	 we	 have	 figured	 out	 how	 to
protect	them	from	that	effect.

MEL:	What	is	the	effect?	Why	is	it	happening?
FRANK:	He	is	teetering	on	the	edge	of	becoming	non-local.
MEL:	Non-what?
FRANK:	 His	 brain	 was	 suddenly	 not	 sure	 which	 precise	 reality	 it	 was

operating	in—and	perhaps	his	body	too.	So	much	to	discover	still!	(NB:
sounding like an eager child. Sounding as if none of it happened thirty years
ago.)

Five minutes pass

TRISTAN	(fully recovered):	Why	didn’t	you	take	notes	of	what	I	said	when	I	first
came	out?

MEL:	Trust	me,	you	said	absolutely	nothing	noteworthy.
TRISTAN	:	That	just	sounds	like	your	usual	lip.	I	need	corroboration.
FRANK:	We	were	all	here.	She’s	right.
TRISTAN	:	You	do	it,	Stokes,	so	I	can	see	what	happens	when	you	come	out.
MEL:	I	don’t	think	so.	Seriously,	it	was	as	if	you’d	gotten	plastered	at	a	frat

party.
TRISTAN	:	Sounds	like	fun.	Give	it	a	go.
FRANK:	I	really	don’t	think	that	you	should	push	her—	(interrupted	by)



TRISTAN	:	She	could	use	a	little	loosening	up.	Come	on,	Stokes,	it’s	a	hazard
of	the	job.

MEL:	I	fail	to	see	how	“becoming	non-local”	falls	within	the	parameters	of
my	contractual	obligations	as	a	translator	of	dead	languages.

TRISTAN	 :	 It	 falls	 within	 the	 parameters	 of	 your	wanting	 to	 know	what	 it’s
like.

MEL:	Apparently	it’s	like	being	drunk.	Been	there,	done	that.
TRISTAN	 :	 Y’know,	 you	 could	 be	 stuck	 in	 your	 tiny	 little	 office	 right	 now,

grading	 papers	 about	 Aramaic	 declensions.	 Get	 your	 butt	 in	 there.
Somebody	get	her	a	snowsuit.	With	a	balaclava.	And	an	oxygen	mask.

I	 wish	 that	 had	 been	 the	 end	 of	 the	 nonsense.	 It	 was	 barely	 the
beginning.

Diachronicle	
DAY	294	 (CONTD. )

NINETY	MINUTES	LATER,	DESPITE	MY	own	best	judgment,	I	was	geared	up	and
ready	to	begin	the	most	ill-considered	experiment	of	my	life	(to	that	point,	I
mean.	Clearly	I	have	engaged	in	more	boneheaded	enterprises	since	then,	else	I
would	not	currently	be	sitting	here	trying	not	to	spill	ink	on	my	borrowed	day
dress.).

I	hope	it	does	not	reflect	badly	on	me	to	admit	 that	I	would	have	refused
obstinately	were	 I	not	 so	keen	 to	please	Tristan.	A	ridiculous	 impulse,	given
that	he	 seemed	 to	 treat	me	as	 if	 I	were	his	personal	R2-D2	 (which	was	 still
preferable	 to	Blevins’s	modus	 operandi).	 But	 there	was	 something	 about	 his
relentless,	 focused	 clarity	 of	 purpose	 that	 made	 all	 things	 else	 fade	 in
significance—including	my	own	mental	balance.	I	submit	that	I	was	not	falling
in	love	with	him,	but	there	was	inarguably	an	intellectual	seduction	at	work.



He	operated	on	my	psyche	the	way	a	lively	Mozart	sonata	might.
And	 so,	 suited	 up	 to	 look	 like	 a	 cartoon	 character,	 I	 toddled	 into	 the

ODEC.	It	was	frigid	inside,	and	my	breath	came	out	in	clouds	until	I	put	the
oxygen	 mask	 on.	 The	 cavity	 had	 a	 cool,	 clinical	 feel	 with	 all	 those	 LEDs
staring	at	me.	I	felt	as	if	I	were	on	the	set	of	a	half-assed	low-budget	sci-fi	flick.
“All	right,”	I	said	with	a	purposeful	nod,	and	the	door	closed.	I	could	feel	my
pulse	 at	 my	 temples,	 hear	 my	 breath	 amplified	 within	 the	 mask.	 It	 was
frightening	and	exhilarating	and	I	had	never	felt	so	alive!	Blevins	could	eat	my
shorts.

I	 cannot	 describe	 what	 happened	 next,	 because	 I	 do	 not	 remember.
Immediately,	it	seemed,	I	found	myself	in	a	very	bland,	undecorated	office,	in
a	hard	plastic	chair	near	a	Formica	table	under	ugly	fluorescent	lights,	shaking
uncontrollably	 for	 no	 good	 reason.	 I	 was	 not	 cold	 or	 scared,	 simply	 .	 .	 .
confused.	And	exhausted.

“Fascinating,”	 said	 a	 very	 handsome	 fellow	 about	 my	 age,	 with	 dazzling
green	 eyes	 and	 neat,	 close-cropped	 hair,	 who	 was	 standing	 over	 me	 and
contemplating	me	with	 a	 grin.	 “If	 that’s	what	 you	were	 like	when	 you	 got
drunk	in	college,	no	wonder	you	don’t	have	a	boyfriend.”

“Give	her	a	few	moments,”	I	heard	an	older,	softer	male	voice	say.	I	knew
that	voice	had	a	name	attached	to	 it—Yoda?	No,	Yoda	was	 from	Star	Wars.
Star	Wars	was	on	my	mind	because	of	R2-D2.	And	the	fellow	in	front	of	me,
I	had	seen	him	brushing	his	teeth	before,	so	if	he	wasn’t	my	boyfriend	maybe
he	was	a	brother	I’d	forgotten	about.

He	began	to	laugh.	“Stokes,”	he	said,	“you’re	saying	all	of	that	out	loud.	I
wouldn’t	speak	until	you	feel	like	yourself.	But	hurry	up	with	it!”	He	leaned
closer	 and	whispered	 into	my	ear,	 “We’ve	got	our	witch	vault.	Let’s	 go	get
our	witch.”

Diachronicle	



DAY	294	 (CONTD. )

In	which	we	meet	Erszebet.	And	then	we	meet	Erszebet.

FIRST	TRISTAN	HAD	TO	BREAK	 the	news	 to	 the	Maxes	 and	 the	Vladimirs	 that
they	had	been	working	all	this	time	on	a	project	whose	end	goal	was	magic.
He	did	this	in	the	one	remaining	non-demolished	office,	so	I	didn’t	have	the
satisfaction	 of	 seeing	 it	 happen.	 They	 seemed	 to	 me	 to	 be	 biting	 back
amusement	when	 they	 filed	 out	 of	 the	 briefing:	 to	 a	man,	 they	 all	 avoided
direct	eye	contact	and	the	corners	of	their	pursed	lips	occasionally	wiggled.

Tristan	 and	 I	 arrived	 at	 420	 Common	 Street	 in	 Belmont	 in	 earliest
afternoon,	to	find—to	our	dismay—a	desanctified	church	converted	into	some
kind	 of	 institutional	 group	 housing.	 WELCOME	 TO	 ELM	 HOUSE	 read	 a	 non-
elucidating	pastel-blue	plastic	sign	planted	in	the	forecourt.

“Hmm,”	I	said.
“Could	be	interesting,”	said	Tristan.	“Could	mean	someone’s	messing	with

us.”
We	parked	on	the	street	and	followed	the	walkway	around	the	side	of	the

old	church	and	across	a	modest	lawn	dotted	with	generic,	dutiful	landscaping.
The	old	church	had	been	built	on	a	very	 large	 lot,	much	of	which	was	now
occupied	by	three-	and	four-story	buildings	with	a	decidedly	mid-twentieth-
century	institutional	vibe.	The	main	entrance	was	in	one	of	those.	The	inside
was	 bland	 and	 sterile,	 like	 a	 hospital	 admitting	 room.	There	was	 a	 linoleum
lobby	 floor	 and	 laminate	 receiving	 desk,	where	 two	 bored	 thirty-something
women	chatted	quietly	and	 ignored	 the	handful	of	elders	beyond	 them,	 in	a
carpeted	 room	 full	 of	 primary-color	bingo	 charts	 and	 large	posters	of	MGM
movie	stars.

“At	least	it’s	not	a	loony	bin,”	Tristan	muttered,	relieved.
All	 of	 the	 residents	 were	 either	 asleep,	 or	 muttering	 to	 themselves

despondently,	or	 staring	up	at	a	very	 loud	 screening	of	The	African	Queen.	 It
smelled	of	old	furniture	in	here,	and	disinfectants.

As	we	stepped	into	the	 lobby,	a	 twig	of	an	ancient	woman,	keen-featured
and	remarkably	upright,	immediately	approached	us.	She	was	wearing	a	1950s-
style	 cocktail	dress,	which	might	have	 flattered	her	 in	 the	1950s,	but	 looked
absurd	on	her	now.	She	was	clutching	a	large	Versace	knockoff	bag	under	one



arm.
Before	I	even	had	the	presence	of	mind	to	greet	her,	she	spoke	in	a	hushed

but	 furious	 tone,	 with	 a	 well-educated	 Eastern	 European	 accent:	 “I	 cannot
believe	how	long	you	have	kept	me	waiting,	Melisande!	It	is	very	rude	and	after
all	 this	 time	 I	 deserve	better.	 I	 see	 you	 cut	 your	hair.	 It	 looked	better	 long.
With	those	bangs	you	resemble	a	rodent.”

I	 stopped	 so	 abruptly	 that	 Tristan	 bumped	 into	 me.	 He	 began	 to	 say
something,	but	she	pushed	ahead	before	he	could:	“You	must	be	Mr.	Tristan
Lyons.	Are	you	her	lover?”

“Did	 she	 say	 I	was?”	Tristan	asked	 immediately,	which	was	a	pretty	good
recovery.

The	 old	 woman	 made	 a	 dismissive	 tch.	 “No.	 Only	 she	 is	 a	 woman	 of
unreliable	morals,	 and	you	have	 a	powerful	 secret	government	position,	 so	 I
presumed.”

“Ma’am,	how	about	we	talk	in	private,”	Tristan	said.	“You’ve	cited	a	few
things	that	raise	security	questions.”

“Of	 course	 we	 talk	 in	 private.	 You’re	 taking	 me	 to	 the	 ODEC—this
instant.”

Tristan	took	her	skinny	arm	in	his	large	hand	and	stood	over	her,	his	chin	a
hand-span	above	the	top	of	her	head.	“Ma’am,”	he	asked	very	softly,	“where
did	you	hear	that	term?”

“From	her,”	she	said	impatiently,	poking	me	in	the	shoulder.
“I	have	never	met	 this	woman,”	I	 said	 to	Tristan,	 recoiling	 from	her,	and

then	to	her:	“I	have	never	met	you.”
“Not	yet,	but	you	will,”	she	retorted	impatiently.	“I	am	Erszebet	Karpathy.

It	 is	 absolutely	 time	 to	 get	 out	 of	 here	 and	 go	 to	 the	 ODEC.	 I	 dressed
specially.”	She	gestured	to	her	cocktail	dress.	“Do	you	know	how	long	 I	have
been	waiting	for	this	day?”

“Ma’am,”	 said	 Tristan.	 It	 seemed	 he	 was	 stalling	 for	 time	 until	 he	 could
form	a	complete	sentence.	“How	long	have	you	been	waiting?”

“Far	too	long,”	she	said.
“Her	first	post	to	me	on	Facebook	was	a	month	ago,”	I	offered.
“You’ve	been	waiting	a	month?”	asked	Tristan.
“Pft,”	she	said.	“That’s	because	I	got	tired	of	waiting	for	you	to	find	me.	I

joined	Facebook	as	soon	as	it	was	available	to	the	public,	as	you	told	me	to.”
A	 pause	 as	 Tristan	 considered	 this.	 “You’re	 saying	 you’ve	 been	 waiting

more	than	a	decade	for	us	to	come	and	find	you?”



“Ha!”	It	was	a	dry,	humorless	 sound.	“I	have	been	waiting	 for	more	 than
one	century	and	a	half.	And	 this	woman”—she	pressed	on,	before	we	could
interrupt	 incredulously—“gives	me	the	words	Facebook	and	Tristan	Lyons	and
ODEC	and	tells	me	this,	now,	 this	 is	 the	exact	month	to	use	those	words	 to
find	you	after	so	much	time.	So.	We	have	found	each	other.	Take	me	to	the
ODEC.”

Tristan	nudged	his	shoulder	against	my	back,	encouraging	me	to	speak.	Was
it	possible	he	was	speechless?	And	did	he	expect	me	to	be	less	so	than	himself?
“Why	are	you	so	eager	to	get	to	the	ODEC?”	I	asked.

“Because	 I	 can	 do	 magic	 again	 in	 the	 ODEC,”	 she	 said	 impatiently.
“Obviously.”

Tristan	frowned	at	her.	“Ma’am,	I	need	you	to	know	that	if	this	is	your	idea
of	a	joke,	you’re	making	trouble	for	yourself.	If	somebody	has	put	you	up	to
saying	these	words,	I	need	to	know	who	it	is,	and	why—”

“Her!	 It’s	 her!”	 she	 said	 irritably,	 jabbing	 her	 bony	 little	 finger	 into	 my
shoulder	again.	“I	would	be	dead	right	now	except	for	her.	I	have	stayed	alive
all	these	years	because	she	commanded	it.”

“Ma’am,	I’ve	never	met	you—”	I	protested	again.
“Don’t	 you	 call	 me	 ma’am,	 you	 hussy!	 You’re	 older	 than	 I	 am.”	 She

checked	herself,	with	obvious	effort.	“That	is,	you	were.	When	we	met.	I	have
now	 been	 old	 for	 longer	 than	most	 people	 have	 been	 alive.	Do	 you	 know
how	boring	that	is?”

Tristan	 had	 collected	 himself	 enough	 to	 play	 the	 polite	West	 Point	 cadet
card.	“We’d	love	to	relieve	your	boredom,	ma’am.	Let’s	step	outside	and	you
can	tell	us	the	whole	story,	how	about	that?”	he	said.	“Do	we	have	to	sign	you
out	or	something?”

“Pft,”	she	harrumphed,	with	a	dismissive	gesture	toward	the	reception	desk.
“Nurse	Ratched	has	given	up	trying	to	control	me.”

“Which	one	is	she?”	Tristan	glanced	toward	the	desk.
“Tristan!”	I	said.	“Come	on.	My	not	knowing	DARPA	pales	compared	to

your	not	knowing	Nurse	Ratched.”
“I	call	all	of	them	Nurse	Ratched	since	the	movie	came	out,”	Erszebet	was

meanwhile	saying.	“It	amuses	me.”
“You’ve	 been	 here	 since	One	 Flew	 Over	 the	 Cuckoo’s	 Nest	 came	 out?”	 I

asked.
“Yes.	Do	you	see	why	I	want	to	leave?	Boring.”
“Let’s	get	her	outside,”	muttered	Tristan.



It	 was	 cool	 outside,	 and	 nobody	 else	 was	 out	 there.	 The	 uninspired
landscaped	path	wended	its	way	around	groupings	of	wrought	iron	benches,	at
which	 the	 residents	might	have	a	modicum	of	privacy	with	guests.	Erszebet,
with	 a	 remarkable	 grace	 of	 movement,	 seated	 herself	 in	 the	 center	 of	 one
bench,	leaving	me	and	Tristan	to	share	the	one	across	from	her,	squinting	into
the	bright	spring	sunlight.

“This	 is	where	 people	 argue	with	 their	 children	 about	 their	 inheritance,”
she	informed	us.	“I	have	no	children,	so	I	do	not	have	this	problem.”

“If	 you	will,	ma’am,	 let’s	 start	 from	 the	 top,”	 suggested	 Tristan.	 “Name,
date	of	birth,	place	of	birth,	basic	background.”

She	 sat	pertly	upright	and	gave	him	a	 self-important	 look.	“You	will	 take
notes?”

He	tapped	his	head.	“Mental	notes,	for	now.	Begin,	please.”
“I	am	Erszebet	Karpathy,”	she	said.	“I	was	born	in	Budapest	in	1832.”
“No,”	said	Tristan.	“No	you	weren’t,	ma’am.	That’s	absurd.”
She	glared	at	him,	and	seemed	to	relish	doing	so.	“Do	not	disrespect	me.	I

am	a	witch.	When	magic	was	 fading	 from	 the	world,	Melisande	warned	me
that	it	would	end	soon,	and	the	last	magic	I	ever	knew	was	a	spell	to	slow	my
aging	by	as	much	as	possible	so	that	I	would	still	be	here,	now,	when	we	could
be	useful	to	each	other.	I	did	not	want	to	do	that,	you	know,”	she	went	on,
directly	to	me.	“I	could	have	just	grown	old	and	died.	Death	would	have	been
less	 boring	 than	 surviving	 this	 last	 century.	 This	 is	 a	 terrible	 country	 for	 old
people.	You	put	them	away	in	horrible	buildings	that	are	completely	shut	off
from	life,	and	then	do	everything	possible	to	keep	them	alive.	It	is	a	very	stupid
system.	You	should	all	be	shot.	Nevertheless,”	she	pressed	on,	when	we	failed
to	agree	or	even	respond,	“here	I	am.	And	here	you	are.	So	put	me	in	your
automobile	and	take	me	to	the	ODEC.	I	am	very	eager	to	do	magic	again.”

Tristan	rubbed	his	 face	with	both	hands	as	 if	he	were	suddenly	very	tired.
“Give	me	 a	moment,	ma’am,”	he	 said.	He	pulled	out	his	 phone.	 “How	do
you	spell	your	name?”

“If	you	Google	me,	you	will	be	disappointed,”	 she	 said.	“I	know	how	to
keep	my	profile	low,	as	you	say.”

“I	use	a	different	 search	engine,”	he	 said.	“You’ll	be	on	 it.	 Just	 spell	your
name,	please.”

The	only	Erszebet	Karpathy	 in	Tristan’s	 secret	 search	engine	was	a	 thirty-
seven-year-old	aerialist	turned	legal	clerk,	currently	living	in	Montreal.	There
was	an	Erszebet	Karpaty	living	in	Rome,	but	she	was	a	madam,	and	anyhow



our	interlocutor	sneered	that	the	name	without	an	h	was	Ukrainian,	which	she
most	certainly	wasn’t.

“Then	 maybe	 Erszebet	 Karpathy	 is	 not	 your	 real	 name,”	 said	 Tristan.
“Ma’am.”

“Can	we	go	now?”	she	said,	standing	up.	“I	have	been	thinking	about	my
first	spell	for	decades,	and	I	am	very	eager	to	perform	it.	And	then	I	want	to	go
roller-skating.	They	won’t	allow	that	here,	those	toads.”

Tristan	remained	seated,	and	leaned	against	me	to	signal	me	to	do	likewise.
“And	what	spell	might	that	be?”

She	grinned	at	him.	“You’ll	just	have	to	see.	It’s	entirely	beneficent,	if	that’s
what	you’re	worried	about.	We	go.”

“The	ODEC	doesn’t	work	yet,”	he	said,	studying	her	face	carefully.	“Since
you	claim	to	know	about	it,	maybe	you	can	help	with	that.”

“You	need	to	up	the	sampling	rate	on	the	internal	sensors,”	recited	Erszebet
smugly,	in	a	triumphant	tone,	as	if	she’d	just	won	a	spelling	bee.

Wow,	I	thought.
Testing	her,	Tristan	replied,	“It’s	going	to	be	hard	pushing	that	much	data

down	the	leads.”
“Swap	 the	 twisted	 pair	 out	 for	 fiber,”	 she	 rejoined	 promptly.	 It	 was	 a

recitation;	 something	 she	 had	 memorized	 the	 way	 a	 child	 memorizes
“indivisible”	in	the	Pledge	of	Allegiance.

“All	 right,	 let’s	 go,”	 said	 Tristan,	 standing	 up	 and	 again	 putting	 his	 large
hand	around	her	tiny	arm.	“The	car’s	right	there,	and	you	are	not	leaving	my
sight	until	I	understand	what	you’re	up	to.”

“Thank	you,”	she	said.	“Finally.”
She	 did	 not	 say	 a	 word	 on	 the	 twenty-minute	 drive	 from	 Belmont	 to

Central	Square,	merely	stared	out	the	window	with	the	bored	rapture	of	a	dog
or	 a	 baby.	 I	 used	 the	 silence	 to	 recollect	 myself.	 Everything	 this	 woman
claimed	seemed	insane,	and	yet	.	.	.	she	knew	me	by	sight,	she	knew	Tristan
by	name,	she	knew	about	the	ODEC	.	.	.

To	accept	her	claims	meant	.	.	.	it	meant	we	were	about	to	witness	genuine
magic	performed	for	the	first	 time	in	at	 least	one	hundred	and	seventy	years.
That	 rocks!	 I	 thought.	 That	 was	 much	 more	 exciting	 than	 going	 to	 New
Orleans.	I	glanced	at	Tristan	as	he	drove,	but	he	was	lost	in	his	own	thoughts,
which	seemed	grumpier	than	mine.

When	we	pulled	up	in	front	of	the	building,	Erszebet	sighed	heavily.	“This
is	it?	Pah,	I	thought	it	might	be	a	nice	place,”	she	said	from	the	backseat.	“This



is	worse	than	where	I	have	been	living.”
“It	won’t	be	as	boring,”	I	promised.
“That’s	 true,”	 she	 said	with	 a	 sudden	grin,	 and	 leaned	 forward	 to	 tap	my

shoulder.	“I	am	very	much	looking	forward	to	this.”	Then	to	Tristan:	“I	think
you	will	be	pleased	with	the	results,	Mr.	Tristan	Lyons.”

“I’m	 certainly	 looking	 forward	 to	 seeing	 what	 happens,	 ma’am,”	 he	 said
tersely.

I	realized	he	was	nervous.	For	what	would	happen	if	after	all	this,	we	found
the	world’s	only	surviving	witch	and	she	was	a	dud?	He	still	wouldn’t	tell	me
who	 he	 was	 answering	 to,	 but	 his	 derriere	 was	 on	 the	 line	 in	 a	 way	mine
wasn’t.

When	we	entered	the	building,	I	walked	toward	the	professor	and	his	wife,
gesturing	for	Erszebet	to	join	me,	but	she	spared	them	only	a	brief	glance,	then
waved	dismissively	in	their	direction	and	gazed	at	the	large	contraption	taking
up	most	of	the	space.

“Is	this	it?”	she	asked	Tristan,	sounding	offended.	“But	it’s	so	ugly.”
“She’s	 a	 little	 preoccupied,”	 I	 said	 apologetically	 to	 Oda-sensei	 and

Rebecca.	They,	in	turn,	were	so	fascinated	by	her	appearance	that	they	hardly
noticed	my	speaking	to	them.	Likewise,	the	Maxes	stopped	their	sundry	duties
and	 paused	 to	 look	 at	 her	 sideways,	 nudging	 each	 other’s	 shoulders	 and
murmuring	between	themselves.	She	took	no	interest	in	any	of	that.

“This?”	 she	demanded	 again.	 “I	 go	 in	here	 and	 I	 can	do	magic?	 Just	 like
that?”

“Hang	 on	 a	 moment,”	 said	 Tristan,	 pulling	 out	 his	 phone.	 “I	 need	 to
document	you,	since	there’s	no	record	of	your	existence.	I	need	your	signature
and	a	photo.”	Before	she	could	object	or	even	notice,	he	snapped	a	photo	of
her	on	his	phone.

“You	don’t	need	my	signature,”	she	said.	She	stared	at	 the	ODEC	with	a
rapture	greater	even	than	Oda-sensei’s,	face	aglow	with	anticipation.	“I	forgive
its	ugliness	if	it	does	its	job	well.	I	just	go	in	and	start	doing	spells	again?”

“That’s	what	we’re	hoping,”	said	Tristan.
She	looked	at	me,	her	eyes	dewy	and	bright.	“Thank	you,	Melisande,	thank

you	for	bringing	me	here.”	And	back	her	attention	went	to	the	ODEC	door.
“Hang	on,”	said	Tristan	as	she	approached	it.	“Let	me	explain	what	happens

when	 it’s	 activated.”	 He	 opened	 the	 door	 with	 an	 oven	 mitt	 and	 gestured
inside—we	could	all	hear	her	expressions	of	 surprise—and	 then	he	 leaned	 in
close	to	her,	voice	calm	and	businesslike,	detailing	what	was	to	come.



The	Odas,	the	Maxes,	and	I	looked	round	at	each	other	with	various	facial
expressions,	all	of	which	were	a	way	of	 saying,	 in	 silence,	Holy	 shit.	“This	 is
really	 happening,”	 I	 said,	 my	 pulse	 dancing.	 Seeing	 Tristan	 and	 a	 witch
standing	at	the	ODEC	door	suddenly	made	my	heart	thrill.	But	for	him,	I	at
this	moment	would	be	grading	worksheets	on	syntax.

I	 sashayed	 over	 to	 them.	 “Should	 we	 put	 her	 in	 the	 ski	 suit?”	 I	 asked
Tristan.

“I	 need	 no	 protection	 from	 the	 forces	 that	 restore	 my	 magic	 to	 me,”
Erszebet	scoffed.

“But	it	will	be	cold	in	there,	like	Siberia—”
“Pft,”	she	said.	“It	will	be	invigorating.”
“It	might	invigorate	you	to	death,”	warned	Tristan.
She	 made	 a	 face	 that	 had	 already,	 in	 the	 last	 forty	 minutes,	 become	 her

signature	 look:	 a	 dismissive	 pout	 with	 contemptuously	 knitted	 brows,	 head
tilted	slightly	to	one	side,	and	a	brief	subtle	eye	roll.	I	suppose	on	another	sort
of	 face—a	 sexy	villainess	 from	a	 silent	movie,	perhaps—it	would	have	had	a
sultry	quality,	but	on	a	centenarian	it	just	looked	silly.

“I	am	strong	in	ways	you	do	not	know,”	she	assured	him.
Tristan	and	I	exchanged	looks.	I	felt	myself	increasingly	thrilled	that	this	was

happening,	and	impressed	with	Tristan’s	unflappable	calm	(although	it	 is	 true
his	face	was	proverbially	shining	with	excitement).	“Stokes,	suit	up	and	be	in
here	with	her,	will	you?”

“Do	not	call	her	Stokes,	that	is	disrespectful.”	Erszebet	scowled.	“You	are	a
disrespectful	man.	You	 called	me	 a	 liar	 before.	Do	not	 get	 on	my	bad	 side.
You	will	regret	it.	But”—and	here	she	turned	to	me	with	a	smile	no	less	fierce
than	her	scowl—“I	agree	for	Melisande	to	be	with	me	for	the	first	spell.	It	is
fitting.	She	was	the	cause	of	the	last	spell.”

Tristan	and	I	exchanged	confused	looks,	without	commentary.
“Tell	us	about	this	first	spell	of	yours,”	Tristan	requested.
She	 shrugged	 offhandedly	 as	 she	 set	 her	 bag	 on	 the	 console	 and	 riffled

through	it.	“It	is	nothing,	it	is	very	simple.	I	must	simply	undo	an	earlier	spell,
that’s	all.	Then	I	can	begin	doing	what	you	ask	of	me.	Hurry,	Melisande.”

I	 left	 the	 chamber	 to	 find	 the	 snowsuit,	 donned	 it,	 and	 re-entered	 the
ODEC	pulling	on	the	oxygen	mask.	Erszebet	regarded	me,	appalled.	She	was
fidgeting	with	something	I	could	not	see	well—through	the	shield	of	the	mask
it	looked	like	she	was	massaging	a	mop	head.	Before	I	had	a	chance	to	ask	her
about	it,	she	was	onto	Tristan	again:



“You	make	her	dress	like	that?”	she	said	to	him.	“I	don’t	like	you	at	all.”
“It’s	 for	 her	 own	protection,”	 he	 said	 tersely.	He	had	 stopped	 calling	 her

“ma’am.”
Erszebet	 (in	 her	 outsized	 vintage	 cocktail	 dress)	 and	 I	 (in	 my	 snowsuit,

balaclava,	and	oxygen	mask)	stood	beside	each	other	as	Tristan,	just	outside	the
ODEC,	raised	his	thumb	and	closed	the	door	on	us.	There	was	a	brief	wait	as
Oda	and	the	Maxes	and	Vladimirs	went	through	their	checklists.	I	glanced	at
the	 old	 lady	 across	 from	 me	 and	 felt	 an	 extraordinary	 combination	 of
sentiments	 all	 at	 once—excitement,	 disbelief,	 anticipation,	 confusion,	 fear,
hope.	Had	anyone	told	me	this	would	be	how	my	spring	were	to	unfold,	I’d
have	laughed	my	ass	off	at	them	scoffed.	Seriously.

I	 remember	 what	 happened	 for	 about	 the	 next	 quarter	 second:	 the	 dim
sound	of	the	Klaxon	outside,	the	hair	standing	up	on	the	back	of	my	neck,	the
lights	going	out.	In	that	precise	moment,	a	lovely	aroma	both	floral	and	musky
overwhelmed	me,	and	then—as	before—I	lost	all	clarity,	and	the	next	thing	I
was	aware	of	was	somebody	peeling	a	balaclava	off	my	head.	I	was	lying	supine
in	 a	 vaguely	 familiar	 office,	 my	 back	 propped	 up	 against	 that	 somebody’s
knees.

“Stokes?	You	okay?”
I	 took	 a	moment	 to	 think	 about	 this.	Only	 the	 fellow	 from	 the	 shadowy

government	 entity	 called	 me	 Stokes,	 so	 this	 must	 be	 him.	 His	 name	 was
something	from	a	medieval	romance.	Percival?	Lancelot?

“Tristan,”	he	corrected,	grinning	down	at	me.	“But	I	get	the	Lancelot	thing
a	lot.”	He	roughed	up	my	hair.	“Come	on,	sit	up.	Meet	our	new	witch.”

Memory	came	flooding	back.	“Yes,”	I	 said	unsteadily.	“Erszebet.	 I’ve	met
her.”

“No.”	He	chuckled.	“You	haven’t.	Take	a	 look.”	He	propped	me	farther
up	so	I	could	look	across	the	room.

About	 twenty	 feet	 away	 from	 me,	 near	 the	 control	 console,	 stood	 a
stunningly	beautiful	young	woman,	hardly	more	than	a	girl,	wearing	Erszebet’s
dress.	 The	 garment	 now	 curved	 and	 clung	 to	 an	 exaggeratedly	 shapely
physique,	almost	perfectly	hourglass.	Her	hair	was	shoulder-length,	 thick	and
full	and	dark,	her	eyes	a	deep	green.	She	mesmerized	us	all	by	simply	standing
there,	 with	 a	 gleeful,	 impertinent	 smirk	 tugging	 the	 perfect	 curve	 of	 her
mouth	to	one	side.

With	Tristan’s	assistance,	I	rose	to	my	feet	terribly	awkwardly,	the	snowsuit
making	synthetic	slithery	noises	as	I	moved.	I	felt	like	a	yeti	in	the	presence	of



a	gazelle.
“Meet	Erszebet	Karpathy,”	said	Tristan,	beaming.	“She’s	our	witch.”

Diachronicle	
DAY	294	 (CONTD. )

In	which	every	little	thing	she	does	is	magic

EVERYONE	IN	THE	ROOM	WAS	staring	at	her—Oda-sensei,	Rebecca,	the	Maxes.
The	gleeful	impertinent	smirk	fixed	on	Tristan.

Tristan	started	to	laugh	in	a	breathy	way,	trying	but	failing	to	suppress	glee.
“Wow,”	he	 said.	Against	my	upper	back,	his	 torso	 shifted	 slightly.	 “We	did
it.”	He	sounded	giddy.	Everyone	applauded,	looking	rapt.

“I	 did	 it,”	 she	 corrected	 him.	 The	 accent,	 which	 had	 made	 her	 sound
crabby	when	 she	was	 nearly	 two	 hundred	 years	 old,	 now	made	 her	 exotic,
adding	to	the	glimmer	of	her	beauty.	“I	warned	you	do	not	want	to	get	on	my
bad	side.”

“Doesn’t	look	like	you	have	a	bad	side,”	I	said,	so	that	Tristan	wouldn’t.
Her	attention	turned	to	me,	and	she	grew	more	serious.	“Do	I	look	more

familiar	now?”	 she	asked.	“This	 is	how	I	appeared	when	we	 first	met.	 I	was
only	nineteen,	but	 I	was	a	prodigy.	You	were	 lucky	 that	 I	was	 the	one	you
found.”

“I’m	 sorry,	 but	 we	 really	 have	 never	 met	 before,”	 I	 said.	 And	 then	 to
Tristan,	 almost	 under	 my	 breath:	 “I	 .	 .	 .	 I’d	 like	 to	 get	 out	 of	 this	 thing,
please.”	It	was	foolish	to	feel	so	self-consciously	lumbering	just	because	there
was	another	young	female	in	the	room	who	happened	to	be	crazy-gorgeous.	I
was	 not	 used	 to	 being	 fawned	 on	 by	 anyone—Tristan	 treated	 me	 like	 an
extension	of	himself—but	suddenly	I	felt	somewhat	gruesome.



Tristan,	eyes	glued	to	Erszebet’s	face	(and	curves,	I	am	sure),	released	me	so
I	could	unzip	myself	from	the	snowsuit.	But	even	wearing	civvies,	I	felt	doltish
while	 this	 elegant	 creature	 held	 us	 all	 entranced.	 Entranced	 is	 not	 the	 right
word,	 though—that	 conjures	 a	 sense	 of	 a	 doe-eyed	 fairy-tale	 princess,	 and
Erszebet	was	not	that.	She	was	fierce.	Not	deliberately,	not	like	the	Alpha	Girl
in	a	high	 school	clique	 .	 .	 .	 it	was	effortless	on	her	part,	 elemental.	And	 she
seemed	amused	by	how	her	transformation	distracted	the	rest	of	us.

“The	experience	was	very	pleasant,”	she	continued	to	Tristan,	in	a	so-there
tone.	“Do	not	presume	to	tell	me	what	is	good	for	me	or	not.	Ever	again.”

“Got	 it,”	 he	 said	 almost	meekly.	His	 eyes	 kept	 sinking	 toward	 her	 boobs
breasts	 bosom,	 as	 if	 lead	 weights	 were	 attached	 to	 them;	 then,	 with	 visible
effort,	he	would	wrench	them	back	to	her	face.

There	 was	 a	 long	 pause	 as	 we	 all	 continued	 to	 register	 what	 we	 were
witnessing,	 and	 she	 continued	 to	 bask	 in	 our	 collective	 gaze.	 Various	 low
voices	 said	 “Wow”	 or	 something	 equally	 articulate.	 We	 were	 more
dumbfounded	by	 the	 fact	of	 the	 transformation	 than	by	 its	 result	 (although	I
cannot	stress	enough	how	impressive	the	result	was)—but	we	were	definitely
dumbfounded.	And	she	was	definitely	preening.

Then	Tristan	collected	himself.	“So.”	He	coughed	slightly.	“All	right	then.
How	did	you	just	do	that?”

“It	 was	 a	 big	 spell.	 Not	 easy,”	 she	 said	 offhandedly.	 “But	 I	 have	 been
thinking	 about	 it,	 rehearsing	 it	 in	my	head,	 for	 a	hundred	 and	 sixty	 years—
since	the	groundwork	for	it	was	laid	in	Budapest.	I	did	it	to	see	if	your	ODEC
works	to	my	satisfaction.”	She	smiled,	and	shifted	her	hips	a	few	times	so	that
the	hem	of	the	cocktail	dress	swirled	around	her	knees.	“It	does.	In	fact	it	was
never	so	effortless	to	do	a	spell	as	in	this	ODEC,	which	I	like	very	much.	What
shall	I	do	next?”

“What	kind	of	magic	were	you	in	the	habit	of	doing	before?”	Tristan	asked.
Without	taking	his	eyes	from	her,	he	pointed	toward	the	small	table	on	which
sat	a	MacBook	Air.	“Stokes.”

I	 collected	 the	 laptop	 and	 dutifully	 seated	 myself,	 opened	 the	 audio
recording	 software,	 and	 pressed	 “record”;	 for	 backup	 I	 decided	 to	 take
dictation	and	remained	there,	fingers	poised	over	the	keyboard.

Erszebet	sobered	abruptly.	Even	grave,	she	was	mesmerizingly	beautiful.	“I
was	 young,	 and	 magic	 was	 waning,	 and	 it	 was	 a	 very	 turbulent	 time.	 My
mother	was	in	the	service	of	Lajos	Kossuth,	and	if	you	know	anything	about
our	 history,	 you	 will	 realize	 her	 magic	 was	 often	 ineffective.	 I	 assisted	 her



when	she	required	it.”
Eyes	 still	 on	 Erszebet,	 Tristan	 signaled	 to	 me.	 “Lajos	 Kossuth,”	 I	 said,

typing.
“With	a	j—”	she	said	to	me;	I	overlapped:	“A	j,	I	know.”
Her	beautiful	dark	eyes	flitted	back	to	Tristan.	“I	like	that	she	is	educated,”

she	 said,	as	 if	approving	of	him	 for	 this,	 then	continued	her	narrative:	“After
the	revolution	failed,	after	Kossuth	fled	in	 late	 ’49,	 the	aristocracy	would	call
upon	my	mother	or	myself	to	perform	stupid	parlor	tricks.	We	would	change
the	color	of	somebody’s	hair,	or	 force	somebody	to	speak	a	childhood	secret
out	loud.	It	was	deliberately	degrading	to	us,	and	I	resented	it,	but	my	mother
was	 so	alarmed	at	our	weakening	powers	 that	 she	grew	 fearful	of	displeasing
those	horrid	 people.	 She	became	 sycophantic,	which	disgusted	me,	 and	 so	 I
went	abroad.”

“Where	to?”	asked	Tristan.
“I	wanted	 to	 follow	Kossuth,	 but	 his	wife	 did	 not	want	me	 in	 his	 sight.

Instead	I	went	to	Switzerland	awhile,	to	train	with	a	powerful	witch	who	was
making	 sure	 younger	witches	 still	 learned	 certain	 spells	 and	 charms	 that	 had
fallen	out	of	use	as	the	world	perceived	we	were	losing	our	power	and	relied
on	us	for	fewer	things.	Her	efforts	were,	in	retrospect,	somewhat	romantic,	as
if	somebody	in	today’s	world	were	teaching	how	to	measure	longitude	with	a
timepiece.	I	learned	much	that	I	had	little	occasion	to	use,	but	I	was	still	glad
for	the	learning,	although	eventually	I	rejoined	my	parents	in	Budapest.”

“So	can	you	change	somebody	into	a	newt?”	Tristan	asked,	getting	to	the
point.

“Of	course	I	can,”	she	said.	“What	a	stupid	question.”
“Can	you	change	them	back?”	I	asked	quickly.
“If	 I	 feel	 like	 it,”	 said	 Erszebet	 complacently.	 She	 gave	 Tristan	 a	 slightly

defiant	look.	“Do	you	wish	to	test	me?”
He	pondered	a	moment,	assessing	her	on	so	many	levels.	“Let’s	start	with	an

inanimate	 object,”	 he	 said.	 “I	 assume	 that’s	 possible?	 I	 mean,	 can	 you	 .	 .	 .
transubstantiate	inanimate	objects?”

“Tell	me	what	you	need,”	she	said	with	a	suddenly	inviting	smile.	Truly,	it
was	almost	a	grin.	For	the	first	time,	she	and	Tristan	were	in	the	same	groove,
and	they	smiled	at	each	other.	He	bit	his	lower	lip	excitedly,	which	made	him
look	charmingly	like	a	goof.

Then	 he	 clapped	 his	 hands	 together	 in	 front	 of	 him,	 actually	 squatted
slightly	 like	a	coach	laying	out	a	game	plan.	It	was	the	first	 time	I	noticed—



fleetingly—that	he	had	a	cute	butt.	“Just	going	to	put	you	through	some	paces
on	 the	 most	 basic	 level	 today.	 Stokes	 will	 take	 notes.	Ms.	 Stokes	 will	 take
notes,”	he	corrected	himself	quickly,	staving	off	her	irritation.

“I	 wish	 those	 stupid	 aristocrats	 who	 made	 us	 do	 parlor	 tricks	 were	 still
alive,”	Erszebet	said	eagerly.	“The	pains	I	would	bring	upon	them	now.”

“Never	mind	about	them,”	said	Tristan.	“You’ll	have	plenty	to	occupy	you
right	here.”

For	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 afternoon,	 Tristan	 tasked	 Erszebet	 with	 simple
assignments,	for	which	we	were	all	the	amazed	witnesses.	I	can	hardly	describe
the	 electricity	 in	 that	 dull	warehouse	 that	 day,	 our	 breathless	wonder	 at	 the
impossible-turned-evident.	 Even	 though	 she	 began	 with	 the	 humblest	 of
efforts,	 the	 whole	 thing	 was	 totally	 fucking	 mind-blowing.	 Here	 follows	 a
sampling,	and	then	I	must	move	on	to	what	happened	afterward,	as	I	still	have
not	 accustomed	 myself	 to	 writing	 with	 a	 dip	 pen	 and	 this	 is	 far	 more
painstaking	than	I	had	realized	when	I	began	this	project—and	I	am	running	out
of	time.

To	begin,	Tristan	put	a	gallon	of	white	paint	into	the	ODEC	with	Erszebet,
and	asked	her	to	turn	it	black;	she	did	so,	and	after	the	Maxes	took	a	sample	to
have	 analyzed,	 she	 returned	 it	 to	white,	which	was	 also	 sampled.	 She	 could
turn	it	any	color,	we	learned;	she	could	match	it	perfectly	to	colored	objects
Tristan	gave	her	to	take	into	the	ODEC	with	her.	(She	could	not	reproduce
this	effect	when	the	paint	or	objects	sat	outside	the	ODEC,	to	the	frustration
of	 both	 herself	 and	Tristan.)	He	 then	 had	 her	 bend	metal	 rods	 into	 perfect
circles;	splinter	stones;	break	glass	and	then	restore	it.

It	was	clear	now	that	anybody	actually	inside	the	ODEC	with	her	could	not
(by	definition,	really)	remain	mentally	coherent,	and	so	each	time	she	set	about
to	 work	 her	 magic,	 she	 did	 so	 alone.	 Sealed	 up	 within	 the	 ODEC,	 her
workings	remained	a	perfect	mystery.

These	acts	of	magic	each	took	between	five	and	thirty	minutes	to	achieve.
While	 happily	 invigorated	 after	 the	 first	 dozen	 or	 so,	 she	 presently	 showed
signs	of	 tiring.	Tristan	chose	not	 to	notice	 this,	 and	 tried	 to	 step	 things	up	a
notch:	he	asked	her	to	materialize	something	out	of	nothing.

“There	 is	no	 such	 thing	 as	nothing.	Not	 even	 in	what	 you	 call	 a	 vacuum.
But	 I	 am	 tired	 now,”	 she	 said,	 lolling	 against	 the	 control	 console.
“Materialization	is	a	complicated	summoning	and	requires	many	calculations.
And	I	am	tired	of	taking	orders	from	you,	Tristan	Lyons.	Perhaps	tomorrow.”

It	was	 clear	 from	her	 tone	 that	Tristan	 should	not	 bother	 asking	more	of



her.	 He	 looked	 both	 contented	 and	 resigned.	 “That’s	 a	 wrap,	 then,”	 he
announced	 to	 all	 of	 us.	 “Back	 here	 at	 0900	 tomorrow.	And	Miss	Karpathy,
thank	 you	 for	 your	 efforts	 today.	 You	 have	 begun	 to	 change	 the	 future	 of
magic.	Thank	you.”

She	made	her	now-usual	dismissive	face,	and	otherwise	did	not	respond.
As	the	Maxes—who	had	scarcely	left	off	staring	at	the	beautiful	witch	when

she	wasn’t	 in	 the	ODEC—began	to	collect	 their	 jackets	and	such	 like,	I	had
the	sudden	thought:	Where	are	we	going	to	put	her?	Clearly	we	could	not	return
her	to	the	nursing	home.

I	 was	 startled	 by	 Rebecca’s	 soft	 voice	 behind	 me:	 “How	 large	 is	 your
apartment?”

I	turned	to	her.	“Not	large	enough,”	I	said.
Rebecca	 sighed	 rather	pointedly	 to	get	Tristan	and	Oda’s	 attention.	“Well

then,”	she	said	in	a	slightly	raised	voice.	“I	suppose	we	must.	But	only	for	the
one	night.”

Erszebet	heard	this,	and	smiled.	She	straightened	up	and	strolled	toward	us.
And	 then—in	 a	 moment	 of	 unguarded	 bliss—she	 threw	 her	 hands	 up	 and
cried	triumphantly,	“How	wonderful	not	to	be	in	prison	anymore!”

“How	 many	 guest	 rooms	 do	 you	 have?”	 Tristan	 asked	 Rebecca	 quietly.
“I’m	responsible	for	her,	I	have—”

“You	are	not	responsible	for	me,”	said	Erszebet,	immediately	exchanging	glee
for	contempt.	“And	you	have	no	authority	over	me	at	all.”

“Excuse	me,	miss,	but	if	it	wasn’t	for	me,	you’d	still	be	a	crone	living	in	a
retirement	community.”

“You	had	nothing	to	do	with	that,”	she	said	dismissively.	“It	was	Melisande
who	found	me.	Not	 that	 she	has	authority	over	me	either,	but	 I	owe	her	at
least	a	debt	of	gratitude.”

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

MAY	19

We’ve	brought	 all	 three	home	 for	 the	night.	 I	made	 it	 clear	 they	must



respect	this	as	our	home,	not	merely	a	dormitory	for	experimental	physicists
and	 their	 sideshow	 curiosities.	 (Obviously	 didn’t	 say	 that.	 Still	 in	 shock
about	Erszebet.)

Immediate	 disagreements	 about	 sleeping	 arrangements.	 We	 have	 the
guest	room	(double	bed)	and	Mei’s	room	(twin).	Tristan	said	he	would	take
Mei’s	room,	but	Erszebet	demanded	to	sleep	alone.	Then:

ERSZEBET:	It	is	ridiculous	that	you	(Tristan/Mel)	refuse	to	share	a	bed.
MEL:	We	don’t	refuse	to—
ERSZEBET:	Good,	then,	do	it.
MEL:	It’s	just	that	we	don’t.
ERSZEBET:	Why	not?
MEL:	We’re	not	romantically	involved.
ERSZEBET:	Why	not?
MEL:	Because	we’re	just	not.
ERSZEBET:	That	answer	is	too	stupid	to	justify	depriving	me	of	my	own	room.

Even	in	that	prison,	I	had	my	own	room	to	sleep	in	at	night.
MEL:	He	snores	very	loudly	and	I	won’t	be	able	to	sleep.
TRISTAN	:	Yeah,	it’s	terrible,	women	leave	me	all	the	time	because	of	it.
ERSZEBET:	They	leave	you	for	other	reasons.
MEL:	 So	 please,	 let’s	 you	 and	 I	 share	 the	 double,	 and	Tristan	has	 his	 own

room.
ERSZEBET:	 I	 cannot	 believe	 the	 indignities	 I	 am	 already	 having	 to	 suffer

under	your	regime.	Sharing	not	just	a	room	but	a	bed.	I	haven’t	had	to	do
that	since	the	1930s.

TRISTAN	:	You	want	to	go	back	to	Elm	House,	I’ll	drive	you.
MEL:	Let’s	everyone	just	calm	the	f**k	down.

Tristan	took	Mel	aside	to	discuss	surveillance	of	Erszebet.	Assuming	my
role	 as	 hostess	 and	 lady	 of	 the	 house,	 I	 stepped	 in	 to	 see	 how	 she	 was
settling	 in.	 She	 had	 left	 the	 elder-hostel	 with	 only	 one	 large	 bag	 of	 faux
leather	 that	 looked	 stolen	 from	 a	 fashion	 shoot.	 She	 was	 removing	 her
possessions	 from	 this	 bag	 and	 laying	 them	 out	 neatly	 on	 the	 painted
wooden	dresser:	 ancient	 boar-bristle	hairbrush,	 couple	 of	 camisoles	 and
dresses,	 small	 satin	 bag	 for	 toiletries	 and	makeup,	 nylon	 stockings.	 Plus
one	object	made	of	yarn	or	string,	a	kind	of	fiber-sculpture.	The	calico	had



leapt	up	onto	the	dresser	to	examine	this,	but	seemed	to	know	better	than
to	swat	at	it.

I	looked	closer	at	it.	It	was	very	old	and	frayed	in	places.	Its	central	artery
was	a	length	of	spun	wool	perhaps	as	long	as	my	forearm,	and	tied	to	it	were
several	hundred	more	slender	strings,	of	varying	lengths.	All	bore	multiple
knots	along	their	lengths—knots	of	varying	shapes,	sizes,	complexities,	and
densities.	A	number	of	strands	were	deliberately	entangled	to	each	other,
and	some	of	the	strands	were	tied	together	into	bundles	thick	as	my	thumb,
creating	 an	 effect	 like	 dreadlocks.	 It	 resembled	 a	 design	 I	 remembered
from	 my	 favorite	 college	 class,	 on	 South	 American	 anthropology,	 so	 I
assumed	 that	 what	 appeared	 to	 be	 the	 ruins	 of	 a	 mop	 was	 in	 fact	 a
calculation-and-record-keeping	device.

“Looks	like	an	Andean	quipu,”	I	said.
“Mm,”	 said	 Erszebet	 absently,	 removing	 her	 shoes	 and	 wiggling	 her

toes.	 “Mine	 is	 better.”	 She	 shooed	 the	 cat	 off	 the	 dresser.	 “What	 do	 you
use?”

“Sorry?”	I	said.
“What	 do	 you—”	 She	 stopped	 herself,	 blinked,	 looked	 lost.	 “Never

mind,”	she	said,	sounding	cross	but	looking	confused.	“I	forget	there	is	no
magic	 now	 except	 in	 this	ODEC.”	 She	 gave	me	 a	 searching	 look.	 “So	 you
can’t	do	magic?	Ever?”

“That’s	right,”	I	said.	Neutral	voice,	neutral	expression.
“Well,	you	can	now,	with	this	ODEC-room,”	she	said.
“I	don’t	do	magic,”	 I	 clarified,	hoping	Mel	would	 return	 and	 interrupt

this	conversation.	“I	have	no	idea	how	to	do	it.”
“Ah,”	she	said,	still	distracted,	and	began	to	brush	her	hair.	“Of	course,

if	it	cannot	be	done,	then	it	cannot	be	practiced	or	remembered.	I	wonder
will	Tristan	Lyons	require	me	to	show	witches	how	to	do	magic.	Probably.”

“I	don’t	see	myself	volunteering	to	become	a	witch,”	I	said.
She	paused	in	her	brushing	to	give	me	a	curious	look.	“You	are	already	a

witch.”
“Excuse	me?”	I	said.	“I	don’t	know	where	you	would	get	that	impression

from.	Do	you	think	that	just	because	I	knew	what	a	quipu	is?	That’s	nothing
to	do	with	magic,	it’s	because—”

She	 resumed	 brushing	 her	 hair.	 “Of	 course	 you	 are	 a	 witch,”	 she	 said
with	offhand	impatience.	“You	smell	like	a	witch.”

“What?”	I	demanded.	“What	do	you	mean	by	that?”



She	shrugged.	“What	is	the	scent	of	a	baby	or	an	old	person	or	a	man	in
love?	There	are	different	human	scents.	You	have	the	scent	of	a	witch.	How
wonderful	 it	feels	to	have	a	full	head	of	hair	to	brush	again!	You	take	these
things	for	granted	when	you’re	young.”

“Excuse	me,	I’m	not	a	witch,”	I	said.	“That	would	be	ridiculous.”
“Then	 your	 mother’s	 mothers	 were,”	 she	 said	 very	 matter-of-factly,

setting	the	brush	on	the	dresser.	“Some	ancestress.	You	carry	the	blood.”
Suddenly	I	was	irrationally	angry	at	Frank.	“Did	my	husband	tell	you	to

say	that	to	me?”
“I	would	not	say	something	because	your	husband	told	me	to.	Ha!	What

an	idea.”
“I	have	an	ancestor	who	was	hanged	in	Salem,	but	she	was	not	a	witch—”
“Well,	 somebody	 was,”	 she	 said,	 and	 peered	 into	 her	 toiletries	 bag	 for

something.
“This	is	nonsense,”	I	said,	ruffled.	“I	don’t	have	one	of	those”—pointing

to	the	quipu-like	object—“and	I	don’t	do	magic,	and	I’m	not	a	witch,	and	I
shall	go	put	on	deodorant	right	now	if	you	think	I	smell	like	one.”

“You	act	as	if	I	have	insulted	you,”	she	said,	sounding	amused.	She	took	a
bottle	of	witch	hazel	and	a	cotton	pad	from	the	little	silk	bag.	“I	have	given
you	the	greatest	compliment.”

“Not	by	my	lights,”	I	said.
As	soon	as	I	left	her,	I	confronted	Frank,	who	never	understands	that	the

Salem	 witch	 hysteria	 is	 inappropriate	 for	 jokes.	 He	 claimed	 innocence,
pointed	out	that	he	had	never	been	alone	with	Erszebet,	but	then—since	the
matter	had	been	raised,	I	suppose—repeated	his	perennial	joke-theory	that
Mary	Estey	really	was	a	witch.	“Now	that	we	know	there	really are	witches,
don’t	 you	 want	 to	 know?”	 he	 said	 with	 his	 eager	 little	 knowing	 grin.
“Wouldn’t	that	be	something?”

How	could	I	ever	fault	him	his	curiosity?	So.	Made	sure	the	guests	were
settled	 in	 with	 bath	 towels	 and	 water	 glasses,	 and	 then	 went	 up	 into	 the
attic	to	Nana’s	trunk,	which	I	have	managed	to	avoid	opening	for	a	quarter
century,	despite	Frank’s	nudging.	God	knows	why	I	felt	compelled	tonight.
I	 already	 know	 the	 family	 tree;	 I	 don’t	 require	 seeing	 it	 in	 writing.	 But
something	pushed	me	to	go	up.

I	 pulled	 the	 string	 on	 the	 bare	 bulb	 that	 hangs	 from	 the	 attic	 ceiling,
knelt	down	by	the	heavy	cedar	chest	that	lives	equidistant	from	the	central
chimneys,	windows,	and	attic	door.	Blew	the	worst	of	the	dust	off	the	top.



Grasped	 the	 two	near	 corners	 and	 lifted	 carefully	 as	 the	wood	 creaked	 in
protest;	the	clasp	broke	at	least	a	century	ago.

Inside,	I	saw	the	sheaf	of	family	papers	I	knew	would	be	there—but	then	I
saw	something	I	had	never	noticed	before.	I	thought	it	was	a	cowl	or	scarf,
maybe	 a	 battered	 swaddling	 cloth.	 Then	 I	 realized.	 Froze.	 Felt	 dizzy.	 Its
similarity	to	Erszebet’s	was	unmistakable.	I should look at that more closely,	I
thought.	I should reach for it.	Yes, I’ll reach for it.

My	limbs	would	not	obey	me.	I	watched	my	own	hands	carefully	close	the
lid	of	the	chest.	I	stood	up	and	left	the	room	very	quickly	as	if	propelled	by
an	 external	 force,	 shutting	 the	 light	 behind	 me.	 I	 sat	 on	 the	 top	 stair,
staring	into	the	darkness	until	I	was	sure	even	Frank	had	gone	to	sleep.

Diachronicle	
DAYS	295–304	 (LATE	MAY,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	there	isn’t	enough	magic	to	go	around

THE	 NEXT	 DAY	 WE	 RETURNED	 to	 the	ODEC	 to	 begin	 a	 more	 sophisticated
series	of	experimentations.	Rebecca	East-Oda	made	it	clear	that	she	felt	Oda-
sensei’s	 involvement	 in	the	project	had	reached	the	end	of	 its	natural	course,
and	so	neither	of	them	returned	with	us.

We	were	to	essentially	sequester	ourselves	 for	a	 fortnight	as	Erszebet	eased
back	 into	 the	 habit	 of	 performing	 magic	 and	 displayed	 her	 skills	 for	 us.
Although	we	were	 free	 to	 leave	 the	building	 to	 eat,	 exercise,	 take	 the	 air—
even	to	return	to	my	apartment	occasionally	to	shower—Erszebet	and	I	would
sleep	 in	 the	 ODEC	 room;	 Tristan	 was	 already	 happily	 ensconced	 in	 his
bachelor	pad	of	an	office.	By	the	time	we	arrived	that	first	morning,	the	Maxes
had	brought	in	camp	cots,	towels	and	linens,	a	couple	of	well-fed	lab	rats	and
lab-rat	grub,	a	case	of	Old	Tearsheet	Best	Bitter	for	Tristan,	toothbrushes	and



toothpaste	(oh	God,	I’d	barter	my	body	for	a	tube	of	Crest	now!	Cleaning	my
teeth	 with	 a	 paste	 of	 borax	 and	 ground	 cuttlefish	 bones,	 with	 anise	 to
“sweeten”	 it.	 Ych.)	 .	 .	 .	 and	 as	 many	 breakfast	 groceries	 and	 snacks	 as	 the
college-dorm-style	 refrigerator	 in	 the	 upstairs	 office	 could	 hold.	There	were
also	 several	 boxes	 of	 seemingly	 random	 props	 from	 a	 list	 that	 Tristan	 had
texted	 the	Maxes	 the	night	before.	As	 soon	as	 they’d	 set	up	our	bunker,	 the
Maxes	 packed	 up	 and	 moved	 on,	 presumably	 to	 their	 next	 shadowy
government	 assignment.	They	 took	 all	 but	one	of	 the	Vladimirs	with	 them.
We	still	had	a	full	complement	of	Lukes	to	guard	the	building	and	assure	our
security,	but	they	were	otherwise	useless.

The	 days	 that	 followed	 were	 long	 ones,	 the	 take-out	 food	 we	 lived	 on
relatively	 tasteless	 (by	 twenty-first-century	 standards	 .	 .	 .	 context	 really	 is
everything!),	 and	 by	 night	 we	 were	 each	 too	 tired	 even	 for	 conversation.
Tristan	 in	particular	was	worn	down	and	preoccupied.	My	memories	of	 that
time	are	drab	and	bleary,	despite	the	remarkable	nature	of	our	undertakings.

The	 first	 week’s	 experiments,	 dictated	 by	 Tristan,	 included:	 manifesting
inanimate	objects,	both	those	occurring	in	nature	(e.g.,	sticks	and	stones)	and
those	man-made	 (e.g.,	 a	cap	gun	 .	 .	 .	or	at	 least	 something	 resembling	one);
changing	 the	 chemical	 composition	 of	 liquids	 (e.g.,	 water	 to	 salt	 water);
moving	 small	 things	 (e.g.,	 the	 manifested	 cap	 gun)	 from	 one	 spot	 in	 the
ODEC	 to	 another.	 The	 array	 of	 requests	 evolved	 over	 the	 days	 from	 the
mundane	(“turn	this	sweater	inside	out”)	to	the	fanciful	(“turn	this	vanilla	ice
cream	 into	Rocky	Road”)	 to	 the	 creepy	 (“animate	 the	 stuffed	 cat”)	 to	 the
startling	(“turn	this	lab	rat	into	a	newt”).

Erszebet	was	willing	to	show	off	her	powers,	although	after	a	day	or	two	of
adjusting	 to	 having	 them	 back,	 she	 made	 it	 very	 clear	 that	 she	 found	 the
assignments	 themselves	 tiresome	 and	 stupid.	 She	 would,	 she	 informed	 us,
perform	magic	because	it	pleased	her	to	do	so	after	so	many	years	deprived	of
it;	 she	would	not	perform	 it	 simply	because	Mr.	Tristan	Lyons	 required	 it	of
her.	She	was	 flexing	 a	muscle	 she’d	 longed	 to	 flex	 for	many	 scores	of	 years,
and	to	a	certain	degree	she	was	preening.	Once	the	buzz	of	that	wore	thin,	we
knew	she	would	feel	no	obligation	to	continue	the	dog-and-pony	show.

Tristan	did	not	waste	breath	explaining	to	either	of	us	what	his	higher-ups
were	expecting	from	this	sequestration;	I	just	took	his	lead,	trying	to	learn	as
much	 as	 we	 could	 about	 Erszebet’s	 powers,	 although	 it	 was	 a	 trying
undertaking.	 Erszebet	 herself	 had	 cast	 us	 as	 good	 cop/bad	 cop,	 and	 it	 was
natural	enough	to	play	those	roles.	Tristan	pushed	her;	I	cajoled.	He	made	her



feel	significant;	I	made	her	feel	appreciated.	Truth	be	told,	after	three	days	of
it,	his	job	proved	far	easier	than	mine,	for	she	was,	to	use	a	post-Victorian	turn
of	phrase,	high-maintenance.

Other	than	her	attitude,	our	biggest	headache	was	that	obviously	we	could
not	tape	or	photograph	what	she	was	doing	in	the	ODEC;	we	could	not	be	in
there	with	her	without	blacking	out.	She	had	to	thump	on	the	door	just	to	let
us	know	she	was	finished	with	each	spell.

Our	only	recourse	for	research,	therefore,	was	for	me	to	interview	her	after
each	 exercise.	 Since	 she	 would	 not	 answer	 Tristan’s	 questions	 (or	 rather,
answered	 them,	 but	 only	 with	 gratuitous	 derision),	 he	 divided	 his	 time
between	measuring	and	studying	whatever	object	she’d	worked	her	magic	on,
and	 hourly	 emailing	 his	 bosses	 at	 the	 shadowy	 government	 entity	 regarding
our	 progress.	 Apparently	 the	 Maxes	 had	 delivered	 glowing	 reports	 on	 the
results	of	Erszebet’s	first	spell	and	it	seemed	the	bosses	wanted	everything	she
did	to	be	as	attention-grabbing	as	she	herself	now	was.

Erszebet,	 in	 these	 interviews	with	me,	was	not	 illuminating.	Here	 follows
almost	verbatim,	as	I	can	remember	it,	the	gist	of	an	early	attempt:

(Upon	 the	 occasion	 of	 Erszebet	 taking	 my	 sweater	 into	 the	 ODEC	 with	 her	 and
changing	 it	 from	 green	 wool	 to	 lavender	 polyester,	 which	 took	 much	 longer	 than	 we
expected—an	entire	afternoon—and	left	her	strangely	exhausted.	NB:	Yes,	Tristan	had
specific	reasons	for	such	peculiar	and	frivolous-seeming	instructions.)

MEL:	Can	you	explain	to	me	how	you	did	this?
ERSZEBET:	Pah.	I	found	where	you	were	wearing	lavender	polyester	and

brought	 that	 here.	 It	 was	 hard	 to	 find.	 There	 are	 not	 many
opportunities	to	find	you	owning	polyester.

MEL:	The	physicists	would	say	that	in	some	parallel	reality	to	this	one	in
the	multiverse,	there	is	a	Mel	wearing	a	lavender	polyester	sweater.

Erszebet	makes	her	dismissive	face,	and	shrugs	to	make	it	clear	she	doesn’t	give	a
fuck	care	what	physicists	would	say.

MEL:	What	we	want	 to	understand	 is,	how	does	 it	 end	up	here,	 in	 this
reality,	and	what	happens	to	the	original	sweater?

ERSZEBET:	I	summon	it	here	and	get	rid	of	the	other	one.
MEL:	How,	though?	By	what	mechanism?
ERSZEBET:	 The	 same	 way	 you	 do	 anything.	 You	 do	 what	 causes	 the



desired	result.	If	you	want	something	to	burn,	you	set	it	on	fire,	if	you
want	 something	 to	 be	 wet,	 you	 pour	 liquid	 on	 it.	 If	 you	 want
something	 that	 is	 upstairs	 to	 be	 downstairs,	 you	 send	 someone	 to
collect	 it.	 It	 is	 exactly	 the	 same.	 Except	 it	 is	 more	 complicated	 to
calculate	what	to	do—for	example,	in	that	metaphor,	what	route	to	tell
the	servant	to	take	upstairs,	how	fast	to	move,	and	so	on.

MEL:	But	can	you	explain	 technically,	mechanically—not	metaphorically
—what	you	are	doing	and	how	you	do	it?

ERSZEBET:	Pah,	 if	 you	 don’t	 understand	 a	 perfectly	 simple	 explanation,
then	you	are	too	stupid	to	understand	a	more	technical	one.

MEL:	Fine.	Can	you	at	least	explain	to	me	why	some	people	can	perform
magic	and	others	can’t?

ERSZEBET:	This	is	like	asking	why	doesn’t	a	blind	person	know	what	blue
smells	like.

.	.	.	and	thus	went	all	interviews.	There	are	transcripts	of	two	dozen	such	on
that	original	laptop.	They	are	probably	now	either	archived	or	expunged.	If	I
don’t	 escape	 from	 1851	 within	 the	 next	 three	 weeks,	 I	 will	 never	 know
which.

FURTHER,	ERSZEBET	WAS	capricious,	and	she	knew	she	held	all	the	power.	We
were	demanding	something	of	her	(quite	a	lot	of	something,	to	be	fair),	while
there	was	nothing	we	could	offer	her	in	recompense.	Her	greatest	desire	was
fulfilled	by	circumstance:	 as	 a	nineteen-year-old	bombshell,	 she	would	never
be	 re-incarcerated	 in	 the	 retirement	 home.	 She	 had	 other	 desires,	 but
expressed	them	only	erratically	at	 first.	Most	significantly,	on	our	twelfth	day
in	seclusion,	when	we	had	stopped	for	lunch,	she	announced	she	wished	to	go
to	Hungary	“to	spit	upon	the	graves	of	my	enemies.”

“We	 don’t	 have	 the	 budget,”	 said	 Tristan,	 and	 took	 a	 bite	 of	 his	 tuna
sandwich.	He	 had	 said	 nothing	 about	 it,	 but	 his	mysterious	 revenue	 stream
seemed	 to	be	drying	up.	Deliveries	of	 liquid	helium	were	 fewer	 and	 further
between,	 and	 seemed	 to	 involve	 his	 spending	 a	 lot	 of	 time	 in	 exhausting
phone	conversations.	He	kept	having	to	call	Frank	Oda	in	to	help	debug	the
ODEC,	which	I	could	see	he	felt	bad	about,	since	Frank	wasn’t	getting	paid.
And	he	 kept	 pressing	 our	 Lukes	 and	 our	Vladimir	 into	 service	 doing	 things
that,	to	judge	from	the	looks	on	their	faces,	weren’t	in	their	job	descriptions.



Tristan	had	always	suffered	from	a	certain	ADHD-ness,	which	was	alternately
charming	 and	 exasperating.	 His	 phone	 had	 lately	 been	 going	 off	 every	 few
minutes,	 which	 made	 this	 even	 worse.	 He’d	 programmed	 it	 to	 produce
different	 ringtones	 and	 vibrate-patterns	 for	 different	 incoming	 callers,	 so	 he
could	 tell	without	even	 looking	 at	 it	who	was	bothering	him.	One	of	 those
was	 a	 snatch	 of	 John	 Philip	 Sousa’s	 “Liberty	 Bell	 March.”	 It	 was	 typical
American	 patriotic	 bombast,	 military	 parade	 stuff.	 Overlaid	 on	 that	 was	 a
whole	different	set	of	associations	based	on	the	fact	that	it	was	the	theme	song
for	Monty	Python’s	Flying	Circus.	Every	so	often	I	would	hear	it	coming	out	of
Tristan’s	phone.	When	it	did,	he	would	drop	what	he	was	doing	and	visibly
snap	to	attention	and	take	that	call	without	delay,	hurrying	off	to	a	quiet	part
of	the	building	and	saying	“Sir!”	and	“Yes,	sir!”	a	lot.	Obviously,	this	was	the
ringtone	he’d	assigned	to	his	boss.	What	I	didn’t	know,	and	what	I	was	dying
to	 ask,	was	 its	meaning.	Was	“Liberty	Bell	March”	 just	 a	 snatch	of	 patriotic
music	to	him,	or	a	wry	allusion	to	an	absurdist	British	comedy	show	that	had
been	canceled	before	he	had	been	born?

We	were	 in	 the	office	 just	outside	 the	ODEC,	 at	 the	 small	 table	where	 I
usually	interviewed	Erszebet.	I	had	been	about	to	suggest	we	repair	outside	to
stroll	down	to	the	Charles,	perhaps	even	drive	to	Walden	Pond	for	some	fresh
air	and	sunshine	(it	was	Memorial	Day	weekend	in	New	England	and	we	were
living,	working,	 and	 sleeping	 in	 a	basement	under	 fluorescent	 lights.	 I	mean
really,	WTF.).	Often	I	still	wonder	how	things	would	be	different	now	if	I	had
pressed	for	such	a	constitutional.	Surely	in	some	other—better—universe,	Mel
made	that	suggestion,	and	so	the	trio	left	the	building	and	was	not	there	when
General	Schneider	arrived.

But	 in	 our	 universe,	 the	 trio	 stayed	 in	 the	 basement,	 having	 this
conversation:

“If	you	cooperate	with	us,”	Tristan	continued,	swallowing	his	bite	of	tuna
salad,	“we	can	probably	get	funding,	and	then	if	you	really	want	to	go	spit	on
the	graves	of	 your	 enemies,	we	 can	discuss	 it.”	And	 then,	putting	down	his
sandwich,	eyes	lighting	up:	“Wait	a	minute!	We	can	get	our	own	funding.	If
you	can	change	water	to	salt	water	.	.	.	why	not	change—”

“—lead	 to	 gold,”	 she	 said	 with	 him,	 with	 an	 adolescent	 groan	 of
disapproval.	“Or	anything	 to	gold.	That	 is	 the	most	unoriginal	 suggestion	 in
the	world.	From	the	dawn	of	magic	this	is	the	first	thing	people	ask	of	witches.”

“And?”	prompted	Tristan.
“We	don’t	do	it,”	she	said.	“Obviously.”



“Why	not?”
“Ask	the	Fuckers.”
“What!?”	Tristan	and	I	exclaimed	in	unison.	Erszebet	had	many	disagreeable

traits,	but	use	of	vulgar	language	was	most	certainly	not	one	of	them.
She	was	taken	aback	by	our	reaction.	“The	Fuckers,”	she	said.	“You	know.

The	Fuckers.”
Tristan	and	I	looked	at	each	other	as	if	to	verify	we’d	both	heard	it.
Erszebet	 laughed	in	a	way	that	 suggested	she	wasn’t	really	all	 that	amused.

“You	 people	 have	 such	 dirty	minds.	 It	 is	 a	 perfectly	 normal	German	name.
Maybe	you	spell	it	F-U-G-G-E-R	just	to	be	polite.”

“Oh,”	I	said,	“Fugger,	as	in	the	old	German	banking	family.”
“As	in	them,	yes.”
“So,	 back	 to	 where	 we	 were,”	 Tristan	 said,	 shaking	 his	 head.	 “You’re

saying	we	should	ask	some	old	dead	German	bankers	why	you	don’t	change
lead	into	gold.”

“They	are	not	 all	dead,”	Erszebet	corrected	him.	“If	you	go	down	 to	 the
financial	district,	you	can	probably	find	one	right	now,	sitting	in	a	nice	discreet
office.”

“Well,”	 I	 said,	 “obviously	 bankers	 would	 have	 something	 to	 say	 about
changing	lead	into	gold.”

“They	would	not	 like	it,”	Erszebet	said.	And	this	was	the	first	 time	I	ever
got	the	sense	from	her	that	she	actually	cared	whether	someone	else	would	or
wouldn’t	like	a	thing.	She	considered	Fuggers—or	Fuckers,	as	she	pronounced
the	name—people	to	be	reckoned	with.

“Let’s	 try	 a	 different	 example,	 if	 you	 don’t	 like	 gold,”	 Tristan	 said.	 “I’m
going	to	show	my	cards	a	little	bit	more	than	I	usually	do.”	And	he	pocketed
his	phone,	which	he’d	been	looking	at	under	the	table,	and	laid	both	hands	on
the	table’s	upper	surface—as	if	literally	showing	his	cards.	“To	hell	with	gold.
Could	you	produce	enriched	uranium?”

She	considered	it.	“The	stuff	they	use	in	bombs?”
“The	stuff	they	use	in	bombs.”
She	shook	her	head.	“Certainly	not.	This	would	cause	too	much	change	too

quickly,	and	bad	things	happen	when	magic	is	used	that	way.”
“What	bad	things?”
“Bad	 things,”	 she	 said	with	 finality.	 “Worse	 than	 your	 ‘nukes.’	We	don’t

even	have	words	to	describe	them.	So	we	don’t	do	that.”
“Then	 there	 are	 rules,”	 I	 said,	 opening	 the	 laptop	 to	 take	 notes.	 “Not



changing	things	too	quickly	is	a	rule.	What	are	some	other	rules?”
“There	is	no	rule,”	she	said.	“We	just	don’t	do	it.	Is	there	a	rule	telling	you

not	to	jump	off	a	cliff?	No.	But	you	don’t	do	it.”
“What	else	don’t	you	do?”	asked	Tristan.
“What	 a	 ridiculous	 question,”	 she	 said.	 To	me:	 “He	 only	 asks	 ridiculous

questions.	I	hope	he	is	not	your	lover,	because	he	is	not	worthy.”
“Why	is	it	a	ridiculous	question?”	pressed	Tristan.
“Can	you	 tell	me	 all	 the	 things	 you	would	not	 do?	No.	You	only	 know

what	not	to	do	when	you’re	faced	with	the	prospect	of	doing	it.	It’s	like	that
with	everything,	including	magic.”

“Can	you	give	me	some	examples?”	he	asked	with	exaggerated	patience.
She	looked	thoughtful,	and	for	a	happily	deluded	moment,	we	both	thought

she	was	going	to	be	cooperative.	“I	am	tired	of	doing	all	the	giving,”	she	said.
“So.	Your	turn	to	give	me	something.	You	will	give	me	a	cat.”

After	a	confused	pause,	I	asked,	“As	a	pet?”
“No,	as	a	cat,”	she	said.
“A	live	cat?”	asked	Tristan.
“Of	course	a	live	cat!	What	would	I	do	with	a	dead	cat?”
“Okay,	you	can	have	a	cat,”	said	Tristan	indulgently.	“We’ll	get	you	a	cat

next	week,	as	soon	as	you’ve	done	something	we	can	show	the	brass.”
“I	will	 show	 the	 brass	 something	 after	 you	 give	me	 a	 cat,”	 she	 corrected

triumphantly.
“Erszebet,”	I	said	in	a	friendly,	intimate	tone.	“We	have	no	time	to	go	fetch

you	a	cat,	or	a	litterbox,	or	any	of	the	other	stuff	a	cat	needs.	But	if	you	would
like	to	be	employed	again	by	powerful	people,	who	can	give	you	as	many	cats
as	you	like,	then	please	cooperate	with	us	for	the	next	few	days.”

She	pursed	her	lips	and	glanced	between	the	two	of	us.	“Put	me	with	those
people	 you	 speak	 of.	 Why	 am	 I	 wasting	 my	 time	 doing	 stupid	 tricks	 for
minions?”

“Because	these	minions	have	an	ODEC,”	said	Tristan	abruptly	and	openly
irritated.	“Without	 this	ODEC,	you	are	nothing.	And	 this	ODEC	is	ours.	 So
play	nice.”

She	gave	him	a	furious,	disgusted	look.	“I	want	to	be	very	clear	with	you
about	 something,”	 she	 said	 in	 a	 warning	 tone.	 “There	 are	 many	 novels	 in
which	there	is	a	handsome	man	and	a	beautiful	woman	and	they	argue	all	the
time	and	are	at	odds	and	constantly	clash	and	it	is	because	secretly	they	want	to
make	passionate	love	to	each	other.	That	is	not	the	case	here.”



At	this,	Tristan	let	out	a	huge	guffaw,	a	rumbling,	raucous	belly	laugh,	head
thrown	back.

“I	am	serious,”	she	protested	hotly.
“I’m	so	glad	you	clarified	that,”	he	said,	huffing	with	 laughter.	“Because	I

gotta	tell	you,	with	General	Schneider	breathing	down	my	neck	to	learn	what
your	magic	is	good	for,	with	my	spending	every	free	waking	moment	trying	to
convince	 him	 and	 his	 bosses	 that	 this	 is	 useful	 even	 if	 you	 haven’t	 already
materialized	enriched	uranium	for	them,	I	gotta	tell	you,	when	I	am	so	totally
preoccupied	with	your	being	seen	as	a	valued	commodity	that	the	time	it	takes
me	 to	 shave	 feels	 like	 a	 personal	 overindulgence,	 I	 love	 knowing	 that	 your
number	 one	 priority	 is	 devaluing	 me	 even	 more	 than	 my	 bosses	 want	 to
devalue	you.	That’s	awesome.	You’re	the	best.	I’ll	be	so	fucking	devastated	when
they	pull	the	plug	on	this	and	you	end	up	in	the	street	without	even	a	nursing
home	 to	 take	 care	of	 you.”	He	 stood	up	 and	 stormed	 to	 the	 far	 side	of	 the
room,	his	hands	at	his	temples.	“Jesus.”

Then	he	turned	back	toward	us	and	said,	from	a	distance,	“I	apologize.	That
was	totally	uncalled	for	and	I	should	have	more	control	over	myself.	It’s	been	a
tough	week.”

“They	want	to	pull	the	plug?”	said	Erszebet,	scandalized.
“How	long	has	that	been	true?”	I	asked,	shocked.
He	 ran	 his	 hands	 through	 his	 short	 hair	 a	 few	 times	 roughly,	 and	 then

returned	to	sit	by	us	again.	“Almost	from	the	word	go,”	he	confessed,	pained.
“General	Schneider	was	excited	for	about	thirty	minutes	and	then	he	and	Dr.
Rudge	wanted	 immediate	gratification.	They	wanted	her	 to	 start	manifesting
stealth	bombers,	or	teleport	invisibly	to	Syria,	that	sort	of	thing.”

This	was	 the	 first	 time	 he	 had	mentioned	 names.	Until	 then,	Tristan	 had
maintained	 impeccable	 secrecy	 concerning	his	 chain	 of	 command.	Either	 he
really	was	at	the	end	of	his	rope,	or	else	he	thought	he	could	gain	Erszebet’s
trust	by	personalizing	the	discussion.

If	 so,	 it	wasn’t	working.	“And	 instead	you	had	me	turning	sweaters	 inside
out?”	demanded	Erszebet	in	disgust.	“And	you	wonder	why	they	do	not	value
me?	You	are	more	of	an	idiot	even	than	I	thought.”

“Every	task	I	gave	you	was	a	beta	test	 for	something	else	that	would	have
obvious	military	use.	They	want	you	 to	 turn	 a	person	 inside	out.	Obviously	 I
have	to	test	that	on	a	sweater	and	not	a	person,	or	even	on	a	lab	rat.	And	of
course	 I’ll	 fulfill	 their	 agenda,	 but	 ideally	 I’d	 like	 to	 exceed	 it.	 I’ve	 got	more
scruples	 than	 they	do,	 so	 I’d	 like	 to	present	you	 to	 them—brand	you,	 so	 to



speak—as	being	useful	for	something	other	than	turning	a	person	inside	out.”
“Such	as?”
“Turning	 lead	 into	 gold	 would	 be	 pretty	 awesome,”	 he	 said,	 sounding

wistful.
She	shook	her	head.
“Why	don’t	you	suggest	something,	then,”	he	said	to	her.	“Given	that	you

can	 only	 work	 your	 magic	 inside	 the	 ODEC,	 you’re	 a	 little	 limited,	 you
realize	that?”

“She	can	turn	rats	into	newts,”	I	reminded	him.
“So	can	your	average	kids’-birthday-party	magician.”
“Not	for	real.	Anyhow,	what	about	a	person?”	I	said.	“What	if	I	let	her	turn

me	into	a	newt?”
“I	 would	 not	 turn	 a	 person	 inside	 out,	 probably,”	 Erszebet	 informed

Tristan.	“That	would	be	tasteless.	You	Americans	are	so	tasteless.”
“Turn	me	into	a	newt,”	I	insisted.	“The	bosses	will	like	that.”
And	that,	as	I	recall,	was	the	moment	when	Tristan’s	phone	began	playing

the	“Liberty	Bell	March.”
He	 pulled	 it	 out	 of	 his	 pocket	 and	 double-taked,	 then	 used	 his	 finger	 to

scroll	 down.	 “Snap	 inspection!”	 he	 announced,	 looking	 up	 to	 make	 eye
contact	 with	 me	 and	 Erszebet.	 “Shine	 your	 shoes	 and	 polish	 your	 belt
buckles!”

Diachronicle	
DAY	304

In	which	General	Schneider	is	impressed

NO	 MORE	 THAN	 FIVE	 MINUTES	 later	 we	 were	 joined	 by	 a	 broad-chested



gentleman	in	uniform,	trailed	by	a	younger	man,	similarly	attired,	whose	sole
purpose	 in	 life	 seemed	 to	be	 to	open	doors	 for,	 and	 to	hold	 the	hat	 of,	 the
boss.

At	 the	 time,	 I	 knew	 nothing	 of	 uniforms,	 rank,	 or	 insignia.	 A	 few	 years
later,	having	spent	a	lot	of	time	around	active-duty	military,	I’d	have	been	able
to	 recognize	 this	 man	 as	 a	 brigadier	 general	 (one	 star)	 and	 his	 aide	 as	 a
lieutenant	 colonel.	 Both	 were	 wearing	 dress	 uniforms—the	 military-world
equivalent	of	business	suits.	Conveniently,	they	were	wearing	name	plates	on
their	right	breast	pockets,	and	so	I	knew	that	their	last	names	were	Schneider
and	Ramirez	even	before	Tristan	made	introductions,	which	he	did	with	even
more	than	his	accustomed	level	of	military	crispness.

General	Schneider	moved	about	the	room	in	an	asymmetrical	gait,	shaking
first	 my	 hand,	 then	 Erszebet’s.	 His	 manner	 was	 extraordinarily	 grim	 and
formal.	 He	 paid	 only	 cursory	 attention	 to	 me.	 Then	 his	 gaze	 settled	 on
Erszebet,	 taking	 her	 in	 head	 to	 foot,	 and	 for	 a	 fleeting	moment	 he	 looked
impressed.	But	then	he	frowned	and	turned	his	attention	to	Tristan.

“I	assume	that’s	the	Asset,”	he	said,	pointing.
“Pointing	is	very	rude,”	said	Erszebet.
Tristan	hastily	said,	“General	Schneider,	yes.	Miss	Karpathy	is	the	one	I	told

you	about.”
“This	 must	 be	 the	 one	 who	 wishes	 me	 to	 turn	 people	 inside	 out,”	 said

Erszebet,	looking	away	with	wounded	dignity.	“Very	tasteless.”
Schneider	 gave	 her	 a	 strange	 look,	 but	 then	 returned	 his	 attention	 to

Tristan,	who	said	quickly,	“You	came	at	a	great	time,	sir.	We	were	just	in	the
middle	of	a	very	productive	conversation.”

“You	 said	 a	 couple	 of	weeks,	Major	 Lyons.	 In	my	 dictionary,	 ‘a	 couple’
means	‘two.’	It	has	been	two.”

“General	Schneider—”
“You’re	not	doing	what	we	discussed,	Major	Lyons.	You’re	going	off	script.

You’re	giving	us	a	science	project.”
“Sir,	 I	 explained	 in	my	 report—”	Tristan	began,	but	Erszebet	 talked	over

him:
“My	powers	are	so	little	to	a	man	who	requires	an	assistant	just	to	walk	into

a	room?”
“She	was	just	about	to	turn	me	into	a	newt,”	I	offered	urgently.
General	Schneider	gave	me	a	look	and	then	turned	condescendingly	to	her.

“Yeah,	 I’ve	 been	 hearing	 about	 the	 newt	 thing	 all	 week.	 That	 might	 have



been	impressive	a	thousand	years	ago—”
“I	was	born	in	1832,	I	was	not	alive	a	thousand	years	ago,”	she	retorted.	“If

you	cannot	grasp	 simple	arithmetic,	 then	you	will	never	have	any	 idea	what
Mr.	Tristan	Lyons	is	trying	to	accomplish	here.”

Schneider	continued	speaking	over	her:	“Those	kinds	of	tricks	are	nothing	in
a	world	with	drones,	cruise	missiles,	and	assault	rifles.	And	according	to	Major
Lyons’s	reports,	it	takes	you	all	day	to	pull	it	off.	By	the	time	you	get	that	spell
half	 out	 of	 your	 mouth,	 I	 can	 rack	 a	 round	 into	 my	 sidearm	 and	 put	 it
between	your	eyes.”

“Do	you	need	your	minion	to	help	you	with	that	too?”	she	asked.
He	looked	back	over	his	shoulder	at	Lieutenant	Colonel	Ramirez.	“Have	a

look	around	the	facility,”	he	said.	Ramirez	departed	wordlessly.
“I	liked	the	Maxes	better,”	Erszebet	announced.
“Do	you	 get	my	point?”	General	 Schneider	 demanded.	 “If	 you	want	 the

taxpayers	 of	 the	United	 States	 to	 go	 on	 subsidizing	 your	 beauty	 treatments,
you	had	better	impress	me.	Now.	Today.	Right	now.”

“Very	well,	 then,”	 purred	Erszebet,	 so	 immediately	 cheerful	 that	my	 skin
prickled.	 I	 glanced	 at	Tristan;	 he	was	 looking	 at	 her	 keenly,	 and	 not	 in	 the
usual	slack-jawed	way	that	men	would	look	at	such	a	woman.

Erszebet	stood	and	gestured	to	the	open	door	of	the	ODEC,	smiling	like	a
1950s	 housewife	 on	 a	 television	 advertisement.	 “If	 you	 would	 like	 to	 step
inside,	 General,	 I	 will	 demonstrate	 the	 kind	 of	 magic	 you	 desire.	 In	 fact	 I
would	be	delighted	to	give	you	what	you’re	asking	for.”

“General—”	said	Tristan	tentatively.
“Good,”	 said	General	 Schneider,	 all	 too	 obviously	 charmed	 by	 Erszebet’s

physical	endowments.	I	got	the	clear	sense	that	in	his	world	he	dealt	with	a	lot
of	submissive	women	who	thought	of	nothing	but	pleasing	him.	“That’s	what
I	was	after,	Major	Lyons.	Why	did	it	take	me	coming	all	 the	way	up	here	to
get	that	kind	of	compliance?	Where’s	the	whatever-it-is	I	have	to	wear?”

“In	that	corner,”	I	said,	gesturing	toward	the	rack	of	snowmobile	suits.
Tristan	respectfully	asked	to	speak	in	private	with	Schneider.	They	stepped

into	the	server	room	for	a	moment,	and	I	could	hear	Tristan’s	voice	trying	to
explain	 something	 and	 the	 general’s	 interrupting	 him.	 The	 door	 opened
suddenly	 and	 Schneider	 limped	 back	 in,	 rolling	 his	 eyes.	 I	 handed	 him	 the
snowsuit,	and	then	gestured	with	my	head	for	Erszebet	to	step	aside	with	me.
She	 joined	me	by	 the	console	panel	 and—an	occasional	habit	of	hers,	 like	 a
nervous	 tic—reached	 into	 her	 bag	 and	 riffled	 through	 it	without	 looking	 at



what	she	was	doing.
“Don’t	turn	him	inside	out,”	I	said.
She	 looked	 insulted.	 “Of	 course	 not.	 Blood—body	 fluids—all	 over	 my

dress.”
“You	know	what	I	mean.	Don’t	hurt	him.	You	said	you	owed	me	a	debt	of

gratitude—I’ll	consider	it	fulfilled	if	you	promise	me	that.”
She	smiled	innocently,	which	filled	me	with	a	sense	of	dread.	“I	promise,	I

am	not	going	to	hurt	him.”	And	then,	grinning	as	broadly	as	she	had	her	first
day	with	us,	she	stopped	fidgeting	with	the	things	in	her	bag,	marched	into	the
ODEC	with	her	dress	flouncing	about	her,	and	waited	for	Schneider.

Meanwhile	 Schneider	 zipped	 and	 velcroed	 himself	 into	 the	 largest	 of	 our
snowmobile	 suits.	 Schneider	 was	 hefty	 and	 the	 suit	 was	 tight.	 I	 noticed
something	that	explained	his	rolling,	asymmetrical	style	of	walking:	he	had	one
artificial	leg.

“Give	us	fifteen	minutes,	please,”	Erszebet	called	out	to	Tristan	as	Schneider
squeezed	into	the	ODEC	with	her.	“To	impress	the	general	will	require	some
effort.”

We	closed	the	door,	and	Tristan	walked	to	the	control	console	to	turn	on
the	ODEC.

There	was,	of	course,	no	way	we	could	know	what	was	going	on	inside	the
ODEC—that	was	 an	unavoidable	part	of	 the	whole	Schrödinger’s	 cat	 thing.
But	after	eleven	minutes	we	heard	the	thump	on	the	door	that	told	us	Erszebet
was	finished.

Tristan	went	to	the	console	and	powered	down	the	ODEC.	I	slipped	on	the
oven	mitts	that	we	used	whenever	we	wanted	to	touch	the	dangerously	cold
door	latches,	and	opened	the	door.

“And	so,”	said	Erszebet,	radiant	and	fresh-faced,	her	tone	sparkling,	“I	have
shown	your	master	a	magic	trick.”	She	walked	out	into	the	room,	leaving	the
coast	clear	 for	us	to	see	 inside.	And	what	we	saw—or	thought	we	saw—was
the	motionless	body	of	General	Schneider,	crumpled	on	the	floor.

“General	Schneider!”	Tristan	exclaimed,	and	stepped	in	through	the	door.
There	wasn’t	enough	room	in	there	for	me	to	join	him,	so	I	contented	myself
with	sticking	my	head	in	for	a	look.

Schneider	wasn’t	 actually	 there.	Collapsed	on	 the	 floor,	 apparently	empty,
was	the	snowmobile	suit.	An	empty	oxygen	mask	was	still	lodged	in	its	hood.
“Where	is	he?”	Tristan	demanded,	horrified.

“Did	you	turn	him	into	a	newt?”	I	asked.



She	examined	her	fingernails.	“Oh,	no!	It	takes	me	all	day	to	pull	that	off.”
Tristan	picked	up	 the	 suit	 and	held	 it	upright;	one	of	 the	 legs	 fell	 straight

down	 as	 if	 weighted	 with	 something,	 and	 clanked	 onto	 the	 floor	 of	 the
ODEC.

“Give	it	to	me,”	I	suggested,	and	reached	through	the	doorway.	He	thrust
the	shoulders	of	the	suit	at	me.	I	grabbed	them	and	pulled	the	whole	thing	out
through	the	door	and	into	the	room,	where	I	laid	it	out	flat	on	the	floor.	Left
behind	in	the	ODEC	was	an	articulated	contraption	consisting	of	a	stump	cup,
some	 straps,	 and	 a	 carbon-fiber	 strut	 terminating	 in	 a	 man’s	 dress	 shoe.
Schneider’s	artificial	leg.

I	unzipped	the	front	of	the	snowmobile	suit	with	some	care.	I	had	an	idea	as
to	what	had	happened.	Somewhere	inside	of	this	bulky	garment	was	a	living,
breathing	newt.	I	needed	to	find	it,	catch	it,	and	return	it	safely	to	the	ODEC
where	Erszebet	could	reverse	the	spell.	No	harm	done.	Point	made.

Inside	 the	 suit	was	 an	 empty	 suit	 of	 clothes—shirt	 buttoned,	 tie	 knotted,
sleeves	of	the	shirt	fitted	into	the	sleeves	of	the	jacket.	But	no	person.	Tristan
had	 emerged	 from	 the	 ODEC,	 carrying	 the	 artificial	 leg	 in	 one	 hand	 and
Schneider’s	remaining	shoe—sock	dangling	from	it—in	the	other.

I	grabbed	the	oxygen	mask	and	pulled	it	carefully	away	from	the	snowsuit’s
hood.	A	little	gleaming	cascade	of	glinting	objects	fell	out	of	it,	followed	by	a
pair	of	fake	teeth	held	together	by	a	bridge	of	pink	plastic.	That	gave	me	a	clue
as	to	the	little	gleaming	things.	They	were	tiny	bits	of	curiously	shaped	metal.

They	were	fillings	from	Schneider’s	teeth.
Groping	carefully	through	Schneider’s	jacket	and	shirt,	Tristan’s	hand	found

something.	He	unbuttoned	 the	 garments	 and	 spread	 them	 apart.	 Exposed	 in
the	middle,	resting	neatly	on	the	back	of	the	white	shirt,	was	a	small	smooth
object	with	a	couple	of	wires	coming	out	of	it.

“That,”	Tristan	said,	“is	a	pacemaker.”
I	couldn’t	even	speak	properly,	so	I	held	out	my	hand	with	the	fillings	and

the	false	teeth	for	Tristan	to	look	at.
Tristan	 was	 squatting	 on	 his	 haunches.	 He	 looked	 at	 these	 exhibits	 for	 a

while,	 thoughtfully.	 Acting	 on	 some	 kind	 of	 military-guy	 autopilot,	 he
rummaged	in	Schneider’s	clothes	until	he	came	out	with	a	small	pistol,	which
Schneider	 had	 evidently	 been	 packing	 in	 a	 holster	 on	 the	 back	 of	 his	 belt.
Tristan	ejected	its	magazine	and	then	worked	the	slide	once	to	eject	a	round.
Having	rendered	the	weapon	safe,	he	set	it	back	down	again,	then	climbed	to
his	feet	and	turned	to	face	Erszebet.



“What	have	you	done	to	him?”	Tristan	demanded,	very	calm.
“Google	it,”	said	Erszebet	breezily.
“Google	what?”
She	put	her	index	finger	to	her	chin	and	looked	up	at	the	ceiling.	“Mmm,

Hungary,	Nagybörzsöny,	 1564,	 one-legged	man,	 naked.	 Perhaps	 taltos.	 You
might	discover	something	interesting.”

“Stokes!”	 said	Tristan	 irritably.	 I	 grabbed	my	 laptop,	 brought	 up	Google,
and	typed	in	the	words.	Nothing	useful	came	up.

“Well?”	demanded	Tristan.	I	shook	my	head.
“Try	refreshing,”	said	Erszebet.	“Perhaps	 it	 takes	a	moment	for	 it	 to	catch

up.”
“Catch	up	with	what?”	Tristan	demanded.
“With	me,”	she	said,	and	began	humming	Liszt	to	herself.
I	opened	another	window	and	 tried	Googling	 the	Hungarian	words	 she’d

used.	Nagybörzsöny	 turned	out	 to	be	 the	name	of	a	village.	Taltos	 I	 already
knew,	it	meant	something	like	“warlock.”

I	 went	 back	 to	 the	 first	 window	 and	 clicked	 the	 refresh	 button.	 Tristan
came	 around	 to	my	 side	 of	 the	 table	 and	 stared	 over	my	 shoulder.	 Erszebet
preened.	I	refreshed	the	page	a	second	time.

“Nothing,”	I	said.
“Try	variations,”	she	suggested,	turning	away	as	if	in	a	reverie.	“Amputee.

Gibberish.”
“Where	is	he?”	Tristan	demanded	again.
I	refreshed	the	page	again.	One	search	result	came	up.
“There’s	a	Wikipedia	entry,”	I	said.
“What	the—”	Tristan	muttered,	as	I	clicked	on	the	link.
“I	made	 it	 into	Wikipedia,”	 sang	 Erszebet.	 “I’ll	 bet	 none	 of	my	 enemies

ever	made	it	into	Wikipedia.”
The	page	came	up,	entitled	“Nagybörzsöny	‘Warlock’	incident,”	containing

a	 short	 paragraph,	 with	 one	 notification	 saying	 the	 entry	 was	 a	 stub	 and
encouraging	 us	 to	 help	 them	 supplement	 it,	 and	 a	 second	 saying	 the	 article
needed	additional	citations	for	verification.	The	paragraph	itself	read:

In	1564,	in	the	small	village	of	Nagybörzsöny,	a	naked	one-legged	man
is	 recorded	 as	 having	 materialized	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 a	 small	 lane,
babbling	in	an	unknown	tongue.	The	townspeople	were	weary	from	a
recent	outbreak	of	typhus	and	on	edge	from	years	caught	between	the



warring	 armies	 of	 the	 Ottoman	 Empire	 and	 Holy	 Roman	 Emperor
Maximilian	 II.	 Once	 they	 recovered	 from	 their	 astonishment,	 the
villagers	bound	the	man	and	dragged	him	to	the	town	square	with	the
intent	 of	 burning	 him	 at	 the	 stake.	 This	 was	 prevented	 by	 the	 local
priest	 of	 Szent	 István,	 who	 instead	 caused	 him	 to	 be	 taken	 to	 the
dungeon	of	the	Inquisition.	The	priest	examined	and	interrogated	him
for	several	hours,	but	was	unable	to	make	sense	of	a	word	of	the	man’s
foreign	gibberish.	The	local	mob,	by	now	in	a	frenzy,	finally	broke	in,
dragged	the	man	out,	and	burned	him	to	death.

I	leapt	to	my	feet.	We	stared	in	horror	at	the	entry.
“What	 have	 you	 done?”	 Tristan	 cried,	 practically	 leaping	 toward	 her.	 He

grabbed	her	by	the	shoulders	and	shook	her.	“You	killed	him!”
She	struggled	against	him.	“Unhand	me.	I	did	not	kill	him,	the	mob	did.	It

says	so	right	in	Wikipedia.	I’ll	bite	you	if	you	don’t	let	me	go.”
“What	did	you	do?”	he	demanded,	his	voice	 sounding	 strangled,	but	 then

released	her.
She	 shrugged,	 adjusting	her	dress.	 “I	 Sent	him	back	 to	1564.	This	 is	 all	 I

did.	What	happens	once	I	Send	him	is	his	responsibility.”
“Time	travel,”	I	said	hesitantly.	“You	can	send	people	back	in	time.”
“People	 can	be	moved	 to	other	 Strands,”	 she	 corrected	me.	 “It	 is	 usually

just	a	parlor	trick,	but	sometimes	it	is	useful	to	get	somebody’s	attention.”
“How	much	control	do	you	have	over	it?”	Tristan	demanded,	thinking	fast.

“Can	you	bring	him	back	here	before	the	crowd	gets	to	him?”
She	shook	her	head.	“No,	because	I	am	not	there	with	him.	If	he	had	asked

a	witch	in	Nagybörzsöny,	politely,	then	she	could	have	Sent	him	back	here.”
“Why	didn’t	you	mention	you	could	do	this?”	I	asked,	trying	pathetically	to

reap	some	useful	research	out	of	the	situation.	In	truth,	we	should	have	known
—it	was	in	a	couple	of	the	translated	documents,	but	always	dismissed	as	being
of	minor	significance.

She	 shrugged	her	 dismissive	 shrug.	 “It	 is	 not	 a	 practical	 skill,	 there	 are	 so
many	.	 .	 .	variables	 to	contend	with	that	 it	 is	of	no	practical	use.	It	 is	 seldom
worth	the	bother.”

“You	just	murdered	someone,”	Tristan	said.
“I	just	Sent	him	away,”	she	protested.	“He	was	very	rude	to	me.”
“That’s	 bullshit.	 You	 sent	 him	 there	 knowing	 he	 could	 die.	 You	 had

control	 over	 a	 situation	 that	 resulted	 in	 a	 man’s	 death,	 how	 is	 that	 not



murder?”
“There	 is	 never	 control	 when	 magic	 is	 involved,”	 she	 replied

philosophically.
Tristan	was	nearly	hyperventilating.	“Moments	ago	he	was	in	this	room	and

now	he’s	dead.	How	is	that	not	at	least	manslaughter?”
“He	was	going	to	shut	the	ODEC	down,”	she	said.	“I	had	to	stop	him.”
“You	could	have	just	turned	him	into	a	newt	or	something,”	I	said.
“You	already	know	I	can	do	that,”	said	Erszebet,	preening	again.	“I	wanted

to	 show	 you	 something	 new.”	To	Tristan	 :	 “Isn’t	 that	what	 you	 asked	 for?
Something	unexpected?	To,	what	was	your	phrase?	To	‘brand’	me?”

“This	 is	 a	 fucking	 catastrophe,”	 Tristan	 shouted,	 and	 kicked	 a	 chair.	 It
tumbled	across	the	room	to	the	far	wall,	where	the	seat	busted	apart	from	the
legs.	“Fuck!”

“He	was	so	disagreeable,”	said	Erszebet.
Tristan	put	his	hands	on	his	face	and	shuddered.	“How	the	fuck	am	I	ever

going	to	explain	this	to	.	.	.	oh,	Jesus	Christ,	you’ve	ruined	everything.	Your
own	 life.	Do	 you	 understand	 that?	 That’s	 it,	 it’s	 over.	 You’re	 done.	We’re
done	here.”	He	was	pacing	wildly	and	kept	making	the	same	anxious	gesture
of	throwing	his	hands	to	either	side	as	if	he’d	just	walked	into	a	spiderweb	and
were	trying	to	free	himself	of	the	gossamer.

“I	mean	it,”	he	said,	after	a	moment	of	silence.	“Leave.	Stokes,	get	out	of
here	before	you	get	embroiled	in	all	of	this.	Leave	her	here.”

“I	am	no	coward,	I	would	not	flee,”	said	Erszebet	haughtily.
“That’s	right.	You’re	going	to	prison,”	he	said	flatly.
“That	 will	 be	 more	 interesting	 than	 the	 nursing	 home,”	 she	 replied,

unfazed.
“Or	I	might	just	shoot	you	myself,”	he	said,	suddenly	weary.	He	uprighted

the	chair	he’d	destroyed,	discovered	it	was	broken,	sat	down	on	the	floor.
Erszebet,	perversely,	 looked	delighted	with	 this	declaration.	“Now	 you	 are

speaking	 like	 a	man	 of	 action.	 I	 have	 not	 seen	 such	 a	 side	 of	 you	 before.	 I
approve	of	it.”

“I	mean	it,	Stokes,”	he	said.	His	voice	was	husky.	“Just	get	out	of	here.	I’ve
got	to	tell	them	what	happened.”	He	put	his	hands	over	his	face	and	began	to
mutter	the	phrases	he	would	soon	be	typing	into	a	report.	“Diachronic	effects
confirmed	.	.	.	results	unpredictable	.	.	.	Casualties	.	.	.	one	KIA.”

Diachronic.	Meaning	“through	time.”
Department	of	Diachronic	.	.	.	something?



“Go	 ahead	 and	 fetch	 his	 minion.	 I	 will	 Send	 him	 somewhere	 nicer,”
Erszebet	offered.	“And	then	we	can	all	pretend	they	never	arrived	and	just	go
back	to	what	we	were	doing.	Only	now	we	will	do	more	interesting	things,
yes?”

Tristan	 pressed	 the	 heels	 of	 his	 hands	 hard	 against	 his	 closed	 eyes	 and
groaned.	“Shut	up,”	he	said.	“Stokes.	Go.	Really.”

“Go	where?”	I	asked.
He	moved	his	hands	away	from	his	eyes.	“Just	get	out	of	town,	let	me	deal

with	 this.	 Somehow.	 I’ll	 let	 you	 know	 when	 it’s	 safe	 to	 come	 home.	 Let
Professor	Oda	know	what	happened	so	he	doesn’t	show	up	in	the	middle	of	a
shitstorm	offering	to	help	with	something.”	He	sighed	heavily.	“On	your	way
out,	tell	Ramirez	to	come	down	here.	I	guess	I	start	by	breaking	the	news	to
him.”

I	hesitated.	I	had	an	instinct	to	go	to	him,	but	as	if	he	sensed	this,	he	made	a
waving-away	motion,	like	he	was	flicking	something	from	his	hand.	“Go,”	he
repeated.	 “I’m	 sorry	 I	 dragged	 you	 into	 this.	 I’ll	 be	 in	 touch	 when	 I	 can.
Thanks	for	everything.	Leave.	Now.”	He	turned	away	from	me.

Diachronicle	
DAYS	305–309	 (EARLY	JUNE,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	not	all	is	lost,	although	in	retrospect	perhaps	it	should	have
been

I	SHALL	SKIP	OVER	THE	miserable,	dreadful	limbo	of	the	next	few	days.	Suffice	it
to	 say:	 after	 alerting	 the	professor	 and	his	wife	of	 the	 tragic	developments,	 I
retreated	 to	 my	 third-floor	 walk-up	 and	 never	 went	 out	 except	 to	 buy
groceries.



I	checked	Facebook	obsessively	on	the	chance	Erszebet	would	reach	out	to
me	 that	 way.	 Nothing.	 I	 read	 the	 papers,	 actual	 and	 virtual;	 I	 ran	 Google
searches	 (so	what	 if	 they	 could	 trace	me,	 they	 already	knew	who	 I	was	 and
where	I	lived).	The	dead	taltos	in	Hungary	remained	an	established	historical
fact.	 Erszebet	 Karpathy—the	 Asset,	 Schneider	 had	 called	 her—remained
nonexistent.

I	sniffed	out	possible	job	openings	at	universities	so	far	below	my	pay	grade
that	no	prospective	boss	would	bother	contacting	Blevins	for	a	reference.

And—although	 this	 sounds	 dramatic—I	 suppose	 I	 grieved.	 I	 had	 thrown
myself	 (uncharacteristically)	 with	 such	 abandon	 into	 the	 most	 remarkable
adventure	 of	 my	 regimented	 little	 life,	 had	 reshaped	 myself	 as	 a	 trailblazer
alongside	a	man	I	realized	was	the	most	vital	human	being	I’d	ever	known	.	.	.
and	now	it	was	all	gone.	The	life,	the	trail,	the	trailblazing,	the	man.	I	was	an
unemployed	 academic	with	 a	 disastrous	 employment	 history	 and	 nothing	 to
offer	 the	 world	 but	 an	 uncanny	 facility	 with	 (mostly	 dead	 and	 dying)
languages.	Nothing	I	might	ever	do	would	come	close	to	seizing	my	attention
the	same	way.

After	what	was	easily	 the	 longest,	most	uncomfortable	 four	or	 five	days	of
my	life,	on	an	afternoon	when	I	was	so	close	to	going	mad	that	I	began	to	re-
alphabetize	 my	 vintage	 cookbook	 collection	 according	 to	 the	 Japanese
syllabary,	 just	 to	shut	my	brain	up	 .	 .	 .	 the	buzzer	 to	my	apartment	blared.	I
almost	jumped	out	of	my	skin.

I	went	to	the	door.	“Who	is	it?”	I	shouted	into	the	intercom.
“Stokes!”	 came	 a	 blessedly	 familiar	 voice	 through	 the	 crackle	 of	 crappy

wiring.
I	shouted	with	relief	as	I	buzzed	him	in;	he	bounded	up	the	stairs,	and	as	he

neared	me,	I	can’t	believe	I	did	this,	but	I	threw	my	arms	around	his	neck	and
gave	him	an	enormous	hug.	“Tristan!”	I	cried,	and	even	planted	a	wet	one	on
kissed	his	cheek.	“You’re	in	one	piece!”

Almost	equally	surprising,	he	was	hugging	me	back,	and	he	being	so	much
taller	 than	 I,	by	 the	 time	he	 reached	 the	 landing,	he	had	hoisted	me	off	 the
ground.	He	squeezed	me	hard	and	then	released	me.	“Better	than	one	piece,
even.	Good	to	see	you,	Stokes.”

“Where’s	Erszebet?	What’s	happened?”
“She’s	fine,	I’ll	explain.	What	do	you	have	for	beer?	Those	pencil-pushers

in	 DC	 all	 drink	 Bud	 Light.”	 He	 strode	 into	 the	 apartment.	 “Missed	 you,
Stokes.”	 He	 gestured	 grandly	 around	 the	 small	 room.	 “This	 is	 where	 it	 all



began.	Someday	there’ll	be	a	plaque	down	front	saying	that.”
“What’s	going	on?”	I	demanded,	opening	the	fridge.	From	the	door	I	took

the	last	Old	Tearsheet	Best	Bitter	from	the	six-pack	he’d	brought	up	the	first
day	we	met.	He	took	it	from	me,	found	the	opener,	and	a	moment	later	was
seated	happily	on	my	couch.	He	patted	the	spot	next	to	himself	and	I	sat.

“They	 were	 batshit-insane-happy	 about	 the	 diachronic	 effects,”	 he	 said.
“They’re	all	about	the	time	travel.”

“But	she	killed	someone!”	I	said.
“That’s	 why	 they’re	 all	 about	 the	 time	 travel.	 It	 got	 results.	 General

Schneider	gets	a	star	on	the	wall.”
“Huh?”
“He	has	been	declared	a	martyr	for	his	country.”
“How	is	that	helpful?	Are	they	going	to	trick	our	enemies	into	standing	in

an	ODEC	so	Erszebet	can	Send	them	to	the	moon?”
“See,	what	you	and	I	were	too	freaked	out	to	think	about	is	that	it’s	possible

to	 get	 sent	 back	 in	 time	 and	 not	 end	 up	 dead,”	 said	 Tristan.	 “It’s	 actually
possible	 to	 go	 back	 in	 time	 and	 do	 stuff.	 In	 fact,	 it	 may	 have	 happened
already.”

“What?”
He	sat	up	and	took	a	big	swig	of	his	beer.	“The	intel	community	has	been

noticing	some	inexplicable	shit	going	on,	but	it’s	a	little	less	inexplicable	if	it	is
the	case	that	foreign	powers	are	engaging	in	diachronic	operations.”

He	 gave	me	 a	moment	 to	 digest	 this.	 “DODO,”	 I	 said.	 “Department	 of
Diachronic	Operations.	You’ve	known	all	along,	haven’t	you?”

“We	have	suspected.	Now	we	know.”
“Are	you	serious?”
He	nodded.
“You	mean	there’s	another	Erszebet	out	there?”
He	shrugged.
“What	exactly	are	you	saying,	Tristan?”
“Well	.	.	.”	He	sat	up	straighter,	put	the	beer	on	the	coffee	table,	rested	his

forearms	 on	 his	 knees,	 and	 looked	 at	 me.	 “IARPA—the	 Intelligence
Advanced	Research	Projects	Agency,	which	has	been	running	this	thing	until
now—thinks	other	countries	might	have,	or	might	 soon	have,	 access	 to	 .	 .	 .
others	 like	Erszebet.	 Somehow.	Purely	 theoretical	 at	 this	 stage,	 but	 the	 time
travel	was	new	information,	and	all	of	a	sudden,	pieces	started	to	fit	together.
So	 in	 case	 certain	 other	 countries	 have	 found	 their	 own	 Erszebets	 and	 are



sending	people	back	in	time	to	fiddle	with	things,	the	DNI	doesn’t	want	to	see
a	Magic	Gap	opening	up.”

“DNI?”
“Director	 of	 National	 Intelligence.	 General	 Octavian	 Frink.	 Reports

directly	 to	 POTUS.	 The	 Director	 of	 IARPA	 reports	 to	 Frink.	 General
Schneider,	God	rest	his	soul,	worked	for	a	black-budget	arm	of	IARPA.	And
what	 has	 happened	 now—less	 than	 twenty-four	 hours	 ago,	 Stokes—is	 that
DODO	has	been	bumped	up	the	org	chart.	Now	it’s	directly	under	General
Frink,	with	a	dotted	line	to	Dr.	Rudge	at	IARPA.”

“Dotted	line?”
“It	just	means	Rudge	is	an	advisor.	We	keep	him	in	the	loop.”
“Who’s	‘we’?”
“Well	.	.	.	I	have	been	promoted	to	lieutenant	colonel	and	made	the	acting

head	 of	 the	 Department	 of	 Diachronic	 Operations.	 I’ve	 been	 tasked	 with
taking	 the	ODEC	 and	Erszebet	 to	 the	 next	 level,	 focusing	 entirely	 on	 time
travel.”

For	 a	 moment	 I	 was	 so	 amazed	 by	 this	 reversal	 of	 fortune	 I	 couldn’t
respond.	Then:	“Great!	So	.	.	.	you’re	not	in	trouble.”

“I’m	not	in	trouble,”	he	said	with	a	small,	contented	smile.
“Wow,	Tristan!”	I	hooked	one	arm	around	his	neck	and	gave	him	a	side-

hug.	He	grinned	but	took	it	a	little	stiffly.	“That’s	amazing.	Erszebet’s	willing
to	cooperate?”

He	rolled	his	eyes,	but	did	not	look	too	worried.	“We’re	working	on	that.
The	 Asset	 likes	 to	 be	 pandered	 to	 by	 powerful	 men	 in	 suits.	 She	 likes
Constantine	 Rudge	 because	 he	 wears	 cuff	 links	 and	 went	 to	 Oxford.	 So	 I
think	I	can	chart	a	course.”

“Well	then,	congratulations.	When	do	you	start?”
“As	soon	as	we	can	get	ourselves	to	DC	for	the	swearing-in.”
“You	and	Erszebet.”
He	gave	me	a	funny	look.	“Stokes.	We’re	going	to	be	sending	people	back

in	time.”	He	jerked	his	left	thumb	over	his	shoulder	as	if	that’s	where	back-in-
time	was.

“Right,	I	got	that.”
“So?”
“So,	what?”
“So	who	do	you	think	is	qualified	to	go	back	in	time?”
I	shrugged.	“Athletes?	Assassins?”	He	was	shaking	his	head.	“Historians?”



“Stokes!”	He	laughed.	“Whoever	goes	has	to	be	able	to	function	in	a	setting
where	 nobody	 speaks	 modern	 American	 English.	 We	 need	 polyglots	 and
linguists.	We	need”—he	pointed—“you.”

I	stared	at	him,	eyes	wide.	I	bet	my	mouth	dropped	open	too.
“I	need	you,”	he	added,	realizing	I	was	incapable	of	speech	at	that	moment.

“And	I’m	pretty	sure	you’re	otherwise	unemployed.”
Although	 safely	 seated,	 I	 suddenly	 felt	 so	 lightheaded	 I	put	 a	hand	on	 the

coffee	table	to	steady	myself.
“So	what	do	you	 say?”	he	asked,	with	a	comradely	grin.	“I	can’t	promise

you’ll	get	to	practice	your	conversational	Sumerian,	but	you	never	know.”
I	felt	like	I	was	on	the	crest	of	a	roller	coaster,	just	about	to	plunge	down	a

steep,	joyfully	terrifying	thrill	ride.	I	would	have	to	be	mad	to	agree	to	such	a
thing.	 “You	want	 to	 send	me	 back	 in	 time?”	 I	 heard	myself	 say,	 not	 really
sounding	like	myself.

“Well,	 not	 permanently,”	 he	 said.	 “I’d	 miss	 you	 too	much,	 Stokes.”	 God
damn	that	grin	of	his.	And	he	even	roughed	up	my	hair,	the	bastard.

“When	do	we	leave?”	I	asked.



PART
TWO



MATERIALIZING	 WAS	 FAR	 more	 startling	 than	 any	 practice	 session	 we’d
attempted	 in	the	ODEC,	chiefly	because	not	only	was	I	 (as	usual)	extremely
disoriented	and	confused,	but	I	landed	completely	naked.	Outside.

My	balance	wobbly,	 I	 felt	warm	grass	 and	 earth	under	my	 feet,	 and	 then
collapsed	 at	once	 sideways	 so	 that	 the	 smell	of	moist,	 sun-warmed	 soil	 filled
my	nostrils.	 I	 spent	a	 few	moments	 just	breathing.	Consciousness—the	here-
and-now	 of	 the	 human	 mind—is	 linked	 to	 the	 body’s	 surroundings	 by	 a
thousand	 strands,	most	 of	which	we’re	 never	 aware	 of	 until	 all	 of	 them	 are
severed.	 The	 modern	 analogy	 would	 be	 to	 what	 happens	 when	 an	 errant
backhoe	 slices	 through	 a	 fat	 underground	 cable,	 in	 an	 instant	 cutting	 off
countless	 phone	 calls	 and	 Internet	 connections.	 One’s	 senses	 are	 always
tracking	sights,	sounds,	smells,	and	sensations.	When	a	witch	Sends	you,	all	of
those	are	interrupted,	and	your	mind	doesn’t	know	what	to	do	with	itself	until
it	has	knit	itself	into	its	new	surroundings.	It	takes	a	minute.

Sun,	dappled	by	 the	branches	of	 a	 tree,	warmed	my	 left	 side,	 as	my	 right
side	 felt	 the	 bumps	 of	 grass	 and	 earth,	 scattered	 twigs,	 knotty	 roots.	 As	my
consciousness	 adjusted	 to	 the	new	environment,	 I	noticed	 an	 absence	of	 the
constant	 ambient	 noise	 of	 modern	 civilization.	 In	 its	 place	 was	 tremendous
birdsong	and	the	buzz	of	insects.

A	whizzing	noise	droned	over	me,	barely	overhead,	like	a	huge	insect,	and
terminated	in	a	 thunk.	I	 looked	over	to	see	an	arrow	that	had	just	embedded
itself	in	the	protruding	root	of	a	huge	tree.	Its	fletchings	of	grey	feathers	were
just	a	vibrating	blur.	It	would	have	hit	me	if	I	hadn’t	toppled	over.

Immediately	 the	 hazy	 sun	was	 blocked	 by	 a	 tall	 figure	 looming	 over	me.
Naked,	dizzy,	and	unarmed,	I	could	not	protect	myself	from	him.	Erszebet	had
just	sent	me	to	my	death	as	surely	as	she’d	sent	General	Schneider.	What	fools
we’d	been	 to	 think	otherwise!	He	 stepped	directly	over	me,	 standing	astride
me,	 as	 if	 I	 were	 not	 there,	 his	 long	 robes	 covering	 my	 naked	 middle.	 A
minister?	A	chieftain?

But	 the	 figure	 shouted	 in	 a	 woman’s	 voice,	 deep	 and	 stern:	 “Samuel!
Hunting	is	not	for	rabbits,	you	must	trap	them.	We	have	told	you	so	already.
Save	your	arrows	for	the	deer	and	do	not	shoot	them	so	close	to	my	house.”	A
native	English	speaker,	with	a	lilt	almost	Appalachian	or	Irish.	A	distant	voice,
a	boy’s,	plaintive,	giving	her	some	back-sass.

“Samuel,	you	saw	no	such	thing,	it	is	your	devilish	fancy	getting	the	better
of	you	again.	You	are	disobedient.	Go	in	to	your	mother.”	A	pause.	“Go	in	to



your	mother,	I	say.	You	may	fetch	your	arrow	back	later.	It	is	easy	to	find—in
the	 root	 of	 the	 tree.”	And	 then,	 a	whisper	 in	my	direction:	 “Do	not	move
until	I	tell	you	to.”	And	back	up:	“Samuel!	Now!”

A	 long	 pause,	 as	 I	 began	 to	 collect	 my	 wits.	 Massachusetts	 Bay	 Colony.
August	1640.	The	village	of	Muddy	River,	 someday	 to	be	more	 attractively
renamed	Brookline.	Yes,	it	was	coming	into	focus	now.

Finally,	the	woman	stepped	back	from	me,	and	I	could	see	her	clearly.	She
was	a	Puritan,	in	a	fitted	dark	blue	top	and	long	skirt,	and	a	simple	white	cap.
A	large	white	collar	covered	her	 throat	and	shoulders.	 I	had	expected	her	 to
look	like	this,	and	yet	seeing	it	was	dizzying.	She	was	not	wearing	a	costume,
she	was	simply	wearing	her	clothes.	I	was	here.	It	was	happening.

I	would	judge	her	to	be	about	forty	years	of	age,	but	I	knew	her	from	our
research	 to	be	 closer	 to	 thirty.	 She	gave	me	 a	 critical	 look.	 “Why	have	you
come?”	she	demanded.	“This	 is	no	place	 for	us.	How	thoughtless	of	you,	 to
appear	where	 anyone	may	 see	you	or	harm	you.	That	 arrow	would	hit	you
another	time.	And	the	boy	saw	you.	You	have	made	me	a	liar	to	say	he	didn’t.
If	he	calls	us	out,	we’ll	both	be	hanged.”

“I	.	.	.	I’m	sorry,	Goody	Fitch,	I	.	.	.”
“Stay	down,”	she	said,	completely	unsurprised	that	I	called	her	by	name.	“I

will	get	something	to	cover	you.”	She	turned	and	walked	out	of	my	view.
I	 raised	 my	 head	 a	 little.	 The	 silence	 and	 birdsong	 continued	 their

counterpoint,	and	in	the	distance	now	I	could	hear,	and	smell,	a	river.	The	still
air	had	 the	 clinging,	heavy	humidity	of	high	 summer.	 I	was	 a	 stone’s	 throw
from	a	small	wattle-and-daub	house	with	a	thatched	roof,	a	small	door,	but	no
windows	on	the	back	wall.	A	hundred	paces	away	in	either	direction,	barely	in
view,	were	similar	dwellings.	The	land	had	mostly	been	cleared,	with	big	axe-
scarred	 tree	 stumps	 still	 protruding	 from	 tilled	 ground	here	 and	 there,	 but	 a
few	huge	old	trees,	too	much	effort	to	chop	down,	remained	scattered	about.	I
was	beneath	one	such,	a	sugar	maple.

Behind	 the	 house	was	 a	 fine,	 verdant	 kitchen	 garden,	 and	 beyond	 that,	 a
forest,	 densely	 leafed,	mostly	 oak,	 some	 pine.	 The	 boy	whom	Goody	 Fitch
had	 scolded	 had	 been	 to	 the	 right	 of	 me—to	 the	 south,	 I	 realized,
superimposing	the	map	of	Muddy	River	over	what	I	could	see.	That	meant	it
was	 the	Griggs	 family.	 Samuel	Griggs	 .	 .	 .	 the	 name	was	 not	 familiar,	 but	 I
hadn’t	memorized	the	whole	village,	just	enough	that	I	could	passably	seem	to
be	familiar	with	it.	Perhaps	he	would	die	before	he	reached	maturity.

It	was	a	 settlement	of	 fewer	 than	 two	hundred	 souls,	 so	of	course	 I	could



not	convince	anyone	that	I	belonged	here.	But	these	lots	were	large—a	dozen
acres	or	more—and	so	it	should	have	been	easy	to	arrive	unnoticed.	That	had
been	the	intention:	I	was	to	arrive	on	the	property	of	someone	we	believed	to
be	 a	 witch,	 out	 of	 sight	 of	 prying	 eyes.	 A	 fine	 scheme	 if	 there	 were	 no
complications.

Dear	reader:	there	are	always	complications.	Every	fucking	time.
Goody	Fitch	returned	with	a	thin	dun-colored	woolen	blanket	and	offered

it	down	to	me.	“Come	inside	quickly,”	she	said.	“We	are	about	the	same	size,
I	 will	 clothe	 you.	 And	 then	 you	must	 leave	 quickly	 in	 case	 Goody	 Griggs
comes	here,	set	on	by	her	son.”	A	pause,	as	I	gathered	the	blanket	around	my
shoulders	and	carefully	got	to	my	feet.	She	did	not	offer	a	hand	to	assist,	 just
stood	watching	me,	evaluating.	“But	before	you	go,	you	will	tell	me	why	you
are	here.”

“I’m	here	on	an—”
Her	eyes	flicked	sideways,	noticing	some	distant	movement.	“Inside.”
Her	caution	seemed	extreme;	we	were	in	the	middle	of	the	wilderness.	But

I	pursed	my	lips	closed	to	reassure	her	and	followed	her	around	the	house,	past
an	axe	resting	on	a	pile	of	recently	split	 firewood.	Rosemary	bushes	grew	to
either	 side	 of	 the	 door,	 flanked	 by	 chamomile	 plants.	 A	 remarkable
coincidence:	Rebecca	East-Oda’s	cellar	hatchway	was	framed	by	the	same	set
of	plants.

The	atmosphere	in	the	house	was	far	more	pleasant	than	I’d	expected.	The
floor	 was	 pounded	 dirt,	 and	 therefore	 both	 cool	 and	 cooling.	 There	 were
glowing	 coals	 on	 the	 hearth	 but	 the	 room	was	 not	 hot,	 as	 the	 southward-
facing	door	stood	open.	Two	windows—one	east,	one	west—were	unglazed,
so	a	very	feeble	breeze	could	move	through	the	space.	Beside	the	hearth	was
an	open	doorway	into	a	back	room,	where	I	saw	beds.

This	main	room	was	uncluttered	and	unadorned,	every	item	in	it	neat	and
practical	and	made	of	wood:	two	small	benches,	a	stool,	one	central	table	and
another	along	the	wall;	two	chests.

“Sit,”	 said	Goody	 Fitch,	 gesturing	 toward	 the	 stool.	 She	 disappeared	 into
the	back	room	and	returned	a	brief	moment	later	with	clothes	draped	over	one
arm:	a	sleeveless	white	linen	smock,	a	reddish	skirt	and	matching	waistcoat,	a
simple	 decorative	 collar,	 and	 a	 long	 apron	 (somewhat	 stained).	 In	 her	 other
hand,	she	held	a	linen	cap,	a	small	drawstring	bag,	and	a	belt.

“Of	course	I	have	no	extra	stays,”	she	said.	This	I	knew	to	be	the	equivalent
of	 a	 corset.	 “This	 is	 the	 best	 I	 can	manage	 for	 you.	My	 extra	 petticoats	 are



wrapped	away,	so	you	must	do	without	them,	or	stockings.	I	have	an	extra	set
of	boots,	tattered	but	useable.	They	are	by	the	door.”

“Thank	you,”	I	 said,	 taking	the	clothes	she	offered.	I	began	to	put	on	the
smock.	“So	you	know,	I	am	not	a	witch.	I	was	sent	here	by	a	witch	to	fulfill	a
task.	Would	you	consider	helping	me?”

She	 tch’d	 without	 responding	 directly,	 making	 it	 clear	 this	 was	 an
imposition.	 “Are	 you	hungry?”	 she	 asked,	 as	 if	 to	 avoid	 the	 topic	of	magic.
“Thirsty?	I	have	ale,	and	there	is	also	some	meal	I	can	cook.	I	cannot	give	you
any	wheat	as	my	husband	will	notice	the	absence,	but	he	does	not	pay	as	much
attention	to	the	maize.”

“The	maize	 is	more	 plentiful	 and	 therefore	 less	 dear,”	 I	 said	 deliberately,
fastening	the	smock	closed	at	the	neck.

“Yes.”	She	crossed	her	arms	and	stared	at	me.	“Are	you	from	elsewhere	in
the	colony,	that	you	know	that?”

“No.	You	are	.	.	.	historical	to	me,”	I	said.	She	nodded,	understanding.	“Let
me	tell	you	my	errand?”

“I’ll	not	stop	you	from	speaking,”	she	said,	going	to	a	barrel	in	the	corner
and	taking	off	the	wooden	lid,	then	scooping	out	cornmeal	and	putting	it	into
an	 iron	 pot.	 “But	 do	 not	 assume	 I’ll	 help	 you.	 ’Tis	 impossible	 to	 do	magic
safely	here.	These	halfwits	 are	 all	 obsessed	with	Satan.”	She	poured	 a	 frothy
liquid	into	the	pot	from	a	pewter	pitcher,	and	then	attached	the	pot	to	an	iron
arm	that	hung	over	the	hearth	coals.	She	raked	the	coals	and	blew	on	them	a
little.	 “This	 will	 take	 some	 time,”	 she	 said.	 “Give	 you	 a	 chance	 to	 explain
yourself.”

It	would	have	been	extremely	rude	for	me	to	say	so,	but	I	was	in	no	hurry
to	 be	 fed.	My	 digestion	 was	 a	 mess.	 Our	 research	 into	 the	 fate	 of	 the	 late
General	Schneider	had	uncovered	evidence	of	an	epidemic	that	had	started	in
the	 village	 of	Nagybörzsöny	 at	 the	 same	 time	 as	 his	 brief	 stay	 there.	 It	was
some	sort	of	bowel	complaint	that	had	taken	a	number	of	lives	before	burning
itself	out.	The	village’s	 isolation	had	prevented	 it	 from	spreading	 farther,	and
the	surviving	locals	had,	of	course,	attributed	it	to	witchcraft.	But	the	lesson	to
us	was	obvious:	time	travelers	could	infect	historical	communities	with	diseases
to	 which	 they	 had	 no	 immunity,	 and	 vice	 versa.	 So	 I’d	 been	 given	 every
vaccination	and	antiviral	drug	known	to	modern	science	before	stepping	into
the	ODEC,	to	protect	myself.	And	to	protect	the	people	of	Muddy	River,	I’d
taken	a	course	of	antibiotics	that	had	killed	everything	in	my	gut,	and	scrubbed
with	 disinfectant	 immediately	 before	 the	mission.	 I	wasn’t	 sure	what	would



happen	if	I	ate	Goody	Fitch’s	gruel.
I	 began	 to	 tie	 the	 skirt	 at	my	waist,	 and	opened	my	mouth	 to	 speak,	 but

before	I	could	say	anything	she	spoke	again,	and	as	she	did	so,	also	came	to	fuss
over	my	skirt.

“They’ve	been	mad	with	witch-hunt	zeal	because	’38	nearly	killed	us	all,”
she	 said.	“Muddy	River	had	 just	been	chartered,	we	had	all	barely	begun	 to
build	our	homes	and	clear	our	gardens,	and	we	were	almost	destroyed	before
we	could	take	root.	We	had	to	plant	 the	corn	twice	because	 it	 rotted	 in	 the
frozen	ground,	then	the	spring	was	too	wet,	the	summer	too	hot,	and	full	of
tempests,	 then	 it	 rained	all	 autumn	until	October,	when	 the	 snow	came	and
never	left.	Many	other	settlements	along	the	Charles	did	not	survive	the	year.
They	attributed	Mother	Nature’s	handiwork	to	witchcraft,	and	the	survival	of
the	village	to	the	Lord’s	Grace.	I	 saved	the	village,	but	 they	do	not	know	it,
and	 they	may	never	 know	 it.	 If	 they	 even	 suspected,	 they	would	not	 thank
me,	 they	would	kill	me	 for	witchcraft	 because	 they	believe	witchcraft	 is	 the
work	of	 the	devil.	Stupid	 folk.”	She	tied	the	drawstring	sharply	 tight	around
my	waist.	“That	was	 the	very	year	 they	excommunicated	Anne	Hutchinson,
one	of	the	best	among	them.	And	then	brought	in	a	slave-ship.	And	they	call
themselves	Christians.	Thick-waisted	you	are,	for	your	size,”	she	said.

“I	did	not	grow	up	wearing	stays.	No	women	of	my	time	did.”
She	 made	 a	 bemused	 sound,	 and	 then	 continued	 her	 monologue	 as	 she

helped	me	into	the	waistcoat.	“Stab	themselves	in	the	foot.	I	cannot	imagine
this	place	will	ever	amount	to	anything.”

“Why	did	you	come,	then?”	I	asked.
“I	 wanted	 to	 meet	 new	 witches,”	 she	 said.	 “I	 am	 from	 a	 family	 of

chroniclers	 and	 sages,	 I	 have	 always	 been	 encouraged	 to	 learn	 as	 much	 as
possible.	 I	 was	 curious	 to	 compare	 information	 with	 the	 witches	 here—I
assumed	there	must	be	some.	My	husband	was	never	a	Puritan	but	he	favored
their	thinking	and	was	anxious	to	be	gone	from	England	for	his	own	reasons.
So	we	sailed	to	Boston.	Later	we	took	the	first	chance	to	settle	away	from	the
peninsula.	 I	had	great	hopes.	But	 the	 settlers	 are	 all	 such	 sanctimonious	 asses
that	none	of	the	native	witches	will	speak	to	me	about	witchcraft,	or	anything
else.	They	fear	I	will	try	to	lead	them	away	from	their	own	gods	and	beliefs,
that	is	how	relentless	and	irritating	these	Puritans	are.	There	are	so	many	plants
here	 we	 don’t	 have	 back	 home,	 and	 I	 fain	 would	 learn	 them,	 but	 I	 find
nobody	who	can	teach	me.”

That	was	my	 in.	“Like	partridge-berry?”	I	 said	as	casually	as	possible.	“Or



perhaps	you	still	call	it	squaw-vine?”
She	stopped	suddenly	as	she	was	buttoning	the	waistcoat,	and	then	resumed.

“How	do	you	know	about	that?”	she	asked.	“That	is	the	very	plant	I	am	most
keen	 to	 understand.	 It	 seems	 to	 me	 it	 requires	 magic	 to	 find	 out	 all	 its
possibilities.”

“And	cranberries,”	I	added,	“but	maybe	those	are	easier	to	understand.”
“Cranberries	 are	magnificent,”	 she	 agreed.	 “And	 the	 elderflower,	which	 I

know	from	its	cousin	in	England.	But	the	squaw-vine	is	something	else	again.”
“It	grows	near	pine	 trees,”	 I	 said.	“Do	you	know	that	much	as	yet?”	She

nodded	 cautiously,	 looking	 at	 me	 with	 new	 interest.	 Thank	 you,	 Rebecca,	 I
thought.	Well	done.

“I	know	a	lot	about	it,”	I	continued,	in	an	offering	tone.	“How	and	when
best	to	harvest	it,	what	parts	of	the	plant	are	most	useful—I	know	a	great	deal,
although	not	of	course	what	can	only	be	known	through	magic,	since	I’m	not
a	witch.	But	I	can	help	you.	If	you’ll	help	me.”

She	was	 tempted	 by	 this	 offer,	 I	 could	 tell,	 but	 remained	 uncertain.	 “Do
you	understand	the	danger	you	are	putting	both	of	us	in?”	she	asked.

“I	 also	know	 some	 interesting	 things	 about	 skullcap,”	 I	 added.	“And	bee-
balm.”

She	shook	her	head.	“I	know	them	already.	They	haven’t	the	scent	of	the
squaw-vine.	They’re	 just	medicinal,	 not	magic.	The	 squaw-vine	 calls	 to	me.
But	in	a	language	I	do	not	speak.”

“We’ll	 fix	that,”	I	said.	“Help	me	with	my	errand,	and	when	I	return,	I’ll
tell	you	everything	I	know.	And	 then	you’ll	 send	me	back	 to	where	 I	came
from.”

A	pause.	“I	will,”	said	Goody	Fitch.	“What	are	you	called?”
“Melisande,”	I	said.	“I	am	unmarried.”
“I	am	Goody	Fitch,”	she	said.	“My	Christian	name	is	Mary.”
“I	know,”	I	said,	then	briefly	told	her	my	errand:	that	I	must	obtain	a	copy

of	the	newly	published	Bay	Psalm	Book,	coop	it	safely	into	a	barrel	to	protect
it	 from	the	elements,	and	then	bury	it	 in	a	very	precise	spot	in	a	field	to	the
northwest	of	the	palisaded	village	of	Cambridge.

Instead	of	questioning	why	 I	needed	 to	have	 the	book,	or	 to	bury	 it,	 she
simply	asked,	“Why	there,	particularly?”

I	considered	how	fully	to	answer.	“That	is	where	a	descendant	of	yours	will
eventually	 live,”	I	said.	“Someone	I	know	in	my	time.	They	need	a	copy	of
the	book.	If	I	do	not	.	.	.	reserve	one	for	them	now,	they	will	never	be	able	to



get	one.”
To	my	 surprise,	 she	 responded	 to	 this	 news	with	 an	outburst	 of	 laughter.

“How	 preposterous	 to	 imagine	 civilization	 ever	 flourishing	 in	 such	 a
backwater!”	she	said.	“And	how	disappointing	to	think	my	own	begotten	will
not	have	the	sense	to	get	out	of	such	a	place!”

I	 bristled	 on	 behalf	 of	my	 adopted	 city.	 “Cambridge	 becomes	 one	 of	 the
greatest	 places	 of	 learning	 in	 the	 world,”	 I	 said—rashly,	 for	 it	 is	 always	 ill-
advised	to	speak	of	future	times.	“It	easily	rivals,	arguably	outshines,	its	British
namesake.”

“Bollocks,”	she	said,	amused.	“A	terrified	village	with	the	greatest	invention
in	 the	world—a	 printing	 press!—and	 all	 they	 do	with	 it	 is	 publish	 religious
nothings.	The	only	school	in	the	New	World	and	what	do	they	teach?	Only
religion.	And	only	their	religion.”

“Well,	 in	 fairness,”	 I	 said,	 “if	 it	 weren’t	 for	 their	 religion,	 none	 of	 this
would	exist	right	now.	You	wouldn’t	be	here.”

“I’d	be	in	Virginia,”	she	agreed	briskly.	“Where	the	religion	is	mercantilism.
It	is	a	marginally	preferable	religion,	although	the	Americans	suffer	more	under
it	than	they	do	under	Christianity.	Anyhow	.	.	.	we’ve	finished	dressing	you,
so	let’s	not	tarry.	Tell	me	directly	what	you	need	from	me.”

“Most	of	 all,	 I	need	you	 to	 send	me	back	 to	where	 I	 came	 from	when	 I
return	here,”	I	said.	“And	if	you	can	point	me	the	way	to	Cambridge,	I’d	be
grateful.”

“Easily	done.	You’ll	need	toll	 for	 the	 ferry,”	 she	 said,	and	went	 to	one	of
the	chests	against	the	wall.	There	was	a	small	locked	box	sitting	atop	it,	about
the	size	of	a	breadbox;	she	opened	this	with	a	key	that	she	wore	around	her
neck	on	a	thin	leather	strap.	From	the	box,	she	removed	two	tiny	spheres,	one
a	 lead	musket	 ball,	 the	 other	 larger,	much	 lighter	 in	 color	 and	weight,	 and
highly	polished.	“Each	of	these	will	suffice	for	the	ferry	toll	in	one	direction.	I
would	give	you	some	commodity	money,	but	my	husband	keeps	track	of	that
and	he	would	notice	the	absence	of	a	cabbage	head.”

“Have	you	a	shovel	I	might	borrow?”
She	 thought	 a	 moment.	 “Yes.	 But	 ’tis	 a	 strange	 thing	 to	 meet	 a	 young

woman	roving	the	land	by	herself,	 stranger	yet	 if	 she	is	brandishing	a	shovel.
Say	you	are	my	cousin	newly	arrived	from	Shropshire	and	you	are	returning	it
to	Goodman	Porter	 in	Watertown,	you	will	need	to	take	that	road	anyhow.
There	is	none	in	Cambridge	know	me	enough	to	ask	questions	that	would	get
you	 into	 trouble.	 I	 think	 there	be	 a	 cooper	 there,	very	near	 the	bookseller’s



shop.	I	can	give	you	nothing	to	buy	his	services,	though,	nor	any	way	to	get
the	book.”

“I	don’t	suppose	I	could	ask	you	to	assist	me	magically?”
“You	 can	 ask	whatever	 you	wish,	 but	 I	will	 not	 risk	 it.	 I	would	 have	 in

England,	 if	 I	 felt	 your	 cause	was	 just.	Not	here.	 Still,	 I	wish	you	 luck.	You
must	be	desperate	in	your	cause	if	it	forces	you	to	come	here.	Fortify	yourself
with	the	maize-meal	and	then	be	off.”

AS	I	ATE	 the	 tasteless,	dry,	crappy	meal,	which	would	make	Cream	of	Wheat
seem	 like	 a	 gourmet	 dessert,	 I	 reviewed	 what	 was	 to	 happen	 next.	 Which
meant	reviewing	what	had	happened	previously—in	the	distant	future,	I	mean.

The	day	after	I’d	accepted	Tristan’s	offer,	just	after	sunrise,	the	whole	crew
had	come	back	together	at	Hanscom	Field,	an	Air	Force	base–cum–executive
jet	terminal	northwest	of	Boston.	For	me,	air	travel	had	always	meant	Logan
Airport.	But	it	turns	out	that	the	kind	of	people	who	fly	around	in	private	jets
fly	 through	Hanscom	Field—as	 do	 air	 travelers	 from	 the	 parallel	 universe	 of
the	 military.	 I,	 Tristan,	 Erszebet,	 Oda-sensei,	 and	 even,	 to	 my	 amazement,
Rebecca	piled	onto	a	plane	that	fit	somewhere	in	the	Venn	diagram	crossover
between	 those	 two	 worlds,	 being	 a	 small	 eight-seater	 jet	 with	 military
markings.	Before	we’d	even	had	time	to	explore	the	plane’s	comforts,	we	were
landing	at	Reagan	National	Airport	across	the	river	from	Washington,	DC.	En
route	 Tristan	 had	monopolized	 the	 plane’s	 washroom	 for	 a	 little	 while	 and
changed	 into	his	Army	uniform—the	 first	 time	 I	had	 seen	him	 so	 attired.	 It
was	 the	dress	uniform	with	necktie	and	all	kinds	of	 little	badges	and	 insignia
that	might	as	well	have	been	a	secret	code	to	me.	He	looked,	if	I	may	say	it,
swashbuckling,	in	a	repressed	sort	of	way.

I	had	been	assuming	a	government	van	would	pick	us	up	at	the	airport,	but
instead	Tristan	 led	us	across	 the	skybridge	to	the	Metro	station	and	dealt	out
keycards.	 “Faster	 than	 fighting	 traffic—it’s	 only	 three	 stops	 up	 the	 line!”	 he
explained.	We	got	on	the	next	northbound	train,	passed	through	Crystal	City
a	few	minutes	later,	and	shortly	pulled	into	the	Trapezoid	City	stop.	I	picked
up	my	bag	and	got	ready	to	detrain,	but	Tristan	caught	my	eye	and	shook	his
head.	 “Trapezoid	 City	 is	 a	 shopping	mall,	 Stokes—not	 the	 real	 deal.	 If	 we
have	time,	we	can	go	there	when	we’re	done!”

Erszebet	was	bemused	by	the	Metro,	and	the	Metro	was	fascinated	by	her.
To	 date,	 we	 hadn’t	 been	 out	 together	 much	 in	 public.	 So	 I’d	 had	 few



opportunities	 to	 see	 how	 random	 strangers	 reacted	 to	 her	 looks.	 Reader,	 I
don’t	 think	 it	would	 be	 boastful	 for	me	 to	 say	 that	 I	 am	not	 a	 bad-looking
woman.	I	get	my	share	of	looks	and	compliments.	But	sitting	near	Erszebet	on
a	subway	train	was	enough	to	make	me	believe	that	invisibility	potions	were	a
real	thing	and	that	she	had	slipped	one	into	my	coffee.

The	next	station	was	called	simply	TRAPEZOID,	but	I	could	have	guessed	as
much	from	the	fact	that	more	than	half	the	people	getting	on	and	off	the	train
were	dressed	in	military	uniforms	of	one	service	or	another.	We	all	 followed
Tristan	 up	 the	 escalators	 to	 a	 bus	 terminal	 complex	 aboveground,	 and	 from
there	 to	 a	 huge,	modern	 security	 checkpoint—a	 separate	 facility	 in	 its	 own
right,	 built	 far	 enough	 from	 the	 subdued	 limestone	 façade	 of	 the	Trapezoid
proper	 to	 provide	 a	 security	 buffer.	We’d	 arrived	 during	 the	morning	 rush,
and	so	ended	up	standing	in	 line	for	a	 few	minutes—long	enough	for	me	to
stare	across	the	parking	lots	at	the	front	of	the	famous	building,	and	to	develop
a	 sense	 of	 this-can’t-be-happening	 unreality	 every	 bit	 as	 strong	 as	 anything
associated	with	the	ODEC.	As	the	headquarters	of	the	American	military	and
presumed	ground	 zero	 for	 any	hostile	military	 strike,	 the	Trapezoid	had,	 for
me,	always	been	more	mythic	 than	real.	Like	Mount	Olympus	or	 the	River
Styx,	it	was	a	thing	alluded	to	in	books	and	movies,	or	used	in	synecdoche	to
mean	the	American	military	as	a	whole.	The	terrorists	had	targeted	it	on	9/11,
and	I	could	see	part	of	the	memorial	that	had	been	built	on	the	side	where	the
plane	had	crashed	into	it.	In	a	weird	way,	it	was	almost	a	letdown	to	see	that	it
really	existed	and	that	it	was,	at	the	end	of	the	day,	just	another	wartime	office
building	with	windows	and	doors	like	any	other.

Lacking	 normal	 credentials	 such	 as	 a	 birth	 certificate,	 Erszebet	 had	 to	 be
whisked	 through	 a	 special	 lane	 by	 aides	 who	 had	 come	 down	 to	 meet	 us.
Tristan	 stayed	with	 her.	 The	 rest	 of	 us	 presented	 our	Massachusetts	 driver’s
licenses	 and	 got	 scanned	 for	 concealed	 weapons.	 Erszebet’s	 idiosyncratic
1950s-era	wardrobe	left	very	few	places	where	she	could	have	hid	anything.	I
suppose	they	x-rayed	her	clutch.	A	lot	of	walking	ensued.	Erszebet	in	her	heels
and	Frank	Oda	with	the	weight	of	his	years	were	not	particularly	fast	walkers,
so	 we	 dawdled	 and	 shuffled	 down	 endless	 corridors	 in	 the	 bowels	 of	 the
Trapezoid	until	we	came	to	an	elevator	that	took	us	up	to	a	nicer-than-normal
office	 zone.	 “The	Acute	Angle,”	Tristan	 explained,	 “the	nice	one,	with	 the
view	over	the	river.”

Anywhere	else	they’d	have	called	it	what	it	was:	a	corner	office	suite	on	the
top	 floor.	 It	 was	 nice,	 old-school,	 paneled	 in	 wood,	 hung	 with	 pictures	 of



battleships	 from	 the	 Age	 of	 Sail,	Washington	 at	 Valley	 Forge,	 and	 the	 like.
After	 passing	 through	 a	 couple	 of	 layers	 of	 receptionists	 and	 aides,	 and
surrendering	our	electronic	devices,	we	were	ushered	into	a	conference	room,
invited	to	take	seats,	and	plied	with	ice	water.	Erszebet	insisted	on	water	with
no	ice	and	gave	us	all	a	piece	of	her	mind	about	the	American	obsession	with
putting	ice	cubes	into	everything.

We	waited	there	for	twenty	minutes	or	so,	which	Tristan	seemed	to	think
was	 only	 mildly	 remarkable.	 Then	 another	 door—not	 the	 one	 we’d	 come
through—was	opened	by	an	aide,	and	in	walked	a	man	in	a	civilian	business
suit.	Even	I,	with	very	little	taste	in	clothes,	could	tell	that	this	was	a	fine	suit
indeed.	“Dr.	Rudge!”	Tristan	said.	“Good	to	see	you	again!”

Rudge	was	 trailed	by	a	couple	of	younger	civilian	aides	who	quietly	 took
seats	along	the	wall	of	the	room	and	opened	up	their	laptops	as	the	rest	of	us
did	 introductions.	“Oh,	please,	don’t	get	up,”	he	 told	us	 in	 the	 sort	of	mid-
Atlantic	 accent	 that	 I	 associated	 with	 Franklin	 Delano	 Roosevelt	 and
midcentury	newsreel	announcers.	“I’m	so	sorry	to	be	late,	we	were	detained	in
the	West	Wing—everything’s	running	late	there	today.	Dr.	Stokes!	Charmed!
I’ve	heard	 so	much	about	you	and	I’m	 looking	 forward	 to	 talking	about	 the
Breton	language	at	some	point	if	we	ever	have	time.	Old	family	connection—
long	story.	And	you	must	be	Mrs.	East-Oda.”

And	so	on.	Dr.	Constantine	Rudge	was	as	 immaculate	in	his	manners	and
breeding	as	he	was	 in	his	attire.	In	his	early	 forties,	he	had	the	gravitas	of	an
older	man,	but	was	styled	younger,	with	somewhat	longer	hair	than	most	men
in	the	Trapezoid,	and	heavy,	stylish	eyeglasses	that	I	thought	of	as	European.
His	jovial	confidence	made	me	feel	somehow	as	if	I	were	missing	something—
was	 this	 guy	 really	 famous?	 Powerful?	 Important?	 Later	 I	 Googled	 him,	 to
discover	that	he	was	classic	Yale,	Rhodes	Scholar,	Fulbright,	City	of	London,
and	all	that,	but	kept	a	low	public	profile.	Rudge	was	the	head	of	IARPA,	the
Intelligence	 Advanced	 Research	 Projects	 Agency,	 which	 like	 a	 lot	 of	 the
intelligence	world	was	 a	blend	of	 civilian	 and	military	personnel.	He’d	been
the	boss	of	 the	 late	General	 Schneider.	As	Tristan	had	 already	 explained,	he
would	 be	 an	 advisor—a	 “dotted	 line”	 on	 the	 org	 chart—to	 the	 newly	 re-
founded	and	upgraded	DODO.

Anyway,	he	got	off	on	the	right	 foot	with	Erszebet	by	kissing	her	hand—
incidentally	giving	her	a	chance	to	admire	his	cuff	links—and	greeting	her	in
what	 sounded	 like	 passable	 Hungarian.	 To	 my	 astonishment	 they	 actually
conducted	 a	 short	 exchange	 in	 that	most	 difficult	 of	 tongues	 before	Rudge



begged	off,	apologized	for	his	butchering	the	beautiful	Magyar	 language,	and
switched	to	High	German.	Catching	my	eye	at	one	point,	Rudge	remarked,
“Dr.	Stokes	will	have	noticed	an	Austrian	accent.	I	 lived	in	Vienna	for	some
years	 in	 my	 twenties,	 working	 on	 a	 dissertation	 about	 interwar	 banking.	 It
took	me	to	Budapest	frequently.”	And	yet	somehow	Rudge	managed	to	say	all
of	 this	 with	 little	 eye	 rolls	 and	 shrugs	 that	 actually	 made	 it	 seem	 self-
deprecating.

I	didn’t	much	care,	all	I	knew	was	that	Erszebet	clearly	thought	Rudge	was
the	only	person	of	any	sophistication	in	the	room,	which	meant	that	the	rest	of
us	didn’t	have	to	expend	energy	trying	to	keep	her	happy.	Tristan	checked	his
watch	a	couple	of	times,	once	raising	his	eyebrows	and	saying	to	me,	“Looks
like	we	won’t	have	time	to	go	shopping	after	all,	Stokes!”

Finally	 General	 Frink	 showed	 up,	 preceded	 and	 followed	 by	more	 aides,
some	civilians,	others	 in	uniforms	of	various	 services.	He	had	a	row	of	 three
stars	on	each	lapel,	which	even	I	knew	made	him	a	very	big	deal.	I	wouldn’t
need	 to	 Google	 this	 fellow.	 He	 was	 the	 Director	 of	 National	 Intelligence,
reporting	directly	 to	the	President.	He	was	Rudge’s	boss,	and	now	Tristan’s.
As	he	blew	in,	he	was	in	full	conversation	with	two	members	of	his	entourage,
and	 scarcely	 seemed	 to	 notice	 that	 he	 had	 entered	 another	 room	 with	 a
different	set	of	humans	in	it.	His	crew	formed	a	sort	of	football	huddle	around
him	 for	 a	minute	 and	 they	 held	 an	 acronym-studded	 conference	 that	 didn’t
concern	us.	Then	half	of	them	speed-walked	out	of	the	room.	Of	those	who
remained,	 some	 took	 up	 seats	 along	 the	 wall.	 General	 Frink	 slammed	 his
formidable	arse	down	into	a	chair	that	had	been	pulled	out	for	him	by	a	junior
officer.	 That	 seemed	 to	 be	 Tristan’s	 signal	 to	 sit	 back	 down—for	 he	 had
exploded	 out	 of	 his	 chair	 when	 Frink	 had	 entered	 the	 room,	 and	 stood	 at
attention	waiting	to	be	noticed.

A	civilian	aide	skimmed	a	sheet	of	paper	onto	the	table	directly	in	front	of
General	Frink.	Frink	reached	into	the	breast	pocket	of	his	uniform,	which	was
stiff	with	ribbons	and	decorations,	and	drew	out	a	pair	of	reading	glasses,	put
them	 on,	 and	 scanned	 the	 page	 for	 a	minute	 before	 finally	 looking	 up	 and
acknowledging	 our	 presence.	 “Yes,”	 he	 said,	 “Department	 of	 Diachronic
Operations.”	His	eyes	scanned	the	row	of	faces	on	our	side	of	the	table,	and	I
suppose	it	was	a	credit	to	his	powers	of	discipline	that	he	lingered	only	briefly
on	Erszebet.	The	civilian	whispered	something	in	his	ear,	and	I	was	pretty	sure
I	heard	 the	 sibilant	word	“Asset,”	which	was	 the	 term	 that	 the	 late	General
Schneider	had	used	 to	 refer	 to	Erszebet.	Frink’s	eyes	went	back	 to	her	 for	 a



moment	and	he	nodded.	He	then	thought	 silently	 for	a	while,	and	heaved	a
sigh.

“I	am	going	so	far	out	on	a	limb	for	you	people,”	he	said,	“that	if	I	hadn’t
seen	even	stranger	things	during	my	career	in	Intelligence	I	would	shitcan	this
project	 in	 a	 heartbeat.	 But	 all	 the	 evidence	 points	 to	 this	 being	 real.	Roger
Blevins	has	vouched	for	it,	and	that	means	a	lot	to	me.”

“Roger	Blevins?”	I	blurted	out.
A	few	moments	of	 silence	ensued.	Everyone	was	startled—most	of	all	me.

I’m	not	a	blurter	in	general.	But	hearing	that	name	in	this	context	could	not
have	been	more	astonishing.	Tristan	kicked	me	under	the	table.

More	 whispering	 from	 the	 civilian	 aide:	 a	 buff-looking	 bro	 in	 his	 early
thirties,	with	heavily	gelled	hair.	“You’re	Stokes,”	Frink	 said.	“Roger’s	your
mentor.	At	Harvard.”

This	really	did	render	me	speechless,	but	Tristan	kicked	me	again	just	to	be
sure.	“General	Frink,	if	I	may,	Dr.	Stokes	here	is	just	a	little	surprised	to	hear
Dr.	Blevins’s	name	brought	up,	because	she	doesn’t	know	of	his	connection	to
the	program.	Operational	security.”

“Ah,	I	see.	Very	good,	Lyons.	Ms.	Stokes,	the	connection	goes	way	back—
Roger	and	 I	went	 to	 school	 together,”	General	Frink	explained.	“When	we
first	 began	 observing	 these	 historical	 anomalies,	 he—along	 with	 Dr.	 Rudge
here—were	part	of	the	brain	trust	we	brought	together	to	seek	explanations.”

I	was	 thoroughly	 tongue-tied	now,	but	 the	 ice	was	broken	as	 far	 as	Frink
was	concerned.	He	pulled	off	his	reading	glasses	and	fidgeted	with	them	as	he
went	into	a	long	mansplanation	of	what	magic	was	and	why	the	United	States
needed	to	avoid	a	“Magic	Gap”	with	other	nations.

“Excuse	 me,”	 Erszebet	 said	 sharply,	 as	 Frink	 began	 wandering	 into	 an
explanation	of	the	many-worlds	interpretation	of	quantum	theory	that	even	I
could	sense	was	painfully	cack-handed.	“Have	you	taken	up	a	day	of	my	life
and	quite	a	lot	of	taxpayer	money	to	bring	me	in	your	foul-smelling	airplane,
all	 the	 way	 here,	 to	 this	 room,	 where	 you	 do	 not	 have	 the	 courtesy	 of
introducing	yourself	to	me	.	.	.	just	so	you	can	inform	me	who	I	am,	and	why
that	is	important	to	you?	Is	this	what	you	have	done	here?”

It	was	 the	 first	 time	I’d	ever	been	grateful	 for	Erszebet’s	 .	 .	 .	Erszebetness.
Frink	gave	her	a	slightly	offended	look	and	tried	to	carry	on	his	monologue,
now	aiming	it	exclusively	at	me,	but	she	was	having	none	of	that.

“This	 is	 a	 yes-or-no	 question	 I’ve	 asked	 you,”	 she	 said,	 standing	 up	 and
placing	 herself	 in	 front	 of	 me	 to	 intercept	 his	 gaze.	 “Are	 you	 incapable	 of



answering	yes	or	no?”	She	looked	at	Tristan,	appalled.	“Do	not	work	for	this
man.	This	man	is	an	imbecile.”

Within	 three	 minutes,	 she	 had	 berated	 Frink	 into	 a	 huffy	 submission,
enough	 that	 he	 rose	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 gruffly	 shook	 hands	 with	 each	 of	 us.
During	this	little	outbreak	of	sociability,	I	also	learned	the	name	of	the	civilian
aide-bro:	 Les	 Holgate,	 who	 went	 around	 and	 shook	 hands	 with	 the	 perky
vigor	of	 a	man	who	had	 sat	 through	one	 too	many	 free	webinars	 about	 the
importance	of	networking.

Erszebet	was	 unconvinced:	 Frink’s	 effort	 at	 politeness	 lacked	 the	 requisite
enthusiasm,	and	Les	Holgate	overdid	it.	We	all	resumed	our	seats.	Frink	took
the	 floor	 again,	 and	 explained	 to	 us	 about	How	Things	 Are	Done	 In	 This
Town,	 including	 brief	 introductions	 to	 the	 concepts	 of	Belt	Tightening	 and
Fiscal	Responsibility.	This	 led	 to	 another	brief	vituperative	 interjection	 from
Erszebet	 regarding	 taxpayer	money	 being	 used	 to	 bring	 four	 people	 to	 him
when	wouldn’t	 it	be	cheaper	 for	him	to	 just	hop	aboard	a	civilian	 flight	and
take	the	T	to	Central	Square,	thus	saving	money	that	was	better	used	for	the
collective	good?	I	had	not	credited	her	with	such	socialist	sensibilities	before.
Nor	have	 I	 seen	her	 express	 such	 sentiments	 since	 then,	 so	 perhaps	 she	was
merely	being	disagreeable	for	effect.

It	was	 the	kind	of	 sermon	 that	would	only	be	delivered	before	bad	news,
and	indeed	Frink	went	on	to	explain	that	we	would	be	given	just	enough	seed
money	to	figure	out	how	to	use	magic	to	self-fund.

Erszebet,	 alarmed,	 put	 aside	 her	 ’tude	 to	 explain	 very	 plainly	 that	 there
could	 be	 no	 changing	 water	 to	 wine	 or	 lead	 to	 gold—to	 say	 nothing	 of
plutonium.	She	wanted	it	understood	that	magic	could	not	be	used	that	way	in
any	era,	or	 it	would	 long	 ago	have	 led	 to	 the	 self-destruction	of	 the	human
race.

“I	 say,	 to	heck	with	gold!”	announced	Les	Holgate.	“There’s	 something	a
lot	more	valuable	than	that:	Microsoft	stock.	Why	not	go	back	in	time	to	the
1980s	and	buy	up	some	of	that?”

Erszebet	drew	breath	to	burn	Holgate	to	the	ground,	but	was	cut	off	by	a
few	 words	 in	 Hungarian	 from	 Dr.	 Rudge.	 “Miss	 Karpathy,	 if	 I	 may.”	 He
turned	 his	 attention	 to	 Holgate.	 “Les,	 this	 is	 covered	 in	 the	 briefing
documents.	Maybe	you	didn’t	get	a	chance	to	scan	them.	I	know	you’re	more
of	a	PowerPoint	guy.”	This	was	delivered	in	such	a	light	tone	that	Holgate’s
face	 didn’t	 start	 turning	 red	 until	 a	 few	 seconds	 later.	 “The	 Sending—the
movement	 of	 the	 subject	 to	 a	DTAP,	 or	Destination	Time	 and	 Place—is	 a



magic-based	process.	As	such,	a	DOer—a	Diachronic	Operative—can	only	be
Sent	to	a	place	and	time	where	magic	works.	Between	1851	and	now,	magic
hasn’t	worked	anywhere.	So	the	most	recent	DTAP	we	can	Send	people	to	is
late	July	of	1851.	The	Microsoft	gambit	can’t	work.	And	we	can’t	go	back	in
time	and	kill	Hitler	either.”

Holgate	hadn’t	 fully	 caught	on	 to	how	deeply	Dr.	Rudge	had	 just	buried
him,	so	he	came	back	for	another	round.	“Okay,	well	then,	go	back	and	invest
in	whale	oil	futures	or	something.”

“That	is	in	essence	what	we	propose	to	do,	Les,”	Tristan	said.	And	he	went
on	to	explain	the	Bay	Psalm	Book	gambit.

Some	years	earlier,	a	copy	of	this	1640	volume—the	first	book	ever	printed
in	North	America—had	 been	 unearthed	 in	 a	 church	 basement,	 and	 sold	 for
millions	 of	 dollars	 at	 auction.	 Tristan	 suggested	 we	 go	 back	 in	 time,	 find
another	copy,	conceal	it	someplace	where	we	could	retrieve	it	 in	the	present
day,	 and	 put	 it	 up	 for	 sale.	 The	 operation	 would	 be	 relatively	 simple.	 It
wouldn’t	 involve	killing	 anyone,	 or	 any	other	heavy-handed	 intervention	 in
history.	 It	 would	 be	 confined	 to	 the	 Boston	 area.	 And	 it	 would	 generate
enough	revenue	to	keep	DODO	afloat	for	the	better	part	of	a	year.

General	Frink	liked	this	idea	immensely.	Dr.	Rudge,	acting	in	his	advisory
capacity,	 asked	 a	 couple	 of	 good	 questions	 about	 the	money	 end	 of	 things,
then	 nodded	 approval.	 Frink	wound	 up	 the	meeting	 briskly,	 and	 sent	 us	 all
back	to	Cambridge	to	begin	the	research	required	for	this	escapade.

A	few	minutes	later,	having	been	reunited	with	our	electronic	devices,	we
were	out-processing	through	the	security	checkpoint,	and	headed	back	down
the	escalators	 to	 the	Metro	 stop.	We	even	had	 time	 for	a	quick	 turn	around
the	 Trapezoid	 City	 shopping	 mall,	 where	 a	 young	 man	 in	 the	 food	 court
approached	 Erszebet—fresh	 from	 raiding	 a	 high-end	 cosmetics	 boite—and
asked	her	for	her	autograph.	He	had	no	idea	who	she	was.	He	simply	assumed
that	she	was	a	movie	star.

The	Bay	Psalm	Book	gambit	had	been	news	 to	 the	rest	of	us.	But	on	the
flight	 home,	 Rebecca	 became	 unexpectedly	 useful.	 I	 had	 considered	 her	 a
reluctant	soldier,	signing	on	only	because	Frank	wouldn’t	do	anything	without
her	 and	 she	 was	 too	 indulgent	 to	 deny	 him.	 But	 as	 we	 flew	 back,	 she
volunteered	a	newfound	suspicion	that	her	accused	ancestress	from	the	Salem
witch	trials	had,	in	fact,	been	a	witch.

When	we	 got	 back	 to	Boston	where	 she	 could	 get	 access	 to	 genealogical
records,	Rebecca	 then	 traced	 this	unfortunate	woman’s	 lineage	back	another



half-century,	to	Muddy	River,	a	settlement	just	inland	from	Boston.	We	could
not,	of	course,	know	if	Goody	Fitch	was	a	witch,	even	if	we	could	be	sure	that
her	 granddaughter	 Mary	 Estey	 had	 been.	 Erszebet	 was	 cavalier	 and	 vague
about	 the	hereditary	nature	of	magic,	but	when	pressed	by	Tristan	 to	give	 it
serious	thought,	said	she	supposed	it	was	a	matrilineal	affair,	although	she	knew
plenty	 of	 instances	 of	 a	 woman	 receiving	 the	 ability	 through	 a	 paternal
ancestress.	Goody	Fitch	being	Goody	Estey’s	maternal	grandmother,	we	had	a
good	chance—but	no	certainty—of	success.

And	for	the	burying	site	of	the	book,	that	too	had	been	Rebecca’s	call.	As
steward	of	 the	 oldest	 house	 in	 the	 area,	 she	was	well	 versed	 in	 local	 history
going	 back	 to	 the	 founding	 of	 Cambridge,	 when	 it	 was	 still	 the	 small,
wooden-walled	village	that	Goody	Fitch	had	just	mocked.	Rebecca’s	present-
day	 backyard	 included	 a	 large	 boulder,	 the	 only	 unadulterated	 topographic
detail	for	blocks	in	all	directions.	In	the	colonial	era	there	was	a	creek	running
near	the	eastern	side	of	it,	but	that	bed	would	dry	up	in	a	year	or	two,	when	a
mill	was	built	on	the	Watertown	Road	and	the	creek	was	diverted	to	power	it.
We	determined	I	would	bury	 the	book,	 in	1640,	against	 the	western	 side	of
this	boulder,	 at	 a	distance	of	my	 arm’s	 length	 and	 to	 the	depth	of	my	 arm’s
reach.

Rebecca	 and	 I	 then	 researched	 what	 I	 would	 need	 to	 do	 to	 “pass”	 as
chronologically	 local—the	 manner	 of	 dress,	 of	 speech,	 of	 courtesy—while
Tristan	established	how	to	best	protect	the	book	from	the	elements	during	its
long	 rest.	He	 determined	 that	 of	 the	 resources	 available	 at	 the	 time,	 a	 small
watertight	barrel	filled	with	flour	or	dry	sand	for	“packaging”	was	our	best	bet.

I	consigned	all	we	had	learned	to	memory,	and	then	prepared	to	be	the	first
DOer	(Diachronic	Operative)	going	back	to	do	the	first	Deed	(or	as	we	spelled
it,	DEDE—“Direct	Engagement	for	Diachronic	Effect”)	under	the	banner	of
the	Department	of	Diachronic	Operations.

HAVING	FINISHED	THE	maize	(which	sat	like	a	cannonball	in	my	sterilized	belly),
I	rose,	and	Goody	Fitch	beckoned	me	to	follow	her	to	the	small	barn	that	was
a	moment’s	walk	downwind	 from	the	house.	As	a	 few	sheep	and	one	 sullen
cow	stared	at	us	incuriously	from	the	pen,	she	examined	the	row	of	neat	farm
tools	and	handed	me	a	long-handled	shovel	with	a	pointy	tip.

“My	 husband	 and	 son	 are	 out	 with	 the	 oxcart	 to	 check	 the	 fields,	 but
Goodman	Griggs	 is	on	his	way	to	the	ferry	 landing	this	hour,”	she	said.	“I’ll



ask	him	to	convey	you	on	the	cart.	It	will	save	you	an	hour	of	walking.”
Goodman	Griggs	was	dressed	 like	he	was	 right	out	of	Central	Casting,	 in

dark	doublet	and	breeches	with	a	wide-brimmed	felt	hat	and	a	barber’s	bib	of	a
collar.	 He	 was	 a	 farmer,	 as	 anyone	 in	 this	 settlement	 must	 be,	 and	 a	 bit
grizzled.	He	seemed	to	do	a	double	take	when	he	saw	me,	before	turning	his
head	sharply	away.	For	a	moment	I	feared	I	had	been	detected	as	a	poser,	but
he	said	nothing.	He	radiated	the	sort	of	pompous	complacency	that	suggested
fundamentalism,	so	I	ran	through	all	my	memorized	scriptural	passages	in	case
I	needed	to	demonstrate	my	affected	faith.	But	he	was	not	one	to	speak.	He
nodded	gruffly	when	I	was	presented	to	him,	as	if	he	did	not	approve	of	me
but	could	not	say	no;	he	made	no	gesture	to	help	me	up	into	the	cart,	which
was	filled	with	barrels	of	corn	and	squash.

A	seventeenth-century	rustic	cart	 is	no	BMW	convertible.	It	 is	not	even	a
carriage,	 for	 it	has	no	 springs,	 is	 purely	utilitarian,	 and	bumps	one	 fiendishly
with	no	regard	for	dignity	or	comfort.	The	ox	that	drew	it	was	flatulent.	Being
grass-fed	 (not	 because	 it	 was	 environmentally	 correct	 but	 because	 grass	 was
then	 the	cheapest	 and	easiest	way	 to	 feed	 an	ox	 in	 summer),	 its	 gas	was	 less
odorous	 than	 I’d	 expected,	 but	 still	was	 nothing	 pleasant,	 and	with	 the	 fine
film	of	sweat	that	covered	me,	I	was	to	feel	the	putrid	scent	molecules	clinging
to	my	skin	all	the	rest	of	the	day.

Shortly,	we	had	 come	 through	 the	woods	 and	 arrived	 at	 the	Charles.	No
clean-cut	 banks	 as	 I	 knew	 it,	 however:	 across	 the	 river	 was	 an	 enormous
marsh,	broader	by	half	than	the	river	itself.	A	narrow	channel	had	been	hacked
and	dredged	through	it	so	that	the	ferry	could	reach	the	landing.	Beyond	that,
shimmering	in	the	heat,	I	could	see	a	palisade	of	vertical	 logs.	This	barrier,	I
assumed,	was	to	protect	the	town’s	most	valuable	commodity—four-year-old
Harvard	 College—from	 marauding	 Indians.	 There	 had	 recently	 been	 a	 war
between	the	Pequot	and	Mohegan	tribes,	won	by	the	latter	with	help	from	the
settlers.	But	now	the	Mohegans	were	quarreling	with	the	Narragansetts.	I	had
not	educated	myself	as	to	where	that	feud	would	lead,	lest	I	inadvertently	say
something	too	prescient	for	1640.	(I	was	pretty	sure	it	didn’t	turn	out	well	for
anyone,	though.)

The	 ferry	 service	was	 very	new,	 and	 at	 present	 comprised	 just	 a	 dock	on
either	 bank	 plus	 a	 flat-bottomed	 boat,	 a	 raft	 with	 skeletal	 bulkheads,	 really.
Standing	beside	it	were	two	young	rowers	who	looked	like	brothers.	Despite
the	unflattering	Puritan	uniform,	they	had	the	agreeable	build	of	a	crew	team,
but	I	knew	better	than	to	stare,	and	averted	my	eyes.



“I	do	not	know	her,	she	came	from	Goody	Fitch,”	Goodman	Griggs	said	to
them	in	a	grumpy	tone	as	he	pulled	up	the	ox.	The	two	younger	ones	gave
me	a	quizzical	look,	then	turned	their	attention	to	their	work:	the	three	men,
forming	 a	 line,	 began	 to	 unload	 the	 barrels	 of	 vegetables	 into	 the	 ferry.	 I
waited	until	they	had	finished,	then	took	from	the	drawstring	bag	at	my	belt
the	little	musket	shot.	I	presented	it	to	the	nearer	ferryman	(the	younger	one)
as	casually	as	I	could,	as	if	I	was	accustomed	to	such	barter.	The	fellow	looked
at	me	oddly,	and	again	I	feared	I	was	about	to	be	unmasked.	He	examined	the
musket	shot	to	make	sure	it	wasn’t	scant—lead	is	such	an	easy	metal	to	carve
off	bits	of.	He	put	it	in	his	own	satchel,	wiped	his	brow	with	the	back	of	his
arm,	and	paid	me	no	further	heed.	I	took	that	as	allowance	to	board	the	ferry.

The	older	brother,	stabilizing	the	last	of	Griggs’s	open	barrels,	glanced	at	me
and	.	.	.	smiled.	His	teeth	were	grey	but	well-shaped.

He	caught	himself	smiling,	blushed,	and	looked	away.
They	were	 strong	 and	 fast,	 those	 two	 rowers,	 for	 such	 an	 unwieldy	 boat

cutting	across	 the	current.	The	older	brother	was	nearer	to	me,	avoiding	my
gaze;	I	found	my	eyes	straying	from	the	water	to	him,	and	enjoyed	watching
his	movements,	sure	and	confident	and	smooth	despite	the	oppressive	heat	and
his	heavy	 clothes.	He	must	have	 felt	my	 stare,	 for	 at	one	moment,	 between
strokes,	he	turned	slightly	to	look	at	me,	and—as	if	despite	himself—he	smiled
shyly.	I	 smiled	back.	He	blushed	again	and	 looked	away.	I	had	not	expected
Puritan	flirtation!

When	we	got	to	the	north	bank	of	the	Charles,	there	was	another	dock	at
which	 the	 boat	 was	 roped,	 and	 two	 boys	 there	 waiting.	 I’d	 watched	 them
splashing	water	at	each	other	as	we	approached,	and	laughing	merrily,	but	now
they	were	 all	 business.	 I	 envied	 them	 the	 freedom	 to	 frolic	 in	 the	 river—it
looked	wonderfully	 cooling.	The	 palisades	 came	 down	 to	 the	 river’s	 edge	 a
stone’s	 throw	 to	 either	 side	 of	 the	 landing,	 creating	 a	 sense	 of	 urgency	 and
purpose,	the	pretense	of	a	city	without	any	sign	of	one	from	here.	I’d	have	to
walk	several	hundred	yards	up	the	slope,	nearly	to	the	future	Harvard	Square,
before	I’d	reach	actual	civilization.

One	 of	 the	 boys	 quickly	 counted	 the	 barrels	 of	 corn	 and	 squash,	 and
nodded,	looking	satisfied.	He	turned	and	ran	up	toward	the	town.	The	other
lad	helped	the	two	ferrymen	to	unload	the	cargo.	I	disembarked,	glancing	one
last	 time	at	 the	older	rower.	He	was	already	staring	at	me,	and	our	eyes	met
again.	Again	he	 smiled;	again	I	 smiled;	again	he	blushed,	and	turned	away.	 I
am	not	one	to	make	eyes	even	in	my	own	era.	Only	an	hour	in	this	strange



new	world	 and	 already	 I	 was	 contemplating	 pulling	 a	Hester	 Prynne!	How
very	disorienting	it	all	was.

I	began	to	walk	up	the	wide	dirt	path	to	the	village,	using	the	shovel	as	a
walking	stick.

Of	all	the	skills	I’d	had	to	learn	for	success	in	this	DTAP	(Destination	Time
and	Place),	the	hardest	of	all	was	thievery.	Language	was	no	issue,	nor	was	my
accent:	 settlers	were	coming	 through	Boston	 from	all	over	England,	 and	 the
English	 regional	 accents	 of	 the	 time	 were	 even	 more	 diverse	 than	 today’s.
Learning	to	dress	myself	had	been	simple	enough.	I’d	found	a	stable	at	which
to	practice	riding	horses	for	the	first	time	since	I	was	ten,	although	I	was	quite
certain	 I’d	 have	 no	 chance	 of	 it	 here.	A	 trip	 to	 Plimoth	 Plantation	 had	 felt
almost	like	a	cheat	sheet,	supplemented	by	a	visit	to	the	Americas	wing	of	the
Museum	of	Fine	Art.	A	costume	shop	that	kitted	out	Boston	theatres	rented	us
a	 colonial	 outfit—smock,	 stays,	 petticoat,	 skirt,	 waistcoat,	 stockings,	 garter,
collar,	coif—which	I’d	practiced	lacing	and	buttoning	myself	 into	and	out	of
until	 I	 could	 do	 it	 fluidly.	 I’d	 memorized	 and	 practiced	 quoting	 certain
passages	from	the	Geneva	Bible	(very	popular	among	the	Pilgrims),	and	taken
a	crash	course	in	celestial	navigation	from	an	MIT	grad	student,	whom	Tristan
signed	to	secrecy	and	paid	well	not	to	ask	any	questions.	This	was	only	the	first
of	many	whom	we	would	later	call	HOSMAs—Historical	Operations	Subject
Matter	 Authorities—and	 whom	 we	 would	 end	 up	 hiring	 to	 teach	 DOers
things	they	would	need	to	know.

All	of	that	had	been	a	cinch.	Harder	by	far	was	to	work	out	how	to	steal	a
book	from	under	its	owner’s	nose.	First,	there	was	my	own	moral	and	ethical
conditioning	to	overcome.	Then	there	was	the	matter	of	simply	how	to	do	it.
Having	so	little	recon	to	rely	on,	Tristan	had	proposed	five	possible	schemes,
and	 I’d	memorized	 all	 of	 them	 step	 by	 step.	 They	 all	 seemed	 preposterous.
Especially	now	that	I	was	here.

I	 reached	 the	 village—a	 loose	 collection	 of	 small	 thatched-hut	 buildings,
some	wattle-and-daub,	but	many	full-timbered,	and	many	with	second	floors.
A	subtle	but	pervasive	odor	of	waste	wafted	about	the	hot,	dusty	streets,	and	I
felt	 the	 porridge	 curdling	 in	 my	 stomach.	 There	 were	 no	 street	 signs,	 but
having	memorized	the	map	of	Cambridge	for	this	era,	I	knew	the	bookseller
would	be	on	the	right	at	 the	 first	 intersection	I	came	to,	at	Water	and	Long
Streets	(or	as	I	knew	them,	Dunster	and	Winthrop).	A	block	farther	up	Water
would	be	the	Meeting	House,	which	was	also	the	church.	We	had	considered
my	taking	a	copy	of	the	psalter	from	the	pews	there,	but	decided	that	in	such	a



small	 community	 a	 newcomer	 would	 be	 eyed	 ceaselessly,	 and	 perhaps
suspiciously,	at	church.	I	would	have	to	pinch	it	from	its	secular	source.

There	 was	 the	 bookseller’s,	 just	 ahead.	 It	 was	 a	 two-story	 building	 with
planks	 lying	on	 the	 ground	 in	 front	 of	 the	 threshold	 to	 approximate	 a	 front
stoop.	The	door	was	open,	and	two	front-facing	windows	were	unshuttered.	I
saw	a	wooden	 floor	within,	and	a	 long	table,	and	many	barrels	and	crates:	 it
was	 not	 specifically	 a	 bookshop,	 but	 a	 shop	 that	 happened	 to	 sell	 books.	 I
leaned	the	shovel	against	the	building	and	went	to	the	doorway.	I	wiped	away
a	layer	of	grime	and	dust	from	my	face,	using	the	sleeve	of	the	waistcoat,	and
looked	in.

Behind	the	long	table	(his	position	suggesting	he	was	the	proprietor	of	the
place)	 was	 a	 round-faced,	 proper-looking	 gentleman	 of	 perhaps	 five	 and
twenty,	frowning	up	at	a	taller	fellow	on	my	side	of	the	table.	The	taller	fellow
was	 frowning	 back	 down	 at	 him.	 The	 proprietor	 looked	 unaccustomed	 to
frowning.	 The	 tall	 fellow	 looked	 quite	 used	 to	 it.	 They	were	 both	 in	 grey
doublet	and	breeches.	The	shorter	man	also	sported	a	canvas	merchant’s	apron.
Between	them,	on	the	table,	was	an	impressive	stack	of	leather-bound	books.

“It	will	destroy	my	profit	to	reprint	them,”	the	tall	fellow	was	complaining.
“Let	alone	rebind	all	 the	reprints.	I	have	created	an	errata	 to	go	with	it,	 that
suffices.	’Tis	selling	well	enough	for	you,	isn’t	it?”

“’Tis	selling	very	well,	but	the	errata	misses	half	the	errors	and	I	am	forever
deflecting	 comments	 about	 it	 from	 the	 people	 who	 have	 given	 me	 their
money	 for	 it,”	 said	 the	merchant,	 in	 the	 tone	of	 a	 parent	 issuing	 a	 firm	but
gentle	rebuke.	He	had	a	benign	energy	to	him.	Instinctively	I	liked	him	more
than	the	other	fellow.	“It	makes	them	disinclined	to	give	me	their	money	for
other	purchases.”

“It’s	the	only	book	you’re	selling,”	protested	the	printer.
“I’ve	 got	 Bibles	 coming	 over	 from	 England,	 due	 next	 week,”	 said	 the

merchant.	“And	there	is	plenty	I	sell	here	beside	books.”
The	 printer	 looked	 taken	 aback.	 “Why	 be	 you	 importing	 Bibles	 from

England	when	you	have	finally	got	a	printer	in	your	own	backyard?”
“Maybe	 he	 is	 not	 a	 very	 good	 printer,”	 said	 the	 merchant,	 as	 kindly	 as

possible.	“Also	there	is	a	new	book	written	by	a	doctor,	about	the	circulation
of	blood.	’Twill	be	here	on	the	next	ship.”

“Yes,	I’ve	heard	about	the	blood,	’tis	a	ridiculous	rumor,”	said	the	printer,
quite	 put	 out.	 “And	 nobody	 decent	 will	 ever	 want	 to	 read	 about	 such
unsavory	subjects.	Especially	in	this	town,	where	we	have	a	college!”



I	decided	this	was	a	fortuitous	accident,	and	that	I	could	use	it	better	than
any	of	the	scenarios	Tristan	had	proposed	for	the	theft.	So	I	stepped	into	the
shop.

The	merchant	 gestured	 to	 the	 pile	 of	 books.	 “They	 are	 no	 good	 to	me,
Stephen.	Reprint	 them.	I’ll	buy	 them	from	you	at	a	higher	price	 if	 that	will
help	 keep	 you	 from	 ruin.”	At	 that	moment,	 they	 both	 saw	me,	 and	 paused
from	their	discourse	to	examine	me.	The	merchant	nodded	and	then	returned
his	 attention	 to	 the	 books,	 while	 Stephen	 the	 Printer	 ogled	 me	 a	 moment
longer,	before	saying	hurriedly	to	the	merchant,	“You’ve	a	wife	and	babe	to
feed	and	another	due	this	leaf-fall,	Hezekiah.	’Twould	be	wrong	of	me	to	take
money	from	your	children’s	mouths.”	He	said	 it	not	as	 if	he	really	meant	 it,
but	as	if	he	knew	he	must	because	there	was	a	witness	present.

“’Twould	be	wrong	of	me	to	sell	any	more	of	this	printing,”	said	Hezekiah
matter-of-factly.

“Is	that	the	new	psalter?”	I	asked.
“’Tis,”	said	the	merchant,	looking	at	me	with	some	skepticism.	“You’re	not

here	to	purchase	one,	are	you?”
“No,	 sir,	 I	 am	here	 to	 purchase	 three.	My	master	 sent	me	 to	 fetch	 them

up,”	I	added,	since	nobody	dressed	as	I	was	dressed	would	be	in	a	position	to
buy	one	for	personal	use.

“Who’s	your	master,	then?”	asked	the	printer,	in	an	almost	lecherous	voice.
“A	squire	of	Boston,”	I	said	with	a	little	attitude.	“He	wants	one	for	himself

and	two	for	family	gifts.”
Stephen	 gestured	 to	 the	 pile.	 “I’m	 Stephen	Day,	 I’m	 the	 printer,	 have	 a

look.”
“I’m	Hezekiah	Usher,	the	bookseller,	and	I’m	not	selling	these	books,”	said

the	merchant,	still	very	matter-of-fact.	“You’d	best	come	back	in	a	sennight.”
I	made	 sure	 to	 look	crushed.	“Oh,	but	Goodman	Usher,	 it	 is	 a	 long	way

from	Boston,	 and	 I’ve	 the	 harvest	 to	 help	with	when	 I	 return.	 I’ve	 not	 the
time	 to	 return.	 Might	 you	 sell	 some	 of	 these	 to	 me,	 even	 if	 they	 be	 not
perfect?”

“Yes.	 Look,”	 commanded	 Stephen	 Day.	 The	 merchant	 was	 about	 to
protest,	 but	 instead	 smirked	 and	 raised	 his	 eyes	 to	 God	 with	 a	 shrug	 of
resignation.	I	walked	to	the	table,	ignoring	the	intense	stare	of	the	printer,	and
picked	up	a	book.	The	leather	was	supple.	When	I	opened	it,	the	binding	was
stiff	and	fresh,	a	faint	smell	of	glue	still	on	it,	as	well	as	the	clean	smell	of	paper,
and	another	smell,	almost	metallic,	which	might	have	been	the	ink.	They	were



elegant,	the	shape	a	little	narrower	than	modern	books,	with	a	bold	exquisite
font	 on	 the	 first	 page:	 “The	WHOLE	 booke	 of	 psalmes	 faithfully	 translated
into	ENGLISH	metre.”	By	modern	standards,	yes,	okay,	the	typesetting	was	an
embarrassment,	but	 the	book	 itself	was	handsome.	 I	 thumbed	 through	a	 few
pages,	 pretended	 to	 study	 a	 leaf,	 set	 the	 volume	 aside,	 thumbed	 through
another	with	 a	 studious	 expression.	Then	 another.	Then	 a	 fourth.	The	 two
men	watched	me.

“What	do	you	look	for?”	asked	the	printer.
I	 was	 about	 to	 give	 him	 a	 polite	 smile	 and	 then	 remembered	 that	 this

population	never	seems	to	do	that.	“You	said	these	had	faults	and	I	am	looking
to	find	the	least	faulty	of	them.”

“They	are	 all	 from	 the	 same	plates,”	 said	 the	printer	 impatiently.	“I	don’t
know	if	you	can	read	but	they’re	all	exactly	the	same.”

“Not	 so,”	 I	 said,	 and	 presented	 the	 book	 I	 held.	 “Do	 you	 see	 how	 the
printed	 area	 is	 slightly	 askew	 on	 this	 page?	The	 others	 I	 looked	 at	 also	 had
uneven	pages.	I	am	trying	to	find	one	where	the	paper	was	set	just	right	on	the
press.	I	do	not	know	the	term	for	it,	but	I	know	what	I	am	looking	for.”

The	printer	huffed	a	bit	at	that.	The	merchant	chuckled	and	reached	for	a
book.	“Let	us	see	if	we	can	find	any	perfectly	set	books.	If	we	can,	Goodman
Day,	then	I’ll	buy	them	off	you	and	sell	them	to	my	customer.”

I	 expected	 Stephen	 Day	 to	 instantly	 declare	 he’d	 sell	 the	 books	 to	 me
directly,	 as	 his	 profit	 would	 be	 greater	 and	 Goodman	 Usher	 had	 already
refused	to	carry	them.	That	is	what	any	enterprising	person	of	my	era	would
do.	 But	 this	 notion	 did	 not	 seem	 to	 enter	 Stephen	 Day’s	 head.	 How	 very
particular	this	society	was:	everyone	kept	to	their	place.

Or	perhaps	Stephen	Day	was	simply	dull-witted.
In	any	case,	he	agreed	to	this	readily,	and	the	two	of	them	began	to	help	me

search	 for	a	book	with	every	 leaf	of	every	octave	perfect.	As	 the	 three	of	us
perused	them,	the	men	resumed	arguing	over	the	fate	of	the	remaining	books.
Now	their	eyes	were	busy	and	their	attention	distracted.	Good.	I	placed	one
book	down	to	my	right	rather	than	back	onto	the	pile	(which	was	to	my	left).
Each	time	I	returned	a	book	to	the	pile	and	reached	for	a	new	one	with	my
left	hand,	I	would	push	this	hijacked	volume	an	inch	or	so	farther	to	the	right,
so	that	eventually	I	had	inched	it	all	the	way	around	a	small	barrel	on	the	table,
where	neither	man	could	see	it	without	searching	for	it.	Their	argument	had
continued	to	grow	until	 they	were	truly	bickering,	so	that	when	we	finished
reviewing	all	fifty-odd	copies	on	the	table,	they	looked	not	to	me	but	to	each



other,	teetering	on	the	edge	of	vitriol.
“I	 shall	 have	 to	 disappoint	my	master,”	 I	 said	 decisively.	 “None	 of	 these

would	be	to	his	standards.	Good	day.”
“Do	you	hear	 that?”	 said	Hezekiah	Usher	 to	Stephen	Day,	 as	 I	 turned	 to

leave.
“This	strumpet	is	failing	to	obey	her	master,”	said	Stephen	Day	to	Hezekiah

Usher.	“He	told	her	to	bring	back	three	copies	of	 the	psalter,	and	she	 leaves
here	without	even	one.	He	did	not	tell	her	to	check	the	quality	of	the	work—”

But	 I	was	 already	out	 the	door.	 I	 grabbed	 the	 shovel	with	my	 right	hand
and	continued	up	Water	Street.

My	left	hand	clutched	the	hijacked	copy	of	the	Bay	Psalm	Book.
Reader,	I	had	walked	out	the	door	right	in	front	of	them,	holding	it	in	plain

sight,	but	they	did	not	see	it.	Not	only	had	they	ceased	to	regard	me,	but	even
to	the	degree	I	was	in	their	peripheral	vision,	they	did	not	see	theft.	What	I	had
just	done	was	unthinkable	to	them.	They	could	not	see	what	they	could	not
imagine.	 Still,	 it	 had	 been	 a	 shuddery	moment,	 and	 I	 barely	 suppressed	 the
urge	to	run,	or	at	least	look	nervously	over	my	shoulder.	But	I	had	it,	and	had
gotten	cleanly	away.

Shovel—check.	 Psalter—check.	 That	 was	 the	 hardest	 part.	 Now	 to	 the
cooper’s,	 and	 then	 to	 the	boulder,	 and	 then	 the	 return	 trip.	 I	 could	do	 this!
Feeling	more	confident,	I	held	myself	more	upright	and	walked	more	briskly.	I
turned	 right	 at	 the	 next	 intersection,	 passed	 a	 leather-worker	 and	 an
apothecary,	 and	 then	on	 the	 left,	 as	 I	 knew	 from	 the	old	maps,	 there	was	 a
cooperage.

The	 cooperage	 had	 a	 yard	 that	 fronted	 the	 street.	 It	 was	 crowded	 with
buckets,	barrels,	and	casks,	and	on	a	huge	tree	stump	in	the	center	was	a	stash
of	metal	hoops	of	different	 sizes.	Various	 axes,	knives,	 and	adzes	 rested	on	a
long,	low	bench	beside	this.	The	lovely	smell	of	wood	shavings	neutralized	the
general	stench	of	filth.	The	cooper,	a	man	of	Tristan’s	build,	dressed	in	Puritan
garb	 of	 faded	maroon	with	 a	 leather	work-apron,	 hatless	 and	 collarless,	 was
bent	over	a	large	half-finished	barrel,	using	a	hammer	and	what	looked	like	an
adze	to	pound	a	hoop	into	place	around	the	staves.

“Are	you	a	dry-tight	cooper?”	I	asked.
“Can	be,”	he	said	without	looking	up.	“What	is	your	need?”
“I	have	a	thing	in	need	of	storage,”	I	said,	and	held	out	the	book.
He	 looked	 up.	 He	 was	 handsome,	 and	 held	 himself	 like	 somebody

extremely	 comfortable	 in	his	own	body—very	different	 from	 the	other	men



I’d	encountered	today.	His	eyes	glanced	briefly	at	the	book	but	then	strayed	to
me,	and	considered	me	a	moment—the	whole	of	me,	not	my	face.	His	 look
gave	me	 shivers.	 Then	 he	 suddenly	 shook	 his	 head,	made	 eye	 contact,	 and
said,	“What,	then?”

“I	need	 this	bound	 into	a	dry-tight	vessel,”	 I	 said.	“’Tis	 an	errand	 for	my
master	in	Boston.”

“Your	master	in	Boston.	Is	that	the	book	everyone	has	been	speaking	of?”
he	asked,	without	much	interest.

“The	first	book	printed	in	America,”	I	said,	and	I	confess	I	was	(and	to	this
day,	remain)	awed	by	the	thought.

He	shrugged.	“That’s	fine	for	those	who	read,”	he	said.	“It	does	less	for	our
common	good	than	did	the	first	grist	mill	or	the	first	forge.”

“.	.	.	True,”	I	said.
He	set	down	the	adze,	held	out	his	hand.	“Let	me	see	the	little	treasure,”	he

said.	 I	 stepped	 off	 the	 street	 into	 the	 yard	 (in	 truth,	 there	 was	 hardly	 any
difference	 between	 the	 two)	 and	 offered	 it	 to	 him.	He	 took	 it	 in	 his	 large
callused	paw	of	a	hand	and	regarded	it.	“Too	small	for	a	firkin,”	he	murmured
to	himself.

He	looked	up	at	me.	There	was	something	slightly	charged	in	his	look—this
had	 been	 true	 of	 Goodman	 Griggs,	 of	 the	 ferryman,	 and	 of	 the	 printer.
Perhaps	it	was	simply	how	Puritan	men	always	looked	at	women.	Perhaps	my
fear	that	they	would	find	me	suspicious	was	causing	me	to	imagine	things.	“I
have	no	barrel	of	the	right	size,	but	there	is	a	lidded	bucket	I	could	alter	to	suit
your	need.”

“I	thank	you,”	I	said.	“If	you	are	sure	it	will	be	watertight.”
“You	could	throw	it	in	the	ocean	and	a	hundred	years	from	now	there	will

be	no	moisture	in	it,”	he	said	with	casual	confidence.
“I	must	probably	 still	pack	 the	book	 in	 something	 to	keep	 it	 from	getting

bumped	around	on	the	journey,”	I	said.
“I’ve	some	felt	in	the	shop	for	oiling	staves.	Wrap	it	in	some	of	that,	’twill

suffice.”
“Again,	 I	 thank	 you,”	 I	 said,	 starting	 to	 feel	 slightly	 unnerved	 by	 the

intensity	of	his	eyes.	He	looked	at	the	barrel	he’d	been	working	on,	considered
it,	 and	 then	 seemed	 to	 decide	 it	 could	 be	 left	 alone	 for	 a	 bit,	 for	 he	 then
glanced	around	the	yard	until	he	 found	a	 small	 lidded	bucket.	He	tossed	 the
book	 into	 the	 bucket,	 with	 no	 reverence	 for	 either	 its	 physical	 or	 spiritual
worth.



After	snatching	some	felt	from	the	back	of	his	shop,	he	hunted	through	the
hoops	for	a	small	one,	and	used	his	cooperish	tricks	to	seal	the	top	as	tightly	as
any	 cask.	 I	 stood	 waiting,	 confused	 by	 how	 handsome	 I	 found	 him	 and
wondering	 how	 best	 to	 negotiate	 the	 payment.	 All	 I	 had	 was	 the	 white
wampum	 bead	 from	 Goody	 Fitch.	 I	 knew	 that	 white	 wampum	 was	 less
valuable	 than	 purple,	 but	 beyond	 that	 had	 no	 idea	 how	 this	 would	 rank
against,	say,	the	musket	shot.

When	 he	 finished,	 he	 held	 out	 the	 sealed	 bucket.	 I	 smiled	 gratefully	 and
reached	 for	 it,	but	 just	before	my	hand	 touched	 it,	he	 raised	 it	out	of	 reach.
“Now	for	the	issue	of	payment,”	he	said.	“What	have	you	for	money?”

“Just	 this,	 from	 my	 master,”	 I	 said,	 pulling	 the	 wampum	 out	 of	 my
drawstring	bag.	I	offered	it	to	him.

“’Tis	a	pretty	bead,”	he	said,	“and	a	good	start,	but	it	will	not	cover	this.”
“I	have	nothing	else,”	I	said.
“Of	course	you	do,”	he	 said	 in	a	 low,	meaningful	voice.	 I	 felt	 a	prickling

down	my	spine.
“I	do	not	know	what	you	mean,”	I	said.
“I	 think	 you	 do,”	 he	 said,	 staring	 at	me.	 Before	 I	 could	move	 away,	 he

reached	 toward	me	with	his	 free	hand	 and	clapped	 it	 around	my	 rib	 cage.	 I
reflexively	 pulled	 away,	 but	 he	 had	 me	 fast.	 “That’s	 a	 body	 not	 wearing	 a
corset.	I	could	tell	just	from	how	you	hold	yourself.”	I	shuddered	and	tried	to
pull	away;	he	held	on	tighter.	“Your	master	sends	you	out	to	do	his	bidding,
with	 insufficient	 currency,	 unlaced.	 Do	 you	 think	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 that
means?”

“My	.	.	.	corset	is	damaged,”	I	said,	trying	to	keep	my	composure.	I	could
not	hit	him	with	the	shovel,	as	I	wanted	to—he	had	the	book!	I	had	to	keep
him	close	enough	to	get	the	book	back!

He	laughed	at	my	claim.	“And	how	does	a	maid’s	corset	get	damaged?	Did
your	master	damage	it?	I	trust	there	was	enjoyment	in	the	damaging.”

“You	have	completely	misconstrued—”
“Don’t	worry,”	he	said	easily.	“I	will	not	report	you	to	Reverend	Shepard.

But	 your	master	 has	 set	 you	 up	 to	 be	 generous	 to	me	 in	 exchange	 for	my
generosity.	Luckily,	it	is	an	exchange	I	am	happy	to	indulge	in.”	He	pulled	me
closer	to	him	and	then	wrapped	his	arm	around	my	waist.

I	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 chest	 to	 repel	 him,	 but	 he	 mistook	 it	 as	 a	 sign	 of
intimacy,	 and	 looked	 pleased.	 I	 could	 not	 avoid	 this	 problem,	 so	 instead	 I
would	have	 to	use	 it:	 “You	have	hit	upon	 the	 truth,”	 I	 said	 resignedly.	His



smile	grew	much	broader.
“Good,”	he	said.
“However,”	I	pushed	on,	trying	to	keep	my	voice	calm	(I	knew	it	would	be

best	to	sound	suggestive,	but	I	could	not	quite	push	myself	to	that	extreme),	“I
have	urgent	errands	to	attend	to,	and	you’ve	a	barrel	not	yet	finished.	Give	me
the	bucket	now	and	I	will	return	here	in	an	hour	with	the	freedom	to	.	.	.	be
generous.”

He	looked	even	more	pleased.	“After	you	are	generous,	I	will	give	you	the
bucket,”	he	declared	triumphantly.

“My	 errand	 requires	 the	 bucket,”	 I	 said.	 “But	 I	 will	 leave	 you	 with	 the
wampum	bead,	plus	a	little	taste	of	what’s	to	come.”	I	glanced	up	and	down
the	street,	but	nobody	was	about.	Knowing	this	was	foolish—and	yet	necessary
—I	 reached	down	and	 lifted	my	 skirt	halfway	up	my	 leg.	 I	did	not	need	 to
point	out	to	him	what	was	missing—no	petticoats,	no	stockings,	nothing	but	a
skirt.	 I	 doubt	 he	 often	 saw	 a	 woman’s	 ankle,	 let	 alone	 her	 shin,	 and	 I	 was
flashing	him	up	to	the	knee.	Immediately	he	pulled	me	against	him	and	I	could
feel	 him	 growing	 hard.	 I	 made	 myself	 smile.	 He	 no	 longer	 looked	 at	 all
handsome	to	me.	“I	 shall	enjoy	being	generous	with	you,”	I	whispered,	and
kissed	him	on	the	cheek.	Blech.

At	this	he	looked	so	radiant	I	feared	he	might	fancy	himself	in	love	with	me.
He	kissed	me	back,	and	released	me.	“You	will	return,”	he	said	sternly.

“Upon	my	soul,	I	will,”	I	answered.
He	gave	me	the	bucket.	I	thanked	him	with	a	smile,	and	then	hurried	down

the	lane,	my	heart	beating	so	hard	that	I	could	feel	it	pulsing	in	my	neck.
Reader,	 I	 am	relieved	 to	 inform	you	 that	 the	next	 leg	of	my	undertaking

was	without	 incident,	although	it	was	 fucking	hot	and	dusty	work.	I	knew	I
had	to	take	the	Watertown	Road	(the	Massachusetts	Avenue	of	later	centuries)
to	a	certain	bend,	where	it	would	intercept	the	creek	that	I	could	follow	to	the
boulder.	Easily	done.	It	was	peculiar	recognizing	the	boulder	 in	a	world	that
was	otherwise	so	unfamiliar.

The	 shaft	 of	 the	 shovel	 gave	me	 a	 nasty	 splinter	 in	 the	web	 between	my
thumb	and	 forefinger,	and	digging	 the	hole	 took	 longer	 than	I’d	anticipated,
perhaps	because	my	body	was	fatigued	by	the	stress	of	the	day.	As	I	worked,	I
unearthed	a	midden—a	deposit	of	oyster	 and	clam	 shells	 that	had	apparently
been	 left	 there	 by	 the	 natives.	 I	 buried	 the	 bucket,	 reburied	 the	 shells,	 and
stomped	 the	earth	down	as	 firmly	 as	possible.	Then,	 shovel	 in	hand,	 slightly
begrimed	on	face,	hands,	boots,	and	skirts,	I	returned	to	the	village.	Sticking	to



the	western	wall	(as	far	from	the	cooperage	as	possible),	I	hurried	down	to	the
ferry	landing.

Luck	was	with	me	again,	for	the	ferry	was	on	this	shore.	But	of	course	I	had
nothing	to	pay	for	passage	with.

Except	an	offer	of	generosity.	Clearly	all	the	men	who	had	been	eyeing	me
today	could	tell	from	my	posture	that	I	was	unfettered	beneath	my	waistcoat.
That	accounted	for	their	unsettling	looks.	Now	that	I	understood	this,	perhaps
I	could	use	it	to	my	advantage	with	the	ferryman.

Although	there	was	his	younger	brother	to	consider.	The	younger	brother
had	not	eyed	me—perhaps	he	didn’t	go	for	girls,	or	was	nearsighted,	or	was	a
fierce	Puritan.	In	any	case,	he	was	in	the	way.

I	went	directly	 to	 the	older	brother.	“I’m	here	 for	my	 return	 trip,”	 I	 said
with	a	smile.

He	flushed	slightly,	 so	I	knew	I	had	him	in	the	palm	of	my	hand.	“Good
day,”	he	said,	and	held	out	his	hand.	“Your	fare.”

“I	thought	the	earlier	fare	I	rendered	was	for	a	two-way	trip,”	I	said.
He	shook	his	head	slightly.	“Who	told	you	such	a	falsehood?”
“’Tis	 how	 the	 service	worked	 in	my	 town	 back	 in	 England.	 I’m	 new	 to

America	and	I	made	a	rash	assumption,”	I	said.	“If	I	had	known	to	ask	it,	sure
my	master	would	have	given	me	more	for	the	fare.”

“Your	master	 should	 have	 known	 the	 toll	 without	 you	 asking,”	 said	 the
young	man.	His	eyes	strayed	very	briefly	to	my	clothed	but	uncorseted	torso,
and	then	back	up	to	meet	mine.	“I	do	not	like	how	your	master	treats	you,”
he	said	quietly.

I	made	myself	blush.	 (I	did	not	know	I	could	do	that	until	 that	moment.)
“It	 is	my	 lot,	 for	now,”	I	 said.	“I	erred	grievously	 in	not	establishing	what	I
would	need	for	the	ferry	toll,	but	I	pray	you	let	me	across	this	one	time.	Next
time	I	shall	be	prepared.”	I	gave	him	what	I	hoped	was	a	doe-eyed,	damsel-in-
distress	look,	feeling	ridiculous	and	very	glad	Tristan	was	not	there	to	tease	me
for	it.

The	 ferryman	considered	me	a	moment	and	 then	moved	his	oar	 away,	 so
that	I	could	enter	the	boat.	“Go	on,	then,”	he	said,	both	kind	and	grudging.
“I’ll	make	excuses	to	my	brother.	But	see	that	your	master	does	not	see	fit	to
try	to	cozen	us	again.”

“Cozen	you?”
“He	knows	what	he	is	doing,	sending	out	an	underdressed	female	servant	as

a	.	.	.	commodity.”



I	 blushed	 even	more	deeply,	 this	 time	 sincerely.	 “I	 am	 astounded	 to	hear
you	say	it.	I	will	speak	to	the	minister	about	him.”

He	 nodded	 approvingly	 .	 .	 .	 and	 then	 gave	 me	 the	 same	 shy	 smile	 I’d
enjoyed	earlier	in	the	day.	How	very	charming:	he	could	only	allow	himself	to
ogle	me	if	he	was	certain	to	receive	no	satisfaction	for	it.

The	trip	back	across	 the	Charles	was	uneventful,	and	so	too	was	the	 long,
hot	walk	back	along	the	road	I’d	taken	the	cart	ride	on	this	morning.	I	met	not
a	soul.	The	sun	was	starting	to	lengthen	the	shadows	when	I	wearily	returned
to	Goody	Fitch’s	home.

The	witch	was	 in	 the	 front	 room	of	 the	 house,	 settling	 an	 iron	 pot	 over
some	covered	coals	in	the	hearth.	It	smelled	mostly	of	vegetables	and	slightly
of	mutton,	and	not	at	all	of	 seasonings.	There	was	a	girl,	perhaps	eight	years
old,	 sitting	 by	 an	 open	 window,	 spinning	 yarn	 with	 a	 drop-spindle	 and
looking	bored.	Her	eyes	lit	up	when	she	saw	me.

“Mama,	is	this	the	woman?”	she	said.
Goody	Fitch	looked	over	her	shoulder.	“Yes.”	And	to	me:	“My	daughter	is

as	I	am.	I	told	her	about	you.”
The	girl,	dressed	almost	identically	to	her	mother—or	rather,	identically	to

me,	since	she	was	not	yet	corseted—put	her	spinning	down	and	came	to	me
with	 a	 wide-eyed	 unsmiling	 look	 of	 reverence.	 “Where	 have	 you	 come
from?”	she	asked.

“Somewhere	 else,”	 said	 her	 mother	 almost	 tartly.	 “Children	 listen,
Elizabeth,	they	do	not	speak.”

“Perhaps	she	would	like	to	listen	to	me	tell	you	about	squaw-vine,”	I	said,
eager	to	fulfill	my	part	of	the	bargain	so	that	she	might	fulfill	hers	by	sending
me	home.

“Yes.	But	more	than	that.	If	you	be	willing	to	tell	us	more	about	what	you
are	doing,	we	want	to	help	you	in	a	greater	way	than	just	this	day’s	work.”

“Really?”	I	asked,	pleased	but	astonished.
She	gestured	to	the	stool,	now	situated	in	the	center	of	the	room	to	catch

the	faint	cross-breeze.	Gratefully,	I	sat	on	it.	“I	have	been	meditating	on	this
matter	all	day,”	she	said.	“I	am	a	settler,	a	pioneer:	I	know	the	importance	of
planning	with	 a	mind	 to	 future	generations.	My	daughter	 is	 gifted,	 far	more
subtle	with	her	 skills	 than	I	was	 so	young,	but	 she	will	never	be	allowed,	 in
this	place,	to	show	herself	as	she	is.	If	you	can	use	her,	and	the	ones	that	come
after	her,	then	our	coming	here	will	perhaps	have	served	some	purpose,	even	if
not	the	one	I	intended.”



The	girl	plunked	herself	at	my	knees	and	looked	up	at	me	with	an	almost
imploring	look.	“Hello,	Elizabeth,”	I	said.	“I	am	Melisande.”

“I	 know,”	 said	 the	 girl.	 “You	 already	 told	me.”	 I	 grimaced	 in	 confusion,
having	no	memory	of	such	a	thing,	and	her	mother	frowned	at	her.	“I	did	not
mean	that,”	said	the	girl,	but	she	sounded	uncertain,	as	if	she	were	following	a
prompt	that	did	not	make	sense	to	her.	I	was	very	fatigued	and	could	not	think
about	this	peculiar	moment	with	any	depth.

Given	this	remarkably	happy	development,	I	stayed	with	them	for	the	next
two	 hours,	 explaining	 (in	 terms	 that	 would	 not	 bewilder	 them)	 the
fundamental	 essence	 of	DODO.	Goody	 Fitch,	 once	 again,	 fell	 into	 gales	 of
laughter	 at	 the	 claim	 that	 this	 small-minded	 enclave	 of	 religious	 extremists
could	ever	blossom	into	a	force	that	influenced	the	whole	globe—but	all	the
same,	she	insisted	her	daughter	listen	to	me.	Somewhere	inside,	she	took	my
descriptions	 to	heart.	We	pledged	mutual	benevolence	and	peace,	and	as	 the
sun	 came	 in	 at	 a	 blinding	 angle	 through	 the	 southern	 window,	 I	 prepared
myself	to	be	Sent	home.

Diachronicle	
DAY	323

In	which	we	learn	quite	rudely	that	nothing	is	ever	simple

I	WAS	IN	THE	ODEC.	As	before,	the	sudden	severing	of	my	connections	to	the
world	of	1640	Boston	 left	me	disoriented,	and	obliged	me	to	 sit	down.	As	I
got	my	wits	about	me	I	had	the	presence	of	mind	to	grab	for	the	oxygen	mask,
just	 in	 case	 the	 chamber	 was	 full	 of	 helium.	 But	 I	 was	 naked,	 and	 soon
shivering	with	cold.	Glancing	down	at	myself,	I	was	delighted	to	see	that	I	had
brought	back	with	me	none	of	the	dirt	and	dust	and	grime	of	1640.	Even	the



splinter	 from	the	rough-hewn	shovel	handle	had	stayed	behind,	although	my
skin	was	still	angry-looking.	My	clothes—T-shirt	and	jeans—were	nowhere	in
sight.

I	 slammed	 a	 big	 red	 button	 that	 cycled	 the	 door.	 During	 the	 weeks	 of
preparation	 for	 this	 day,	 the	 Maxes	 had	 come	 back	 in	 force	 and	 made	 a
number	of	improvements.	No	longer	did	test	subjects	have	to	be	released	from
the	 ODEC	 by	 outside	 helpers	 wearing	 oven	 mitts.	 Now	 the	 door	 opened
automatically.	For	a	moment	my	nakedness	must	have	been	hidden	from	view
by	a	cloud	of	vapor—long	enough	for	me	to	snatch	a	blanket	from	a	hook	by
the	door	and	wrap	it	around	me.

The	big	 room	that	had	 formerly	contained	 the	ODEC,	 the	control	panel,
and	everything	else	had	been	rearranged,	tidied	up,	and	cut	in	half	by	a	wall	of
glass.	The	 control	 panel	was	on	 the	other	 side	of	 it.	Through	 it	 I	 could	 see
Tristan,	Erszebet,	Rebecca,	 and	Oda	 applauding	 and	giving	me	 the	 thumbs-
up.

The	Maxes	 had	 also	 installed	 a	 shower	 stall	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 the	ODEC
chamber,	and	plumbed	 it	with	a	 system	that	would	 inject	a	 sterilant	 into	 the
hot	 water.	 I	 went	 in	 there	 and	 warmed	 up	 with	 a	 long	 shower,	 scrubbing
myself	all	over	with	some	manner	of	 liquid	soap	that	was	supposed	to	kill	all
bacteria	and	viruses.	I	emerged	from	that	to	find	more	pills	awaiting	me	on	a
stainless	 steel	 tray,	 and	 swallowed	 those.	 Meanwhile	 the	 ODEC	 and	 the
chamber	 surrounding	 it	 had	 been	 sprayed	 down	with	more	 disinfectant	 and
irradiated	with	germ-killing	purple	light.

I	 stepped	out	 into	 a	 small	dressing	 room	where	my	clothes	were	 awaiting
me,	and	put	them	on.	Then	out	through	another	door	into	the	control	room,
where	I	was	received	as	a	conquering	hero.

“So	you	have	 survived,”	 said	Erszebet	proudly.	“I	knew	you	would.	You
are	not	like	General	Schneider.”

Rebecca	 looked	 at	me	with	wide	 eyes,	 shaking	 her	 head.	 “I	 .	 .	 .	 I	 don’t
even	know	what	to	ask	you.”

“That’s	 good,”	 I	 said,	 “because	 I	 don’t	 even	 know	what	 to	 say.	 Let’s	 go
check	the	site	and	see	if	it’s	there.	I	can	describe	the	rest	later.”

But:	 “Stokes!”	 came	 an	 exuberant	 voice	 from	 the	 hallway,	 and	 of	 course
when	I	exited	I	was	briefly	embraced	by	Tristan—who’d	been	on	the	phone
to	his	 higher-ups	 in	DC,	 giving	 them	 the	 good	news.	 It	was	 almost	 exactly
like	 being	 grabbed	 by	 the	 cooper,	 but	 without	 the	 erection	 or	 the	 general
sense	 of	 ickiness.	 I	 realized	 how	 tense	 I	 had	 truly	 been.	There	was	 nothing



more	I	needed	in	that	moment	than	to	feel	that	comforting	clutch.
I	did	not	 say	 such	 a	 thing,	of	 course;	 I	 just	nodded,	 clapped	his	 shoulder,

and	waited	for	him	to	release	me.	“Tell	us,”	he	said.	“Tell	us	all	of	it.”
“On	our	way	to	the	boulder,”	I	said.
His	face	lit	up.	“You	did	it!	You	buried	it!”
I	tried	not	to	preen.	“Sure.	But	I	want	to	go	there	while	I	still	have	a	very

clear	sense	of	exactly	where	I	buried	it.”
“She	did	it!”	he	shouted	to	the	world	at	 large.	“Good	work	ethic,	Stokes.

The	professor’s	car	is	behind	the	building.”
I	 could	 not	 believe	 how	 immediately	 overwhelmed	 I	 was,	 by	 the	 air

pollution	 and	 ambient	 city	 noises,	 by	 the	 seams	 in	 my	 blue	 jeans,	 by	 the
squishiness	 of	 the	 car	 seat.	 I	 felt	 strangely	 bereft	 of	 something.	 As	we	 drove
through	Central	Square	and	up	Mass	Ave,	I	gave	the	four	of	them—Oda	was
driving—the	clearest	depiction	I	could	of	my	day.	Erszebet	was	gleeful	to	hear
that	she	lived	in	a	better	time	period	than	the	poor	miserable	Puritan	witches.
“It	heartens	me	to	hear	somebody	else	suffered	even	more	than	I	did	for	being
in	the	wrong	place	at	the	wrong	time,”	she	informed	us.

We	were	learning	to	ignore	her	when	she	got	like	this.
Finally	 we	 arrived	 at	 the	 Odas’	 house	 and	 the	 professor	 pulled	 into	 his

driveway.	 An	 eager	 cluster	 of	 five,	 we	 all	 went	 through	 the	 gate	 into	 the
garden	and	straight	through	to	the	back	of	the	property.

There	was	the	boulder,	looking	more	worn	and	slightly	shorter	than	it	had
four	 hundred	 years	 ago,	 but	 not	 by	much,	 and	mostly	 because	 it	 was	 now
surrounded	by	landscaped	gardens.	It	was	almost	impossible	to	imagine	where
the	stream	had	been,	but	it	was	this	near	side	of	the	rock	I	wanted	anyhow.	I
recognized	a	particular	bulge	in	the	stone	and	oriented	myself	around	it,	lay	on
the	ground,	 and	 reached	 toward	 the	 stone,	 then	 tapped	 the	 earth	below	my
shoulder.

“It	is	right	under	here,”	I	said.	“In	a	sealed	wooden	bucket.”
They	 already	had	 the	 tools	 for	digging	handy.	We	all	 dug.	Even	Erszebet

took	a	mostly	symbolic	turn	at	it.
An	 hour	 later,	 there	 was	 a	 hole	 five	 feet	 deep	 and	 twice	 that	 wide,

obliterating	Rebecca’s	vegetable	garden.	The	back	of	 the	property	resembled
an	archaeological	excavation.	And	 indeed	 it	was:	we	 found	a	 rusty	 toy	 truck
that	 looked	 to	be	 from	 the	1950s	 and	 some	bones	 that	 looked	 to	have	been
buried	by	a	dog.	Below	that,	the	rust-skeletal	remains	of	a	nineteenth-century
lantern.	 Below	 that—as	my	 heart	 beat	more	 quickly—the	 broken-up	 oyster



and	 clam	 shells	 I’d	 held	 in	 my	 hands	 four	 hundred	 years	 ago,	 a	 few	 hours
earlier	.	.	.

And	that	was	all.
There	was	no	bucket.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

JUNE	16

Temperature	 today	 about	 75F,	 bright	 and	 sunny,	 no	 breeze.	 Barometer
steady.

All	vegetables:	deceased.	Flowers:	largely	trampled.	South-side	peonies
(blooming),	 flame	 azalea	 (blooming),	 and	most	 rose	 bushes	 still	 in	 good
form.	South-facing	herb	bed	generally	doing	well.

The	garden	has	been	completely	destroyed	in	the	interest	of	digging	up
the	book	Melisande	says	she	buried	four	hundred	years	ago.	No	sign	of	it.	I
have	never	seen	her	so	distraught	or	confused.	We	stood	about	a	large	hole
that	had	been	my	vegetable	bed.	Tristan	offering	condolence	that	“at	least
the	 soil	 is	 getting	 aerated.”	 Mel	 circling	 the	 hole,	 shaking	 her	 head,
climbing	 into	 it,	 searching	 on	 her	 hands	 and	 knees,	 trying	 to	 dig	 even
deeper	with	her	fingers.

Erszebet,	retro-chic	handbag	clutched	to	her	side	as	usual,	watching	all
of	us	with	superior	amusement.	“Obviously	not	here,”	she	said.	“We	have	to
try	again	on	another	Strand.	This	is	quite	normal.”

Mel	 looked	 up	 from	 the	 hole,	 gave	 Tristan	 a	 questioning	 look.	 Tristan
and	Frank	also	swapped	glances.	“What	do	you	mean	by	‘another	Strand’?”
asked	Frank.

She	 shrugged.	 “I	 mean	 another	 Strand.	 Of	 time,”	 she	 clarified,	 seeing
their	 confusion.	 “You	 have	 your	 fancy	 technical	 language	 to	 explain	 it.	 I
have	 only	 what	 it	 really	 is.	 There	 are	 many	 possibilities	 and	 you	 cannot
completely	control	which	Strand	you	are	on	when	you	are	summoning.	It	is
not	 up	 to	 you.	Magic	 does	not	make	 you	 omnipotent.	 So	Melisande	went
back	on	just	one	Strand,	and	that	one	Strand	did	not	change	things	to	your



liking.	Maybe	 she	will	 go	back	on	 another	Strand,	 and	 then	another,	 and
when	enough	Strands	have	been	shifted	a	little	by	this,	then	maybe	it	will
help	here	and	now.”

“That	makes	my	brain	hurt,”	Mel	said,	sounding	tired.	“Do	you	mean	I
have	to	go	back	and	redo	everything	I	just	did?	Relive	the	entire	day?”

“Of	course,”	said	Erszebet.	“Several	times,	most	likely.”
Melisande	groaned	and	threw	herself	onto	the	earth	at	the	bottom	of	the

hole,	 a	 dry-dock	 Ophelia.	 “I’d	 almost	 rather	 go	 back	 to	 working	 for
Blevins.”

Erszebet	 (scolding):	 “You	 have	 a	 simplistic	 notion	 of	 how	 complicated
things	work.	 It	 is	 like	when	 the	euro	came	 into	being.”	(Uncomprehending
looks from all of us.)	“If	somebody	had	made	up	a	new	coin	and	called	it	the
euro	 and	 walked	 in	 someplace	 to	 use	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 suddenly	 money.	 But
because	many	people	all	agreed	to	make	up	a	new	coin,	and	then	use	these
new	coins	over	and	over,	now	the	euro	is	used	and	the	old	coins	are	not.”

Tristan	(irritated):	“Bad	metaphor.	That	was	an	economic	policy	move	on
the	part	of	governmental	bodies,	it	wasn’t—”

“It	may	have	been	decided	by	governmental	bodies,	but	it	did	not	happen,
it	was	not	real,	until	many	people	stopped	doing	things	one	way	and	started
doing	them	another,	consciously	and	deliberately.	Now,	of	course	one	uses
the	euro.	One	does	not	think	about	it.”

Mel	stood	up	and	brushed	the	moist	dark	soil	from	her	jeans.	Erszebet	is
appalled	 that	Mel	“dresses	 like	a	man,”	and	not	even	a	proper	gentleman
but	a	 farmhand.	She	keeps	 trying	 to	get	Mel	 to	wear	dresses	and	 lipstick.
Some	of	her	advice	 is	not	without	merit,	 for	she	has	 tastes	 that	are	highly
refined,	albeit	stuck	in	the	1950s.	But	today	jeans	were	the	right	attire.

“How	many	 times	must	 I	 redo	 it	before	 it	 takes?”	Mel	 asked,	 sounding
exhausted.

“I	cannot	say	for	certain,	but	I	will	try	to	determine,	because	I	like	you,”
said	Erszebet.	Reached	into	her	bag,	pulled	out	 the	frazzled-mop-looking
thing.

“What	 is	 that?”	 Tristan	 demanded,	 in	 such	 a	 tone	 I	 realized	 he	 hadn’t
seen	it	before.

“My	 számológép,”	 she	 said,	 haughty.	 She	 began	 to	 pick	 through	 the
strings—the	strands—of	 it.	Tristan	 turned	to	Melisande	with	a	questioning
expression.



“Calculator,”	Mel	 translated.	 “Not	 like	 a	 desk	 calculator,	more	 like	 an
accounting	device.”

We	all	watched	Erszebet	as	she	selected	a	strand,	examined	it,	muttered
to	 herself,	 pulled	 it	 away	 from	 the	 mass.	 It	 was	 entangled	 with	 another
strand	near	the	bottom.	“Yes,”	she	said,	shoving	the	whole	thing	back	into
her	bag.	“You	have	to	go	back.	We	will	see	a	difference	next	time.”

“You	mean	the	book	will	be	here	next	time?”
“Almost	 certainly	 not!”	 Erszebet	 scoffed.	 “But	 we	will	 be	 closer	 to	 the

book	being	here	next	time.”
“Excuse	me,”	said	Frank	with	his	gentle	smile,	“would	you	show	me	how

that	object	works?”
Erszebet	looked	almost	shocked,	and	squeezed	her	arm	tighter	over	the

bag.	“I	cannot	give	you	my	számológép,”	she	said.	“I	made	it	myself	with	my
mother.	It	took	years.	I	would	sooner	cut	my	hair	off	and	give	it	to	you.”

“I	don’t	want	to	keep	it,	I	just	want	to	look	at	it.”
“It	will	mean	nothing	to	you.	And	if	you	start	to	fiddle	with	it	you	might

change	it.	So,	no.”
“May	I	ask,	 at	 least,	what	 you	use	 it	 for?”	he	 said.	Mel,	with	a	hand	up

from	 Tristan,	 climbed	 out	 of	 the	 hole	 and	 reached	 for	 the	 sweatshirt	 I
handed	her.	It	was	early	evening	and	the	air	was	beginning	to	cool.

Erszebet	 looked	 at	 the	 object	 in	 her	 hand	 as	 if	 Frank’s	 question	 put	 it
into	an	entirely	new	light.	“What	do	I	use	it	for?	It	is	.	.	.	a	kind	of	cheating.”
She	laughed	a	short,	harsh,	scold-me-if-you-dare	laugh.

“Cheating?”
“Every	 action	 has	 reactions	 which	 have	 reactions.	 So,	 many

consequences.	You	must	keep	track	of	all	the	possible	consequences	or	bad
things	 maybe	 happen.	 Nobody	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 hold	 that	 much
information	 in	 her	mind	 at	 once.	 The	 számológép	 helps	me	 to	 track	 the
possible	consequences.”

“And	how	does	it	work,	exactly?”	asked	Frank,	his	face	now	glowing	with
anticipation	at	getting	his	Physics	Itch	scratched.

“It	will	be	easier	to	show	you	after	Melisande	has	done	it	a	few	times.”
“A	few	times,”	said	Mel	under	her	breath,	sounding	like	she	had	the	flu.

“All	right.	But	I	need	a	decent	meal	first.”
“I’ll	get	you	home,”	said	Tristan,	tossing	her	one	of	my	clean	gardening

rags	 to	 wipe	 the	 dirt	 off	 her	 face.	 “Good	 work,	 soldier,	 we’ll	 try	 again
tomorrow.	Erszebet,	 let’s	 go.	 Eh	 .	 .	 .”	He	 looked	 at	 the	 hole,	 then	 at	me.



“Sorry	about	 the	garden,	ma’am.	 I’ll	 call	 some	men	 to	come	 in	 tomorrow
morning	and	tamp	all	the	soil	back	down	in	there.”

“Won’t	save	the	tomatoes,”	I	said.
“Well,	 we	 need	 it	 intact	 so	 we	 can	 dig	 it	 up	 again,”	 he	 said,	 almost

sheepish.
When	they	were	gone	(Erszebet	now	bunking	with	Mel,	who	has	moved

to	 a	 larger	 apartment),	 Frank	 and	 I	 gazed	 at	 each	 other	 through	 the
deepening	 twilight,	 over	 what	 had	 been	 the	 best	 of	 my	 cucumber	 patch.
“Such	an	interesting	thing,	that	 .	 .	 .	számológép,”	he	said,	pronouncing	it
wrong.	“I	wonder	if	I	could	figure	out	how	it	works,	what	she’s	doing	with
it.”	(I	should	have	known	that	would	be	his	takeaway	from	the	entire	day:
not	 the	 failure,	not	 the	 future,	not	 the	 ruined	garden,	but	 the	 interesting
gadget.)

I	thought	about	what	was	in	the	attic.	I	wished	it	were	not	in	the	attic,	and
that	being	unavoidable,	I	wished	I	did	not	know	that	it	was	in	the	attic.	But
that	glowing,	boyish	eagerness	on	his	face	.	.	.	for	more	than	fifty	years	now
I	have	been	charmed	by	it.

“I	know	where	to	find	one,”	I	said.	“Stay	here.	I’ll	be	right	back.”

Diachronicle	
DAY	324	 (COLONIAL	BOSTON	DTAP,	1640)

In	which,	having	not	succeeded,	I	try,	try	again

THE	SECOND	TIME,	THE	ARROW	struck	me	before	I	fell	out	of	its	way.
I	 cried	 out,	 too	 dizzy	 and	 disoriented	 to	 keep	 quiet,	 and	 found	 myself

remembering	 what	 Goody	 Fitch	 had	 said	 the	 first	 time:	 “It	 would	 hit	 you
another	time.”	What	she’d	meant	was,	it	does	hit	me	another	time.	She	knew.
She	knew	I	arrived	here	more	than	once.	What	else	did	she	know?



In	a	dreamlike	state,	I	heard	her	shouting	out	to	Samuel,	heard	her	tell	me
not	 to	move,	waited	until	 she	came	back	with	 the	blanket—and	this	 time,	a
small	 roll	of	 linen	 that	 she	used	 to	bandage	my	calf.	The	wound	was	only	 a
superficial	 graze,	 really,	 enough	 to	 require	 tending	 but	 not	 enough	 to	 lame
me.	Enough,	however,	that	it	would	make	the	slog	of	the	day	even	more	of	a
slog.

What	followed	was	a	six-hour	stretch	of	déjà	vu,	ameliorated	by	the	benefit
of	hindsight-as-foresight.	The	witch	 and	 I	had	 almost	 the	 same	conversation
we’d	 had	 before.	 I	 declined	 the	 maize,	 knowing	 what	 it	 would	 do	 to	 my
innards.	When	she	offered	me	the	musket	ball	and	piece	of	wampum,	I	begged
her	for	a	second	wampum	bead,	and	she	gave	it	to	me.	I	asked	her	if	I	might
wear	her	corset,	since	I	was	going	out	into	the	world	and	she	was	not,	but	she
declined,	as	she	expected	Goody	Griggs	to	be	by	to	quilt	midday	and	did	not
want	to	appear	slovenly	to	a	neighbor.

“Always	 feel	 free	 to	 ask	me,	 though,”	 she	 added.	 “Sometime	 it	might	 be
available.”

That	was	the	closest	she	came	to	telling	me	she	knew	that	I	was	visiting	her
multiple	 times.	Now	 the	daughter’s	 comment	when	 I’d	 given	her	my	name
—“You	already	told	me”—made	sense	too.	Once	I’d	returned	from	my	tasks
in	 Cambridge,	 I	 was	 determined	 to	 interview	 Goody	 Fitch,	 to	 ask	 her	 to
explain	her	understanding	of	 the	Strands,	 as	Erszebet	 called	 them.	Perhaps	 if
various	witches	described	it,	we	could,	between	all	their	descriptions,	come	to
grasp	it.

The	déjà	 vu	 returned	 as	Goodman	Griggs	 gave	me	his	 furtive,	 grumbling
look	and	drove	me	to	 the	 ferry.	The	 ferryman	once	again	ogled	me	and	the
boys	once	again	splashed	water	at	each	other	across	the	Charles.	With	a	slight
limp,	trudging,	shovel	 in	hand,	I	again	strode	up	Water	Street,	 into	the	shop
where	Usher	 and	Day	were	 arguing	 about	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 printing.	 The
same	 trick	worked	 to	 steal	 the	 book	 again—remarkable,	 how	 at	 ease	 I	 felt,
now	 that	 I	 knew	 I	 would	 accomplish	 it—and	 finally	 I	 approached	 the
cooperage.	I	felt	my	pace	slow.	Even	if	I	offered	this	unsettling	fellow	both	of
the	wampum	beads	(one	was	intended	for	the	ferry	back	to	Muddy	River),	I
suspected	he	would	claim	that	it	did	not	cover	the	fee.	My	real	trouble	was	my
want	of	a	corset.

But	 at	 least	 I	 knew	what	 I	 was	 in	 for,	 and	 that	 was	 oddly	 comforting.	 I
presented	myself	to	him	with	a	slight	brazenness,	so	that	at	least	I	avoided	the
unpleasantness	 of	 being	 groped—I	 came	 near	 to	 actually	 teasing	 him,



promising	 future	 “generosity”	 before	 he	 even	 asked	 for	 it.	 I	 had	 his	 full
attention	and	cooperation,	and	I	was	out	of	there	sooner,	and	less	grossed	out,
than	last	time.

So:	 déjà	 vu	 continued	 up	 the	 road	 to	Watertown,	 and	 into	 the	 copse	 of
trees	where	the	creek	was,	and	the	boulder.	I	took	off	my	apron,	wrapped	it
around	my	hand	while	I	was	shoveling,	and	thereby	saved	myself	the	splinter
of	the	last	visit.	My	muscles	were	sore	from	all	the	digging	yesterday—for	my
body	knew	that	to	have	happened	yesterday,	even	if	I	was	now	situated	long,
long	 before	 yesterday.	 Also,	 I	 was	 terribly	 hungry.	 And	 my	 leg	 was	 now
throbbing	like	a	motherfucker	badly.	So	I	was	not	in	good	humor.

I	 found	 the	 same	Native	American	midden,	 and	 this	 time,	when	 the	hole
was	 deep	 enough,	 tossed	 the	 shells	 in	 first	 and	 then	 put	 the	 bucket	 in	 atop
them.	I	buried	 it,	and	then	in	a	state	of	 filthy	exhaustion	 limped	back	to	the
ferry,	where	 I	 paid	my	way	 and	 therefore	 had	 no	 need	 to	 even	 talk	 to	 the
ferryman;	miserably,	 I	 dragged	my	 fatigued	butt	 back	 to	Goody	Fitch’s,	 and
barely	had	the	energy	to	thank	her	or	speak	to	her	daughter.	I	had	no	energy
at	all	to	follow	through	on	my	earlier	intention	of	interviewing	her	regarding
the	Strands	of	time.	Still,	she	made	the	same	offer	she	had	the	first	time,	which
was	heartening.

This	time,	her	daughter	did	not	say,	“You	already	told	me.”	I	took	that	as	a
good	sign:	this	must	be	the	visit	she’d	been	referring	to	the	other	time.	There
need	be	no	more.	Two	visits	should	suffice.	Please,	God,	let	two	suffice.

Goody	Fitch	sent	me	forward	to	the	ODEC,	where	I	arrived	shivering	and
naked,	the	superficial	gash	on	my	calf	crusted	and	angry.	I	went	through	the
decontamination	procedure	 as	before.	Tristan,	without	 the	excited	 fanfare	of
the	previous	day,	drove	us	back	to	the	East-Oda	homestead,	where	Rebecca
tended	my	wound	with	a	salve	she	had	whipped	up	herself—a	combination	of
modern	 antibiotics	 from	 the	 pharmacy	 and	 herbs	 from	 her	 garden.	 The
menfolk	once	again	dug	up	the	backyard.	Or	rather,	Tristan	dug,	while	Frank
Oda	watched	with	 the	 interest	 of	 a	 schoolboy	who	was	 illicitly	 attending	 a
ballgame.

Early	that	morning,	Tristan	had	“sent	some	men	around”	to	fill	in	the	hole.
This	had	further	torn	up	the	yard	and	made	a	terrible	noise,	as	it	involved	the
kind	 of	 pounder	 that	 is	 used	 to	 smooth	 out	 new	 asphalt	 laid	 down	 over
potholes.	 The	 neighbors	 were	 up	 in	 arms,	 Rebecca	 told	 us	 with	 a	 sigh,
although	 mostly	 she	 was	 upset	 about	 her	 garden.	 Tristan	 of	 course	 was
indifferent	to	the	controversy.



Once	 I	 was	 sufficiently	 bandaged	 and	 plied	 with	 painkillers,	 we	 went
downstairs	and	out	the	back	to	see	how	the	digging	was	coming,	ignoring	the
black	and	calico	cats	who	were	trying	to	trip	us.	Frank	Oda	was	leaning	against
the	boulder	with	a	cup	of	tea;	we	three	women	stood	on	the	small	back	deck
of	the	house,	staring	over	the	railing.	The	midden	of	oyster	and	clam	shells—
which	 I	 had	 deliberately	 placed	 under	 the	 bucket	 this	 time—had	 been
unearthed	.	.	.	yet	still	no	bucket.

As	I	watched,	it	seemed	to	me	that	my	exhaustion,	or	perhaps	a	side	effect
of	 the	 painkillers,	 was	 affecting	 my	 eyesight,	 for	 Tristan	 suddenly	 looked
slightly	blurred,	as	if	I	were	looking	at	him	across	a	lit	BBQ	grill.

“You	 see?”	 said	Erszebet,	 sounding	 satisfied.	 She	 gestured	 casually	 toward
Tristan.	“It’s	coming	along.”

“Is	he	.	.	.	wavy?”	I	asked.
“He’s	not	wavy,”	she	said	in	her	usual	being-derisive-about-Tristan	voice.
“Something	is	wavy,”	said	Rebecca	decisively.
Tristan	stopped	digging	and	leaned	on	the	shovel,	breathing	harder	than	he

had	yesterday	although	the	soil	was	looser	and	the	hole	was	smaller	(but	then,
this	 time,	he	was	 the	only	one	digging	 it).	“Ma’am,	could	 I	 trouble	you	 for
some	saline	drops?”	he	asked	Rebecca.	“I’ve	got	something	in	my	eyes.”

“No	you	don’t,”	Erszebet	informed	him.	“That’s	just	the	glimmer.”
A	childlike	 surge	of	 excitement	overrode	my	exhaustion,	briefly:	“Like	 in

.	 .	 .	 like	 in	old	 stories	 about	witchcraft?	You	mean	 ‘glamour’?”	 I	 asked.	For
with	her	accent	it	was	difficult	to	tell.

She	 shrugged.	 “I	 don’t	 know	what	 it	 is	 called	 in	old	 stories.	We	called	 it
pislákoló,	this	is	‘glimmer’	or	‘glamour’	or	something	in	English.	I	never	knew
the	English	term	for	it,	magic	was	nearly	gone	by	the	time	I	was	fluent	in	your
language	so	there	was	no	occasion	to	describe	it.	And	now	the	word	‘glamour’
is	ruined	by	that	magazine.”

“What	is	it,	exactly?”	said	Tristan.	“What’s	going	on?”
“It	happens	because	it	is	the	spot	.	.	.”	Erszebet	paused,	then	sighed	noisily,

as	 if	 put	 upon.	 “When	 magic	 existed,	 this	 was	 common	 knowledge	 and
nobody	ever	had	to	explain	it	any	more	than	you	would	have	to	explain	why
you	 sweat	 when	 you	 are	 hot	 or	 need	 air	 to	 breathe.	 But	 I	 will	 try.”	 She
pressed	her	elbow	upon	the	deck	rail	and	leaned	her	chin	into	the	back	of	one
lithe	hand,	lips	pursed—Lauren	Bacall	imitating	Rodin’s	Thinker.	“This	spot	is
where	 we	 are	 trying	 to	make	 change.	When	 there	 is	 no	magic	 happening,
things	 look	 normal.	 But	 when	 magic	 is	 happening,	 then	 what-could-be



becomes	 .	 .	 .	 louder,	 or	 bigger,	 than	 whatever-currently-is.	 That	 causes	 the
glimmer.	So	glimmer	is	a	good	sign.”	She	reached	into	her	bag,	pulled	out	the
számológép,	 and	 began	 to	 finger	 certain	 strands	 with	 seemingly	 random
dexterity.	Then	she	put	it	away,	looked	directly	at	me,	and	declared,	“I	think
seven	more	times	back	to	this	DTAP	without	complications,	and	we	will	find
the	bucket	when	we	dig	for	it	here.”

I	heard	myself	 groan	before	 I	 could	 contain	 it.	 Seven	more	days	of	 being
ogled	by	the	cooper.	Of	digging	a	deep	hole	in	virgin	soil	with	an	unwieldy
shovel.	Of	that	long,	swampy	trudge	back	to	Muddy	River.	“And	it	has	to	be
me,	correct?”	I	said.	“We	cannot	swap	me	out	for	Tristan.	That	would	be	like
resetting	the	counter	to	zero?”

She	nodded.
“I’ll	take	the	next	DTAP,”	said	Tristan.	“Scout’s	honor.”
“What	if	the	next	one	requires	conversational	Sumerian?”	I	asked.

WE	WAITED	A	 couple	 of	 days	 for	my	 leg	 to	 heal,	 and	 then	Erszebet	 sent	me
back	again.

And	then	she	sent	me	back	again.	And	then	again	and	again	and	again.
It	was	as	if	I	 inhabited	a	perverse	universe	at	the	intersection	of	Groundhog

Day	and	a	computer	game.	I	knew	what	I	had	to	do	to	get	to	the	next	level,
so	to	speak	.	.	.	and	I	could	do	it,	increasingly	well,	but	dammit,	that	did	not
release	me	from	the	requirement	of	repeating	it.

There	were	always	 slight	variations,	of	course.	For	 that	was,	 in	a	way,	 the
whole	 point	 of	 what	 Erszebet	 called	 the	 Strands.	 They	 were	 never	 exact
clones.	They	were	more	 like	 a	 family	of	 similar	pasts	 that	 all	 got	 to	vote	on
what	their	shared	future	was	going	to	look	like.	My	next	visitation,	the	witch’s
house	was	sited	slightly	closer	to	the	river;	otherwise,	all	was	the	same.	But	the
time	after	that,	Goodman	Griggs	was	blind,	and	his	son	drove	the	cart	for	him
—and	thus,	being	a	young	man	responsible	for	the	well-being	of	a	household,
he	had	not	been	out	illicitly	shooting	rabbits	as	I	arrived.	The	time	after	that,	it
was	the	younger	ferryman	who	looked	at	me,	not	the	older.	In	that	Strand,	the
witch	 had	 only	 a	 son,	 but	 said	 she	 would	 pass	 the	 word	 on	 to	 any	 other
witches	she	met,	not	that	there	were	likely	to	be	many	in	such	a	society.	The
next	time	around,	the	printer	Stephen	Day	was	drunk,	and	as	I	left	the	shop,	I
heard	him	 slur	 to	HezekiahJ	Uoushrenr,a	 “lT	Ehenretr	 iys		soofmething	 about	 that	woman,
she	seems	so	familiar	.	.	.”



Rebecca	East-Oda
JUNE	22

Temperature	about	75F,	pleasantly	humid.	Slight	SW	breeze.	Barometer
falling.

Seedlings	planted	in	container	garden	on	front	steps:	kale,	lettuce,	seed
onions.	 Tea	 roses	 transplanted	 to	 south	 side	 of	 house	 to	 avoid	 further
damage	 to	 root	 system;	 hate	 to	 do	 that	 this	 time	 of	 year,	 but	 no	 choice,
really.

The	digging	continues.	Tristan	has	ceased	claiming	the	aeration	is	good
for	 the	 soil.	 Has	 offered	 to	 have	 fertilizer	 mixed	 in	 after	 the	 final	 dig.
Neighbors	 registering	 complaints	 about	 the	 early	 morning	 noise.	 Cats
stressed	even	though	they	are	strictly	inside.

Today	was	the	fifth	dig.	Each	time	we	collect	to	watch	Tristan	at	work,	the
glamour	 is	 stronger.	 It	 feels	 almost	 as	 if,	when	 I	 attempt	 to	 look	directly
into	the	hole,	some	force	shunts	my	vision	aside.	A	very	strange	sensation,
but	Erszebet	says	it	is	a	good	sign.	Frank	is	pleased	with	himself	for	coming
up	with	 an	 acronym:	GLAAMR,	 for	Galvanic	 Liminal	 Aura	 Antecedent	 to
Manifold	Rift.	I	hope	he	is	not	just	being	optimistic.

It	 is	 clearly	exhausting	 for	Mel	 to	make	 these	excursions	day	after	day,
but	 she	 keeps	 her	 chin	 up.	 Tristan	 getting	 increasingly	 agitated	 (in	 a
contained	but	obvious	way).	“Can	you	make	it	happen	any	faster?”	he	asked
Erszebet	today.

Erszebet’s	 answer:	 “No.”	 And	 then	 continued,	 as	 if	 the	 same
conversation,	“I	am	ready	to	go	to	Hungary	now	to	spit	on	the	graves	of	my
enemies.”

Tristan:	 “We’ve	 already	 had	 this	 conversation.	 We	 need	 money.	 What
we’re	doing	now,	that’s	how	we	get	money.”

“I	know,	I	was	present	at	the	rude	idiot’s	office	in	Washington,	DC,	when
you	volunteered	me	for	this	indentured	servitude.”

A	 pause	 as	 he	 reclaimed	 his	 cool.	 “The	 sooner	 we’re	 successful,	 the
sooner	we	fly	you	to	Hungary	to	spit	on	the	graves	of	your	enemies.”

“I	cannot	alter	 the	 laws	of	 the	universe,	even	 if	you	 tell	 the	 idiot	 I	can.



But	when	I	Send	back	Melisande	this	time,	I	will	try	very	hard	to	summon
her	toward	a	Strand	that	is	especially	conducive	to	change.	That	is	the	most
I	can	do.”

Diachronicle	
DAY	335	 (COLONIAL	BOSTON	DTAP,	1640)

In	which	I	am	foundationally	challenged

FOR	 WHAT	 I	 HOPED	 MIGHT	 be	 the	 final	 repetition,	 I	 just	 wanted	 to	 hurry
through	the	motions	and	be	done	with	it.	I	realized	the	witch	was	aware	of	all
my	 other	 visitations,	 but	 referred	 to	 them	 only	 occasionally	 and	 only	 very
obliquely—they	were,	in	a	sense,	all	happening	at	the	same	moment	in	time	to
different	versions	of	her.	And	to	all	of	her	non-witch	neighbors,	of	course.	But
part	of	what	 it	was	 to	be	a	witch,	 I	was	beginning	 to	 realize,	was	 that	all	of
those	different	versions	were	somehow	in	closer	touch	with	one	another	than
was	the	case	for	non-witches.	So	on	this	visit	I	was	less	conversational,	got	out
the	 door	 faster—finally	 (to	 my	 great	 relief,	 uncomfortable	 though	 it	 was)
borrowing	 the	 witch’s	 corset.	 Happily,	 Goodman	 Griggs	 was	 also	 leaving
earlier,	and	his	ox	had	more	oomph	to	his	step	as	the	sun	had	not	gotten	to	its
hottest	point	yet.	I	was	over	the	river	in	record	time,	walked	out	of	the	shop
holding	 the	 Bay	 Psalm	 Book	 scant	 minutes	 later,	 and	 even	 the	 cooper	 was
prompt	and	respectful	(perhaps	because	I	was	finally	dressed	like	a	goody	rather
than	a	hussy).	The	day	felt	like	the	last	fortnight	of	high	school,	senior	year:	I
had	 to	 show	up,	 but	 no	Powers	On	High	 expected	me	 to	 do	 anything	 but
phone	it	in.

I	was	in	such	a	good	mood,	and	now	so	familiar	with	the	way,	that	truly	I
was	operating	on	autopilot	 as	 I	 approached	 the	creek	 that	would	 lead	me	 to
the	boulder.	This	may	account	for	why	I	did	not	quite	register	that	something



was	suddenly	extremely	different:	the	creek,	which	had	heretofore	dwindled	in
size	 and	 force	 as	 I	 approached	 the	 boulder,	 was	 now	 running	 rapidly	 and
loudly.	 I	 looked	 at	 it	 .	 .	 .	 and	 stopped	 in	 my	 tracks.	 It	 had	 been	 recently
dredged	 and	 the	 banks	 cut	 back	 to	 allow	 for	 a	 faster	 flow.	 I	 was	 moving
upriver,	so	looked	ahead	to	see	how	far	this	man-made	alteration	went.

I	 saw	 the	 foundation	 to	 a	 building.	My	 jaw	dropped	open	 in	 shock.	The
earth	and	vegetation	all	around	the	boulder	had	been	cleared	for	many	yards,
and	the	boulder	 itself	 incorporated	 into	the	half-built	 foundation,	although	it
was	of	course	much	higher	than	the	other	foundation	stones,	high	enough	to
be	a	section	of	wall	 for	the	ground	floor.	The	site	was	unmanned	at	present,
but	there	were	stacks	of	lumber	and	shaped	rock;	instruments	and	tools	rested
on	canvas	 tarps,	 and	beyond	 the	boulder,	near	 the	 stream,	was	 an	enormous
mixing	 vessel	with	 bags	 of	 sand	 around	 it.	The	 stone	 foundation	must	 have
cost	a	 fortune;	hewing	and	bringing	 in	the	stones	alone	would	have	been	an
ambitious	undertaking.

What	was	this	thing?	How	could	it	have	come	out	of	absolutely	nowhere,
and	what	was	I	to	do	about	it?	Clearly	I	could	not	bury	the	book	here.	With	a
sigh	 of	 resignation,	 I	 collected	 myself	 and	 began	 to	 slog	 back	 toward	 the
Cambridge	palisades.	The	tall	gates	being	unmanned	by	daylight,	I	 let	myself
through	and	headed	back	to	the	bookseller’s.

Merchant	 Usher	 and	 Printer	 Day	 had	 just	 finished	 arguing,	 with	 Usher
apparently	 the	victor,	 for	Day	was	gloomily	boxing	up	his	 stacks	of	books.	 I
begged	pardon	 and	placed	 the	bucket	down	 so	 they	would	not	 think	 to	 ask
about	it.

“What	 might	 be	 the	 building	 under	 construction	 up	 the	 creek,	 off	 the
Watertown	Road?”	I	asked.

The	 merchant	 laughed	 without	 malice—or	 humor.	 “That	 is	 the	 most
ambitious	 undertaking	 the	 devil	 ever	 spurred	 anyone	 to.	 It	 is	 to	 be	 a	maple
sugaring	factory.	A	very	enterprising	company	from	back	home	has	decided	to
stake	a	claim	in	the	future	fortune	of	the	colony,	and	has	determined	that	sugar
maples	are	what	Providence	has	provided	to	enrich	us.”

“The	name	of	the	company?”
“The	Boston	Council	for	Boston,”	he	said.
“Have	you	a	share	in	it?”	I	asked.
He	shook	his	head.	“I	was	invited	to	invest,	and	I	confess	I	was	tempted,	to

engage	 in	 something	 so	 forward-thinking.	 But	 I	 fear	 it	 is	 a	 bit	 too	 forward-
thinking.	Every	 joint-stock	company	of	 the	New	World	 so	 far	has	 failed,	or



been	 taken	 over	 by	 the	 crown,	 and	 I	 see	 no	 sign	 this	 one	 should	 fare	 any
better.	When	 the	 town	requires	palisades	 for	 safety	because	all	 the	American
tribes	are	at	each	other’s	 throats,	and	the	 factory	 is	half	a	mile’s	walk	outside
the	palisades	.	.	.	I	fear	they	are	doomed.”

“’Tis	a	wondrous	thing,”	the	printer	said	to	me,	dismissing	Usher’s	concern.
“Any	bettering	in	our	circumstances	is	to	be	applauded.”

“Only	 when	 it	 is	 done	 well,	 Stephen,”	 said	 Hezekiah	 gently,	 as	 if	 in
regretful	rebuke.

Thanking	 them,	 but	 rather	 flummoxed,	 I	 left	 the	 keg	 on	 the	 step	 of	 the
booksellers,	as	it	was	not	worth	it	to	cart	it	back	to	Goody	Fitch’s,	who	would
then	be	left	with	what	to	do	with	it.	I	took	the	ferry	back	across	and	walked	in
great	agitation	the	now-familiar	route	to	the	witch’s	home.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

JUNE	28

Temperature	70F,	raining	steadily.
Seedlings:	no	sign	of	germination,	but	it	is	too	soon.	Flame	azaleas	and

peonies	a	smidge	beyond	peak.	Herb	garden	thriving.	Roses	seem	adjusted
to	new	spot.	The	rain	helps.

A	complication	has	arisen	in	the	project,	that	being	the	foundation	of	a
factory	 having	 sprung	 up	 where	 this	 house	 now	 stands.	 Tristan	 phoned,
asked	us	to	come	in	to	brainstorm.	Frank	was	distracted	poking	about	with
the	quipu-like	object	I	had	brought	down	from	the	attic,	and	I	did	not	want
to	interrupt	him,	so	I	told	them	to	come	to	us.	We	settled	in	Frank’s	office
and	 I	 made	 a	 fire,	 for	 ambience.	 A	 summer	 thunderstorm	 was	 passing
through,	and	rain	was	lashing	the	windows.

Melisande	was	exasperated,	Tristan	grim.	Frank	curious,	when	brought
up	to	speed,	and	questioning	Erszebet,	who	demonstrated	boredom.

“Does	that	mean	there	is	a	parallel	universe	in	which	our	house	does	not
exist?”	Frank	asked	Erszebet.

“I	do	not	know	if	it	is	parallel,	I	have	never	measured	it,”	she	said.	“But



clearly,	something	like	that.	If	I	were	you,	I	would	not	try	to	return	to	that
world.”

“Why	did	you	send	me	 there	 in	 the	 first	place?”	Mel	demanded,	cross.
She	sat	closest	 to	 the	fire	and	held	her	hands	right	above	the	flames,	still
chilled	from	her	return.	Calico	trying	and	failing	to	convince	her	to	scratch
his	head.

“You	 think	 I	 have	 control	 over	 the	 universe?”	 said	 Erszebet.	 “If	 I	 had
such	control,	I	would	not	have	allowed	magic	to	be	ruined	in	the	first	place.
There	is	no	certainty.	There	is	never	certainty.”

“How	do	we	get	rid	of	the	factory?	What	are	our	options?”	Tristan	asked.
Erszebet	said,	“You	cannot	get	rid	of	it,	you	can	only	uncreate	it.”	Then

explained	that	the	usual	means	of	resolving	such	problems	is	to	go	back	to
an	 even	 earlier	 time	 and	 prevent	 the	 conflict,	 by	 slightly	 (and	 multiple
times)	altering	something	prior	to	the	event	 in	question.	All	shoulders	 in
the	room	sagged	at	this	notion.

“Could	we	not	simply	go	back	to	1640	and	try	again?”	I	suggested.	“There
has	 only	 been	 one	 reality	 in	 which	 there	 was	 a	maple	 syrup	 factory,	 and
many	more	in	which	it	didn’t	exist,	so	perhaps	we	can	simply	continue	the
effort	 in	 another	 Strand	without	 the	 factory—sidestep	 the	 problem,	 so	 to
speak.”

“You	can	try	that,	but	clearly	things	are	tending	toward	the	factory	being
there,	 so	 I	 recommend	 that	 you	 address	 the	 factory.”	 She	 yawned
expressively	to	make	sure	we’d	noticed	how	dull	this	sort	of	talk	was.

“Why?”	asked	Frank,	who	was	 as	usual	 the	 least	 exasperated	person	 in
the	room.	“Why	are	things	tending	toward	the	factory	being	built?”

“Yes,	 what	 are	 the	 mechanics	 here?”	 demanded	 Tristan,	 almost
interrupting	him.

“There	are	no	mechanics,”	said	Erszebet	disdainfully.	“It	is	magic.	Magic
does	not	 speak	 your	 language,	Mr.	Military-Physicist.	 Study	 it	 as	 hard	 as
you	 wish,	 some	 part	 of	 it	 will	 always	 elude	 you.	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 the	 best
advice	there	is.”

“You	 are	 saying,”	 said	 Tristan	 (patience exaggerated),	 “that	 we	must	 go
back	 to	 a	 time	 before	 the	 factory	was	 built,	 and	 prevent	 the	 factory	 from
being	built.”

“Several	times.”
Tristan	swore	under	his	breath.
“All	 of	 this	 effort	 for	 an	 unreliable	 result	 is	why	 time	 travel	 has	 never



been	a	smart	use	of	magic,”	she	added	in	a	superior	tone.	“I	knew	it	would
be	a	terrible	way	to	try	to	influence	anything.”

“Why	 didn’t	 you	 say	 that	 when	 I	 first	 suggested	 it	 to	 Frink?”	 Tristan
demanded.

“Agreeing	to	try	it	was	the	quickest	way	to	earn	a	salary,	which	gives	me	a
chance	to	go	to	Hungary	and	spit	on	the	graves	of	my	enemies.”	She	added
darkly,	 “Not	 all	 my	 enemies	 are	 in	 Hungary,	 you	 know,”	 and	 with	 that
glanced	briefly	toward	Mel,	who	was	staring	at	her	hands	poised	just	above
the	flames	and	did	not	notice.

I	 requested	 Erszebet	 to	 help	 me	 with	 the	 tea,	 and,	 once	 alone	 in	 the
kitchen	with	her,	asked	why	she	had	shot	that	look	at	Mel.

She	 tossed	her	dark	hair	back	over	one	 shoulder.	 “I	 am	only	 still	 alive
because	of	Melisande.”	She	is	so	beautiful,	and	so	very	present	in	her	young
body,	that	it	is	continually	difficult	to	remember	how	old	she	really	is.

“Is	that	such	a	bad	thing?”
“There	is	no	benefit	to	my	staying	so	long,”	she	said.	“Now	I	am	treated

like	Tristan	Lyons’s	trained	dog.	His	Asset.	If	I	had	died	in	natural	time,	I
would	be	at	peace	now.	This”—gesturing	out	the	window	toward	my	ruined
garden	 plot—“is	not	 what	 I	 ever	 believed	 it	 would	 be	 like	 when	 I	 finally
could	 perform	 magic	 again,	 and	 in	 the	 meantime	 I	 have	 survived	 one
century	and	a	half	of	unnatural	alienation	and	boredom	and	loss.”

I	did	not	know	what	to	say.	I	could	not	blame	her	the	bitterness.
“So,”	 she	 continued	 briskly,	 gesturing	 now	 toward	 her	 own	 splendid

figure,	 in	 tight-waisted	sundress	and	heeled	sandals.	“I	am	going	 to	have
some	 enjoyment	 now,	 to	make	 up	 for	 all	 those	 years.	 But	 even	 so”—and
here	she	darkened—“I	am	only	making	the	best	of	a	bad	situation.	And	I	am
in	that	situation	because	of	Melisande	Stokes.”

“Whatever	it	was	that	happened,	I’m	sure	she	meant	you	no	harm,”	I	said
quickly.

“Neither	did	the	first	photographer,”	said	Erszebet,	and	walked	briskly
back	toward	the	study.

I	feel	for	her,	deeply,	but	I	wonder	if	she	is	a	reliable	participant	in	this
undertaking.	Which	 is	worrisome,	 as	 she	 is	 the	only	 one	 involved	who	 is
irreplaceable.



Diachronicle	
DAYS	335–352	 (EARLY	JULY,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	we	are	London-bound

I	DO	NOT	KNOW	IF	the	Boston	Council	for	Boston	was	a	going	concern	before
I	stumbled	across	that	stone	foundation	on	the	Watertown	Road.	But	since	I’d
discovered	it,	it	existed	historically.	An	upstart	private	company	of	enterprising
Calvinists	 in	 the	 original	 Boston	 (in	 Lincolnshire,	 England),	 it	 was	 created
twenty-five	years	before	the	founding	of	the	New	World’s	Boston	and	actually
had	nothing	to	do	with	it;	its	purpose	was	to	bring	money	back	to	its	founders’
local	 economy.	 An	 odd	 mixture	 of	 socialism,	 isolationism,	 and	 snark,	 the
Boston	Council	for	Boston’s	name	really	meant:	“Our	Council	for	Us.”

Research	 into	the	Boston	Council	 for	Boston	quickly	revealed	that	 in	 late
September	1601,	the	company	(which	was	otherwise	about	to	fall	apart	before
it	had	so	much	agreed	upon	an	initial	investment)	got	backing	from	one	of	its
native	sons,	Edward	Greylock,	whose	father	had	adroitly	married	into	a	family
of	 Continental	 bankers,	 and	 as	 a	 result,	 risen	 in	 prominence	 in	 Queen
Elizabeth’s	 court—albeit	 on	 the	 outskirts.	 As	 of	 1601	 the	 son—Sir	 Edward
Greylock—lived	 primarily	 in	 London.	 Further	 research	 into	 Sir	 Edward
showed	him	(and	his	fortune)	to	have	cavorted	a	good	bit	with	the	adventurer
George	 Clifford,	 Earl	 of	 Cumberland,	 founding	 member	 of	 the	 East	 India
Company,	which	had	been	founded	only	at	the	end	of	the	previous	year.

If	Sir	Edward	could	be	persuaded	to	give	the	East	India	Company	his	coin,
and	not	merely	his	society,	then	the	Boston	Council	for	Boston	would	never
get	 the	 funds	 required	 to	 go	 to	 America,	 and	 thus	 never	 build	 their
inconvenient	syrup	boiler	on	the	road	to	Watertown.	The	next	DTAP	would
have	to	be	the	city	of	London,	1601.

This	is	how	we	met	Gráinne.

Journal	Entry	of



Rebecca	East-Oda
JULY	10

Temperature	81F,	slight	breeze	from	southwest.	Barometer	steady.
Container	 garden	 on	 front	 steps:	 kale,	 lettuce	 have	 germinated.	 Tea

roses	doing	well	in	their	new	setting.	Flame	azalea	almost	passed.
It	 is	 decided:	 Tristan	 will	 go	 to	 Renaissance	 London.	 I	 find	 myself

relieved	to	be	off	the	hook	now	as	I	can	be	of	no	practical	help.	There	have
been	 long	 days	 of	 discussion	 and	 theorizing	 and	 research	 to	 establish	 a
possible	witch	in	that	DTAP,	but	there	is	no	way	to	know.

In	the	absence	of	an	individual	witch	to	target,	Tristan	has	proposed	he
be	Sent	 to	 a	 setting	 that	 is	 likely	 to	 attract	witches.	Erszebet	 followed	 the
development	of	this	plan	with	some	private	amusement,	it	seemed	to	me.	I
am	not	at	all	certain	that	she	cares	whether	or	not	we	succeed.

To	 determine	 the	 sort	 of	 place	 witches	might	 be	 drawn	 to,	 it	 becomes
necessary	to	psychologically	profile	the	average	witch.	Having	only	Erszebet
and	a	cursory	experience	of	Goody	Fitch	as	a	sample	population	 is	hardly
sufficient,	but	the	only	other	source	is	secondary:	Erszebet’s	memories	of
other	 witches.	 These	memories	may	 say	more	 about	 Erszebet	 herself,	 or
her	circumstances,	than	they	do	about	her	mother,	her	mentor,	etc.	But	the
general	type	we	arrived	at	was	this:

A	witch	generally	speaks	her	mind	when	she	can	get	away	with	it,	doesn’t
care	much	about	what	men	 think,	 and	 is	determined	 to	have	 agency	over
her	fate,	even	in	a	 time	and	place	when	such	a	 thing	was	hard	to	come	by
(which,	 Erszebet	 added,	 was	most	 of	 human	 history).	 Based	 on	 Erszebet
herself,	and	her	claims	of	her	mother’s	behavior,	it	is	also	possible	witches
enjoyed	 the	 influence	 they	had	over	men	by	 their	 attractiveness,	but	 this
does	not	 seem	 to	be	 tempered	by	 any	 fondness	 for	 the	men	whose	heads
they	enjoyed	turning.

Sitting	 in	 Frank’s	 study—where	 I	 preferred	 we	 congregate	 when	 the
ODEC	 or	 office	 equipment	 was	 not	 specifically	 required—the	 four	 of	 us,
with	Erszebet	watching,	sat	musing	upon	this	collection	of	traits,	as	the	two
household	cats	wound	their	way	around	Frank’s	legs.



“This	 isn’t	 flattering,”	said	Tristan,	“but	 this	also	fits	 the	psychological
profile	of	a	lot	of	prostitutes.”

Erszebet	laughed.
“No	disrespect,”	Tristan	said.
“It	 is	 amusing	 that	 it	 has	 taken	 you	 so	 many	 hours	 to	 come	 to	 this

conclusion.”
“You	mean	you	already	knew?	You	could	have	told	us	this	and	saved	us	a

lot	of	time.”
“Yes,”	said	Erszebet,	pleased.
“Why	didn’t	you?”
“You	put	me	 through	my	paces	 to	 see	what	 I	 could	 do,	 I	wanted	 to	 see

what	it	was	like	to	be	in	your	position.	I	have	enjoyed	it.”
A	moment	of	Tristan	silently	grinding	his	teeth.	“So	you	are	confirming

that	we	need	to	look	for	prostitutes.”
“Not	any	prostitutes.	But	it	makes	sense,	yes?”	she	said.	“It	is	one	way	to

have	children	without	the	bother	of	husbands.”
“I	don’t	buy	that,”	said	Melisande.	“That’s	a	totally	romanticized	image

of	 sex	 workers.	 They’re	 generally	 poor	 and	 disenfranchised,	 and	 a	 witch
with	 any	 savvy	 at	 all	 would	 never	 choose	 such	 a	 life,	 for	 herself	 or	 her
children.	In	the	documents	I	translated,	witches	were	considered	powerful
and	 valuable	 by	 whoever	 was	 in	 charge.	 Even	 if	 they	 were	 seen	 as
dangerous,	they	were	valued.”

“That	doesn’t	mean	they	were	married,”	said	Erszebet.	“We	didn’t	need
to	be	married	to	have	power.”

Mel	looked	doubtful.	“So	was	that	the	norm	for	witches?	Being,	what,	a
courtesan,	or	at	least	someone’s	‘kept	woman’?”

Erszebet	gave	Mel	a	look.	“I	am	only	one	witch	and	have	lived	in	only	one
society	 of	 witches,	 at	 one	moment	 in	 history.	 You	 with	 your	 translations
have	 a	 broader	 knowledge	 than	 I	 do.	 But	 such	 a	 thing	 was	 referred	 to
casually	 by	 my	 mother’s	 friends.	 If	 a	 witch	 wanted	 children,	 there	 were
always	the	wealthy	men	around	who	can	treat	you	well	and	support	a	bastard
without	wanting	to	have	to	publicly	acknowledge	it.”

A	heavy	thought	came	over	me.	“Did	you	do	that?”	I	asked.	“I	mean	.	.	.
did	you	have	children?”

Erszebet	gave	me	a	look	that	scorched	my	liver.	“Of	course	not,”	she	said
after	 a	moment.	 “I	 could	 not	 bear	 the	 thought	 that	 I	 would	 live	 to	 watch
them	 age	 and	 wither	 and	 die	 and	 I	 would	 still	 be	 here	 and	 have	 to	 bury



them.”
There	was	 a	 long	 and	 uncomfortable	 pause.	Mel	 looked	down,	 seemed

almost	to	huddle	over	herself.
Tristan	coughed.	“So	we	need	to	look	for	.	.	.	courtesans?	High-ranking

mistresses,	that	sort	of	thing.”
“I	would	say	so,”	said	Erszebet	loftily.
“Hang	on,”	said	Mel,	looking	up.	“This	DTAP	was	near	the	end	of	Queen

Elizabeth’s	 reign,	 right?	 I	 don’t	 know	 how	 much	 autonomy	 attractive,
powerful	women	would	be	allowed	in	courtly	circles,	I	think	Elizabeth	was
increasingly	 paranoid	 and	 jealous	 as	 she	 aged.	 So	 maybe	 common
prostitutes	after	all.”

“No,”	said	Erszebet.	“We	would	not	tolerate	being	common.”
“Maybe	 an	 uncommon	 prostitute,	 then,	 who	 had	 her	 own	 reasons	 for

staying	away	from	the	court,”	Mel	suggested.
“There	were	a	 lot	of	brothels	in	Southwark,	where	the	theatres	were,”	I

offered.	 “I	 read	 that	 in	 the	 program	 notes	 for	 Henry IV	 when	 Boston
Shakespeare	did	it.”

“What	 do	 you	 think?”	 Tristan	 asked	Erszebet.	 “Does	 Southwark	 sound
right	to	you?”

She	 sniffed.	 “I	 have	 never	 heard	 of	 this	 place.	 But	 if	 it	 is	 full	 of
troublesome	women	then	you	might	be	in	luck.”

Diachronicle	
DAYS	335–352	 (CONTD. ;	EARLY	JULY,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	Tristan	learns	a	euphemism

THIS	PEN	WRITES	NO	FASTER,	 the	eclipse	 is	now	just	 twenty-three	days	away,
and	 I	 continue	 to	 entertain	 foolish	 fond	 thoughts	 that	 somehow	 I	 may	 yet



escape	 1851	 London.	 I	 am	 sure	 I	 have	 already	 complained	 in	 these	 leaves
about	the	stench,	but	as	summer	ripens,	so	too	do	its	smells.	No	pension	plan
is	worth	 this	 shit,	 in	 quite	 the	most	 literal	 sense.	 I	must	 tell	 this	 story	more
quickly	and	elide	some	details	to	get	it	all	down.

I	pled	travel	fatigue,	and	Tristan	honored	his	word	to	take	the	next	DTAP.
He	required	a	 specific	place	 to	 land	 in	London,	September	1601,	during	 the
week	before	the	investor,	Sir	Edward	Greylock,	agreed	to	put	his	money	into
the	Boston	Council	for	Boston.	This	was	an	event	we	were	able	to	date	with
precision	 from	 legal	 records.	 Finding	 a	 suitable	 landing	 place	 in	 that	DTAP
was	more	of	a	project.

During	the	course	of	our	research,	we	obtained	scans	of	city	maps	that	had
been	drawn	up	circa	1600	and	printed	them	out	on	huge	sheets	of	paper	that
we	taped	up	all	over	the	walls.	There,	they	accumulated	sticky	notes,	pushpins,
and	written	annotations.	It	was	while	studying	one	of	those	that	Tristan	let	out
an	oath	much	more	explicit	than	we	usually	heard	from	him,	and	jammed	his
finger	 into	a	 smudge	on	a	map	so	hard	 that	 it	must	have	hurt.	The	 smudge,
magnified	 and	 examined,	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 the	 words	 YE	 TEAR-SHEETE

BREWERY.
As	 mentioned	 previously,	 Tristan	 had	 a	 sentimental	 regard	 for	 Old

Tearsheet	Best	Bitter,	the	flagship	product	of	Tearsheet	Beverage	Group	Ltd.,
which	 claimed	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	 continuously	 operating	 breweries	 in
London.	He’d	spent	a	semester	abroad	in	the	city,	and	thought	himself	sporty
for	having	acquired	a	taste	for	something	so	obscure—not	quite	a	microbrew
but	neither	 a	household	name	 anywhere.	Bottled,	 it	was	 available	 at	 a	 select
few	package	stores	in	New	England.	On	tap,	it	could	be	had	in	some	pubs	that
catered	to	Anglophiles	and	expats.

Improbable	 as	 it	 might	 sound,	 further	 research	 bore	 out	 that	 Tearsheet
Beverage	 Group	 Ltd.	 really	 was	 the	 survival	 into	 modern	 times	 of	 the
enterprise	labeled	on	that	old	map.	To	Tristan’s	delight,	TBG	Ltd.	were	proud
enough	 of	 their	 heritage,	 and	 savvy	 enough	 with	 their	 marketing,	 that	 a
section	of	their	website	was	devoted	to	the	history	of	their	plant	in	London.	In
the	early	seventeenth	century,	the	brewhouse	proper	had	boasted	an	adjacent
public	 house.	 It	 was	 at	 most	 two	 hundred	 yards	 from	 the	 Globe	 Theatre.
Though	 the	 site	 did	 not	 mention	 it,	 the	 area	 had	 famously	 teemed	 with
brothels.

I	went	 back	 into	 the	Widener	Library	 stacks.	Where	 I	 discovered—to	no
great	 surprise—that	 the	 adjacent	 pub	was	 too	 large,	 with	 too	many	 upstairs



nooks,	 to	 have	 been	 merely	 a	 pub.	 Given	 the	 neighborhood,	 it	 probably
wasn’t	merely	an	inn	either.

“So	there	it	is,”	said	Tristan,	pleased,	when	I	showed	him	a	map	I’d	scanned
at	Widener.	“That’s	my	ground	zero.	What	else	do	we	know	about	it?”

“The	very	word	‘Tearsheet’	was	a	slang	term	for	a	prostitute,”	I	said.
He	pulled	a	face.	“I	had	no	idea.”
“The	 place	 was	 famous	 for	 always	 having	 ‘six	 comely	 maidens’	 working

there,”	I	said,	with	air	quotes,	“‘serving	the	customers	ale	and	aught.’”
“What’s	aught?”	asked	Tristan.
“Whatever	you	want	it	to	be,”	I	said.	“Their	names	are	not	recorded,	but	as

of	1600	we	know	that	one	was	Irish	and	two	were	Scottish.	If	we’re	looking
for	 loose	women	who	would	never	 fit	 in	at	Elizabeth’s	court,	 those	 three	 fit
the	bill.	Especially	the	Irish	one,	she	had	to	travel	by	sea	to	get	there,	and	the
seas	 between	 Ireland	 and	England	were	 full	 of	 pirates.	And	 she	would	 have
almost	certainly	been	Catholic—so	why	would	she	go	there	unless	 she	had	a
very	good	reason?”

Tristan	 sat	 at	 his	 desk	 examining	 the	 papers.	 The	 Tearsheet	 website	 had
airbrushed	the	map	a	bit.	In	reality,	not	only	was	the	“pub”	next	door	bigger
than	 the	 brewery	 claimed,	 but	 it	was	 connected,	 by	 an	 underground	 tunnel
and	secret	passages	on	every	floor,	directly	to	the	brewery	itself—thus	allowing
johns	who	needed	to	remain	anonymous	a	way	to	escape	if	the	brothel	were
raided	 by	 the	 constables.	Too	bad	none	of	 that	was	 on	 the	website.	 I	 think
their	sales	might	have	improved	if	they’d	shared	all	the	dirt.

Over	the	next	two	weeks,	Tristan	was	on	a	crash	course	in	preparing	to	pass
as	a	visitor	to	Elizabethan	London.	We	knew	he	would	never	get	the	accent
right,	 but	 as	with	myself	 in	Boston	 forty	 years	 later,	 this	was	 not	 an	 urgent
issue:	London’s	population	was	exploding,	and	the	city	was	babbling	away	in
different	accents	and	dialects	from	all	over.

A	benefit	to	choosing	this	DTAP	was	that	it	corresponded	with	the	height
of	 William	 Shakespeare’s	 career,	 and	 American	 theatres	 are	 simply	 obsessed
with	Shakespeare.	Therefore	Boston,	despite	 its	 small	 size,	was	crawling	with
fight	 choreographers	 who	 specialized	 in	 the	 swordplay	 and	 knife	 skills
common	 in	Shakespeare’s	 time—or	 at	 least	 in	his	 playhouse.	Tristan	 learned
drills	he	could	do	on	his	own	and	then	honed	his	skills	for	hours	each	day	in
the	 one	 still-separate	 office	 space	 in	 the	DODO	building.	He	 also	 practiced
bowing,	 cap-doffing,	 eating	without	 a	 fork,	 and	 sundry	 other	 small	 niceties,
whilst	 I	 drilled	 him	 on	 Elizabethan	 turns	 of	 phrase.	 Our	 costumer	 friend



helped	 again	with	 clothing,	 renting	 us	 a	 variety	 of	 different	men’s	 outfits	 so
that	 Tristan	 could	 practice	 putting	 them	 on	 and	 off,	 as	 we	 had	 no	 way	 of
knowing	 what	 clothes	 he	 might	 eventually	 find	 himself	 in.	 He	 would	 be
enormous	by	the	standards	of	the	time;	the	chances	of	his	actually	blending	in
were	slim	to	none.

I	enjoyed	watching	him	at	his	drills	even	more	than	I’d	enjoyed	watching
the	 ferryman	 row	 me	 across	 the	 Charles.	 I	 truly	 did	 not	 want	 to	 enjoy
watching	him.	It	seemed	incestuous.	I	thought	Tristan	was	a	looker	from	the
moment	I’d	laid	eyes	on	him,	but	all	of	that	had	been	swept	to	the	back	of	my
mind	 immediately	 because	 of	 the	 peculiarity	 of	 our	 meeting	 and	 then	 our
unceasing	work.	Except	 for	 the	 small	 talk	of	our	 first	meal	 together,	we	had
barely	ever	“chatted.”	Tristan,	as	a	general	rule,	does	not	chat.	I	knew	him	so
well	and	trusted	him	quite	literally	with	my	life,	and	yet	I	hardly	knew	him	at
all.

When	 he	 had	 been	 the	 brains	 of	 the	 operation,	 the	 guiding	 hand,	 the
commanding	officer,	I	somehow	hadn’t	noticed	that	.	.	.	but	now	as	he	was	in
training,	I	became	the	guide,	and	the	dynamic	shifted.	I	became	his	equal,	in
some	ways	 his	 superior,	 and	 this	 in	 turn	made	me	 proprietary.	 I	 felt	 secret
jealousy	toward	the	rest	of	his	life—how	absurd,	as	he	had	no	“rest	of	his	life,”
and	 in	 fairness	neither	did	 I	anymore.	He	seemed	 to	have	no	 friends	 locally,
never	 mentioned	 his	 family,	 and	 I	 can’t	 remember	 him	 referring	 to	 any
memories	 or	 relationships.	He	was	 an	 unformed	 block,	 from	which	 he	was
now	laboring,	literally,	to	sculpt	a	Renaissance	Man.

Reader,	that	was	an	attractive	thing	to	watch.
It	felt	like	failure	and	betrayal	to	admit	this	to	myself.
But	 the	 truth	 is,	 I	had	a	 fucking	crush	on	 somewhat	 fancied	him.	Always

had.	How	 ridiculous.	Anyone	 could	 fancy	Tristan	 Lyons;	 it	 took	 no	 special
qualities.	I	wished	to	demonstrate,	at	least	to	myself,	that	I	was	made	of	special
qualities.	So	I	chose	to	disregard	my	sentimentality.

This	was	 hard	 because:	 first,	 he	 looked	 pretty	 hot	when	he	was	 thrusting
that	 rapier,	 and	 second,	 I	was	 aware	he	was	 about	 to	go	away	 to	a	place	 far
more	dangerous	than	my	DTAP	had	been,	and	while	it	was	possible	he	would
return	 immediately,	 it	was	 also	 possible	 he	would	 not	 return	 at	 all.	That	 he
would	be	really,	truly,	not	just	Schrödinger’s-cat-like,	dead.

Nothing	like	the	possibility	of	eternal	separation	to	bring	out	the	romantic
in	a	girl.

But	 I	 squelched	 it.	 Before	 he	 went	 into	 the	 ODEC	 on	 July	 19	 with



Erszebet,	I	just	clapped	him	on	his	shoulder.	(Said	shoulder	was	clad	only	in	a
T-shirt;	 recent	 improvements	 to	 the	ODEC	 had	 included	 a	 heating	 system
that	made	 it	 into	 a	 shirtsleeves	 environment,	 and	we	 had	 taken	 our	 rack	 of
snowsuits	to	Goodwill.)	I	squeezed	said	shoulder	but	did	not	speak	any	of	the
words	 that	my	mouth	 suddenly	wanted	 to	 form.	 I	 gave	 him	 a	 peck	 on	 the
cheek,	and	watched	as	he	passed	through	the	airlock	into	the	decontamination
chamber.	 He’d	 already	 taken	 the	 medicines	 to	 sterilize	 his	 gut,	 but	 now
scrubbed	himself	 in	the	disinfectant	shower	and	emerged	in	a	pair	of	surgical
scrubs,	 the	 ungainliness	 of	 which	 helped	 to	 dampen	 my	 romantic	 stirrings.
Through	 the	 glass	 I	 waved	 like	 a	 younger	 sister	 as	 her	 brother	 goes	 off	 to
summer	camp.	He	nodded	while	backing	into	the	ODEC,	where	Erszebet	was
waiting.	He	closed	 the	door	behind	him.	Oda-sensei,	at	 the	control	console,
flipped	 up	 the	 cover	 over	 the	 toggle	 switch,	 switched	 it	 on.	 The	 Klaxon
clacked,	however	muffled.	We	waited.

It	felt	like	years	passed.
Finally,	Erszebet	opened	 the	ODEC	door.	Oda-sensei	powered	down	 the

ODEC.	I	had	been	hovering	anxiously	at	 the	door.	When	he	signaled	me	it
was	safe,	I	went	inside.

Lying	 on	 the	 floor	were	Tristan’s	 scrubs	 and	 two	white	 ceramic	 fillings	 I
hadn’t	known	about.	How	ridiculous	to	confess	this,	but	it	saddened	me	that	I
had	 not	 known	 about	 his	 fillings.	 The	 gulf	 of	 my	 ignorance	 regarding	 his
dental	work	left	me	feeling	irrationally	bereft.

Erszebet	 grabbed	my	 arm	 and	 tugged	 it	 to	 get	my	 attention.	 I	 forced	my
eyes	away	from	the	artifacts	of	Tristan	to	look	at	her.

She	reached	gently	for	my	face	and	with	her	thumb	and	finger	caressed	the
very	pursed	space	between	my	brows.	I	hadn’t	realized	I’d	been	frowning.	“If
he	 doesn’t	 make	 it	 back,	 you	 will	 easily	 find	 a	 better	 lover,”	 she	 said
consolingly.

I	blushed	so	intensely	it	almost	made	my	eyes	water.	“He’s	not	my	lover,”	I
said	irritably.

Erszebet	gave	me	a	knowing	grin.	“He’s	not	your	lover	yet,”	she	said.

LETTER	FROM



GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
A	Monday	of	Mid-Harvest,	1601

Auspiciousness	and	prosperity	to	you,	milady!
Gráinne	it	is	who’s	writing	this,	and	’tis	the	most	astounding	news	I	have	to

share	with	Your	Grace.	I’m	after	meeting	a	gentleman	by	the	name	of	Tristan
Lyons.	You’ll	want	to	add	him	to	your	stable	of	faithful	vassals,	and	I	think	he
can	find	his	way	there	with	the	proper	inducements.	I’ll	be	working	on	him	to
that	end,	anyhow.

I	was	 putting	 in	my	 time	 at	 the	 bawdy-house	 beside	 the	 brewery.	 I	 know
Your	Grace	 would	 rather	 I	 not,	 but	 truly	 it’s	 the	 best	 way	 to	 hide	 in	 plain
sight,	 and	 sometimes	 it’s	 great	 crack.	 I	 was	 servicing—or,	 to	 put	 it	 another
way,	 being	 serviced	by—a	gentleman	of	Bess’s	 court,	 a	 lumbering	heap	of	 a
knight	 and	 not	 the	 brightest	 candle	 in	 the	 chandelier.	He	 thinks	 he’s	 never
revealing	any	secrets,	but	sure	it’s	as	easy	to	read	him	as	it	is	to	read	the	signs
on	the	High	Street,	 so	 it’s	a	mutually	beneficial	arrangement.	Himself	 it	was
who	 let	 slip	 the	 rumour	 about	 the	Earl	 of	Essex	 some	months	back.	As	you
might	recall	this	allowed	Your	Grace’s	agent	to	adopt	some	of	His	Lordship’s
silver	that	was	left	tragically	unattended	during	His	Lordship’s	arrest.

So	there	we	were	getting	along	with	business,	and	I	 look	over	his	shoulder
and	what	I	see	there	in	the	corner	is	a	bit	of	glamour.	So	I	know	there’s	some
magic	afoot	but	it’s	not	me	performing	it,	and	there’s	nobody	else	in	the	room.
And	 just	 as	 it’s	 occurring	 to	 me	 that	 another	 witch	 must	 be	 Sending	 me
something,	what	 is	 there	 in	 the	 corner	 suddenly	but	 a	 large	 handsome	man,
buck	naked,	looking	dazed	as	a	newborn,	and	doesn’t	he	fall	right	to	his	knees
and	 clutch	 at	 his	 head	 in	 utter	 confusion.	And	 then	 he	moans	 a	 bit,	 louder
than	my	dim	fella,	and	my	dim	fella	hears	him,	stops	abruptly	in	his	exertions,
and	looks	over	his	shoulder.

You	don’t	want	to	have	to	go	explaining	to	a	man	in	the	heat	of	passion	why
there’s	suddenly	another	naked	man	in	the	room.	Especially	one	who’s	a	better
specimen.	 This	 new	 naked	 fella,	 he	 was	 tall	 and	 broad	 and	 the	 healthiest
looking	 lad	 I’ve	 seen	 in	 ages,	 even	 finer	 than	 the	 lads	 back	home.	 I	 guessed
right	off	he	was	probably	from	the	Continent	or	maybe	the	Golden	Age,	you
know	 how	 them	 idiot	 pagans	 like	 to	 mess	 around—not	 from	 around	 here,
anyway,	which	means	he	would	be	needing	clothing	and	some	dosh,	like	they
do.



So	I	thought	fast	and	said	to	your	man	who	was	on	top	of	me,	“Hey	now,
look	I’ve	got	you	the	voyeur	you	were	importuning	me	for	last	week,	but	it’s
going	to	cost	you	extra	for	the	privilege,	so	let’s	finish	up	here	and	give	me	the
silver	for	 it.”	He	was	too	astonished	to	speak	and	that	gave	me	a	moment	to
consider	the	situation.

I	had	to	reckon	what	the	new	fellow	would	be	doing	here,	given	he	clearly
was	not	Irish.	He	looked	more	Saxon,	but	what	did	that	mean	now	the	Vikings
are	no	more?	Was	he	an	enemy	or	a	friend?	Did	he	come	here	deliberately	to
me,	or	maybe	a	blunder	it	was?	He	looked	familiar,	yet	I	knew	of	a	certainty
I’d	never	clapped	eyes	on	him	before—and	as	I	needn’t	belabor	to	you	of	all
people,	milady,	this	told	me	that	what	was	occurring	here	and	now	was	sure	to
be	repeating	itself	on	other	Strands.	Something	was	afoot.	Some	shite-for-brains
was	actually	trying	to	accomplish	something	by	sending	this	poor	young	buck	to
other	times	and	places.	He	was	still	looking	bolloxed	so	I	couldn’t	ask	him	yet.

Meanwhile	my	 dim	 fella	 had	 collected	 his	meagre	wits	 enough	 to	 protest
that	he’d	never	wanted	a	voyeur.	I	said,	“Oh,	come	now,	I	know	you	too	well
for	 you	 to	 hide	 anything	 from	 me,	 you’re	 falling	 all	 over	 yourself	 for	 the
opportunity.	Finish	off	and	be	giving	me	the	money,	so.”

He’s	out	of	the	humour	now,	which	I	don’t	mind.	Very	grudgingly,	in	a	foul
mood,	he	reaches	for	his	belt	on	the	floor	and	yanks	out	some	extra	coin	and
tosses	 them	 to	 me	 in	 a	 huff.	 The	 fellow	 on	 the	 floor	 has	 pulled	 himself
together	a	bit,	looks	around	the	wee	room	and	his	eyes	widen.

“It’s	all	right,	lad,”	says	I	to	him.	“You’ve	played	your	part	well	so	far.”
“You’d	 be	Gráinne?”	 he	 asks,	 pronouncing	 it	 almost	 right,	 like	 he’s	 been

practicing.	 Which	 was	 awkward	 since	 I’m	 never	 going	 by	 that	 name	 at	 the
Tearsheet.

“No,”	says	I,	giving	him	a	wink	to	put	him	at	his	ease,	and	making	a	glance
at	the	other	fella.

Which	 is	where	 it	all	went	 sideways.	This	new	fella	 is	one	of	 those	 literal-
minded	sorts	so	tediously	common	in	this	nation,	who	actually	believes	what
he	hears.	He’s	not	looking	at	me,	supposing	it	were	indelicate	to	gaze	upon	a
naked	lady,	so	he	doesn’t	collect	the	wink.	“I	beg	your	pardon,”	he	says,	ever	so
polite,	and	clambers	to	his	feet,	moving	well,	with	an	eye	on	the	door.

Increasingly	displeased,	is	my	dim	fella	about	this	turn	of	events,	the	more
he	 thinks	 about	 it.	 He	 has	 no	 scruples	 about	 looking	 at	 a	 naked	 lady	 he’s
bought	and	paid	 for,	 so	he	 takes	 in	 the	wink	and	the	glance,	and	even	more
displeased	they	make	him.	He	pushes	off	of	me	and	turns	around	just	in	time



to	see	the	new	fella	thoughtlessly	getting	between	him	and	his	baldric,	which
he’s	slung	over	the	peg	beside	the	doorway.	Suspended	in	that,	of	course,	are
the	scabbards	containing	his	rapier	and	his	dagger.	The	new	fella’s	still	looking
about	himself	in	that	way	people	do	after	they’ve	been	Sent	somewhere	for	the
first	 time,	 it’s	 all	 new	 to	 him,	 he	 doesn’t	 appreciate	 that	 it’s	 bad	 practice	 to
come	 between	 a	 knight	 and	 his	 arms—doubly	 so	 when	 the	 knight’s	 buck
naked	and	just	had	a	perfectly	good	fuck	interrupted	by	a	nasty	surprise.	My
customer	moves,	fast,	dropping	one	shoulder	and	barreling	into	the	new	man
from	behind,	catching	him	in	the	ribs	and	giving	him	a	good	bash.	It	wouldn’t
have	been	an	equal	contest	had	the	new	lad	been	looking	him	in	the	face,	and
on	his	toes,	but	as	it	was	the	blow	staggered	him	out	of	the	way.	While	he	was
pivoting	 about	 and	 getting	 his	 balance,	 my	 customer	 made	 straight	 for	 the
door	and	pulled	his	dagger	out	of	its	sheath—the	chamber	being	far	too	small,
you’ll	understand,	for	the	rapier	to	be	of	any	use.

Well,	to	that	point	in	the	proceedings,	the	new	arrival	might’ve	been	in	a	bit
of	a	daze,	but	the	sight	of	bare	steel	in	another	fella’s	hand	snapped	him	out	of
it	 in	 a	 trice,	 and	 suddenly	 wasn’t	 he	 moving	 with	 marvelous	 speed	 and
sureness,	as	if	he	engaged	in	naked	dagger	fighting	several	times	a	day.	Rather
than	 stepping	 back,	 as	 an	 ordinary	 person	 might’ve,	 he	 moved	 toward	 the
knight	and	got	in	close,	stifling	his	movement	even	as	he	was	drawing	back	to
stab.	Then	something	happened	too	quickly	for	me	to	follow	it,	and	next	thing
I	 know	 the	 dagger’s	 clattering	 on	 the	 floorboards	 and	 the	 Saxon	 has	 the
knight’s	arm	all	twisted	about	in	some	manner	of	wrestling	hold,	I	reckon.	The
knight	tries	to	squirm	out	but	the	visitor	pushes	a	bit	harder,	and	I	can	hear
something	threatening	to	give	way	in	the	shoulder	joint.	“I	yield,”	says	he	who’s
clearly	got	the	worst	of	it.	The	new	lad	lets	him	go,	but	not	before	kicking	the
dagger	across	 the	 floor,	out	of	 reach.	 I	 snatched	 it	up	 so	 there’d	be	no	more
such	 foolishness,	 and	 clasped	 it	 to	 my	 breast.	 Rarely	 have	 I	 enjoyed	 such
spectation	at	the	Tearsheet.	The	new	lad	was	so	fine	to	look	at	and	the	other
fella	was	so	dull,	and	I	haven’t	got	out	to	a	bear-baiting	or	even	a	play	in	the
longest	 time.	To	watch	naked	men	have	 a	 go	 at	 each	 other	with	weapons	 is
better	than	either.	Makes	me	homesick,	so	it	does.

“I	humbly	apologize	 for	 this	misunderstanding,”	 says	 the	Saxon.	 I	couldn’t
recognize	 the	 accent.	 His	 teeth	 were	 gorgeous.	 “And	 for	 my	 unmannerly
arrival.”	He	said	unmannerly	as	if	it	weren’t	a	word	used	to	coming	out	of	his
mouth.	So	I	figured	he	were	from	a	place	where	manners	aren’t	important	but
he’s	 trying	 to	 respect	 the	 occasion,	 and	 I	 liked	 that	well	 enough.	 Enough	 to



want	to	keep	seeing	him	naked,	anyhow.
So	I	take	the	dim	fella’s	purse,	help	myself	to	my	newly	augmented	fee,	toss

him	his	 clothes,	 and	give	him	a	wink.	 “Be	 changing	outside	now,”	 I	 say,	 and
send	him	off.

That	makes	it	easier	to	stare	at	your	naked	Saxon.
“Gráinne,”	he	said.	“But	you	don’t	go	by	that	name.	I	understand.”
“You’re	not	one	of	them	locals,”	I	observe.
“What	gave	it	away?”	he	asked.	I	like	a	bit	of	dry	humour.	I	laughed.
“So	 tell	me,	 then,	who	 are	you	 and	what	 is	 it	brings	 you	here?	Who	Sent

you?”
“Classified,”	he	said.
“Never	heard	of	him.	Perhaps	a	Cornish	name,	is	it?	Protestant	or	Catholic?”
“’Tisn’t	a	name,”	he	said.	“It	means	I	cannot	tell	you.	I	am	under	orders	not

to	tell	you.”
“Are	you?	How’s	your	master	expect	you	to	get	anything	done,	then?	Once

you’ve	answered	my	questions	to	my	satisfaction	I’ll	give	you	this	extra	money
the	fella	left,	and	get	you	some	clothes,	both	of	which	you’ll	be	needing.	We’ve
some	extra	shirts	and	drawers	around	for	our	favorite	customers,	since	things
do	tend	to	get	nicked	here.	But	you’ll	get	no	help	from	me	until	you	answer
my	questions.	Right	idiot	your	master	is	if	he	thinks	it	works	any	other	way.”

Clearly	the	fellow’s	never	been	Sent	before;	he	got	a	caged-bear	look	on	his
face,	and	I	felt	for	him,	but	obviously	it’s	not	safe	to	do	anything	until	I	know
more.	 I’m	 passing	 as	 Protestant	 Irish,	 it’s	 my	 excuse	 for	 being	 in	 London
instead	of	back	home,	but	Protestant	Irish	is	a	hard	act	to	play	without	giving
it	the	full	Puritan	extreme	and	that’s	not	safe	either.	I	have	to	watch	my	back
all	the	time.	I	needed	to	know	where	his	sympathies	were.

And	then	he	uttered	such	an	 idiot	claim:	“I’m	here	 for	a	purely	economic
concern,”	 he	 says.	 “It’s	 just	 financial,	 I’ve	 got	 no	 political	 or	 religious
affiliation.”

“Is	it	Protestant	money	or	Catholic	money	you’re	after?”	I	ask.
“It	does	not	matter,”	he	says.	“Not	where	I	come	from.”
“Where	 in	God’s	name	do	you	come	 from?”	 I	 ask	 again.	 “May	 I	 go	 there

with	you?	Because	in	the	name	of	Our	Lord’s	mammy,	if	I	could	be	someplace
where	money’s	got	no	 religion	and	 religion’s	got	no	money,	 I’d	be	a	happier
woman.”

He	sits	on	the	bed	beside	me,	turned	a	little	away	so	I	can’t	see	his	front	so
well	(I	did	try	to	peek	though).	He	said	he	would	tell	me	as	much	as	he	could



—anything	that	wasn’t	“classified.”	And	here’s	what	he	told	me.	I’ll	make	it	as
brief	as	I	can,	but	it	was	quite	the	long	chat	we	had	about	it:

He	 is	 from	 the	 future,	 from	 a	 land	 that	 will	 become	 an	 English-speaking
nation	 some	 day—but	 not	 a	 part	 of	 England!	 So	 their	 accursed	 language
triumphs,	but	they	themselves	do	not.	The	fuckers	lose	most	of	Ireland	as	well,
turns	out.	I	don’t	know	how	long	it	will	take	this	to	happen,	maybe	ten	years,
maybe	 a	 hundred.	 I	 pressed	 him	 for	 details,	 especially	 about	 Your	 Grace’s
legacy	 of	 course,	 but	 he	 said	 he	 couldn’t	 give	 me	 any	 unless	 I	 let	 him	 get
dressed,	which	I	wouldn’t.	It	was	great	crack	to	see	how	uncomfortable	he	was
being	naked.

“Guess	you	don’t	do	that	much	in	the	future,”	I	teased	him.	“Thought	that
would	be	a	constant	across	the	ages—how	bawdy-houses	work.”

“I	have	never	been	to	a	bawdy-house	before,”	he	said.
Of	 course	 I	 didn’t	 believe	 him,	 but	 it	 wasn’t	 important,	 so	 I	 pressed	 on,

trying	 to	 learn	 more	 about	 this	 Future	 where	 the	 best-looking	 fellas	 speak
English	but	are	not,	in	fact,	English.	We	spent	no	small	sum	of	time	discussing
why	wearing	 clothes	would	make	 it	 easier	 for	 him	 to	 speak.	Otherwise,	 all	 I
could	get	out	of	him	was	that	the	land	that	the	English	are	now	preparing	to
settle	in	the	New	World	breaks	away	from	England	to	become	its	own	nation,
and	keeps	speaking	English	but	becomes	notable	for	its	deep	regard	of	Ireland.
This	 is	 especially	 true	of	 the	area	where	he	himself	had	come	 from	directly,
which	is	a	province	with	the	queer	enough	name	of	Massive	Shoe	Hits	(code,	I
expect).	Anyhow,	seems	in	the	future	there	will	be	lots	of	Irish	running	around
over	there,	but	they’ll	be	speaking	English.

“So	 where’s	 their	 loyalty?”	 I	 demanded,	 and	 he	 said	 it’s	 with	 themselves.
“They	get	distracted	with	their	new	world,	they	don’t	have	the	energy	to	stay
preoccupied	with	old	grudges.	Eventually,	I	mean.	It	takes	awhile.”

Beyond	that	the	most	I	could	get	out	of	him	was	that	he	had	come	back	in
time	 to	me,	 specifically,	 to	 seek	 my	 assistance.	 Wasn’t	 I	 flattered	 at	 that,	 I
confess.	“How	did	you	know	to	find	me?”	I	asked.

“Classified,”	 he	 said	 quickly,	 and	 then	 grimaced	 and	 corrected	 himself:	 “I
can’t	tell	you.	But	I	know	you’re	the	right	one	for	me	to	ask	for	help.”

“All	right	then.	What	be	in	it	for	me?”	I	asked.	“Given	you’ve	no	money	to
offer	me,	and	refusing	you	are	to	tell	me	about	the	future,	which	is	the	only
reason	I’d	be	interested	in	you.	Except	maybe	for	playing	around	because	you
are	a	beautiful	specimen	of	a	man.	I’ll	wager	all	your	children	are	beauties.”

“Might	we	continue	this	conversation	once	I’m	clothed?”	himself	asks	again,



with	 a	 bit	 more	 urgency	 now	 as	 my	 words	 are	 having	 their	 effect	 and	 he’s
beginning	to	get	big	and	firm	down	below.

“Lordy,	no,”	I	say.	“I	am	enjoying	this	too	much.	Do	you	know	how	rare	it	is
to	sit	next	to	a	fellow	who’s	clean	and	nice-looking	and	isn’t	asking	anything	of
me?	It’s	enough	to	make	me	want	to	offer	myself.”

“That’s	 not	 why	 I’m	 here,”	 he	 says,	 crossing	 his	 legs	 more	 than	 a	 bit
awkwardly.

“Well	then	tell	me	why	you	are	here,”	I	ordered.
“I	 need	 to	 convince	 a	 man	 named	 Sir	 Edward	 Greylock	 that	 he	 should

invest	his	money	in	the	East	India	Company.”
“Sure,	I’ve	heard	of	Sir	Edward,	we’ve	some	friends	in	common,	if	you	take

my	meaning.”
“Oh,	do	you	know	how	to	find	him?”
“I	might,”	I	say,	and	it’s	pretty	confident	I	am	about	it.	Your	Grace	might

remember	the	wee	peccadillo	of	last	year	with	that	German	banker	fellow	and
the	silk	merchant?	Sir	Edward	is	the	German’s	grand-nephew	on	his	ma’s	side,
and	I	met	him	in	passing	at	the	funeral,	but	he	was	quite	drunk	so	he	wouldn’t
remember	 me.	 However,	 knowing	 the	 family	 to	 be	 Protestant	 bankers	 I’ve
kept	 a	 careful	 eye	 on	 all	 their	 spawn.	 And	 as	 Your	 Grace	 knows	 well,	 I’ve
made	 it	my	business	to	win	the	confidences	of	some	of	the	wenches	working
the	taverns	near	Whitehall	Palace,	and	I	keep	an	inventory	in	my	head	of	their
regulars’	 habits,	 same	 as	 they	 themselves	 do.	 So	 I	 happen	 to	 know	 that	 Sir
Edward	Greylock	is	a	regular	for	late	dinner	at	the	Bell,	on	King	Street,	right
by	the	stairs.	I	didn’t	tell	my	Saxon	all	this,	of	course.	First	I	had	to	know	more
from	him.	“Is	it	that	you	want	to	ruin	Sir	Edward,	and	the	East	India	Company
is	going	to	fail?”	I	asked.	“Or	is	it	that	you	want	him	to	succeed	and	it’s	going
to	thrive?	Answer	if	you	want	my	help.”

“Neither,	 really.	 I	 just	 want	 to	 distract	 him	 from	 putting	 his	money	 into
another	company.	I’m	trying	to	avoid	something.”

“So	it’s	another	enterprise	that	you	want	to	see	fail,”	I	said.	He	nodded	once.
“Is	it	Protestant	or	Catholic,	this	other	one?”

“That’s	truly	got	nothing	to	do	with	anything,”	he	insisted.
“If	you	know	what	comes	of	the	East	India	Company,	tell	me,	since	that	will

be	useful	 to	 somebody	I	know,	and	you’d	better	make	yourself	useful	 if	you
expect	me	to	give	a	shite	about	you.”

“I	can’t	tell	you	what	happens	with	the	East	India	Company.”
“Classified,	is	it?”



“Yes.	Classified.”
“Goodo.	God	ye	good	day,	then,”	I	said	cheerily,	stood	up	from	the	mattress

and	headed	for	the	little	curtained	doorway.
“Where	are	you	going?”	he	demands,	paling	a	little.
“I’m	leaving	you	with	your	classifieds,”	I	said.	“I’ll	keep	my	own	classifieds

until	you’re	willing	to	have	a	fair	exchange.”
And	 I	 left	 the	 room,	went	 down	 the	wee	 corridor	 and	 climbed	 down	 the

steps	to	the	ground	level	where	the	tavern	is.	I	went	out	back,	used	the	privy,
then	stepped	back	into	the	tavern	to	see	if	anyone	was	in	need	of	me.	But	it
was	that	time	of	day	when	the	few	men	there	are	mostly	there	for	the	drink.

So	having	left	the	Saxon	alone	for	about	as	long	as	it	would	take	to	walk	a	half
mile,	I	returned	to	the	wee	chamber,	and	as	I	anticipated	he	was	more	willing
to	negotiate.

He	allowed	that	the	East	India	Company	is	a	good	investment	for	those	who
can	risk	it—it	takes	awhile	to	come	to	much,	but	then	it	will	be	around	a	long
while	and	’tis	a	private	company	with	good	returns	on	the	investment	in	time.
So,	Your	Grace,	 let	me	 know	 if	 you’re	 interested	 in	 channeling	 some	 funds
that	way,	 and	 I’ll	 alert	your	agent	here.	 If	 it’s	 good	enough	 for	a	Fugger,	 it’s
good	enough	for	a	Fucker.

Meanwhile,	since	I	wanted	him	to	see	he’d	get	rewarded,	and	since	sadly	it
seemed	we	weren’t	going	to	have	any	kind	of	adventure	while	he	was	naked,	I
pulled	out	the	extra	set	of	drawers	and	shirt	that	were	hiding	under	that	very
mattress	the	whole	time	and	tossed	them	to	him.

“I’ll	help	you	find	your	Sir	Edward,”	I	said,	“but	first	we	need	to	kit	you	out
in	more	than	underwear.	Lucky	for	you	it’s	me	you	sought	out,	as	I’m	the	one
best	knows	how	to	get	togemans	for	such	a	large	lad.”

Once	he	had	donned	the	threads	I	had	for	him,	he	relaxed	a	bit	and	even
introduced	himself	properly:	Tristan	Lyons,	he	claims	 to	be.	Can’t	make	out
where	 he’s	 really	 from	 by	 the	 name,	 any	 more	 than	 by	 the	 looks.	 (French,
maybe?	 In	 which	 case	 likely	 Catholic,	 but	 not	 likely	 an	 ally	 even	 so.	 The
French	are	slippery	that	way.)

I	decided	to	take	him	to	the	Globe,	on	account	of	Dick	Burbage	has	a	closet
full	of	costumes	he	did	steal	from	Ned	Alleyn.	He	played	a	heap	of	roles	in	his
day,	 did	 Ned,	 so	 I	 was	 hoping	 we	 could	 make	 Tristan	 over	 into	 whatever
would	be	most	expedient	for	his	undertaking.

’Tis	a	short	walk	from	the	Tearsheet	to	the	Globe,	mostly	along	the	river,



and	one	I	never	thought	of	as	remarkable,	but	you’d	think	I	was	asking	Tristan
to	 eat	 a	 sewer.	Practically	 retching	 the	whole	way	he	was,	despite	my	 taking
him	along	the	broader	lane	where	gravel	is	laid	down	over	the	clay,	and	all	the
sewage	 lies	 neatly	 in	 the	 drainage	 ditches	 to	 the	 side	 of	 the	 streets,	 not	 like
some	alley	where	the	offal	sits	right	in	the	street	once	it’s	dumped	from	above.
’Twas	only	a	turd	or	two	we	had	to	sidestep,	not	counting	the	horse	manure,
which	isn’t	at	all	offensive,	in	fact	it	has	a	barnyard	smell	that	reminds	me	of
home.

Tristan	Lyons	had	only	his	underclothes	on,	of	 course,	but	 in	 this	part	of
town	that	hardly	draws	attention,	no	matter	he	was	such	a	large	fella.	Crowds
were	streaming	 into	the	Globe’s	gates.	Trumpets	did	sound	from	within,	and
then	I	recognized	Hal	Condell’s	voice	like	an	oratorio,	which	meant	they	were
beginning	some	fool	play.	Tristan’s	attention	 turned	toward	the	gate	as	 if	he
were	curious	to	go	in.

“’Tisn’t	that	way	we’re	going,”	I	said.
“That	phrase,”	he	 said,	 looking	 surprised.	 “Even	 I	 know	 that	phrase.	 ‘Star-

crossed	lovers.’	They’re	doing	Romeo	and	Juliet	in	there.	The	original	Romeo	and
Juliet.”

“No,	 the	 original	 had	 Saunder	 Cooke	 as	 Juliet,”	 I	 said.	 “That	 was	 much
better	than	whoever’s	doing	it	since	Saunder	grew	a	beard.	Anyhow	it’s	a	shite
play,	 just	 a	 stupid	 court-sponsored	 rant	 against	 the	 Irish.”	 I	 grabbed	his	 arm
and	began	 to	pull	him	through	 the	 floods	of	people	 streaming	back	 into	 the
theatre.	We	must	need	get	around	to	the	back	of	 the	stage	where	the	tiring-
house	was.

“How	is	it	anti-Irish?”	Tristan	asked.
“The	villain	is	a	Catholic	friar,”	I	pointed	out.	“He	being	a	meddling	busy-

body	who	traffics	in	poison—he’s	the	reason	it’s	a	tragedy	and	not	a	comedy,
and	everyone	knows	Catholic	is	code	for	Irish.”

“Aren’t	the	French	Catholic?”	asked	Tristan.	“And	the	Spanish?”
“The	 friar’s	 name	 is	 Lawrence,”	 I	 countered,	 as	 I	 pulled	 him	 along.	 “So

obviously	named	after	St.	Labhrás.	He	was	martyred	by	drinking	a	poison	of
his	 own	 concocting.	 The	 whole	 play	 is	 just	 a	 coded	 insult	 to	 the	 Irish,	 a
demonstration	of	how	amoral	we	supposedly	are.	It’s	bollocks.	You	be	missing
nothing.	Especially	now	that	Saunder’s	grown	a	beard.”

“I	don’t	want	to	see	it,	I	 just	never	heard	that	Shakespeare	hated	the	Irish
before,”	said	Tristan,	only	it	was	so	crowded	there	that	he	was	shouting	just	to
be	heard	as	all	the	people	pressed	past	us	to	get	inside.



“Why	 would	 anyone	 in	 your	 time	 give	 a	 shite	 about	 Will	 Shakespeare’s
politics?	 But,	 aye,	 he	 does,”	 I	 said.	 “I	 can	 quote	 reams	 of	 examples,	 same	 as
anyone.	Worst	 of	 all	was	 just	 the	 other	 year,	 one	 of	 them	plays	 about	 some
English	king,	 and	 there	was	a	 terrible	drunk	 Irish	character	 staggering	about
the	stage	wailing	about	how	all	the	Irish	are	villains	and	bastards	and	knaves.
And	awhile	before	that	he	had	a	play	about	some	other	English	king	who	went
to	 conquer	 Ireland,	 and	 he	 said	 the	 Irish	 live	 like	 venom.	 Venom.	 That’s
poison,	so	it	is.	He’s	obsessed	with	the	Irish	and	poison.	Trying	to	convince	the
masses	that	one	of	us	is	planning	to	poison	the	Queen.”

“Are	you?”	asked	Tristan.
“Course	not.	Not	worth	the	risk.	She’ll	be	dying	soon	anyhow	and	’tisn’t	as

if	 she	 could	 suddenly	 produce	 an	 heir	 at	 her	 age.	 There’ll	 be	 chaos	 soon
without	us	meddling.”

“Fair	enough,”	he	said.
“It	is	not	fair	enough.	It	would	be	fair	if	she’d	died	years	ago.	’Tis	always	the

wrong	 ones	 living	 too	 long	 and	 the	wrong	 ones	 dying	 too	 young.”	And	 then
because	this	touches	a	subject	near	to	my	sensitive	heart,	of	course	I	pressed
on:	“Like	my	Kit	Marlowe.”

“Who’s	Kit	Marlowe?”
I	 stopped	 walking,	 and	 let	 the	 crowd	 bump	 past	 me	 as	 I	 turned	 to	 him.

“Christopher	Marlowe?	Are	you	telling	me	you’ve	never	heard	of	Christopher
Marlowe?”

“Christopher	Marlowe.	Of	course	I	know	the	name.”	He	thought	a	moment.
“He	was	a	spy	and	a	writer,	but	I	was	not	briefed	about	him	in	depth	because
he	died	years	before	I	needed	to	arrive	here.”

“Briefed?	 There’s	 nothing	 brief	 about	 him,	 except	 his	 life,	 he	 is	 only	 the
greatest	playwright	 that	ever	was,	who	only	wrote	the	greatest	play	that	ever
was.”	 And	 because	 no	 light	 of	 recognition	 went	 on	 in	 his	 pretty	 eyes,	 I
prompted,	“It’s	Tamburlaine	I	mean.”

He	 shrugged.	 “I	 do	 not	 know	 it.”	 I	 was	 incredulous	 and	 I	 expressed	 my
incredulity	with	colorful	language.	“More	famous	than	Hamlet?”	he	asked.

I	 figured	he	was	 codding	me	 and	 almost	 fell	 over	with	 the	 laughter.	 “Are
you	taking	the	piss,	Tristan	Lyons?”	I	asked.	“Hamlet’s	a	dull	fuck	of	a	story
where	a	fellow	stands	around	lamenting	how	useless	he	is	even	to	his	own	self,
and	then	there’s	one	pansy	swordfight	and	it’s	over.	The	only	good	part	of	that
is	what	he	nicked	from	Kit’s	Dido.”

Tristan	shrugged	again.	“I’m	not	much	of	a	theatre-goer.”



“No	theatre,	no	whoring	.	.	.	pray	what	is	it	you	do	for	recreation,	then?”
But	before	he	could	answer,	we’d	reached	the	back	of	the	Globe,	and	they

know	me	in	the	tiring-house,	so	I	grabbed	him	by	the	hand	and	in	we	marched.
The	tiring-house	is	a	fair	way	to	madness,	and	it	was	a	big	masquerade-ball

scene	they	were	gearing	up	for,	with	all	the	supernumeraries	donning	gorgeous
gowns	and	robes	and	masks	the	like	of	which	could	have	afforded	us	half	Your
Grace’s	 navy	 for	 a	 season.	The	 Prop	Man	 (I	 never	 have	 learned	 that	 fella’s
name)	 and	 his	 lads	 were	 flying	 around,	 handing	 out	masks	 and	 candles	 and
chalices	and	bated	rapiers	and	kerchiefs,	and	I	could	hear	the	musicians	in	the
gallery	above	tuning	quietly,	while	Dick	Burbage	was	bellowing	on	the	boards,
pretending	to	be	a	horny	young	man,	which	he	is,	except	for	the	young	part.

“Here	to	see	Dicky,”	I	say	to	the	Prop	Man.	He	looks	disgruntled,	which	is
his	usual	state,	and	he	says,	“Come	back	after	the	show	is	down.”	Then	he	sees
Tristan	and	his	eyes	fix	on	him,	because	Tristan	is	big	and	I	realize	Prop	Man
is	worried	about	costuming	him—he’s	there	in	nothing	but	undergarments,	so
he	looks	as	if	he	must	be	expecting	a	costume	(which	is	true	in	a	way).

“He’s	with	me,”	I	say.	“Only	I	need	to	speak	to	Dicky	about	some	clothes
for	him.”

Prop	Man	 frowns,	 cocks	 his	 ear	 toward	 the	 upstage	 center	 curtain.	 “He’s
almost	off,”	he	whispers.	“And	he’s	not	in	scene	three.”

Tristan	 and	 I	 try	 to	 stay	 out	 of	 the	way	of	 all	 the	 foot-traffic	by	pushing
ourselves	 against	 the	 wall.	 It	 smells	 foul	 in	 there—there’s	 some	 silks	 being
worn	by	boy-actors	that	stink	like	they	came	right	from	a	brothel,	and	I	don’t
mean	that	in	a	nice	way.	But	we’re	only	there	a	few	moments	when	in	through
the	curtain,	right	from	the	stage,	comes	Dick,	trussed	up	like	a	boy	although
it’s	a	bit	long	in	the	tooth	he	is	now	for	the	likes	of	Romeo.

He	sees	me	through	the	crowd	of	milling	minions	and	the	smile	he	gives	me
could	 light	 the	heavens,	he’s	 that	 fond	of	me,	 and	 sure	why	wouldn’t	he	be?
“Gracie,”	he	calls	out	to	me,	for	that’s	how	they	say	my	name	here	(and	yours
as	well,	Your	Majesty—in	England	 they	do	 say	Grace	O’Malley).	The	Prop
Man	hushes	Dick	with	irritation,	but	like	always,	Dick	ignores	the	Prop	Man.
“What	do	you	mean	finding	a	bigger	man	than	I?”	Burbage	says.	He	pushes	his
way	through	the	crew	of	underlings,	all	of	whom	disregard	him	as	 if	he	were
one	of	them	and	not	the	richest	and	most	renowned	actor	in	all	Creation.

He	 comes	 to	 us,	 looking	Tristan	Lyons	 up	 and	down.	Tristan	Lyons	 says
nothing,	 just	 gazes	 levelly	 back	 at	 him.	 “You	 a	 comedian,	 fellow?”	 he	 asks
Tristan,	and	claps	him	hard	on	the	shoulder.	Then	he	looks	surprised,	as	if	he



had	just	struck	a	boulder	while	thinking	he’d	be	striking	wool.
“No,”	says	Tristan.	“Soldier.”
And	Dick,	he	backs	up	a	bit,	looks	respectful.	“Who	do	you	fight	for,	then,

lad?”	he	asks.
“Classified,”	I	say.
Dick	looks	impressed.
“If	you	be	Gracie’s	 friend,	 then	you’re	a	 friend	of	mine,”	he	 says,	without

introducing	himself	(assuming	he	would	not	need	to,	assuming	everyone	knows
him	already,	sure).	“And	I’ll	help	you	out	howe’er	you	need	it.”

“It’s	costumery	he’s	needing,”	I	say.	“Nothing	outlandish,	mind	you.	Needs
to	blend	in	with	some	fellas	down	by	Whitehall.	I	was	thinking	you	had	Ned
Alleyn’s—”

“I	do	indeed,”	says	Dick.	And	to	Tristan,	“Honored	to	be	of	service	to	you,
sir.	I’m	back	on	in	a	moment	so	we	must	be	quick,	but	follow	me.”	He	gestures
us	to	follow	him	through	the	whispering	mob,	to	a	tiny	closet	along	the	inner
wall—he	 being	 a	 principal	 shareholder,	 he	 has	 the	 privilege	 of	 some	 small
privacy.	 In	this	closet	are	some	pegs	and	on	them	hang	clothes	custom-made
for	a	man	of	easily	Tristan	Lyons’s	height.	These	were	some	of	the	costumes	of
Edward	 Alleyn,	 tallest	 actor	 of	 our	 age	 and	 the	 leading	 man	 of	 the	 rival
company	the	Admiral’s	Men.	So	tall	he	is,	nobody	can	fit	into	his	clothes,	not
even	Burbage,	who	stole	them	as	a	prank	when	Ned	retired	a	few	year	back.

“Make	him	a	gentleman	or	a	knight	or	a	wealthy	merchant,”	I	suggested,	as
Dick	glanced	between	the	pegs	and	Tristan.

“All	right,	I’ve	an	idea,”	he	said.	He	chucks	aside	some	galligaskins	and	then
a	pair	of	French	hosen	filled	with	bombast,	and	Tristan’s	 looking	relieved	he
won’t	 be	wearing	 anything	 so	ponce-like.	 Finally	Dick	pulls	 out	 some	 longer
Venetians,	 that	 tie	 below	 the	 knee.	 They’re	 made	 of	 damask,	 pluderhosen-
style,	 a	dark	blue	with	 red	 showing	 through	at	 the	 slashes.	He	also	pulls	out
some	black	silk	netherstockings	to	go	under	them.	And	then	a	blue	velvet	vest.
Also	a	blue	worsted	doublet	with	a	codpiece	attached,	but	 I	protest	 that,	on
account	of	 the	heat	of	 the	day.	“Haven’t	you	a	mere	 jerkin?”	I	ask,	and	sure
enough	 he	 has,	 a	 red	 velvet	 one	 with	 gold	 and	 ivory	 buttons,	 and	 stiff
shoulders	 sticking	 out	 like	 the	 stubs	 of	 angel	 wings.	 “No	 codpiece	 with	 it
though,”	says	Burbage.	“Sorry,	fellow.”	Then	a	crowned	felt	hat	and	a	ruff	for
the	neck,	and	cordwain	boots,	which	are	nicer	than	the	workman’s	galoshes	I’d
found	for	him	back	at	Tearsheet.	“You’ll	have	to	dress	yourself,	I’m	back	on
stage	 in	 fifteen	 lines,”	he	 says	when	he’s	hauled	 it	out	and	 then	 reclosed	 the



closet.	 I	 thanked	him	and	promised	him	 to	 return	 the	costumes	quickly.	He
kissed	my	cheek,	saluted	Tristan,	and	dashed	back	out	onto	the	stage,	groaning
like	a	man	suffering	unrequited	love,	followed	by	a	handful	of	merry	lads	with
masks	and	torches	and	one	godawful	pipe	player.

Tristan	had	throughout	this	remained	quiet	and	somewhat	stiff,	taking	it	all
in.	 I	 wonder	what	 his	 home-time	must	 be	 like	 in	 comparison.	 I	 help	 him	 to
dress,	the	mad	hushed	bustle	of	getting	ready	for	the	ball	scene	all	around	us.
He’s	a	wee	bit	shorter	and	a	wee	bit	broader	than	Ned	Alleyn,	but	the	clothes
fit	him	well	enough.

“Who	was	that	man?”	he	asked	when	we’re	safely	outside	the	bounds	of	the
Globe.

“Among	 many	 other	 fellows,	 Hamlet,”	 I	 say,	 and	 I	 roll	 my	 eyes.	 “And
Romeo.”	He	doesn’t	look	so	very	impressed	and	my	regard	for	him,	it	rises	a
bit.	 Plus	 he’s	 easy	 on	 the	 eyes,	 with	 the	 jerkin	 all	 laced	 up	 and	 his	muscles
nearly	bulging	through	it.	Ned	Alleyn	didn’t	have	those	lovely	teeth	either.	So
I’m	enjoying	our	little	assignment,	it’s	a	grand	way	to	pass	the	day.

I	say	it’s	to	Whitehall	we’re	heading.	He	appears	to	know	something	of	 it.
We	walk	out	to	the	Thames,	and	himself	sees	that	massive	long	London	Bridge
to	 the	 east,	 with	 all	 its	 fine	 buildings,	 and	 some	 two	 dozen	 traitors’	 heads
decaying	on	 the	Great	Stone	Gate,	and	his	eyes	pop	right	open	 like	a	caged
monkey’s,	so	I	reckon	he’s	from	a	place	without	much	architecture	to	speak	of.
I	can’t	wait	for	him	to	see	Savoy	Palace	and	all	them—he	might	fall	right	into
the	Thames!	 I	budge	his	 elbow	and	point	 to	 the	west.	 “This	way,”	 I	 say.	He
follows,	 looking	 like	 I	 did	 the	 first	 time	 I	 ever	 stepped	 into	 St.	 Paul’s.	 The
tide’s	 starting	 to	 turn	 and	 the	 upstream	 boats	 are	 starting	 to	 struggle,	 so	 I
decide	we’ll	walk	to	the	river-bend	and	go	across	there.

I	 find	 the	walk	 refreshing,	 for	 there’s	 open	 air	 over	 the	Thames	which	 is
nicer	than	the	open	sewers	of	Southwark,	but	the	mild	dyspeptic	look	he’s	had
on	 his	 face	 hardly	 lessens	 as	 he	 walks	 along.	 He	 must	 be	 from	 some	 small
village	in	the	New	World,	to	have	such	a	hard	time	with	the	city	air.	But	then,
he	 gazes	 upon	 all	 the	 barges	 and	 ships	 and	 wherries	 with	 a	 keen	 look	 that
makes	me	think	he	might	have	a	nautical	background.	He’s	fascinated	by	all	of
them—the	 dung	 boats	 no	 less	 than	 the	 Queen’s	 glass	 barge,	 and	 he	 asks
questions	 that	 I	 answer	 best	 I	 can.	 I	 try	 to	 make	 some	 conversation	 about
himself,	 but	 he’s	 not	 at	 all	 forthcoming	 about	 himself	 or	 the	 reason	 for	 his
mission.	 I	 don’t	 push	 him	 for	 it	 now—that	 can	 come	 in	 time.	 Trustingly
dependent	I’ll	make	him,	then	when	he	is	particularly	in	need	of	my	assistance,



I’ll	demand	cooperation.	I’ve	done	it	often	enough.
We	walk	by	the	Paris	Gardens,	and	you	can	hear	the	bears	and	the	dogs	and

isn’t	the	crowd	loving	it.	It	always	gives	me	a	laugh	that	the	Queen	will	bring
herself	 all	 the	 way	 over	 here	 to	 watch	 the	 bear-baiting	 but	 has	 never	 once
stepped	into	the	Globe,	for	all	Will	Shakespeare’s	trying	to	kiss	her	arse	with
his	Irish-hating	sentiments.

Less	 than	 halfway	 along	 our	walk,	where	 the	Narrow	Wall	 begins	 on	 our
shore,	all	the	palaces	of	bishops	and	nobility	become	visible	on	the	far	bank—
Salisbury	House,	all	 the	Inns	of	Court,	Arundel	House,	and	the	rest.	 I	point
them	 out	 to	 him	 (of	 course	 I	 know	 them	 all	 from	 various	 dalliances	 I	 have
contrived	on	Your	Grace’s	behalf),	but	he	does	not	goggle	at	them	as	he	had	at
London	Bridge.	“A	little	different	from	my	own	time,”	is	all	he	says.

At	 this	 point,	 the	 Thames	 bends	 to	 snake	 south,	 and	 soon	 as	 I	 hear	 a
ferryman	 calling	 “Westward	 ho!”	 I	 hail	 him.	 “We’re	 taking	 this	 wherry,”	 I
explain	 to	Tristan,	 “for	 a	 penny,	which	will	 come	 out	 of	 your	money	 that	 I
procured	 so	 cleverly	 for	 you	 from	 the	 dim	 fella.”	 The	 ferryman	 fetches	 us
across,	brings	us	to	the	far	side	without	the	tide	causing	him	too	much	grief.
Tristan	 pays	 his	 penny,	 and	 then	 it’s	 just	 a	 street	 away	 we	 are	 from	 King
Street,	 in	the	shadow	of	Whitehall	Palace,	and	right	away	 is	 the	Bell	Tavern.
One	 of	 three	 taverns	 where	 the	 minor	 courtiers	 like	 to	 eat	 and	 drink	 and
sometimes	 do	 other	 things.	 I’m	 more	 at	 home	 in	 Southwark,	 and	 less
conspicuous,	but	as	Your	Grace	knows,	it’s	plenty	of	time	I	spend	here.

It	was	quiet	there	for	the	time	of	day,	as	the	last	of	the	diners	were	finishing.
A	 strange	 stillness	 after	 the	din	 and	bustle	 of	 the	 streets	 and	 the	Thames.	 I
nodded	 to	 Mary,	 who	 works	 there.	 She	 nodded	 back	 at	 me—and	 her	 eyes
found	Tristan,	and	they	opened	wider,	then	she	gave	me	an	approving	look.	I
sauntered	over	to	her	and	said	low	in	her	ear,	“Sir	Edward	Greylock?	You	have
said	he	was	a	dinnertime	regular.”

“Indeed	he	is,	and	you’re	in	luck,	he’s	just	finishing	his	lamb.”	With	a	jut	of
the	chin	she	gestured	toward	a	fellow	of	perhaps	thirty	years,	tall	and	elegant
but	with	a	willowy,	pale	presentation,	sitting	alone	at	a	table	by	the	door,	the
dregs	of	another	diner’s	meal	across	from	him.	As	if	a	strong	wind	would	bend
him	 over.	Curly	 reddish-brown	 hair	 and	 pink	 cheeks	made	 him	 look	 almost
feminine.	A	pretty	man	all	around,	but	not	impressive.	I	recognized	him	from
a	few	times	when	I	was	spending	the	evening	with	one	of	his	acquaintances.	I
in	turn	pointed	him	out	to	Tristan.

It	is	now	that	Tristan	begins	to	impress	himself	upon	me	in	a	good	way.	For



what	does	he	do	but	approach	Sir	Edward	and	with	the	most	nuanced	mixture
of	 respect	and	 swagger,	he	does	bend	 the	knee	 just	 a	wee	bit	 and	 lowers	his
head,	doffs	his	hat	and	holds	it	down	by	his	right	leg,	kisses	his	left	hand	and
says,	“God	give	you	good	day,	m’lord,”	and	then	as	if	turned	to	stone,	he	awaits
to	be	noticed	by	Sir	Edward.

Sir	 Edward	 looks	 up	 from	 his	 lamb	 pie	 and	 stares	 at	 Tristan,	 perhaps	 as
distracted	by	his	manly	physic	as	Mary	was.	“Well	met,	sir,”	he	said,	uncertain
of	Tristan’s	rank	from	his	piecemeal	attire.

“I	cry	you	mercy,	m’lord,”	says	Tristan,	not	at	all	 like	a	fellow	who	comes
from	 a	 time	 and	 place	 without	 any	 English	 nobility	 oppressing	 him.	 “I’m	 a
gentleman	soldier	from	the	Isle	of	Man	and	I	would	beg	a	boon	of	you.”	And
when	Sir	Edward	did	not	appear	 ready	 to	disregard	him,	he	pressed	on,	 in	a
steady	 enough	 voice:	 “The	 world	 speaks	 of	 you	 as	 friends	 with	 the	 Earl	 of
Cumberland,	 and	 he	 is	 a	 lord	 I	 fain	 would	 meet,	 but	 have	 no	 means	 of
introduction.”

“And	who	might	you	be,	sir?”	asked	Sir	Edward,	without	malice	he	said	it,
studying	him.

“I	am	called	Tristan	Lyons,	and	I	am	a	Manx	adventurer,	recently	returned
from	Java.”

Confusion	 flashed	 across	 Sir	Edward’s	 face.	 “An	 adventurer?”	he	 said,	 and
then	 seemed	to	choose	polite	caution	by	gesturing	warmly	 to	 the	 seat	across
from	him.	“Pray	be	seated,”	he	said.	“What	would	you	with	the	Earl?”

“Faith	sir,	in	Java	I	befriended	some	agents	of	the	Earl	of	Cumberland,	and
heard	 from	 them	 of	 some	 ambitious	 plans	 intended	 by	 the	 Earl	 and	 his
aldermen	and	knights.”

“Ay,	the	East	India	Company,”	says	Sir	Edward.
“Just	so,	m’lord.	My	connexions	are	all	abroad	and	I	fear	I	cannot	write	to

them	 in	 time	 for	 them	 to	 send	 references	 of	 my	 character	 before	 the	 Earl
sends	Sir	 James	Lancaster	off	on	his	next	voyage.	 I	would	be	deeply	 in	your
debt	if	you	would	consider	brokering	an	introduction.	I	can	hardly	conceive	of
a	better	 investment	 to	be	made	with	my	 inheritance.”	At	 this	 I	nearly	burst
out	 laughing	 for	he	 sounded	not	at	 all	 excited,	but	as	 if	he	had	been	carved
from	a	bit	of	peat	and	only	half-animated.	But	then,	Your	Grace,	he	continued
to	 speak,	 and	 to	 describe	 in	 such	 details	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 Javanese	 pepper
harvest	that	in	faith	my	own	mouth	was	watering,	and	I	have	never	even	tried
the	stuff.	And	since	I	knew	his	motives,	didn’t	I	marvel	at	how	well	he	kept	his
true	intention	from	this	fella,	spoke	as	if	he	hadn’t	one	jot	of	interest	in	seeing



the	fella	himself	invest	in	the	Earl	of	Cumberland’s	schemes.
Sir	Edward	says	he	regrets	to	inform	Tristan	that	Sir	James	set	sail	back	in

April,	 and	Tristan	 begs	 his	 pardon	 and	 asks	 him	 does	 he	 think	 it	might	 be
possible	to	make	an	investment	anyhow,	toward	future	returns?

Then	Tristan	 goes	 on	 a	 bit	 and	 begins	 to	 speak	 in	 tones	 of	 wonder	 and
reverence,	 as	 if	 he	 were	 merely	 musing	 aloud	 to	 himself,	 of	 Hither	 India.
There	 is	 one	 thing	 in	 particular	 he	 goes	 on	 about,	 and	 that’s	 spices	 called
turmeric	and	saffron,	the	both	of	which	create	a	cheery	yellow-orange	dye	for
silks	 and	 cottons—fabrics	 easy	 to	 obtain	 in	 Hither	 India.	 And	 now	 it’s	 Sir
Edward	 I’m	watching,	 as	 his	 face	becomes	 a	marvel	 of	 interest.	 Suddenly	he
says	he’s	a	mind	to	speak	to	the	Earl	himself	and	see	about	such	an	investment,
and	if	Tristan	will	come	to	see	him	in	two	days’	time,	he	will	happily	inform
him	 of	 the	 possibilities.	 Tristan	 falls	 all	 over	 himself	 with	 appreciation	 and
gratitude,	 honors	 Sir	 Edward	 as	 if	 Sir	 Edward	 were	 a	 king	 and	 himself	 a
peasant,	and	then	with	some	assistance	from	me	(whom	Sir	Edward	never	once
regarded	directly),	removes	himself	from	the	building.

But	 not	 before	making	 certain	 that	 Sir	 Edward	 knew	 he	 could	 find	 some
pleasant	 behind-the-door	 diversions	 at	 the	 Tearsheet	 Brewery	 in	 Southwark,
for	which	I	am	much	obliged.

“That	 was	 nicely	 done,”	 I	 said,	 as	 we	 walked	 back	 toward	 the	 riverbank.
“Why	did	you	go	on	about	that	dye	color?	Why	did	that	hook	him?”

“He	 is	 betrothed	 to	 a	 lady	 of	 Elizabeth’s	 bedchamber,”	Tristan	 answered.
“We	studied	portraits	of	her.	She	is	very	taken	with	that	particular	color,	and	it
is	 a	 difficult	 color	 to	 come	 by	 with	 English	 or	 even	 European	 dyes.	 Theirs
seems	to	be	a	match	of	affection	as	well	as	opportunity,	so	I	guessed	that	he
would	know	her	preferences,	and	also	want	to	know	how	to	please	her.	Seems	I
guessed	correctly.”

“Is	 right	 you	 did,”	 I	 agreed.	 “Although	 not	 so	much	 affection	 he	 doesn’t
want	the	odd	discreet	diversion.	I	thank	you	for	that	as	well.”

“It	 seemed	 the	 least	 I	 could	 do	 for	 the	 time	 you’ve	 donated	 to	my	 cause
today.”

We	squeezed	round	a	tight	corner	into	a	larger	street.	He	might	more	easily
have	dropped	back	and	let	me	go	ahead	of	him.	If	he	had,	things	might	have
come	out	differently.	But	intent	as	he	was	on	the	conversation,	he	was	desirous
of	 remaining	 abreast	 of	me,	his	 eyes	upon	mine.	He	 tried	 to	pass	 through	 a
space	 too	 narrow	 for	 the	 both	 of	 us.	 In	 doing	 so	 he	 brushed—I	 don’t	 say
banged	into,	or	jostled,	but	merely	brushed—the	shoulder	of	a	tosser	in	fancy



dress	and	a	long	face,	 leaning	against	a	wall	sucking	on	a	long-stemmed	pipe,
and	 sulking.	 He	 probably	 hadn’t	 managed	 to	 get	 an	 audience	 with	 old
Elizabeth	like	his	ma	told	him	to	expect	he	would.	Tristan	didn’t	even	notice;
but	in	the	corner	of	my	eye	I	saw	this	tosser	giving	my	man	a	sharp	look.

“I	 would	 be	 happy	 to	 strike	 up	 a	 working	 relationship	 with	 you,	 Tristan
Lyons,	so	I	would,”	I	said.	“I	can	imagine	all	manner	of	ways	we	might	be	of
mutual	benefit.	So	if	you’re	ever	in	Southwark	again,	stop	in.”

He	 paused	 a	 moment	 and	 regarded	 me.	 And	 I	 regarded	 him	 back,	 as	 it
pleased	me	to	do	so.	But	at	the	same	time	I	threw	a	glance	back	at	the	tosser	in
the	fancy	dress,	who	had	dislodged	himself	from	the	wall,	and	was	now	giving
Tristan	a	thorough	inspection	from	hat	to	shoes	and	back	up	again.

I	took	Tristan’s	arm	firmly	and	pulled	him	along.
“What’s	troubling	you?”	he	asked,	with	a	glance	back	over	his	shoulder.
After	we	had	put	a	bit	more	distance	between	ourselves	and	that	unsavory

fop	 who	 seemed	 to	 have	 taken	 such	 an	 interest	 in	 my	 companion,	 I	 said,
“Farthing	 for	 your	 thoughts.”	 As	 you’ll	 have	 collected,	 milady,	 I	 was	 after
learning	whether	Tristan	knew	of	Strands	and	the	like.

“Did	I	seem	at	all	familiar	to	you,	when	I	first	met	your	eye?”	he	asked.
So	yes.	He	knew	something	of	it.	“Let’s	not	bandy	words,”	I	said.	“Whoever

Sent	you—whoever	you	cooked	up	this	plan	with—knows	perfectly	well	that
it’ll	never	suffice	to	do	this	on	one	Strand	only.	Hence	all	of	your	preparations.
Learning	to	pronounce	my	name.	Looking	at	paintings	and	noticing	the	colors
of	dyestuffs	and	such.”

“It	would	be	idle	to	deny	it,”	he	said	with	a	nod	of	his	fine	chin.
“It’s	 in	many	another	Strand	that	 I’m	even	now	meeting	you	again	 in	 like

manner,	walking	these	streets,	having	this	conversation.”
“As	I	understand	it,	yes.”
“You	understand	it	well	enough,	’tis	plain,”	I	said,	“and	it’s	little	trouble	for

me	 to	Wend	my	way	 to	 those	 Strands—or	 snáithe	 as	 we	 say	 at	 home—and
meet	 with	 you	 there	 and	 then	 and	 further	 enjoy	 the	 pleasure	 of	 your
company.”

“I	would	 like	that	very	much,”	he	said.	“Are	there	others	 like	you	I	might
work	with	as	well?”

“Don’t	get	cheeky,	 lad,”	 I	 said.	 “Let’s	 see	how	you	can	make	 things	worth
my	while	first,	and	then	I’ll	decide	if	I	want	to	cut	anyone	else	in.”

“If	 you	make	 yourself	my	 ally,	 it’s	 quite	 possible.	 So	 think	 about	 what	 I
might	be	able	to	offer	you.”



“Oh,	 I	will,”	 I	assured	him.	 “I	already	am.	Now,	 if	you’ve	a	good	witch	 to
Send	you,”	I	continued,	“have	her	Send	you	to	arrive	yesterday.”

“Why?”
“This	is	Monday.	Had	you	arrived	yesterday,	everyone	would	have	been	at

Sunday	 services.	Not	 that	 I	mind	 finding	you	naked	 in	my	 closet	 each	 time
you	return,	but	it	will	be	simpler	if	you	arrive	when	things	are	quiet.”

“Will	you	skip	Sunday	services	to	meet	me?”
“If	 you	 want	 to	 pay	 the	 fine	 I’d	 be	 receiving	 for	 failure	 to	 appear.”	And

since	 he	 seemed	 to	 be	 considering	 this,	 I	 said,	 “No,	 I	 cannot,	 lad.	 I	 cannot
afford	to	be	seen	as	shirking	my	religious	duties,	it’s	suspicious	enough	that	I’m
Irish	and	over	here,	while	there’s	an	armed	uprising	against	the	English	back	at
home.	But	you’re	not	on	the	rolls	anywhere,	so	your	absence	won’t	be	noted.
Come	 on	 Sunday	 and	 dress	 yourself,	 now	 that	 you	 know	 where	 I	 keep	 the
shirts	and	breeches,	and	just	wait	for	me.”

We	 were	 having	 this	 conversation	 as	 we	 came	 down	 King	 Street	 to	 the
Whitehall	Stairs,	where	I	planned	to	find	us	a	ferryman.	There	were	plenty	of
wherries	out	there	since	the	tide	was	heading	out,	and	traffic’s	easier	eastward.
I	slowed	my	pace	as	I	surveyed	the	scene.

Then	someone	barreled	into	me	from	behind,	knocking	me	off	balance.
I	stumble	and	my	shoe	gets	caught	in	a	tear	in	my	petticoat,	and	I’m	falling

to	my	 knees	 when,	 faster	 than	 I	 can	 think,	 there’s	Tristan	 catching	me	 and
helping	me	to	right	myself.	But	 in	doing	so	he	 jostles	the	rude	bastard	who’s
almost	knocked	me	down.	By	the	time	I’ve	got	my	balance	and	my	wits	back,
that	bastard	has	spun	on	his	heel	to	confront	Tristan.	They’re	standing	arm’s
length	apart.	I	recognize	him	as	the	tosser	who	followed	us.

This	fop—who	doesn’t	look	like	much,	hardly	any	manlier	than	Sir	Edward
—instantly	 draws	 back	 to	 a	 distance,	 puts	 his	 right	 hand	 on	 his	 rapier	 and
draws	 it	 out,	 no	more	 than	 the	 width	 of	 two	 fingers,	 but	 enough	 to	 send	 a
message.	Other	people	coming	and	going	on	the	steps	give	him	a	wider	berth,
but	otherwise	continue	their	business	on	and	off	the	wherries.

“Stand	off,	villain!”	says	the	fella	with	the	rapier,	pompous	and	angry.	“What
business	have	you	touching	me	so	rudely?”

Tristan	 catches	 himself.	 “Good	 morrow,	 my	 lord,	 pray	 excuse	 my
abruptness.”

“Once	you	have	explained	yourself,	I	might.”
Tristan	 blinks,	 then	 says,	 “’Tis	 my	 sister	 you	 just	 knocked	 to	 her	 knees

there.	I’ll	let	it	be	if	you	will.”



The	 fellow	 looks	 utterly	 astounded,	 and	 then	 laughs	 in	 Tristan’s	 face.
“What,	 that	 common	 whore?	 That	 slattern?	 She’s	 not	 your	 sister,	 you	 lying
knave.	’Tis	she	owes	me	an	apology,	for	being	in	my	way.”	He	turns	to	me	and
commands	me:	“Apologize!”

“She	owes	you	no	apology,	sir,”	says	Tristan,	very	calm.
“Let	 it	 be,	Tristan,”	 I	 say	 sharply,	 and	 I’m	using	my	best	London	 accent,

which	Tristan	 notices	with	 surprise.	He’s	 sharp	 enough	 to	 understand	 I’ve	 a
reason	for	it.	“Pray	pardon	me,	m’lord,”	I	say	to	the	fellow.	“I	did	not	hear	you
coming.”

Tristan	says	nothing.	But	 the	set	of	his	mouth	shows	a	kind	of	annoyance
and	the	tosser	with	the	rapier	notices.	He	draws	the	rapier	a	little	farther.

“Do	you	 take	 offense	 at	my	behavior	 toward	 this	whore?”	 he	 demands	 of
Tristan.

“He	doesn’t,”	I	say.
“Shut	 up,	 whore,”	 he	 says.	 “Tell	 me	 yourself,	 sirrah,	 assure	 me	 you

understand	this	bawd	is	in	the	wrong	here,	and	for	even	thinking	of	defending
her,	you	are	too.	Say	so	and	beg	apology.”

I	 recognize	 the	 tosser	now—he’s	been	a	customer	at	 the	Tearsheet	of	my
mate	Morag,	the	Caledonian	wench.	He’s	a	terrible	mean	streak	and	he	loves
his	violence.	It’s	not	apologizing	he	wants	from	Tristan—it’s	a	fight.

Tristan	 is	 still	 standing	 there.	 I	 sense	 he’s	 about	 to	 vomit	 with	 the	 rage,
although	he	looks	calm	enough.	“To	avoid	a	disruption	of	the	Queen’s	Peace,	I
will	 apologize	 whole-heartedly,”	 he	 says,	 but	 of	 course	 that	 just	 feeds	 the
fellow’s	ire:

“If	 that’s	 why	 you’re	 apologizing,	 I	 reject	 it,”	 he	 says.	 “I	 demand	 you
acknowledge	you’re	wrong	for	insulting	and	challenging	a	nobleman.	And	now
you’re	being	insolent	as	well.”	He	draws	the	rapier	fully	from	its	sheath.	“Will
it	take	a	taste	of	steel	for	you	to	find	your	manners?”

“I	have	no	weapon,”	Tristan	says,	still	quiet-like.
The	nobleman	laughs.	“So?”	he	says.
“Would	you	strike	an	unarmed	man?”
He	laughs	again.	“That	makes	it	easier	to	strike	him,	doesn’t	it?”	Around	us,

folk	are	 still	hustling	by,	and	by	now	we’ve	missed	a	 few	wherries.	 I	want	 to
catch	one	while	the	tide	is	with	us,	and	I	certainly	don’t	want	to	get	ourselves
stuck	here.

Now	the	nobleman	looks	around,	as	if	expecting	an	admiring	crowd.
In	 truth,	 almost	 everyone’s	 giving	 us	 a	 wide	 berth.	 There	 are	 only	 two



exceptions.	 Standing	 off	 at	 a	 distance,	 observing	 matters	 carefully,	 is	 a
gentleman	with	 a	 long,	 sharp	 yellow	 beard,	 dressed	 in	 those	 sorts	 of	 clothes
that	look	dark	at	first	glance	but	on	closer	examination	are	splendid.	Closer	to
hand,	three	paces	behind	and	to	one	side	of	the	tosser,	is	another	courtier,	old
enough	to	be	the	fop’s	father,	dressed	as	if	he’s	on	his	way	home	from	a	Dutch
funeral.

“But	 I’m	happy	 to	give	an	advantage	 to	one	who	so	desperately	needs	 it,”
continues	the	tosser.	“George,”	he	says	to	the	old	git	in	the	neck-ruff,	“lend	this
varlet	 that	 rusty	meat	cleaver	you	have	hanging	 from	your	belt.	 I’ll	 take	my
apology	 in	 blood.”	 Very	 familiar	 he	 is,	 and	 cheeky	 in	 his	 description	 of
George’s	sidearm,	which	looks	a	perfectly	respectable	weapon	to	my	eye,	but
George	 takes	no	offense;	 I	 reckon	 these	 two	know	each	other	well,	 and	 that
George	is	some	manner	of	retainer	or	vassal.

“You’ll	be	 fined	again,	Herbert,”	 says	George,	who	 for	one	 so	 long	 in	 the
tooth	and	so	weedy	in	his	attire	is,	I	confess,	a	bit	fierce-looking.

“The	fine’s	a	trifle,”	Herbert	says	breezily.	“Lend	him	your	sword.”
George	tosses	his	cape	back,	reaches	across	his	body,	and	draws	the	weapon,

which	turns	out	to	be	as	old	and	out-of-date	as	his	clothing:	it’s	a	heavy,	single-
edged	backsword	of	the	old	school,	such	as	you’ll	see	Protestants	toting	about
at	home,	the	better	to	wave	menacingly	at	Irish	folk.	He	offers	it	hilt-first	over
his	arm	to	Tristan,	who	declines	to	take	it.	“I	pray	you	accept	my	pardon	for
all	 offenses	uttered,”	Tristan	 says.	 “I’ve	 an	ailing	mother	 in	Southwark	and	 I
would	fain	meet	her	within	the	hour.”

“If	 she	 ails	 enough,	 you	 can	 meet	 her	 in	 heaven	 in	 half	 that	 time,”	 says
Herbert.	“Take	the	sword.”

Tristan	remains	where	he	is.
Herbert,	 without	 warning,	 slashes	 at	 Tristan’s	 face.	 He’d	 have	 taken

Tristan’s	 nose	 off	 if	Tristan’s	 reflexes	 were	 not	 so	 fast.	 But	 like	 a	 dragonfly
avoiding	a	bird,	my	Saxon	has	ducked	the	blow,	grabbed	the	hilt	of	the	offered
backsword,	and	swung	it	around	to	face	his	attacker.	Old	George,	no	fool,	steps
back	to	give	them	room.	A	passing	washerwoman	utters	a	 little	shout	of	fear
and	scurries	off,	and	suddenly	I	notice	nobody	else	is	on	the	steps	now	but	the
four	of	us,	and	sure	I’m	sweating	in	the	hazy	September	sun	much	more	than	I
was	moments	ago.

The	 fight	 was	 fierce	 but	 very	 short.	Wherever	 Tristan	 comes	 from,	 they
must	use	swords	because	it’s	confident,	strong	and	graceful	he	seemed	to	me.
But	I	think	whatever	their	swords	are,	they	can’t	be	rapiers.	He	looked	like	he



was	dancing,	like	he’d	learned	steps	he	could	perform	very	well,	but	Herbert
—although	far	less	elegant	and	less	muscle	on	him—was	so	accustomed	to	the
weapon	that	using	it	was	like	walking	or	eating	for	him.

Their	fight	moved	them	down	a	couple	steps	and	then	back	up,	and	nobody
watched	 overtly	 as	 they	 might	 back	 home,	 here	 in	 the	 city	 people	 mostly
hurried	away	up	on	 the	 road,	or	 if	 they	were	on	 the	 river,	 they	kept	 rowing
toward	the	Westminster	stairs	or	the	nearest	sandbank	to	disembark.	Herbert
was	wielding	his	slender	blade	like	an	Italian	fence-master,	darting	in	from	this
angle	 and	 that,	 and	 it	 was	 all	 Tristan	 could	 do	 to	 set	 his	 thrusts	 aside	 with
herky-jerky	 movements	 of	 the	 backsword.	 It	 looked	 ponderous	 even	 in	 his
strong	hands.

Suddenly,	I	didn’t	see	how,	the	backsword	went	flying	out	of	Tristan’s	hand
and	Herbert	had	him	flat	back	against	the	stairs—his	sword	actually	pinning
Tristan	against	 the	 stone	by	virtue	of	having	pierced	 through	 the	 shirt,	vest,
and	jerkin	just	at	the	side	of	Tristan’s	neck,	and	then	Herbert	stabbed	it	into
the	crevice	between	the	rise	and	tread	of	the	stone	steps.	Tristan	was	stuck.	It
seemed	a	fancy	move	from	a	fellow	not	likely	capable	of	fancy	moves.

“To	 fall	 for	 such	 an	 easy	 and	 old-fashioned	 technique,”	 said	 Herbert,
making	a	tch-tch-tch’ing	sound.	“A	stupid	error—and	a	fatal	one.”

But	then	a	gloved	hand	came	down,	gently	but	firmly,	upon	Herbert’s	wrist.
An	 extraordinarily	 fine	 glove	 it	 was,	 made	 of	 white	 kid,	 with	 intricate
embroidery.

Herbert	hadn’t	seen	this	coming.	Nor	had	I.	Both	of	us	looked	up	into	the
face	 of	 the	 gentleman	 I	 had	 noticed	 a	minute	 ago—the	 finely	 dressed	 chap
with	 the	 sharp	 yellow	 beard.	 “Who	 are	 you,	 sirrah,	 and	 how	 dare	 you?”
Herbert	demanded,	and	tried	to	wrench	free	of	the	other’s	grip.	But	the	white
kid	glove	held	firm.

“I	 am	 the	gentleman’s	 second,”	 said	 the	man	with	 the	 sharp	yellow	beard.
He	had	an	accent—’twas	ze	he	said	instead	of	the,	like	a	German.	He	glanced
over	at	George,	then	returned	his	eyes	to	Herbert’s	face.	Or	perhaps	I	should
say	 eye,	 for	he	was	wearing	a	 tall	hat	with	a	broad	brim,	gorgeously	plumed,
and	 in	the	best	style	of	all	 the	young	blades,	he’d	pulled	 it	down	low	to	one
side,	concealing	his	left	eye.	“You	have	your	second,”	the	German	continued,
flicking	that	eye	momentarily	at	George,	“and	so	ze	honorable	tradition	is	zat
your	opponent	in	ze	duel	should	have	one	also.	Is	it	not	so?”

“It	is	so,”	Herbert	admitted,	“but	you	do	not	even	know	this	varlet.”
The	German	shrugged,	giving	me	cause	to	admire	the	exquisite	silk	lining



of	 his	 cape.	 “Zis	 in	 no	way	 alters	 ze	 honorable	 tradition.	As	 you	will	 know.
Being	a	man	of	honor.”	And	the	German	now	turned	his	head	to	look	about	at
the	crowd	of	onlookers	that	had	gathered	during	the	pause	in	swordplay.	The
scarlet	plume	in	his	hat	wafted	first	this	way,	then	that.	Herbert	looked	up	to
see	 that	 there	 were	 now	many	 witnesses.	 Some	 of	 whom	were	 gentlemen—
capable	of	giving	testimony	and	of	being	believed	by	a	judge.

The	German’s	intervention	had	worked;	Herbert’s	humours	had	cooled.	He
looked	down	at	Tristan.	 “Go	ask	the	wet-nurse	how	to	escape	next	 time.	But
first	give	me	apologies.	Varlet.”

The	German	released	Herbert’s	wrist,	 spun	away,	and	walked	off	 into	 the
crowd.

“I	apologize,”	said	Tristan	stiffly,	from	his	awkward	supine	position.
“For	what	wrongs	precisely,	sirrah?”
Tristan	 took	 a	moment	 as	 if	 trying	 to	 remember	what	his	 sins	were.	 “For

daring	to	show	such	insolence	to	one	of	my	betters.”
“Apology	 accepted.”	 He	 withdrew	 his	 sword,	 stood	 upright,	 and	 casually

sheathed	his	blade.	“If	it	happens	again,	’twill	be	your	throat	I	pierce	and	not
the	clothes	around	it,”	he	said,	then	gestured	to	George	(who	had	retrieved	his
backsword	 and	 was	 inspecting	 it	 for	 damage).	 They	 walked	 down	 the	 steps,
took	the	next	wherry,	and	sailed	off	downstream.

Tristan	got	to	his	feet	before	I	could	move	to	offer	him	a	hand.	He	shook
his	head	slightly,	looking	spooked.	“Well	there’s	a	lesson	in	that,”	muttered	he
to	himself.	“Learning	from	a	fight	choreographer	has	its	limits.”	He	gave	me	a
reassuring	smile.	“It’s	been	a	very	fruitful	day.”

And	 to	 make	 a	 quick	 end	 of	 it,	 Your	 Grace,	 back	 we	 went	 along	 the
Thames,	and	back	to	the	brewery,	and	then	I	Sent	him	back	to	where	he	came
from,	which	is	farther	into	the	future	than	I	had	dreamed,	hundreds	of	years	it
sounds	like.	I’ve	kept	Ned	Alleyn’s	stolen	costume	for	his	next	visit.

So	that	is	the	tale	of	Tristan	Lyons,	whom	I’ll	surely	see	on	many	another
snáithe	as	I	Wend	my	way	thence.

And	in	conclusion,	let	me	tell	Your	Majesty	that	nobody	in	London	seems
at	 all	 aware	 that	 the	 Spanish	 are	 about	 to	 land	 at	 Kinsale;	 that	 Penelope
Devereux,	sister	to	the	traitor	Essex,	has	been	divorced	by	her	husband	Lord
Rich	 for	 having	 an	 affair	 (and	 bastard	 children)	 with	 Mountjoy,	 known	 to
yourself	 also	 as	 Charles	 Blount,	 known	 to	 yourself	 also	 as	 “Lord	Deputy	 of
Ireland.”	They	have	but	one	son,	Mountjoy	Blount,	and	himself	 is	four	years
old,	but	I	do	intend	to	put	a	curse	on	him	that	all	of	his	children	will	be	still-



born	or	idiots,	and	so	that	line	will	end.
And	now	I	shall	close	with	great	love	and	regard	to	Your	Majesty,	as	I	am

off	to	enjoy	my	one	personal	indulgence:	the	honey-love	of	a	full	night	spent	in
the	arms	of	my	sweetheart.	My	life	is	naught	but	secrets	that	I	either	keep	or
destroy	on	your	behalf;	sure	it	does	my	soul	good	to	have	one	small	nugget	of
mine	own.

Whether	 I	 be	near	 or	 far,	may	 I	 hear	 only	 good	 things	 of	 you,	My	Lady
Gráinne!	Yours	ever,	Gráinne	in	London

Diachronicle	
DAY	352

In	which	we	fail	better

I	 SET	 UP	 A	 VIGIL	 in	 the	 office,	 determining	 not	 to	 leave	 until	 Tristan	 had
returned.	 What	 if	 our	 research	 about	 the	 witch	 Gráinne	 had	 been	 wrong?
What	if	she	was	sloppy	with	her	details,	and	returned	him	to	the	wrong	time
or	place?	So	in	a	sense,	it	made	no	sense	at	all	to	wait,	and	yet	I	could	focus	on
nothing	else.	I	continued	to	collate	our	databases,	determined	not	to	leave	the
building	 despite	 the	 lovely	 summer	 weather—weather	 not	 unlike	 what	 is
outside	 right	now,	given	 in	both	cases	 it	 is	 July	 in	 a	 temperate	climate.	The
whole	 day	 passed.	 Erszebet	 took	 it	 upon	 herself	 to	 buy	 a	 used	 bicycle	with
what	 she	 called	“pin	money”	given	her	by	Tristan	 for	 sundry	 expenses,	 and
she	began	to	map	out	a	bike	route	she	would	take	to	Walden	Pond	the	next
day	if	Tristan	had	not	returned.	She	seemed	to	be	hoping	he’d	be	gone	awhile.
Frank	and	Rebecca,	who	had	left	the	office	shortly	after	Tristan	had	been	Sent
to	the	DTAP,	called	to	invite	us	to	dinner.	This	struck	me	as	bizarrely	normal
when	we	were	living	under	not-at-all-normal	circumstances,	so	I	declined,	but
Erszebet,	overhearing	the	call,	insisted	I	call	them	back	so	that	she	could	go	on
her	own.



A	 buzz	 from	 the	 control	 panel	 let	 us	 know	 that	 the	 ODEC	 door	 was
opening.	Erszebet’s	face	fell	slightly.	“He’s	back,”	she	said,	as	if	he’d	returned
just	 to	 ruin	 her	 social	 calendar.	 “Now	we’ll	 have	 to	 take	 him	 to	 dinner	 as
well.”

“Don’t	you	want	to	hear	what	happened?”	I	asked.	I	went	to	the	glass	wall
and	 looked	 to	 the	ODEC,	 then,	 realizing	Tristan	would	 be	 naked,	 stopped
myself.	There	was	now	an	intercom	system	that	we	could	use	to	communicate
through	the	wall.	I	flipped	it	on.	“Tristan?”	I	called.	“Are	you	all	right?”

“Give	me	a	moment,”	he	called	back	out,	 in	a	hazy	voice.	“Actually	give
me	five	moments.”

“Look	at	you,	 smiling	 like	a	girl,”	 said	Erszebet,	grudgingly	amused.	“It	 is
disappointing	to	me	you	don’t	raise	your	standards.”

“Don’t	you	want	to	know	how	it	went?”	I	demanded.
She	 shrugged	 her	 trademark	 disdainful	 shrug.	 “It	 does	 not	matter	 how	 it

went,	it	is	only	the	first	time,	he	will	have	to	go	back	and	do	it	again.	It	will	be
days	before	there	is	anything	interesting	to	hear	about.”

“I’m	calling	Oda-sensei,”	I	said,	 feeling	uncharacteristically	peevish	toward
her.	Quite	suddenly	I	had	a	lot	of	energy	and	no	clear	sense	of	how	to	channel
it.	I	 sent	them	a	text;	Rebecca	answered	and	said	that	 they	would,	naturally,
come	at	once.

We	all	convened	in	an	office	near	the	ODEC	that	we	had	converted	into	a
briefing	and	debriefing	 room.	It	was	equipped	with	gear	 for	 recording	audio
and	video,	though	we	had	not	yet	got	in	the	habit	of	using	it.	Tristan	smelled
of	the	disinfectant	shower	he’d	just	stepped	out	of.	He’d	changed	back	into	his
jeans	and	T-shirt	and	thrown	his	damp	towel	around	his	neck	like	a	shawl.	He
looked	fine,	although	he	was	slightly	distracted	as	his	tongue	worked	the	small
gap	in	his	back	teeth	due	to	the	missing	fillings.	I’d	handed	those	back	to	him
upon	his	return.	They	now	sat	before	him	on	the	table,	giving	him	something
to	fidget	with.	He	looked	like	he	could	use	a	beer,	and	so	I	got	him	one.

“I	have	good	news	and	bad	news,”	he	began,	after	whetting	his	whistle	with
a	swallow	of	Old	Tearsheet.	“The	good	news—the	most	important	news—is
that	I	believe	Sir	Edward	will	change	his	mind	about	his	investment.	I	believe
he	will	opt	for	the	East	India	Company	over	the	Boston	Council.”

“On	one	Strand,”	said	Erszebet.
“Yes,”	said	Tristan.	“I	realize	I	need	to	do	it	a	few	more	times,	although	it

might	be	worth	Mel’s	time	to	go	back	to	1640	Cambridge	just	to	see	if	there’s
a	difference.”



“There	won’t	be,”	said	Erszebet.	“It	does	not	work	that	way,	you’ve	already
witnessed	that.	Why	would	you	subject	her	to	that	unpleasant	effort?”

“I	think	it’s	worth	checking,”	Tristan	repeated.	“To	see	how	much	can	be
accomplished	in	a	single	go.”

There	was	a	 loaded	pause	and	 then	Erszebet	 said	 flatly,	“Well	 then,	you’ll
have	to	Send	her	yourself.	I	will	not	do	it.”

“You	are	refusing	an	order?”
“I	 reject	 the	notion	you	can	give	me	orders,”	 said	Erszebet.	“I	am	simply

refusing	to	do	something	foolish.”
“Erszebet,”	said	Frank	Oda,	ever	the	conciliatory	force.	“You	signed	papers

agreeing	to	cooperate,	do	you	remember	that,	in	Washington?”
“I	will	cooperate,”	said	Erszebet.	“When	it	is	in	the	interest	of	the	mission.

This	is	just	in	the	interest	of	Tristan	Lyons	throwing	his	weight	around,	and	I
did	not	sign	anything	saying	I	would	do	that.”

“He’s	 your	 superior	 officer,”	 I	 tried	 tentatively,	 realizing	 it	was	 a	mistake
even	as	the	words	came	out	of	my	mouth,	for	she	burst	out	laughing	and	said,
“Him?	He’s	not	my	superior	anything.”	She	sobered.	“I	will	Send	Tristan	back
to	London	in	September	of	1601,	to	the	Tearsheet	Brewery.	I	will	do	that	as
many	times	as	 it	 takes,	my	guess	 is	 four	times	at	 least,	and	only	then	will	we
send	Melisande	back	to	Cambridge	to	see	if	it	has	worked	yet.”

Tristan	 took	a	moment	 to	 look	 silently	 long-suffering,	 although	 in	 truth	 I
think	he	did	this	just	to	humor	her	desire	to	discomfit	him.	“Fine,”	he	said	at
last.	“That	brings	me	to	 the	 lessons	 learned.	 I	had	an	opportunity	 to	 test	my
weapons	 skills,	 and	 I’m	a	 little	 shell-shocked	by	how	poorly	prepared	 I	was.
Oh,	 grappling	 and	 knife	 disarms	 work	 as	 well	 in	 that	 age	 as	 today.
Swordfighting	 is	a	different	matter	altogether.”	He	delivered	this	news	 in	his
usual	clipped	and	businesslike	Tristan	manner,	but	then	paused,	staring	off	into
space,	as	if	reviewing	some	action	in	his	mind’s	eye.

Frank	Oda	and	I	exchanged	a	look.
“You	saw	a	real	swordfight?”	Oda-sensei	asked,	fascinated.
Tristan	seemed	not	to	hear	the	question.	He	had	slightly	extended	his	right

arm,	 fingers	curled	as	 if	gripping	 the	hilt	of	 a	 sword,	and	was	moving	 it	 this
way	and	that.	Meeting	my	eye,	he	pulled	the	towel	off	of	his	neck,	revealing	a
long,	superficial	cut.

“You	were	in	a	real	swordfight!?”	I	exclaimed.
This	seemed	to	snap	him	out	of	it.	He	let	his	hand	drop	to	the	table,	where

he	 went	 back	 to	 fidgeting	 with	 the	 disembodied	 fillings.	 “They	 have	more



than	one	kind	of	 sword,”	he	announced.	“It’s	not	all	 just	 rapiers.	There’s	an
older	style	too.	Bigger,	heavier.	Kind	of	like	nowadays	you	might	see	an	older
person	driving	a	big	old	Buick	sedan	while	the	younger	generation	is	tooling
around	in	little	hybrids.	I	need	to	get	good	at	fighting	with	a	Buick.	I	need	a
combat	historian	who	can	drill	me	on	the	nuances	of	that	era.	My	opponent
did	something	very	subtle	that	I	wasn’t	expecting.”

“Should	I	ask	Darren	to	come	back	in?”
Darren	 was	 the	 fight	 choreographer	 from	 Boston	 Shakespeare.	 We	 had

sworn	him	to	secrecy	and	hired	him	to	teach	Tristan	what	he	knew.
“Darren’s	 wrong	 for	 it,”	 Tristan	 said.	 “He’s	 spot-on	 with	 the	 historical

detail,	 I’ll	 give	 him	 that.	 But	 the	 whole	 point	 of	 stage	 fighting	 is	 that	 it’s
supposed	to	look	as	flashy	as	possible,	while	being	totally	safe.	And	I	am	here
to	 tell	 you	 that	 real	 swordfighting	 is	 pretty	 non-flashy	 and	 pretty	 fucking
dangerous.”

“I	 know	 who	 to	 ask,”	 said	 Rebecca.	 She	 had	 turned	 herself	 into	 a
resourceful	Girl	Friday,	given	she	had	never	actually	approved	of	any	of	this.
There	wasn’t	much	we	would	put	past	her.	Even	so,	we	all	turned	to	see	if	she
was	 serious.	 “In	 the	park	down	 the	 street,”	 she	 explained,	“in	 the	 evenings,
when	the	weather’s	good,	there’s	a	group	of	historical	swordfighters	who	meet
to	practice.”

“LARPers?”	Tristan	asked,	clearly	skeptical.	Seeing	that	no	one	besides	him
knew	 what	 a	 LARPer	 was,	 he	 continued,	 “Guys	 who	 fight	 with	 foam
weapons?”

“Not	foam,”	Rebecca	said.	“It	is	steel	on	steel,	I	can	hear	the	din	of	it	from
my	 garden.	 They	 should	 be	 meeting	 this	 evening.	 I’ll	 go	 there	 and	 make
inquiries	as	soon	as	you’re	done	debriefing	us.”

“Great.	If	we	can	find	one	willing	to	sign	the	NDA,	I	want	to	book	him	all
day	tomorrow	and	the	next	day,	maybe	even	three	days	in	a	row.	I	need	to	get
back	to	the	Tearsheet	as	quickly	as	possible,	and	I	definitely	have	to	be	on	my
game.”	His	eye	fell	on	the	beer	bottle	in	front	of	him,	with	its	ye	olde	lettering
and	 its	 ye	 olde	 artist’s	 conception	 of	 the	 original	 Tearsheet	 Brewery.	 He
devoted	a	few	moments	to	examining	this,	as	if	comparing	it	to	the	real	one	he
had	departed	only	a	few	minutes	ago.

Then	he	 turned	 to	Erszebet.	 “Here’s	 the	other	 thing.	When	 I	 go	back,	 I
need	to	go	back	to	a	different	day,	the	day	before	I	was	last	there.	How	will
that	affect	the	Strands?”

She	shrugged,	but	this	time	thoughtfully,	not	disdainfully.	“It	depends,”	she



said.	“Nothing	is	ever	certain.	If	you	will	not	be	traveling	for	a	few	days,	I	will
spend	 that	 time	 with	 my	 számológép	 and	 try	 to	 determine	 this.	 The	 more
different	moments	you	visit,	the	more	Strands	there	are	to	contend	with,	and	it
is	 an	exponential	 increase	 in	 complications.	 I	will	 tell	 you	 something:	 in	 the
history	of	magic	it	is	a	general	trend	that	all	new	rulers	wish	to	use	our	time-
transporting	skills	to	their	advantage,	but	the	more	seasoned	they	become,	the
more	they	understand	the	complications,	and	the	less	they	wish	to	lean	upon
it.”

“We’re	not	in	the	history	of	magic,”	Tristan	replied	evenly.	“We’re	outside
of	it.	That’s	sort	of	the	point.”

“Thank	 you	 for	 .	 .	 .	 doing	whatever	 it	 is	 you’re	 going	 to	 be	 doing	with
your,	mmm,	számológép,”	I	said.

“What	exactly	are	you	going	to	be	doing	with	it?”	asked	Frank	Oda.
“I	already	told	you,	you	cannot	touch	it,”	she	said	shortly.
“And	I	won’t,”	 said	Oda-sensei,	ever	affable.	“But	 I	would	 so	very	much

like	 to	 watch	 as	 you	 do	 the	 work.	 I	 have	 been	 playing	 with	 an	 artifact	 of
Rebecca’s	ancestress	that	reminds	me	of	your	számológép.	Perhaps	I	could	ask
questions	and	you	could	explain	it	to	me.”	A	smile.	“I	would	be	so	extremely
grateful	to	be	a	beginner	at	the	feet	of	such	an	expert.”

“That’s	flattery,”	said	Erszebet,	looking	pleased	about	it.
“It	is	the	truth,”	said	Oda-sensei.	“Sometimes	the	truth	is	flattering.”
She	considered	him	a	moment,	and	then	smiled.	It	was	rare	she	smiled,	and

it	 only	 further	 emphasized	 her	 beauty.	 “Very	 well,”	 she	 said.	 “We	 start
tomorrow.”

And	thus	began	Oda-sensei’s	initiation	into	diachronic	calculations.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

JULY	22

Temperature	82F.	High	clouds,	mild	breeze.	Barometer	rising.
All	herbs	faring	nicely.	Butterfly	weed	beginning	to	bloom.	Anise	hyssop

approaching	four	feet,	very	healthy.	Scarlet	elder:	flowers	past,	berries	not



yet	ripe.	Vegetables:	kale	and	 lettuce	 in	containers	coming	nicely	(lettuce
harvestable	as	baby	greens),	but	I	fear	I	planted	the	onions	too	late	in	the
season.

Generally	 less	 time	 and	 energy	 for	 gardening,	 to	 be	 honest.	 I	 am
distracted	 by	 the	 distant	 clinking	 and	 clanking	 of	 blunt	 steel	weapons	 in
the	 park	 down	 the	 street,	 where	 Tristan	 has	 been	 learning	 the	 art	 of	 the
backsword	from	one	Mortimer	Shore,	a	local	historical	fencing	enthusiast
whom	I	have	recruited.

Have	 been	 watching	 Frank	 and	 Erszebet	 converse,	 as	 she	 attempts	 to
describe	 to	 him	 what	 her	 számológép	 does	 for	 her.	 For	 all	 my	 years	 of
editing	his	papers	and	carrying	my	weight	at	those	awkward	faculty	parties
(in	which	 fundamentally	 non-social	 creatures—physicists—were	 expected
to	behave	 like	 social	 creatures),	 I	 cannot	 follow	most	 of	 their	discussion.
This	 is	not	actually	due	 to	 the	calculus	or	physics,	given	that	Erszebet	has
absolutely	no	training	in	either	field.	It	is	rather	that	I	find	it	exhausting	to
try	to	be	essentially	bilingual,	which	Frank	is	so	willing	to	be.	She	speaks	in
her	 eccentric	 lingo	 and	he	 finds	ways	 to	 respond	 to	her	with	 very	 simply
layman’s	physics—“When	you	say	XYZ,	is	that	another	way	of	saying	ABC?”
And	 she	 thinks,	 and	 sighs,	 and	 says	 she	 supposes	 so,	 if	 somebody	 is	 too
thick	to	simply	understand	XYZ.

After	several	hours	of	discussion,	Frank	thanked	her,	brought	home	his
notes,	 and	 sat	 down	with	my	 shaggy	 family	 heirloom	 to	 experiment	 with
what	he’d	learned.	He	has	not	yet	shared	any	of	his	discoveries	with	me—
not	because	he	is	keeping	it	a	secret,	but	because	he	most	enjoys	bringing
me	in	to	his	work	when	he’s	accomplished	something.	I	believe	he	means
to	construct	a	számológép/quipu/shaggy-family-artifact-like	object	that	he
can	 use	 whether	 or	 not	 Erszebet	 is	 of	 a	 mind	 to	 cooperate	 with	 Tristan.
(Although	 since	 she	 is	 the	 only	 one	 who	 can	 actually	 make	 time	 travel
happen,	 there	 is	 no	 practical	 benefit	 to	 having	 a	 quipu	 unless	 she	 is
cooperating.	 There	 I	 go	 being	 a	 pragmatist,	 which	 is	 not	 how	 Frank	 is
wired.)

The	 only	 other	 item	 of	 note—besides	 Tristan	 re-training	 himself	 for
period	combat,	which	I	hope	he	 is	never	 foolhardy	enough	 to	use—is	 that
our	two	young	leaders,	especially	Tristan,	seem	to	be	growing	tense	about
how	 long	 this	 is	 taking.	 I	 have	 spent	 fifty	 years	married	 to	 a	man	who	 is
delightedly	 preoccupied	 with	 the	 journey,	 and	 now	 suddenly	 we	 are
working	with	those	who	care	only	for	the	destination.



This	does	not,	in	truth,	seem	to	match	their	personalities,	certainly	not
Mel’s.	 It	 clearly	 originates	 from	 higher	 up	 the	 “food	 chain,”	 the	 cast	 of
characters	we	met	around	that	conference	table	in	the	Trapezoid.	General
Frink	 must	 be	 ultimately	 responsible;	 but	 it	 is	 Lester	 Holgate,	 Frink’s
eager-beaver	civilian	 toady,	who	seems	 to	be	on	 the	other	end	of	most	of
the	phone	calls	and	email	threads.

LETTER	FROM

GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
A	Sunday	of	Mid-Harvest,	1601

Auspiciousness	and	prosperity	to	you,	milady!
It’s	mostly	Tristan	Lyons	I’m	writing	of	today,	Your	Grace,	as	precious	few

other	 developments	 there’ve	 been	 but	 plenty	 involving	 him.	He	must	 be	 in
alliance	 with	 a	 proper	 witch,	 and	 depending	 on	 who	 and	 where	 she	 is,	 she
could	be	useful	for	Your	Grace.

In	order	for	me	to	string	this	together	into	a	proper	tale	I’ve	had	to	Wend
my	way	to	all	of	the	snáithe—the	Strands—in	which	he	has	appeared	to	carry
out	 the	 same	 set	 of	 deeds.	 As	 you	 and	 I	 understand,	 Your	 Grace,	 they	 all
happened	at	once,	as	choristers	in	the	church	nave	sing	the	same	tune	at	the
same	time;	but	I	cannot	write	many	stories	down	in	such	a	manner	and	so	I’ll
relate	them	one	after	the	other,	like	beads	on	a	rosary.

He	has	been	Sent	to	several	Strands,	always	on	the	Sunday,	and	always	with
the	same	task:	to	convince	Sir	Edward	Greylock	to	move	his	financial	interests
to	 the	 East	 India	 Company,	 and	 away	 from	 some	 queer	 little	 joint-stock
company	 called	 the	Boston	Council.	He	wants	 this	 as	 the	 cause	 of	 an	 effect
forty	years	distant	and	all	the	way	across	the	sea.	He	is	not	very	forthcoming
in	his	plans,	except	to	assure	me	they	have	no	bearing	on	Your	Grace.	I	have
not	yet	begun	to	pry	him	for	important	information,	as	I	believe	the	longer	I



let	him	get	 accustomed	 to	my	cooperation,	 the	easier	will	 it	be	 to	 twist	him
round	 my	 finger	 when	 it’s	 time.	 So	 I	 will	 continue	 to	 knit	 myself	 into	 his
affections.	 I’ve	 offered	 him	 the	 occasional	 chance	 for	making	 the	 beast	with
two	backs,	but	he	never	takes	me	up	on	it.	It’s	a	shame	since	he’s	cleaner	and
better-smelling	 than	 any	 other	 fellow	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 (except	 my
sweetheart).

It’s	the	same	each	Strand:	he	arrives	while	we	are	all	at	mass,	dons	the	shirt
and	 drawers	 I	 keep	 extra	 at	 hand,	 and	 then	 waits	 for	 me	 to	 return	 from
services,	when	I	unlock	my	chest	and	give	him	a	few	coins	and	Ned	Alleyn’s
costume	pieces.	To	keep	him	in	the	habit	of	telling	me	things	(although	small
things	they	are,	for	now),	I	pester	him	for	information	on	his	future	world.	I’ve
learned	things	that	are	pleasing	enough	to	my	ear,	assuming	he’s	not	codding
me.	He	tells	me	of	all	the	saints	there	ever	was,	 it’s	only	Padraig	whose	feast
day	 is	 celebrated	 in	 his	 nation.	He	 tells	me	 the	 spirit	 of	 the	 Irish	where	 he
dwells	is	powerful,	so	powerful	that	many	of	our	countrymen	will	hold	a	great
many	courtly	offices,	 so	great	 that	 it’s	our	 luchrupán	used	as	a	 talisman	by	a
guild	of	men	who	somehow	earn	their	living	playing	a	game	with	a	pig	bladder
(I	 cannot	 fathom	 how	 this	 happens,	 but	 I	 will	 query	 further	 if	 Your	Grace
requests	 to	know	 it).	He	 spends	 the	night	 in	 the	bawdy-house,	 and	 the	next
day	we	venture	across	the	river.	Tristan	understands	he	must	make	the	effort
several	times	to	see	results.	It’s	four	times	he’s	had	the	same	conversation	with
the	 same	Sir	Edward	Greylock	at	 the	 same	 tavern	near	Whitehall.	However,
there	have	been	two	remarkable	changes	in	the	routine.

First	of	all,	when	we	enter	the	tavern,	’tis	no	longer	Sir	Edward	sitting	alone
we	see,	 looking	across	the	table	at	the	remains	of	some	other	diner’s	food.	In
these	other	Strands,	his	dinner	companion	has	lingered	over	his	meal,	drawing
out	the	conversation.	Finely	dressed	this	 fella	 is,	 in	clothes	 that	are	dark	and
even	a	touch	old-fashioned,	but	ever	so	well	made.	He’s	wearing	a	tall	hat	with
a	broad	brim	pulled	rakishly	down	over	one	eye,	sporting	a	scarlet	plume,	and
when	he	turns	his	head	to	take	note	of	Tristan,	it’s	a	yellow	beard	that	comes
into	view,	 trimmed	and	groomed	to	a	 long	 sharp	point.	 It	 is,	 in	other	words,
the	German	with	 the	white	kid	gloves	who	came	out	of	nowhere	 in	 the	 first
Strand	and	prevented	Tristan	from	being	murdered	in	the	duel.	He	sits	there
quietly,	 listening	 to	 what	 Tristan	 has	 to	 say.	 From	 time	 to	 time	 he	 and	 Sir
Edward	 glance	 across	 the	 table	 at	 each	 other	 in	 a	 manner	 that	 is	 full	 of
significance.	Anon	he	excuses	himself	and	leaves	the	tavern.

Secondly:	on	these	other	Strands,	we	are	chanced	upon	by	the	same	tosser



and	 the	 same	 weedy	 curmudgeon—Herbert	 and	 George—I	 wrote	 about
before.	 As	 before	 they	 follow	 us,	 and	 Herbert	 has	 a	 go	 at	 Tristan	 on	 the
Whitehall	steps.	As	before	the	German’s	there,	stepping	up	to	act	as	Tristan’s
second.	 And	 you	 might	 think	 that	 Tristan	 would	 properly	 apologize	 and
humble	himself	to	avoid	a	repetition	of	the	duel.	But	didn’t	he	amaze	me	the
first	 time	 he	 came	 back,	 accepting	 George’s	 backsword	 straightaway,	 and
disarming	Herbert	 in	a	trice!	His	abilities,	his	skill,	his	confidence—all	these
more	 than	 trebled	 from	 one	 Strand	 to	 the	 next!	 I	 cannot	 account	 for	 the
marvel	of	 it,	but	 it	does	make	him	even	more	 lovely	a	 fellow	 to	watch	now.
The	German	watches	all,	but	does	 less,	 as	his	 services	are	no	 longer	needed,
and	doesn’t	he	disappear	into	the	crowd	before	he	can	be	thanked.

For	Tristan’s	fifth	appearance,	things	were	different.	This	time,	he	reported
to	me	that	his	acolyte,	a	woman	named	Melisande	(not	a	witch),	has	been	to
the	nearer	 future	 to	 check	 the	outcome	of	his	 labors,	but	 those	 efforts	have
been	futile.	So	he	asked	if	rather	than	repeating	our	circuit	of	Whitehall	and
the	 Bell	 Tavern,	 we	 might	 discourse	 of	 other	 ways	 to	 effect	 the	 necessary
change.

This	I	knew	to	be	my	opportunity	to	start	to	work	him	round	my	finger.	“I
might	be	able	to	help	you,”	says	I,	“if	you	give	me	more	information	than	you
have	been.”

“Fair	enough,”	he	says—as	if	being	fair	were	what	mattered.	“What	do	you
want	to	know?”

“Why	are	you	needing	this	Boston	Council	scheme	to	fail?	What	gain	you
by	that?”

“In	my	reality	as	 it	now	stands,	 the	Council	builds	 something	 in	 the	New
World	that	we	don’t	want	there.	A	factory.	But	it’s	in	the	way	of	where	a	house
should	be,	a	house	that	had	been	there	when	we	began	our	efforts.	We	need	the
house	to	still	be	there,	meaning	we	need	the	factory	to	never	have	been	built.”

“Righto,	 but	 why	 were	 you	 meddling	 there	 to	 start	 with?	 Surely	 in	 your
future	world	full	of	handsome	creatures	such	as	yourself,	there	is	little	enough
you	could	gain	by	going	to	visit	some	house	in	the	wilderness?	What	was	there
for	you?”

He	 grimaced,	 for	 he	 wasn’t	 in	 the	 humour	 to	 go	 into	 it,	 but	 eventually
didn’t	I	coax	from	him	his	story,	that	being:	he	and	brethren	were	attempting
to	make	a	small	fortune	for	themselves	by	secreting	away	an	item—a	printed
book—that	 was	 easy	 enough	 to	 get	 in	 1640	 but	 near	 impossible	 to	 get	 in
Tristan’s	age,	making	it	of	great	worth.



“So	you’re	thieves	and	chancers,”	said	I	approvingly.
“No,”	he	objected.	“It	is	a	strategy.	The	money	is	not	to	save	us	from	having

to	labor	for	a	living,	it	is	what	we	need	to	be	able	to	labor	for	a	living.”
“Seems	peculiar,”	I	said.	“You’re	saying	once	you’ve	the	money	in	hand—

enough	to	live	on	for	the	rest	of	your	days,	in	leisure	and	doing	whatever	you
like—instead	 of	 doing	 that,	 you’d	 be	 using	 the	 money	 for	 something	 that
requires	you	to	toil	more	than	you’d	have	to	without	the	money.	Be	you	daft?”

“The	labor	we	want	to	do	is	important	work.	It	means	far	more	to	us	to	do
that	work	than	to	simply	live	a	life	of	leisure.”

I	laughed	at	him.	“So	it’s	Protestant	you	be!”	I	said.	“Or	farmers.	Sure	none
else	would	make	that	choice.”

“Would	you	not?”	he	 asked.	 “Is	 there	nothing	 in	 the	world	 that	means	 so
much	to	you	that	if	you	were	given	treasure,	you	would	use	it	not	for	yourself
but	to	support	and	protect	the	thing	you	love?”

And	then	didn’t	I	shut	my	mouth	and	nod,	for	I	understood	him.
“That	is	why	we	need	the	money,”	he	said.	“That	we	can	do	our	work.”
“And	what	 be	 your	 work?”	 I	 asked	 of	 course,	 and	 of	 course	 he	 answered,

“Classified.”
I	shrugged	then.	“I	can’t	help	you	figure	out	how	to	accomplish	something	if

you	won’t	be	telling	me	what	you’re	trying	to	accomplish,”	I	said.
“All	that	matters	is	for	the	factory	to	disappear	so	that	we	still	have	a	place

to	hide	the	book.”
“So	you	say.	But	I	need	to	know	the	nature	of	your	work,	so	I	know	if	it’s

something	I	want	 to	be	abetting.	What	 if	 it’s	against	 the	 interests	of	 Ireland,
for	all	you	say	we	prosper	over	there	in	your	New	World?”

“It’s	got	nothing	at	all	to	do	with	Ireland,”	he	insisted.
“Then	 tell	me	 what	 it’s	 got	 to	 do	 with.	 From	where	 I	 sit,	 the	 only	 thing

you’ve	 got	 to	 offer	 me—besides	 telling	 Sir	 Edward	 to	 spend	 his	 whoring
largesse	with	me	and	my	sisters—is	that	you’ve	knowledge	I	have	not.	That’s
the	cost	of	my	assisting	you:	knowledge.	Start	with	something	simple.	Such	as
what	it	is	you’re	doing.	In	the	bigger	sense,	I	mean.”

He	grimaced.	Sat	for	a	bit,	he	did,	as	if	chewing	over	the	diet	of	truth	in	his
mind.	Then	he	 finally	presented	 this	bit	of	business	 to	me:	 “In	 the	 future—
long	after	you	are	dead,	but	long	before	I	am	born—magic	is	completely	done
away	with.”

“That’s	impossible,”	I	said.
“I	 gain	 nothing	 by	 dishonesty,”	 he	 said.	 “I	 have	 nothing	 to	 offer	 you	 but



truth.”
“What	destroys	it?	Is	it	the	Inquisition?	Those	idiot	priests	go	chasing	after

innocent	women,	as	if	real	witches	would	let	themselves	be	caught	and	tortured
and	 killed!	 Almost	 by	 definition,	 anyone	 who	 is	 caught	 and	 tortured,	 and
doesn’t	free	themselves	by	magic,	has	no	magic	powers.	It’s	simple	reason.	Is	it
the	Inquisition?	How	do	they	ever	manage	it,	thick	as	they	are?”

He	 shook	 his	 head.	 “How	magic	 disappears	 is	 a	 separate	 conversation	 for
another	time.	What	matters	is	that	my	fellows	and	I	are	trying	to	bring	it	back.
But	to	bring	it	back	requires	many	things,	 ingredients	and	props	and	general
expenses	that	I	cannot	easily	explain.	There	is	only	one	witch	left	in	my	time.”

“What,	in	the	whole	world?”	I	exclaimed	in	amazement.
“To	the	best	of	our	knowledge.	She	is	very	old,	and	when	she	was	young	and

learning	magic,	magic	was	almost	gone.	So	we	are	at	a	disadvantage	in	my	time.
We	are	trying	to	learn	more,	that	we	may	bring	that	knowledge	into	the	future
and	make	sure	magic	is	restored.”

Now	it	was	my	turn	to	sit	a	moment	grimacing.	“As	hard	as	it	is	to	believe
this	story,”	I	said,	“I	believe	you	are	sincere	in	telling	it.	Speaking	on	behalf	of
my	sisters	I	thank	you	for	the	work	you’re	doing.”

“Will	you	aid	me	to	do	that	work?”
“As	much	as	I	can,”	I	said,	“although	many’s	the	questions	I	still	have	about

this,	more	now	than	before	you	told	me	anything	at	all.”
“I	realize	it’s	a	lot	to	hear	all	at	once,”	said	Tristan	Lyons.	“I	hope	that	you

will	help	me.	In	this	endeavor,	and	perhaps	others.”
“For	the	sake	of	my	sisters	though	I	never	meet	them,	I	give	you	my	hand

and	my	heart.	But	we	begin	with	this	one	task,	aye?”
“Aye,”	he	said.	“Once	we	have	accomplished	this,	I	will	know	better	how	to

proceed	in	general.	And	I’ll	have	more	to	tell	you.”
“Is	right	you	will.	Well	then.	We	must	consider	other	means	through	which

Sir	Edward	would	not	fund	this	Boston	Council.”
“Perhaps	he	squandered	his	inheritance,”	suggested	Tristan.	“Can	you	cause

that	to	have	happened?”
I	shook	my	head.	“That	would	be	the	act	of	a	man	of	a	different	character

altogether,	and	so	’twould	require	too	many	other	changes.	It	needs	must	be	a
simple	 thing,	 one	 specific	 event.	 Perhaps	 he	 was	 never	 born,	 or	 died	 in
childhood.”

“That’s	 a	 bit	 extreme,”	 said	 Tristan,	 who	 I	 wouldn’t	 have	 taken	 for	 the
sentimental	 type.	 “Plus	 he	 has	 offspring	 down	 the	 line	 who	 are	 important



enough	to	look	up	in	the	encyclopedia.”
“In	the	what?”
“He	has	 important	 descendants	who	 are	 not	 born	 yet.	We	 cannot	 change

the	 future	 that	much;	we	must	keep	him	alive.”	He	thought	a	moment.	 “He
could	put	his	money	into	the	Boston	Council	but	the	ships	could	all	be	lost	at
sea.”

“We	do	not	exactly	do	weather	magic,”	I	said,	“save	in	fairy	tales.	It	does	not
really	work	that	way.	’Tis	more	specific	than	just	raising	a	storm	to	blow	a	ship
off	course.	More	scientific	it	is,	if	you	understand	that	concept.”

“I’m	familiar	with	it,”	he	said.
“But	let	me	look	into	it,”	I	offered,	and	from	behind	the	chest	I	pulled	out

my	áireamhán	and	held	it	out	before	me,	to	meditate	upon	it.
“You’re	going	to	look	into	it	with	a	broom?”	asked	Tristan.
“It’s	not	 a	broom,”	 I	 said,	 although	 I	 realized	 I	did	not	know	 the	word	 in

English	as	I’ve	never	the	cause	to	utter	 it.	His	confusion	was	understandable.
To	 him	 it	would	 look	 like	 a	 bundle	 of	 branching	 twigs,	 bound	 fast	 in	 such-
same	manner	 as	 a	 sweep-broom.	And	 indeed	 haven’t	 I	 heard	 tell	 of	 witches
who	sweep	the	 floor	with	 their	áireamhán	as	a	way	 to	allay	 the	suspicions	of
priests	and	busybodies?

“It’s	 a	 .	 .	 .	measuring-counter-helper,”	 I	 explained.	 “It’s	 a	 strange	 look	 you
have	on	your	face	there,	Tristan	Lyons.	Why	would	that	be?”

“What	 do	 you	 use	 it	 for	 exactly?”	 he	 asked,	 in	 a	 tone	 and	 with	 just	 the
expression	of	an	excited	child	first	getting	to	touch	a	salamander.	Wanted	to
snatch	it	from	me,	I	think	he	did,	but	he	restrained	himself.

“It	 helps	 me	 to	 reckon	 the	 odds	 and	 the	 complications	 of	 all	 these
undertakings.	Without	it,	I	could	never	have	Wended	my	way	to	this	Strand	to
assist	you.	You	cannot	play	such	games	as	you	be	playing	without	risk	of	very
serious	consequences;	this	assists	me	in	knowing	how	those	might	come	out.”

Carefully	controlling	his	breathing,	he	was.	“Do	you	know	what	a	quipu	is?”
he	demanded.	I	shook	my	head.	“How	about	a	számológép?”

“What	are	you	talking	about?”
“We	have—our	witch	has—something	like	that	broom	of	yours,	but	made

of	different	material.	Flexible	 rather	 than	 stiff.	But	with	 the	 same	branching,
many-stranded	structure.	She	employs	it	the	way	you	have	just	now	described
employing	yours.	To	 calculate	 the	possible	 consequences	 of	her	magic.	How
does	it	work?”

“What	an	idiot	question,”	I	said.	“How	does	writing	work?	Can	you	tell	me



how	it	is	I	scratch	thrice-ten	marks	on	a	piece	of	vellum	and	you	can	look	at	it
and	learn	every	piece	of	knowledge	in	the	world?”

“Actually,	in	my	time,	we	can	explain	how	that	happens,”	said	Tristan.
“Well	 then,	 you	 tell	me	how	my	 áireamhán	works,”	 I	 suggested.	 “Because

I’ve	not	the	faintest	idea,	I	just	know	it	does.”
So	that’s	the	sort	of	talk	we	were	having	on	that	Strand,	Your	Majesty.	I	did

some	readings	on	the	áireamhán	and	from	them	we	concluded	that	there	was
no	wisdom	in	trying	to	sink	the	ship	that	takes	Sir	Edward’s	silver	across,	as	the
first	 mate	 eventually	 has	 some	 offspring	 who	 has	 some	 other	 offspring	 ad
nauseam,	and	one	of	them	eventually	writes	a	book	about	a	fish,	that	Tristan
says	is	important.	And	we	determined	likewise	that	there	be	lomadh	danger	in
trying	 to	 destroy	 the	 factory,	 as	 likely	 the	 local	 American	 tribe	 would	 be
blamed	for	it	by	the	Puritans	in	the	nearby	village,	who	would	then	attack	the
American	 tribe,	 who	 would	 then	 burn	 down	 the	 whole	 village,	 and	 that
imperils	a	school	to	be	built	whose	existence	must	not	be	blotted	out.	All	 in
all,	 it	 seemed	 to	 me,	 his	 likeliest	 course	 of	 action	 was	 for	 him	 to	 stay	 the
course,	try	two	or	three	more	times	to	sway	Sir	Edward,	and	then	go	back	to
check	again.

So,	not	 to	be	putting	 too	much	emphasis	upon	 it,	we	went	 as	 ever	 to	 the
Bell	 Tavern,	 and	 he	 chatted	 up	 Sir	 Edward	 and	 the	 German,	 and	 back	 we
came	 to	 the	 brewery	 (I	 do	 so	 love	 that	 swordfight,	 and	 on	 certain	 Strands,
Tristan	 is	a	marvel!	Although	 in	 fairness,	he	now	knows	Herbert’s	 style	very
well;	 poor	Herbert	has	no	 idea	what	he	 is	 getting	 into,	 and	moreover	 seems
increasingly	distracted	by	the	queer	feeling	that	this	has	all	happened	to	him
before.).	Then	I	Sent	him	direct	to	1640	in	America,	for	the	economy	of	time,
by	 checking	 for	 himself	 if	 the	 change	 had	 been	made.	 I	 don’t	 know	 if	 he’ll
Home	to	his	own	time	or	back	to	me,	but	in	either	case,	it’s	here	he’ll	return
on	some	other	Strand,	and	I	shall	keep	working	on	him	to	learn	something.	His
talk	 of	 the	 loss	 of	 magic	 is	 distressing	 to	 me,	 although	 it	 will	 happen	 long
enough	from	now	that	it	shall	have	no	bearing	on	Your	Grace’s	plans.

Little	to	report	in	other	news	as	I	just	wrote	you	so	recently.	At	the	Globe
they	brought	back	Will’s	comedy	As	You	Like	It,	which	I	went	to	see,	although
it	irks	me	to	see	him	nicking	Your	Grace’s	own	story,	for	Rosalind	is	a	thinly
disguised	Grace	O’Malley	 (as	 they	 call	 you	 here)	 and	 doesn’t	 all	 of	London
know	 it?	 A	 grand	 enough	 play	 it	 is,	 but	 only	 one	 line	 of	 true	 beauty	 in	 it:
“Whoever	 loved	who	 loved	not	 at	 first	 sight?”	And	 isn’t	 that	 a	 line	 he	 stole
from	Kit	Marlowe	 and	 furthermore	didn’t	Kit	write	 that	 line	 about	meeting



me!	 My	 poor	 dead	 Kit.	 That	 poxy	 arse	 Will	 Shakespeare.	 He’s	 even	 the
effrontery	to	speak	obliquely	of	my	sweetheart’s	demise,	for	when	Will	Kempe
as	the	fool	Touchstone	refers	to	“a	great	reckoning	in	a	little	room,”	don’t	we
all	know	he	means	Kit	being	murdered	in	that	pub	brawl?

Having	finished	my	message	to	you,	I’m	off	to	dispel	my	melancholy	with
my	 paramour.	 If	 I	 told	 you	 who	 ’twas,	 you	 would	 not	 believe	 me,	 is	 how
discreet	I’m	being.

Whether	 I	 be	near	 or	 far,	may	 I	 hear	 only	 good	 things	 of	 you,	My	Lady
Gráinne!	Yours	ever,	Gráinne	in	London

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

AUGUST	1

Temperature	90F,	extremely	muggy.	Barometer	falling,	hopefully	rain	to
come.

Container	garden	on	 front	 steps:	kale	harvestable	but	bitter	due	 to	 the
heat,	new	generation	of	lettuce	coming	in	fine.	Onions	will	be	ready	soon,
to	my	surprise.	The	rest	of	it	makes	do	on	its	own.	Have	put	in	an	irrigation
system	as	I	am	growing	forgetful	of	the	water	rotations.	Almost	a	relief	not
to	have	an	entire	vegetable	garden	to	weed	and	oversee.	How	did	I	ever	have
the	 time	 and	 energy?	 I	would	 even	 forget	 to	 feed	 the	 cats	 if	 they	 did	not
remind	me.

Frank	 continues	 to	 crunch	 numbers	 and	 create	 formulas	 to	 further
understand	 the	 quipu,	 querying	 Erszebet	 about	 her	 object	 and	 then
examining	 the	 “witch’s	mop”	 as	 we	 call	 the	 artifact	 from	 the	 attic	 chest.
Tristan	agrees	this	is	a	priority.	He	has	determined	to	save	time	by	traveling
directly	 between	 1601	 to	 1640	 if	 possible,	 now	 that	 we	 have	 “Known
Compliant	 Witches”	 (inevitably	 “KCWs”)	 in	 both	 of	 those	 DTAPs,	 but	 it
seems	 foolish	 to	 do	 this	 without	 calculating	 the	 risks,	 and	 Erszebet—



although	willing	to	do	it—has	warned	that	she	can	only	calculate	so	fast.	In
the	 meanwhile,	 he	 has	 decided	 to	 travel	 from	 1601	 London	 to	 1640
Cambridge	but	then	return	here—so	far,	without	success.	The	maple	syrup
boiler	remains.	At	least	the	yard	is	no	longer	getting	dug	up	once	a	day.

The	other	item	of	note	is	the	addition	to	our	team	of	a	new	man.	Frink,
the	 fellow	 with	 the	 lapels	 and	 the	 desk	 in	 Washington,	 has	 sent	 us	 his
protégé	because,	he	tells	us,	based	on	Tristan’s	progress	reports,	we	need	to
“boost	 our	 morale,”	 “take	 the	 bull	 by	 the	 horns,”	 and	 generally	 make
ourselves	more	of	an	historical	nuisance	than	Erszebet	feels	is	a	good	idea.
His	name	is	Lester	Holgate	(“Call	me	Les”),	and	by	a	strange	coincidence—
is	 it	 a	 coincidence?—he	 is	 the	nephew	of	one	Roger	Blevins,	who	was	 the
chair	of	Melisande’s	department	at	Harvard.

Rather	than	attempt	to	describe	Les	and	his	effect	on	the	team,	I	attach	a
“hard	 copy”	of	 a	PowerPoint	presentation	 that	he	 accidentally	 emailed	 to
me.

SLIDE	1:	—CLASSIFIED—
INTERIM	SITREP
OPERATION	“BOLSTER	GAINS”
From:	LESTER	(“LES”)	HOLGATE
(currently	embedded	DODO	Site	Prime—Cambridge,	MA)
To:	FRINK—EYES	ONLY

SLIDE	2 :	DODO	PROGRESS	TO	DATE
•		Key	personnel	recruited	and	papered

•		Prof.	Blevins
•		Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons
•		Dr.	Stokes



•		Auxiliary	personnel

•		Dr.	Oda
•		Rebecca	East-Oda

•		The	Asset

•		“Elizabeth	Karpathy”	(real	name,	DOB	unknown—FOREIGN
NATIONAL)

•		The	Asset’s	personal	computational	device,	“Smallogep”	(spelling?)

•		Functioning	ODEC

•		Magic

•		Diachronic	Transport	confirmed—multiple	insertions/recoveries	of	2
DOers	(Stokes	and	Lyons)	to	2	DTAPs	(Cambridge,	MA,	1640;	London
1601)

SLIDE	3 :	CHALLENGES/ISSUES
•		General	Schneider	confirmed	KIA—possible	fratricide	incident?

•		Failure	to	achieve	cash	flow	positivity	on	sustainable	timetable

•		Bay	Psalter	gambit	stalled
•		Requirement	for	multiple,	redundant	re-execution	of	same	DEDE	in
different	so-called	“Strands”	entails	massive	duplication	of	effort
and	prolonged	delays

•		Unanticipated	requirement	to	go	farther	back	in	time	to	complete
secondary	DEDE	suggests	possible	recursive	“forking”	of
tasks/spends

•		No	end	in	sight	
•		Unauthorized	involvement	of	irregular/unpapered	personnel

•		?	Unprofessional	conduct	between	Stokes	and	Lyons	?

•		Insubordinate/undisciplined	witch—murders	colleagues,	not	on	board
with	mission	objectives,	declines	to	disclose	functionality	of
Smallogep



•		Ad	hoc/improvised	mission	plan

•		Lyons:	excessive	personal	investment	in	current	roster	&	game	plan—
not	enough	professional	detachment

SLIDE	4 :	GOALS	OF	OPERATION	“BOLSTER
GAINS”

•		Overriding	goal:	secure	the	future	of	DODO	by	aggressively	monetizing
its	unique	skill	set	without	further	delay

•		Strategy:	stir	the	pot/incentivize	current	roster	(the	Lyons-led	“Blue
Team”)	via	insertion	of	competitive	“Red	Team”

•		Provisional	“Red	Team”	leader:	Lester	(“Les”)	Holgate

•		Insert	Red	Team	Leader	@	DODO	Site	Prime	←	ACHIEVED

•		Observe/evaluate/report	on	performance	dynamics	of	existing	“Blue
Team”	←	ACHIEVED

•		Challenge	Blue	Team	to	raise	expectations/boost	performance	←
ACHIEVED

•		Spearhead	innovative	operational	modalities

•		Possibly	submit	Asset’s	Smallogep	to	DC	labs	for	analysis

•		Take	executive	action	with	prejudice	to	get	current	DEDE	back	on
track

•		Cauterize	Blue	Team,	replace	with	new	personnel	if	indicated

SLIDE	5 :	LESTER	 (“LES” )	HOLGATE
BACKGROUND/QUALIFICATIONS

•		Education

•		North	Pointe	Preparatory	Academy,	Marblehead,	MA
•		Captain,	chess	team
•		Valedictorian



•		Letter	(6”)	in	lacrosse
•		Dartmouth	College
•		Magna	cum	laude
•		Psychology/political	science
•		Vice	President,	Gamma	Theta	Rho	chapter
•		Intramural	lacrosse
•		Harvard	MBA

•		Woolsack	McNair	Dobermann

•		As	management	consultant	for	America’s	preeminent	business
consultancy	firm,	exceeded	expectations	assisting	various	public
and	private	sector	clients	in	optimizing	operations	and	maximizing
ROI

•		Defense	Intelligence	Agency	(classified)

•		Worked	with	multiple	stakeholders	in	the	black	ops	ecosystem	to
obliterate	institutional	roadblocks	and	maximize	ordnance	on
target	in	complex	operational	environments	characterized	by
ambiguous/ad	hoc	chains	of	command

SLIDE	6 :	OPERATION	“BOLSTER	GAINS”
ACHIEVEMENTS	TO	DATE	 ( 1	OF	5 ) , 	 INSERTION
OF	RED	TEAM	LEADER	TO	DODO	SITE	PRIME,

CAMBRIDGE,	MA
Transportation	 from	 Washington,	 DC,	 area	 proceeded	 nominally	 via
civilian	 transport	 modalities.	 Exploitation	 of	 a	 remote	 credentials
override	 on	 site	 security	 system	 enabled	Red	 Team	Leader	 to	 achieve
ingress	to	facility	without	incident	at	6:04	a.m.	Tactical	objective	was
to	arrive,	set	up	temporary	work	base,	and	“hit	the	ground	running”	prior
to	 the	 arrival	 on	 site	 of	 existing	 (“Blue	 Team”)	 personnel,	 setting	 an
example	and	jarring	them	out	of	complacent	work	habits.



SLIDE	7 :	OPERATION	“BOLSTER	GAINS”
ACHIEVEMENTS	TO	DATE	 (2	OF	5 ) , 	 INCIDENT

REPORT
Upon	 breaching	 secure	 perimeter	 and	 achieving	 site	 ingress	 at	 6:04,
Red	 Team	 Leader	 was	 confronted	 by	 Blue	 Team	 Leader	 (Lyons),	 who
contrary	to	expectations	was	already	on	site	and	awake,	having	pushed
all	furniture	to	the	walls,	stripped	to	his	underwear,	and	was	performing
drills	with	a	long,	one-handed	sword	[sic],	 later	identified	from	Internet
research	 as	 a	 “backsword.”	 Blue	 Team	 Leader	 was	 perspiring	 heavily,
indicating	 a	 high	 degree	 of	 physical	 activity,	 and	 executing	 a
combination	 of	 thrusting	 movements	 with	 sweeping	 cuts	 at	 various
angles.	Upon	becoming	aware	that	Red	Team	Leader	had	ingressed	the
facility,	and	not	knowing	in	advance	of	his	insertion,	Lyons	placed	the	tip
of	 his	 weapon	 in	 close	 proximity	 to	 Red	 Team	 Leader’s	 chest.	 Upon
visual	 inspection	the	tip	was	observed	to	be	sharp,	 in	contravention	of
common-sense	 safety	 procedures.	 Lyons	 advanced,	 obliging	 Red	 Team
Leader	 to	 retreat	 until	 cornered	 behind	 a	 potted	 plant	 (deceased).
Having	thereby	gained	tactical	advantage	Lyons	interrogated	Red	Team
Leader	 as	 to	 his	 authorization,	 making	 a	 cellphone	 call	 with	 his	 free
hand,	 until	 satisfied	 that	 Red	 Team	 Leader	 was	 duly	 authorized.	 The
standoff	 then	 terminated	 without	 further	 incident	 (and	 without
apology).
Action	 Item:	 Review	 and	 upgrade	 weapons	 safety	 procedures.

Institute	 mandatory	 training	 webinars	 for	 all	 DODO	 personnel
authorized	to	handle	weapons.

SLIDE	8 :	OPERATION	“BOLSTER	GAINS”
ACHIEVEMENTS	TO	DATE	 (3	of	5 ) , 	“BROKEN

WINDOWS”
POLICY	PLACED	 IN	EFFECT

Upon	 initial	 inspection,	 DODO	 Site	 Prime	 was	 observed	 to	 be	 in
substandard	 physical	 condition	 with	 several	 plants	 deceased
(presumably	owing	to	lack	of	appropriate	watering	rota),	dirty	dishes	in



sink,	 a	 cold	 cup	 of	 coffee	 in	 the	 microwave,	 a	 low	 standard	 of
maintenance	 in	the	men’s	washroom	(the	women’s	was	not	 inspected),
and	whiteboards	 rendered	 unusable	 by	 virtue	 of	 being	 entirely	 covered
with	cryptic	symbols.	Red	Team	Leader	spontaneously	took	initiative	to
effect	a	“broken	windows”	policy	of	proactively	cleaning	and	tidying	the
space	as	a	way	of	setting	an	example	to	 inspire/motivate	demoralized
Blue	Team	personnel.

SLIDE	9 :	OPERATION	“BOLSTER	GAINS”
ACHIEVEMENTS	TO	DATE	 (4	of	5 ) , 	 INCIDENT

REPORT
Remaining	Blue	Team	personnel	filtered	in	between	8	and	11	a.m.,	with	no
clear	policy	apparently	in	effect	regarding	work	hours.	At	9:13,	Dr.	Frank
Oda	 and	 his	 wife,	 Rebecca	 East-Oda,	 entered	 the	 facility.	 Dr.	 Oda
affected	 bewilderment	 at	 the	 dramatic	 upsurge	 in	 whiteboard	 usable
space	area,	and	inquired	as	to	the	fate	of	the	“calculations”	he	had	left
on	them	the	night	before.	Red	Team	Leader	briefed	him	on	the	“broken
windows”	 policy,	 but	 before	 its	 rationale	 and	 benefits	 could	 be
enumerated,	 was	 interrupted	 by	 Mrs.	 East-Oda	 who	 went	 off	 agenda
with	 a	 lengthy	 and	 impassioned	 monologue	 containing	 a	 litany	 of
unprofessional	 remarks	as	 to	 the	qualifications	and	character	 of	Red
Team	Leader.	The	tone	and	style	of	her	delivery	did	not	meet	reasonable
expectations	as	to	social	skills	and	concern	for	feelings	of	co-workers.
Admittedly	this	may	be	a	high	bar	for	Mrs.	East-Oda	who	according	to
background	 checks	 has	 no	 work	 experience	 in	 high-performance
collaborative	organizations	and	a	history	of	lashing	out	in	defense	of	Dr.
Oda.	Oda	himself	was	entirely	silent	during	this	event,	staring	off	 into
space	 in	 a	 distracted	 manner	 possibly	 indicative	 of	 neurological
impairment	 (presumably	age-related).	 The	situation	was	defused	when
Blue	 Team	 Leader	 (Lyons)	 emerged	 from	 an	 adjoining	 room	 and
announced	 that	 he	 was	 in	 the	 habit	 of	 photographing	 Dr.	 Oda’s
whiteboards	and	archiving	 the	 images	as	a	 hedge	 against	mishaps	 of
this	type.
Action	 items:	 Mrs.	 East-Oda	 should	 be	 placed	 on	 a	 Performance

Enhancement	 Plan	 with	 the	 clear	 expectation	 that	 she	 will	 be



terminated	 with	 prejudice	 if	 her	 attitude	 does	 not	 show	 clear
improvement.	 Dr.	 Oda	 should	 be	 closely	 observed	 for	 further	 signs	 of
senile	dementia	and	placed	on	medical	leave	as	indicated.

SLIDE	10 :	OPERATION	“BOLSTER	GAINS”
ACHIEVEMENTS	TO	DATE	 (5	of	5 ) , 	THINKING

OUTSIDE	THE	BOX
Red	 Team	 Leader	 took	 advantage	 of	 a	 clean,	 available	 whiteboard	 to
bullet-point	 a	 number	 of	 gambits,	 ranging	 from	 persuasive	 to	 kinetic,
that	might	be	employed	in	order	to	break	through	Sir	Edward	Greylock’s
reluctance	to	pivot	his	1601	investment	strategy	toward	the	East	India
Company.	Noticing	a	strong,	intoxicating	fragrance	he	turned	about	to
discover	that	he	was	under	observation	by	an	ostensibly	young	woman
matching	the	description	of	the	Asset.	Other	Blue	Team	members	had
drifted	away	one	by	one,	claiming	that	they	had	other	duties	to	attend
to,	 but	 the	 Asset	 had	 arrived	 quite	 late	 and	 seemed	 to	 have	 been
observing	 me	 for	 a	 little	 while.	 She	 was	 dressed	 and	 groomed	 in	 a
manner	likely	(and	presumably	calculated)	to	pose	a	distraction	to	co-
workers.	 Speaking	 in	 a	 strong	 foreign	 accent,	 she	 demanded	 an
explanation	 of	 what	 I	 was	 doing.	 She	 found	 my	 response	 strangely
amusing.	I	 inquired	as	to	what	was	so	funny.	Offering	her	a	whiteboard
marker	in	a	contrasting	color	(which	she	refused),	I	requested	that	she
supply	point-by-point	rebuttals	(anticipating	a	lively	exchange	of	views,	I
had	 left	 ample	 whitespace	 for	 same	 between	 my	 bullet	 points).	 She
refused	 to	 accept	 the	 proffered	 writing	 instrument	 or	 even	 to	 supply
itemized	 refutations	 in	 a	 verbal	 format,	 instead	 issuing	 what,	 if	 I
understood	 it	 correctly,	 was	 a	 blanket	 dismissal	 of	 the	 entire	 way	 of
thinking	 underlying	 my	 program	 of	 suggested	 Greylock	 inducement
modalities.	During	this	time	I	witnessed	her	fidgeting	with	the	previously
mentioned	Smallogep,	which	resembles	a	raggedy	tangle	of	yarn.	When	I
pressed	 her	 again	 for	 more	 actionable	 feedback,	 she	 waved	 the
Smallogep	toward	the	part	of	the	whiteboard	where	I	had	bulleted	some
more	forward-leaning	measures	and	told	me	that	these	were	utter	folly
because	 they	 ran	 the	 risk	 of	 producing	 something	 that	 sounded	 like
“near	 osh.”	 I	 requested	 an	 explanation	 of	 the	 seemingly	 undesirable



phenomenon	of	 “near	osh.”	 This	only	 produced	more	 laughter	 from	the
Asset,	who,	once	she	had	recovered	her	composure,	assured	me	that	if	I
were	the	sort	of	person	who	needed	to	have	 it	explained,	there	was	no
point	in	explaining	it	to	me.
The	conversation,	if	 it	could	even	be	called	that,	was	cut	short	when

Dr.	Stokes	emerged	from	her	office	carrying	what	I	later	understood	to
be	 a	 briefing	 document	 that	 she	 had	 prepared	 for	 Blue	 Team	 Leader.
She	summoned	the	other	members	of	the	team	and	 led	a	pre-mission
briefing	 session,	 short	 on	 actual	 operational	 detail	 and	 heavy	 on
historical	 trivia.	 Blue	 Team	 Leader	 seemed	 distracted	 and	 unfocused.
At	more	than	one	point	during	the	meeting	I	observed	him	gazing	fixedly
at	the	whiteboard	on	which	I	had	drawn	up	my	bullet	points.	When	it	was
time	 for	 the	mission	 to	 begin,	Dr.	Stokes	 had	 to	 snap	 him	 out	 of	 his
reverie	 and	 inquire	 as	 to	 whether	 he	 felt	 ready	 to	 venture	 once	more
into	 the	 ODEC.	 While	 I	 cannot	 read	 his	 mind,	 I	 interpreted	 this	 as
suggesting	 that	my	 intervention	 and	my	 suggested	 bullet	 points	 had
impacted	his	 thinking.	 This	 gave	me	some	hope	 that	during	 the	DEDE
that	 commenced	 a	 few	minutes	 later	 he	 might	 take	 more	 direct	 and
aggressive	action	to	resolve	the	 logjam	that	has	developed	around	Sir
Edward	Greylock’s	investment	strategy.

SLIDE	11 : 	CONCLUSION	TO	 INTERIM	SITREP
•		DODO	Site	Prime	in	state	of	general	disarray

•		Corrective	measures	under	way;	some	personnel	resistant	to	change

•		Abundant	grounds	for	HR	proceedings	against	several	members	of
existing	Blue	Team	staff	should	that	be	desirable	from	tactical
standpoint

•		Smallogep	requires	further	analysis

•		Recommend	wait	and	see	approach	but	only	for	brief	window



LETTER	FROM

GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
A	Sunday	of	Late-Harvest,	1601

Auspiciousness	and	prosperity	to	you,	milady!
It’s	 in	 a	 dozen	 Strands	 that	 Tristan	 Lyons	 has	 tried	 to	 sway	 Sir	 Edward

Greylock	to	put	his	money	into	the	East	India	Company,	and	in	each	one	Sir
Edward	 seems	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 doing	 so,	 and	 yet	 Tristan	 returns	 from	 the
future	with	word	of	no	success.	He	has	now	amended	his	strategy,	so	that	he
appears	 to	 Sir	 Edward	 twice	 in	 a	 week,	 that	 they	 may	 have	 an	 unfolding
conversation	and	he	may	twice	 impress	upon	him,	without	seeming	to	do	so,
the	wisdom	of	entrusting	his	fortune	to	the	East	India	Company.

The	 German	 with	 the	 sharp	 yellow	 beard	 is	 present	 in	 all	 of	 these
conversations,	 though	according	 to	Tristan	he	hears	much	and	 says	 little.	At
least	 we	 know	 his	 name	 now:	 Athanasius	 Fugger.	 Himself	 pronounces	 it
“Fucker,”	 in	 the	German	style,	but	 it’s	 “Fugger”	 they	spell	 it	when	abroad	 in
England.	He	 is	 some	manner	of	 third	cousin	 thrice	 removed	 to	Sir	Edward’s
German	mother.	Like	all	of	his	clan,	he	is	a	banker,	and	’twould	seem	he	has
Sir	Edward’s	ear.	Tristan	complains	that	this	Athanasius	has	“a	poker	face	that
would	make	him	a	million	in	Vegas,”	which	means	naught	to	you	and	me,	but
to	him	what	 it	 signifies	 is	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	make	out	what	 the	 fella	 is
thinking—whether	 he	 favors	 the	 plan	 of	 investing	 in	 the	Boston	Council	 or
the	East	India.

Nor	is	 it	much	Tristan	can	glean	from	Sir	Edward	himself.	For	each	time,
doesn’t	Sir	Edward	claim	he	is	“seriously	considering	moving	his	investments”?
And	yet	each	time,	when	Tristan	goes	off	 to	spy	upon	that	 factory,	 isn’t	 the
factory	still	there?

So	I	made	Tristan	an	offer,	and	it’s	sorely	tempted	he	was	to	accept:	 if	he
would	 but	 tell	 me	 plainly	 everything,	 the	 whole	 of	 his	 schemes	 and	 their
necessity—why	magic	declines,	why	he	wants	to	save	it,	and	with	whom,	and
by	what	means—I	would	find	others	who	might	also	prevail	upon	Sir	Edward,
and	 I	 would	 find	 other	 witches	 for	 him	 to	 talk	 to,	 should	 our	 witchiness
somehow	be	helping	his	efforts	in	the	future.	Most	tempting	to	him,	of	course,
was	when	I	offered	to	introduce	him	to	the	Court	Witches,	as	they	be	the	only
witches	with	the	standing	to	turn	Sir	Edward’s	head.

Tristan	 is	 eager	 enough	 to	be	meeting	 the	Court	Witches,	 once	 I	 allowed



that	there	were	some.	Especially	it	was	the	younger	ones	he	wished	to	meet,	for
he	has	a	most	ambitious	plan	that	is	somewhat	mad,	and	yet	’twould	amuse	me
to	see	it	come	to	pass:	he	wishes	to	create	a	broad	constellation	or	“net-work”
of	 witches	 who	 might	 overlap	 in	 time,	 if	 not	 in	 space,	 so	 that	 he	 and	 his
brethren,	having	traveled	to	some	particular	time,	might	freely	move	about	the
globe	with	 the	assistance	of	 these	witches,	 in	any	era	of	 their	 choosing.	So	 if
our	young	witches	here	can	be	brought	 into	his	fold,	then	when	they	be	old,
they	will	be	alive	at	the	same	time	as	the	witches	in	the	New	World	who	are
helping	 him	 there	 already,	 and	 thus	 he	 and	 his	 brethren	 can	 be	 moving
between	 the	New	World	 and	 the	Old	with	 ease,	 as	 Breda	 and	myself	move
Your	Grace’s	agents	between	Ireland	and	London	when	the	need	arises.

A	mystery	it	is	to	me,	why	anyone	would	want	to	do	this	in	some	era	not	of
their	own	living.	’Twould	be	exhausting.	The	complications	are	legion	and	you
would	 need	 an	 áireamhán	 so	 large	 that	 it	 would	 fill	 a	 room,	 and	months	 it
would	 take	 to	 work	 through	 all	 the	 twigs	 and	 stems	 to	 guard	 against	 the
lomadh.	Himself	seems	to	understand	this,	and	yet	will	not	be	dissuaded.	He
will	not	explain	more	to	me,	but	it’s	arrogant	he	is	in	believing	I	should	give
him	 everything	 he	wants	 anyhow.	 “It’s	 for	 the	 sake	 of	magic’s	 preservation,”
has	quick	enough	become	his	new	 rallying	cry,	 and	 I	believe	him	 to	a	point
but	 ’tisn’t	 enough	 to	keep	me	his	 ally	 if	 he	will	 not	 tell	me	more.	 Sure	 I’ve
played	enough	people	in	my	time	that	I	do	not	like	being	played	my	own	self.

Although	sure	it’s	gorgeous	shoulders	he	does	have.
So	I	have	told	Tristan	that	until	he	confesses	more	of	his	strategy,	he	would

not	 be	meeting	 any	Court	Witches	 or	 even	 being	 introduced	 to	 others	who
might	 help	 change	 Sir	 Edward’s	 inclinations	 as	 to	 his	 inheritance.	 But	 I	 did
agree	 to	 introduce	 him	 to	 one	 other	 witch,	 should	 something	 ill	 befall	 me
before	his	work	here	is	complete.

A	wealthy	merchant’s	daughter	she	is,	fixing	to	be	married	by	her	ambitious
father	on	the	Feast	of	St.	Ethelburga	to	a	country	gentleman.	Rose	is	her	name.
I	met	her	when	first	I	came	over	from	Eire,	years	back.	Her	father	loved	the
theatre	and	took	her	and	her	brothers	 to	the	comedies,	where	I	met	her	and
knew	 her	 for	 a	 witch.	 It’s	 often	 enough	 I	 cross	 paths	 with	 her,	 and	 have
watched	her	grow	to	be	a	lovely	lass.	She	makes	it	a	habit	to	go	to	the	plays	of
a	Wednesday,	and	since	Tristan	has	now	taken	to	returning	for	a	second	visit,
to	 “follow	 up”	 with	 Sir	 Edward,	 I	 suggested	 he	 come	 then,	 and	 I	 could
introduce	them.

So	 we	met	 up	 with	 Rose	 just	 outside	 the	Globe	 gates,	 because	 of	 all	 the



entertainment	to	be	had	in	London,	she	always	has	a	yen	to	see	that	Stratford
Gobshite’s	 latest.	There	were	mobs	of	folks	streaming	 in	and	the	chatter	was
loud,	so	it	was,	and	not	a	few	of	them	stank	as	bad	as	the	backstage	fellas.	Rose
is	a	wee	thing,	plump	and	round-faced,	with	blue	eyes	and	black	hair,	almost
pretty	enough	to	be	Irish.	I’d	already	explained	to	her	all	about	Tristan.

Tristan	was,	of	course,	wearing	one	of	Ned	Alleyn’s	costumes.	Recognized	it
right	off,	Rose	did,	and	feigned	more	interest	in	it	than	in	our	visitor.	Tristan
doffed	 his	 cap	 and	 bent	 his	 knee—far	 more	 honor	 than	 a	 lass	 of	 her	 rank
demanded,	but	he’s	a	chivalrous	type—and	Rose	instantly	said	to	me,	in	a	tone
of	delight,	“That’s	half	of	Dr.	Faustus	he’s	got	upon	him,	isn’t	it?”	(For	wasn’t
Faustus	the	play	of	Kit’s	at	which	Rose	and	I	first	met.)

Tristan	straightens	up,	frowning	a	bit,	and	Rose	gives	him	a	brief	courtesy,
hardly	more	than	a	dip	of	the	head.	“God	ye	good	day,”	says	she	to	us	both.
And	to	Tristan,	“You	must	be	Gracie’s	new	friend.”

“She’s	been	very	kind	to	me,”	said	Tristan.
“I’ll	wager	she	has,”	chuckled	Rose,	more	to	me	than	him.	I	shook	my	head

no;	 she	 shrugged	 (she	doesn’t	 take	 to	 the	 lads	much,	does	our	Rose).	Tristan
either	truly	did	not	understand,	or	chose	to	counterfeit	ignorance.

“I	am	on	a	mission	that	requires	the	aid	of	many	of	you,”	he	continued.	“I
hope	that	you	will	support	my	cause	as	generously	as	Gráinne—as	Grace	has.”

“We	could	have	met	inside	the	gates,”	Rose	said	to	me,	as	if	Tristan	was	not
even	there.

“If	we’d	gone	inside,	we’d	have	had	to	pay	a	penny	each,	just	to	watch	Dick
Burbage	recite	lines	Will	Shakespeare	probably	nicked	from	Raff	Holinshed,”
I	retorted.	“Including	his	usual	insults	’gainst	the	Irish.”

Rose	smirked	and	said	to	Tristan	(as	if	she’d	never	been	ignoring	him),	“Has
Gracie	been	bending	your	ear	with	her	rant	about	how	Will	Shakespeare	hates
the	 Irish?	 She’ll	 go	 on	 all	 day	 if	we	 let	 her.	 So	 then.	What	 is	 it	 exactly	 that
you’re	asking	of	us?	You	may	safely	call	me	a	witch	here,	nobody’s	 listening
and	anyhow	they	wouldn’t	care,	not	here.”

“My	 brethren	 and	 I	 are	 seeking	 witches	 who	 would	 be	 willing	 to	 align
themselves	with	 us,	 so	 that	 if	 we	 come	 here	 on	 certain	 quests,	 we	might	 be
Sent	to	other	places	or	times,	and	most	especially,	that	we	might	be	returned
to	where	we	came	from.”

“Gracie	 says	you’re	doing	 this	on	account	of	centuries	 from	now,	magic	 is
lost	from	the	world	and	you	are	trying	to	restore	it.”

“Aye.”



“How	does	it	come	to	be	lost?”
He	shook	his	head	a	wee	bit,	looked	exhausted	for	a	heartbeat.	“That	would

be	a	very	long	discourse,”	he	said.
She	shrugged.	“I	am	in	no	hurry,	the	worst	that	will	happen	is	that	I	miss	the

players	today.”
“I	will	tell	you	more	if	you	agree	to	help.”
“You’ve	 got	 it	 backwards,	 sir.	 I	 will	 agree	 to	 help	 you	 after	 you	 tell	 me

more.	 For	 instance,	 how	 does	 your	 romping	 around	 through	 space	 and	 time
bring	magic	back?	What	exactly	is	it	you	be	doing?”

He	grimaced	briefly.	“I	cannot	tell	you	all	 that	yet,”	he	said.	“If	you	work
with	us,	and	it	is	a	fruitful	relationship,	then	I	can	reveal	more.”

She	 frowned	 at	 him.	 “Do	 you	 perceive	 yourself	 to	 be	 doing	me	 a	 favor?
What	do	I	care	what	happens	to	magic	a	thousand	years	from	now?	I’ll	be	dead
and	gone.	I’ll	help	you	now	only	 if	you	make	yourself	 interesting	to	me,	and
prithee	pardon	me	but	you	are	failing	mightily	to	accomplish	that.”

“I	swear	in	God’s	own	name	that	I	will	tell	you	more	just	as	soon	as	I	can.”
“Will	 you?”	She	gave	him	 the	 friendliest	 of	 smiles.	 “That’s	 lovely.	Let	me

know	when	 you’re	 capable	 of	 doing	 so	 and	we	 can	 continue	 this	 discussion.
God	ye	good	day,	sir.”

And	off	she	sallied	into	the	Globe,	reaching	into	her	pocket	for	a	penny.
There’s	many	better	a	thing	I	can	think	to	do	with	a	penny.	But	at	least	the

two	 have	 met,	 and	 under	 circumstances	 that	 make	 Tristan’s	 situation	 here
plain	to	him.

Tristan,	 so	unlike	his	usual	 stoic	 self,	 seemed	dismayed	as	he	watched	her
flounce	off	into	the	theatre	yard	to	join	the	other	groundlings.

“It’s	 nothing	 worse	 than	 anything	 I’ve	 said	 to	 you,	 lad,”	 I	 said,	 with	 a
comforting	hand	on	his	shoulder	because	I	do	so	like	the	curves	on	him.

“I	must	get	home,”	he	said.	“If	you	will	not	help	me	directly,	I	must	get	back
to	my	time.	’Tis	difficult	there	now.	They	need	me.”

“You	 look	 like	you	could	use	 some	relaxing,	Tristan	Lyons,”	 I	 said	with	a
smile,	and	put	my	hand	on	his	arm.	The	gates	closed	 to	 the	 theatre	and	the
trumpet	sounded	within.	“Come	back	to	the	Tearsheet.”	I	smiled	invitingly.

He	 moved	 away	 from	 me,	 but	 I	 noticed	 it	 was	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 the
Tearsheet	he	was	walking	anyhow.	 “That’s	 right,”	 I	 said,	purring.	 “That’s	 the
way	you	want	to	be	going.”	I	walked	past	him	toward	the	tavern.	I	heard	a	little
irritated	sigh	as	he	followed	me.	“What’s	making	it	so	very	hard	back	home?”	I
asked	in	a	sympathetic	voice,	looking	over	my	shoulder.



“There’s	a	new	man	where	I	work,”	he	said	 in	clipped	syllables.	 “We	have
different	.	.	.	methods.	He	is	more	forceful,	and	I	am	more	strategic.”

“I	 like	forceful,”	 I	 said,	 smiling.	“I	pray	you,	do	tell	him	he’s	welcome	any
time.”	Tristan	made	the	briefest	expression	of	dismay,	and	kept	walking.

We	got	back	to	the	brewery	and	marched	right	up	to	my	closet,	as	always.
By	now	our	established	method	was	that	we	stood	in	the	room	together,	he	in
Ned	Alleyn’s	 stolen	costumes,	 and	 I	Sent	him	away	and	 then	 just	 folded	up
the	clothes	and	locked	them	in	the	chest.	But	he	really	did	seem	so	distressed,
and	I	love	the	scent	of	a	man	under	pressure.	Playful	I	decided	to	be,	and	so	I
said,	“Tell	me	everything	in	detail,	or	I	won’t	be	Sending	you	home	at	all.”

The	look	of	shock	on	his	face	was	so	fetching,	I	couldn’t	keep	myself	from
laughing.

“I’m	codding	you,	Tristan	Lyons—what	would	I	gain	by	keeping	you	here
when	you	won’t	even	kiss	me?	You’d	scare	all	my	customers	away	and	I’d	die
of	starvation,	so	I	would.”

’Twas	 both	 relieved	 and	 annoyed	 he	 looked,	 briefly,	 then	 said,	 “I	 don’t
believe	that.	You	do	not	make	your	living	as	a	bawd,	as	much	as	you	want	it	to
seem	so.”

I	raised	my	eyebrows	at	him.	“Do	you	know	that,	or	is	it	guessing	you	are?”
“Common	 sense.	 If	 a	witch	 can	 evade	 torture,	 as	 you	mentioned,	 she	 can

evade	poverty	and	degradation.	The	harlotry	is	a	cover.	For	what,	I	wonder?”
I	leaned	in	closer	to	him.	“I’ll	tell	you	my	secrets	if	you	tell	me	yours,”	said

I,	and	gave	him	the	sweetest	smile	in	my	broad	collection.
His	eyes	narrowed	a	touch	and	he	looked	sideways	at	me.	“I’m	not	an	idiot.

Make	me	that	offer	without	the	smile	and	I’ll	consider	it.”
“What	if	I	keep	the	smile	but	drop	the	offer?”	I	said.	“Is	it	a	smile	I	get	from

you	in	exchange?	Perhaps	a	little	something	more?”
“We	are	 in	 league	 together,”	he	 said,	holding	up	his	hand	as	 if	 I	were	 the

devil	and	he	a	priest.	“I	cannot	do	that	with	a	colleague.”
“Delighted	I	am	to	hear	we’re	colleagues!”	I	said.	“Pray	tell	me	what	scheme

it	is,	in	which	it’s	colleagues	we	are?	And	don’t	be	saying	classified	because	if
we’re	in	league,	then	we	should	be	pooling	our	secrets,	not	keeping	them	from
each	 other.	 It’s	 a	waste	 of	 your	 time	 to	 be	 asking	me	 for	 help	 if	 you’re	 not
willing	to	take	me	into	your	confidences.”

He	 sat	 a	 moment	 considering,	 then	 nodded	 grimly.	 “I	 understand	 your
position,	yours	and	Rose’s.	And	it	is	reasonable.	Send	me	home	and	I	shall	talk
of	this	with	my	brethren	in	my	era.	I	must	not	act	without	their	knowledge.”



“That’s	grand,	but	do	not	come	back	here	unless	you	are	prepared	 to	 tell
me	everything.”

“So	be	it.”
And	off	I	Sent	him,	once	again,	and	now	there’s	naught	to	that	but	seek	out

other	Strands	where	he	might	be	carrying	on	in	like	manner.	Meanwhile	I’ve
naught	 else	 to	 report	 to	Your	Grace,	 so	once	 again	 it’s	 off	 I	 go	 to	meet	my
sweetheart.

Whether	 I	be	near	or	 far,	may	 I	hear	only	good	 things	of	you,	My	Lady!
Yours	ever,	Gráinne	in	London

Diachronicle	
DAYS	380–389	 (AUGUST,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	we	meet	the	Fuggers

ANOTHER	VENTURE	TO	 1640	CAMBRIDGE	 resulted	 in	 another	 failure.	This	was
duly	boiled	down	into	a	series	of	bullet	points	by	Les	Holgate,	and	transmitted
to	Frink	in	Washington.	I’d	been	doing	my	best	to	avoid	the	man.	That	said,	it
was	unavoidable	but	to	interact	with	him.	My	academic	career	had	left	me	in
possession	of	a	certain	toolkit.	As	the	saying	goes,	when	you	have	a	hammer,
everything	looks	like	a	nail.

Reader,	I	learned	his	language.	I	hoped	that	mirroring	and	echoing	some	of
his	speech	patterns,	or	(those	being	non-intuitive)	at	least	inserting	some	of	his
vocabulary	 into	 my	 conversation	 with	 him,	 might	 put	 him	 at	 his	 ease	 and
allow	him	to	relax	enough	to	behave	as	a	human	being	might,	should	he	wish
to	emulate	one.	What	follows	is	an	approximation	of	my	first	attempt	at	such	a
discourse.

LH:	As	I	anticipated,	this	last	insertion	to	the	1640	DTAP	was	yet	another
confirmed	failure.



MS:	 It	 was	 a	 tactical	 failure	 in	 that	 it	 failed	 to	 accomplish	 the	 primary
stated	goal,	however,	 it	was	strategically	useful	 in	that	it	enabled	Blue
Team	Leader	to	break	trail	on	formation	of	an	alliance	with	a	potential
Asset	in	that	DTAP.

LH:	 Try	 to	 focus,	 Dr.	 Stokes.	 That	 was	 not	 the	 indicated	 goal	 of	 this
mission,	 nor	 does	 it	 move	 the	 needle	 according	 to	 the	 operative
metrics.	The	goal	of	this	mission	is	to	monetize	the	skill	set	we	already
have	on	deck	in	the	form	of	the	Asset	and	the	ODEC.

MS:	Yes,	but	only	after	we	have	monetized	the	skill	set	by	gathering	low-
hanging	 fruit.	 Blue	 Team’s	 road	 map	 is	 to	 utilize	 the	 transport
modalities	available	to	us	due	to	the	Asset	and	the	ODEC,	to	incept	a
diachronic	 network	 and	 exploit	 resulting	 network	 effects	 that	 will
enable	DODO	to	scale.

LH:	 That	 level	 of	 strategic	 vision	 is	 above	 your	 pay	 grade,	 Dr.	 Stokes.
Your	task	 is	 to	maintain	 laser-like	 focus	on	Phase	1	deliverables.	And
the	fact	is	that	in	all	of	your	dozens	of	diachronic	transport	insertions,
which	have	 taken	weeks	 to	accomplish	and	have	generated	operating
costs	now	far	exceeding	your	allowed	budget,	you	have	found	a	total
of	three	potential	but	unauthorized	Assets	in	two	DTAPS,	without	any
confirmed	 achievement	 toward	 actually	 securing	 the	 monetizable
artifact	by	liquidation	of	the	blocking	factor.

MS:	You	mean	we	still	haven’t	yet	secured	the	psalm	book	by	preventing
the	maple	syrup	boiler.

LH:	Isn’t	that	what	I	just	said?

With	this	example,	it	should	come	as	no	surprise	to	hear	that	the	other	five
of	 us	 got	 into	 the	 habit	 of	 meeting	 away	 from	 the	 office,	 at	 Frank	 and
Rebecca’s	home.	I	have	no	idea	what	Les	was	doing	most	of	the	time,	and	I
didn’t	much	care,	because	he	was	just	an	irritant	and	I’m	sure	he	was	getting
paid	as	much	as	all	of	us	together.	He	also	slightly	resembled	his	uncle,	Roger
Blevins,	chairman	of	my	former	department,	only	without	the	grey	hair,	and
more	 slender.	 But	 a	 trick	 of	 the	 voice	 and	 the	 general	 body	 language	 was
enough	that	I	had	a	visceral	desire	to	simply	avoid	him.

And	I	enjoyed	the	ambience	of	my	alternate	workplaces:	Rebecca’s	home,
and	Widener	Library.

It	was	in	the	latter	that	I	began	to	dig	into	the	history	of	the	Fuggers.	This
was	 the	 third	 time	 in	 the	 short	 history	 of	 DODO	 that	 the	 name	 had



unexpectedly	 come	 up.	 And	 even	 though	 they	 were	 a	 famous	 old	 banking
family,	well	known	to	any	student	of	European	history,	 this	 seemed	 like	 too
many	coincidences	to	me.

They	had	 first	 entered	 the	 story	 very	 early,	when	Tristan	 and	 I	 had	been
going	through	the	boxes	of	old	documents	that	needed	to	be	translated.	Some
of	them	had	been	marked	with	a	 logo	that	 looked	familiar	 to	me.	I	couldn’t
place	it	at	the	time,	and	it	nagged	at	me	until	a	few	months	later,	when	I	was
leafing	through	a	copy	of	The	Economist	in	my	dentist’s	waiting	room	and	saw
a	 similar	 logo	 in	 an	 advertisement	 in	 the	 back	 of	 the	 magazine.	 It	 was	 an
international	charity	announcing	a	job	opening.	When	I	pulled	on	that	thread,
taking	advantage	of	some	of	the	secret	government	databases	we	had	access	to
at	DODO,	I	learned	that	the	charity	in	question	was	the	non-profit	arm	of	a
complex	 of	 holding	 companies	 that,	 to	 make	 a	 long	 story	 short,	 was	 the
survival	into	modern	times	of	the	medieval	Fuggers.

The	second	incident	had	occurred	shortly	before	General	Schneider’s	brief
but	 tragically	 eventful	 visit	 to	 DODO	 HQ.	 Tristan	 had	 asked	 Erszebet
whether	she	could	turn	lead	into	gold.	As	I	later	understood,	he	didn’t	really
care	about	gold	at	all—what	his	higher-ups	at	the	Trapezoid	really	were	after
was	 plutonium.	 But	 Erszebet	 had	 scoffed	 at	 the	 idea	 and	 spoken	 about	 the
“Fuckers”—her	pronunciation	of	“Fuggers”—in	a	tone	of	voice	that	bordered
on	fearful.	Not	her	usual	style	at	all.

And	now	here	was	 a	 real	 live	Fugger,	one	Athanasius,	who	 seemed	 to	be
directly	intervening	in	Tristan’s	DEDE	in	Elizabethan	London.

Even	 with	 the	 combined	 resources	 of	 Harvard’s	 library	 system	 and	 U.S.
intelligence	 databases,	 I	wasn’t	 able	 to	 find	much.	The	medieval	 part	 of	 the
story	 has	 been	 common	 knowledge	 for	 centuries.	 The	 Fucker	 family	 had
migrated	 to	Augsburg	 in	 1373	 and	 prospered	 in	 textiles.	 In	 1459	 the	 family
had	produced	Jacob,	the	seventh	surviving	child	in	a	large	brood.	Seeing	few
opportunities	at	home,	where	his	older	brothers	were	dominating	the	Fucker
family	 business,	 Jacob	 had	 traveled	 over	 the	 Alps	 to	 Venice,	 where	 he	 had
served	an	apprenticeship	 in	the	German	merchants’	warehouse	on	the	Rialto
and	 learned	 about	 banking.	Upon	 his	 return	 to	Augsburg,	 Jacob	 had	 begun
lending	money	 to	 broke	 but	 powerful	 nobles	 on	 stiff	 terms	 and,	 to	make	 a
long	story	short,	become	the	richest	person	in	the	world.

The	Fuggers	(somewhere	along	the	line,	they’d	switched	to	a	more	palatable
spelling	of	their	name)	had	become	as	famous	and	as	well	documented	as	they
were	rich.	The	research	skills	I’d	developed	while	earning	my	Ph.D.	weren’t



even	needed;	hundreds	of	books	about	Jacob	Fugger	and	his	 family	could	be
summoned	up	with	a	 few	keystrokes.	The	great	man	had	died	at	 the	end	of
1525	 and	 handed	 the	 business	 off	 to	 his	 nephew	 Anton,	 who	 seemed
reasonably	 talented,	 and	 made	 some	 investments	 in	 the	 Americas.	 But	 he’d
been	caught	in	the	mangle	of	the	Catholic/Protestant	wars,	lending	money	to
warmongering	 kings	 who	 didn’t	 pay	 it	 back.	 In	 the	 end	 he	 had	 essentially
liquidated	the	business	and	distributed	the	proceeds	among	a	few	dozen	family
members	who	were	 content	 to	 live	off	 the	 interest	 as	members	 of	 the	 titled
nobility	or	the	landed	gentry.

By	1601—the	year	that	Tristan	was	visiting—the	trail	had	gone	cold.	There
was	no	one	single	entity	that	could	be	pointed	to	as	the	Fugger	bank.	The	last
person	to	wield	any	kind	of	central	authority	over	it	had	been	Markus	Fugger,
a	grandnephew	of	Jacob,	who	had	died	four	years	earlier	after	distributing	most
of	the	remaining	assets	to	the	family.	And	Markus	seemed	like	someone	who
would	have	been	 interesting	 to	 idle	 away	 the	hours	with:	 a	patron	of	 arts,	 a
history	buff,	a	collector	of	old	artifacts,	an	ancient-languages	geek.

Athanasius	Fugger—at	 least,	 the	Athanasius	Fugger	described	by	Tristan—
was	completely	absent	from	the	historical	record.

Which	 was	 not	 a	 big	 deal.	 No	 one	 knows	 better	 than	 a	 historian	 how
tattered	that	record	is.	But	it	did	whet	my	curiosity.	The	obvious	explanation
was	 simple	 enough:	 he	 was	 some	 descendant	 of	 Markus,	 sharing	 the	 same
family	name,	who	had	inherited	a	share	of	 the	money	and	was	now	hanging
around	in	London	just	because	he	 liked	it	 there	and	had	the	freedom	to	 live
wherever	he	wanted.

And	 yet,	 judging	 from	 Tristan’s	 story,	 this	 Athanasius	 wasn’t	 merely	 a
drinking	buddy.	He	was	acting	as	some	kind	of	financial	advisor	to	Sir	Edward
Greylock,	which	probably	meant	he	was	still	active	in	the	banking	business.

I	tried	working	from	the	other	direction,	getting	what	information	I	could
about	 the	modern-day	organization,	 and	working	backwards.	But	 they	were
discreet	to	the	point	of	paranoia,	running	their	business	through	a	network	of
offshore	companies	registered	in	places	like	the	Cayman	Islands,	Jersey,	and	the
Isle	of	Man.	They	only	allowed	the	Fugger	name	to	break	the	surface	when	it
was	 to	 their	 tactical	 advantage,	 as	when	 trying	 to	hire	 employees	 for	one	of
their	humanitarian	NGOs.

So	 my	 studies	 into	 the	 Fuggers	 produced	 very	 little	 that	 Tristan	 could
actually	use.	Discussing	it	over	an	Old	Tearsheet	Best	Bitter	 in	the	Apostolic
Café—served	 as	 usual	 by	 the	 woman	 with	 the	 eyebrow	 tattoos,	 Julie	 Lee



(Professional	 Smart-ass	Oboist)—we	 agreed	 on	 a	 plausible	 scenario:	 some	 of
the	 younger	 Fuggers,	 tired	 of	 the	 wars	 and	 turmoil	 in	 central	 Europe,	 had
moved	 to	London	 and	put	 down	 roots	 in	 its	 banking	 scene.	Athanasius	was
one	of	 those,	 and	 the	business	 had	 grown	 since	 then	 as	 a	 private	 bank	with
tentacles	all	over	the	place.

Erszebet	had	told	us	once	that	a	Fugger	branch	office	was	probably	nearby,
and	indeed	we	were	able	to	find	that	they	had	an	unobtrusive	space	in	an	old
building	 near	 Boston	 Common.	 There	 was	 a	 similar	 but	 somewhat	 larger
office	in	lower	Manhattan,	and	others	in	different	financial	centers	around	the
world.

Anyway,	 the	 research	 kept	 me	 out	 of	 the	 office,	 which	 had	 become	 a
disagreeable	place	to	work.	Tristan	was	fairly	immune	to	ambience	and	had	a
far	 higher	 tolerance	 for	 annoying	personalities	 than	 I	 did,	 but	he	was	 just	 as
happy	as	I	was	to	avoid	Les	Holgate.

The	 advent	 of	 Holgate	 had	 dramatically	 increased	 Erszebet’s	 regard	 for
Tristan,	 now	 that	 she	 had	 another	 by-the-book	 thirty-something	 white
American	male	to	compare	him	to.	She	became	almost	pleasant	 toward	him.
That	said,	when	he	expressed	pleasure	that	the	“node”	for	diachronic	transport
was	developing	in	London,	Erszebet’s	immediate	response	was	suspicion.

We	were	in	Oda-sensei’s	study	on	a	drizzly	afternoon,	and	Rebecca	had	just
served	compote	of	warm	peaches.	(At	the	time	it	seemed	so	quaint	and	tasteful
—now	my	stomach	nearly	heaves	at	the	thought	of	adding	yet	more	sugar	to
my	diet.)

“Why	 do	we	 need	 a	 node?”	 Erszebet	 asked.	 “Aren’t	 we	 just	 supposed	 to
make	money?”

“Yes,”	 said	 Tristan	 patiently,	 who	 had	 inhaled	 all	 of	 his	 peaches	without
tasting	them	or	possibly	even	chewing	them.	“But	we’re	doing	that	in	order	to
start	funding	the	actual	work	that	is	to	be	done.	Having	a	node—and	later,	a
network	of	them,	in	various	DTAPs—will	help	with	all	that	future	work.”

She	shook	her	head	in	an	I-don’t-know-about-that	way.	“I	did	not	promise
to	do	anything	beyond	helping	you	make	money	from	the	Bay	Psalm	Book,”
she	 said.	 “And	 that	 is	 only	 because	 I	 want	 to	 go	 spit	 on	 the	 graves	 of	 my
enemies.”

“You	won’t	be	allowed	back	in	the	ODEC	unless	you’re	doing	the	magic
we	need	you	to	do.”

“Cruel,”	she	hissed	under	her	breath.
“Practical,”	 said	 Tristan.	 She	 turned	 her	 back	 on	 him	 to	 stare	 out	 the



window	 in	 a	 sullenly	 coquettish	 way	 (we	 had	 become	 used	 to	 that),	 so	 he
returned	his	attention	to	the	rest	of	us	sitting	around	the	coffee	table,	and	we
continued	to	discuss	strategy:	before	he	returned	from	the	DTAP,	Gráinne	had
demanded	more	transparency	if	she	were	going	to	continue	to	abet	him.

Frank	Oda	and	Rebecca	both	sounded	cautious	approval	of	this	request.
“She	sounds	like	a	worthwhile	connection,”	I	agreed.	“I	think	you	should

open	up	to	her	a	 little	more.	If	 she	 is	willing	to	 introduce	you	to	the	Court
Witches,	they	could	provide	another	angle	of	approach	with	Sir	Edward.”

“Good	 luck	with	 that,”	 said	 Erszebet,	 her	 back	 still	 to	 us,	 knees	 crossed,
waggling	 one	 high-heeled	 sandal.	 “You	 are	 not	 likely	 to	 win	 any	 witchy
friends	if	the	witchy	friends	knew	the	whole	truth.	I	certainly	would	not	help
you	if	I	had	known	the	whole	truth.”

Reader,	know	this:	I	still	preferred	her	to	Les	Holgate.

WE	RETURNED	TO	the	office	so	that	Erszebet	could	Send	Tristan	back	to	1601
London.	 Les	 was	 there,	 with	 an	 expensive-looking	 coffee-like	 beverage
(which	smelled	like	that	awful	thing	I’d	ordered	from	the	Smart-ass	Oboist	at
the	Apostolic	Café	the	day	Tristan	had	first	approached	me.	How	peculiar,	the
things	that	summon	nostalgia.).	Les	seemed	even	more	smug	than	usual,	as	 if
he	had	a	secret	he	was	just	bursting	to	share	with	us,	but	did	not	want	to	give
up	his	privileged	position	of	being	the	only	one	with	the	secret.	As	usual,	we
ignored	him.

Erszebet	 Sent	 Tristan	 back	 to	 1601.	 Although	 her	 Sending	 one	 of	 us
somewhere	was	now	a	fairly	regular	aspect	of	our	working	life,	we	were	still
respectful	of	its	significance,	and	generally	made	it	a	practice	that	whoever	was
in	the	office	gathered	in	the	control	room	to	watch	through	the	glass	and	wave
to	 the	 DOer	 as	 they	 emerged	 from	 the	 sterilizing	 shower	 and	 entered	 the
ODEC.	This	time,	I	noticed	Les	was	not	present.	Some	minutes	passed	while
Erszebet	performed	the	Sending.	When	she	had	finished	and	let	herself	out	of
the	chamber,	I	noticed	Les	walking	into	the	control	room	from	the	corridor,
smiling	in	a	self-congratulatory	way	as	he	slipped	his	phone	into	his	pocket.

Not	 ten	minutes	 later,	 the	office	phone	 rang:	Frink	was	calling	 from	DC.
He	demanded	to	be	transferred	to	a	video	conference.

Most	of	the	offices	in	the	building	had	long	since	been	demolished,	but	in
recent	 weeks	 a	 couple	 of	 Maxes	 had	 built	 a	 new	 one	 from	 scratch	 in	 an
underused	 corner	 of	 the	 building.	 Supposedly	 it	 had	 all	 kinds	 of	 anti-



surveillance	 shielding	and	other	 top-secret	electronic	gear	built	 into	 its	walls.
On	the	inside	it	looked	like	just	another	corporate	meeting	room,	dominated
at	one	end	by	a	flat-panel	screen	without	which	Les	Holgate	would	have	been
effectively	deaf	and	mute,	since	all	of	his	communication	took	place	through
PowerPoint	 decks.	 It	 could	 also	 be	 used	 for	 secure,	 encrypted	 video
conferences	with	the	Trapezoid	or	other	nodes	 in	the	dot-mil	world.	We	all
gathered	around	the	conference	table	while	Les	Holgate	connected	us.

“I	especially	need	to	speak	to	the	Asset,”	Frink	said	as	soon	as	he	appeared
onscreen.

“I	have	a	name,”	 said	Erszebet.	She	 slithered	 into	a	 slumped	position	on	a
rotating	 office	 chair	 and,	 like	 a	 bored,	 fidgeting	 schoolgirl,	 began	 to	 push
herself	 back	 and	 forth	 through	 a	 wide	 arc,	 chin	 practically	 resting	 on	 her
sternum.

“Glad	you’re	there.	And	everyone	else?	Sound	off.”
“I’m	here—Mel—but	Tristan	has	just	gone	back	to	the	Tearsheet	DTAP,”	I

said.
“Here,”	said	Frank	and	Rebecca	at	the	same	moment,	since	it	was	already

clear	Frink	hardly	registered	their	presence.
“Here,	sir,”	said	Les	Holgate.	He	remained	standing.
“Okay,	good,	here	are	your	orders,”	said	Frink’s	voice.	“Elizabeth,	Send	Les

back	to	the	Tearsheet	DTAP.”
“Who	 is	 Elizabeth?”	 asked	 Erszebet,	 without	 interrupting	 the	 arc	 of	 her

fidgets.	“How	wonderful	you	have	another	witch	to	boss	around.	I	would	like
a	vacation.	Elizabeth	can	fill	in	for	me.”

“Erszebet,	please,”	I	said.
She	 stopped	 twisting	 the	 chair.	 “I	 am	 Sending	 him	 back	 exactly	 where

Tristan	goes?”	she	said,	sounding	wary.
“Yes,	exactly.”
She	 sat	 up	 a	 little	 straighter.	 “Why	 do	we	 have	 two	DOers	 in	 the	 same

DTAP?”	 she	 asked.	 “This	 is	 a	 complication.	 It	 is	 hard	 enough	 to	 keep	 one
person	on	the	right	Strand.	Two	is	very	tricky.”

“It’s	time	to	get	fresh	eyes	on	the	problem.	We	need	to	think	outside	of	the
box.”

Erszebet	said,	“This	is	a	terrible	idea,	and	I	do	not	want	to	do	it.”
“Yeah,	 I	 had	 a	 feeling	 you	were	 going	 to	 be	 difficult,”	 said	 Frink.	 “Les,

show	her	the	goods.”
Les	 smiled	 complacently,	 opened	 a	 manila	 folder	 he’d	 been	 holding,	 and



pulled	 out	 some	 documents.	 “Look	 at	 these,”	 he	 said,	 as	 if	 speaking	 to	 an
eight-year-old.	“Erszebet,	it	has	your	name	on	it.”

He	laid	it	on	the	table	directly	in	front	of	her:	a	British	Airways	itinerary	for
Erszebet	Karpathy	 to	 fly	 from	Logan	Airport	 to	Budapest	 three	 days	 hence.
Despite	herself,	she	gasped	audibly,	and	on	reflex	her	hand	slammed	down	on
the	paper	so	that	he	could	not	pull	it	away.

“Look	what	else	I	have,”	he	said,	and	from	the	inside	pocket	of	his	blazer	he
pulled	out	an	American	passport.	He	opened	it.	There	was	a	photo	of	Erszebet
—I	still	don’t	recall	any	moment	in	time	when	we	subjected	her	to	an	official
government-issued	photo,	so	I	don’t	know	how	he’d	got	it.	But	he’d	got	it.

Erszebet	 reached	 out	 for	 the	 passport	 with	 a	 rare	 display	 of	 physical
impulsiveness.	He	let	her	grasp	it,	but	did	not	let	go	his	own	grip	on	it.

“Once	you	have	Sent	me	back	there,”	he	said.
I	 got	 a	 terrible	 feeling	 in	 the	 pit	 of	 my	 stomach.	 Glancing	 at	 Frank	 and

Rebecca,	 I	could	 see	 they	 felt	 it	 too.	All	 three	of	us	 turned	our	attention	 to
Erszebet.

For	 an	 endless	 moment	 her	 eyes	 flicked	 between	 the	 passport	 and	 Les
Holgate’s	face,	whilst	her	other	hand	continued	to	press	down	on	the	British
Airways	 itinerary.	 Some	 fathomless	 gulf	 inside	 of	 her	 survived	 a	 change	 of
moral	tides,	and	then	with	a	look	of	genuine	pain	on	her	face,	she	released	her
grip	on	the	passport	and	crumpled	the	British	Airways	page	into	a	ball,	hurling
it	away	from	the	table.

“You	are	bad	men,”	she	said	in	a	husky	voice,	and	looked	away.	“You	are
very	wrong	to	tempt	me	this	way	when	it	is	not	safe	to	say	yes.”

Les	 appeared	 slightly	 taken	 aback	 that	 his	 plan	 had	met	 resistance,	 but	 he
rallied.	 “There’s	 nothing	 dangerous	 about	 this.	 It’s	 not	 like	 I’m	 taking	 a	 gun
back	there	with	me,”	he	said	in	a	cajoling	voice.

She	gave	him	an	incredulous	 look.	“You	say	that	as	 if	 it	were	a	 choice	you
were	making,”	she	said.	“Do	you	know	anything?”

“Don’t	overthink	this,	honey,”	said	Les.	“Do	you	want	to	go	to	Hungary,
yes	or	no?”

At	 the	word	 “honey,”	 a	 look	 flashed	 across	 Erszebet’s	 face	 that	made	me
relieved,	for	Les’s	sake,	that	she	could	not	do	magic	outside	of	the	ODEC.

“Of	course	I	want	to	go	to	Hungary,”	she	said	fiercely.	“But	not	enough	to
risk	performing	bad	magic	at	your	demand.”

“You’re	saying	you	need	stronger	motivation,”	said	Les,	in	an	arrogant	yet
maddeningly	agreeable	voice.



“I	am	saying	I	need	to	calculate	on	my	számológép,	before	anything,”	she
corrected	him.	“But	I	suspect	those	calculations	will	tell	me	not	to	do	it.”

Les’s	 eyes	 flicked	 to	 the	 computer	 screen.	 I	 watched	 Erszebet	 follow	 his
gaze.	Les	Holgate	and	Frink	exchanged	meaningful	looks.

“Do	you	know	what,”	Erszebet	amended,	 sounding	almost	nervous,	“you
are	so	undeserving	of	my	trust	and	cooperation,	I	must	say	no,	absolutely	I	will
not	Send	him.	It	is	a	terrible	idea.	I	don’t	even	need	the	számológép.”

“Well	that’s	good	at	least,”	huffed	Frink.	“Since	you	no	longer	have	it.”
A	hardwired	reflex	sent	Erszebet’s	hand	clutching	for	her	bag.	“What?”	she

cried.	She	began	to	frantically	grope	around	in	the	bag.
“I	 removed	 the	 Asset’s	 personal	 computational	 device	 for	 security	 and

analysis,”	Les	Holgate	 explained	 to	 the	 rest	of	us.	All	 the	blood	had	drained
out	of	Erszebet’s	complexion	as	 she	dumped	 the	entire	contents	of	her	 large
handbag	 onto	 the	 conference	 table,	 then	 began	 to	 shove	 things—hairbrush,
tissues,	 cough	drops,	 lipstick,	 vintage	perfume	 atomizer—off	 the	 edge	 in	her
frantic	 search	 for	 the	 számológép.	 “Sir,”	 Les	 continued,	 to	 the	 face	 on	 the
computer	 screen,	 “I	 believe	 this	move	will	 now	 also	work	 as	 a	 negotiating
tactic.”

“Where	 is	 my	 számológép?”	 Erszebet	 demanded,	 almost	 voiceless	 with
panic.	I	had	never	imagined	she	could	look	so	vulnerable.

Briskly,	Les	Holgate	pulled	out	a	shipping	bill	from	his	other	inside	pocket.
“While	 you	 were	 Sending	 Tristan,	 I	 secured	 it	 and	 shipped	 it	 to	 the
Trapezoid.”

“Where	is	it?”	Erszebet	repeated,	wide-eyed.	“I	must	know	this.”
“It’s	in	transit,”	said	Les	Holgate.
“I	need	it,”	said	Erszebet,	struggling	to	maintain	her	dignity.	“I	must	have

it,	here,	in	my	hand.	There	can	be	no	diachronic	magic	without	it.”
“Permission	 to	 negotiate	with	 Asset?”	 said	 Les	 to	 the	 computer	 screen.	 I

barely	repressed	the	impulse	to	throw	something	at	him.
“Granted,”	said	Frink.
Les	 turned	 to	Erszebet,	 tucking	 the	 shipping	 receipt	back	 into	his	 pocket.

The	 glib,	 aggressive	 positivity	 he	 radiated	 was	 the	 social	 equivalent	 to
fingernails	down	a	chalkboard.	“You	obviously	don’t	need	the	zamlagip”—(he
never	once	pronounced	 this	 correctly)—“for	 every	 transfer,	 since	you	didn’t
have	it	on	you	just	now	when	you	Sent	Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons	back.	Ergo,
you	don’t	need	it	to	Send	me	back.	Just	one	DTAP,	one	time,	one	DEDE.”

As	usual,	he	pronounced	it	wrong:	“dee-dee.”	Rebecca	rolled	her	eyes	and



blurted	 out,	 “Deed!”	He	wasn’t	 expecting	 the	 correction,	 and	 faltered	 for	 a
moment	before	winding	up	to	the	big	finish:

“Trust	 .	 .	 .	 just	 .	 .	 .	 trust	 me	 on	 this.	 It’s	 only	 going	 to	 take	 one	 time,
because	I’m	going	to	crush	this!”

I	 saw	her	almost	answer	him,	and	then	restrain	herself.	She	had	recovered
some	color,	but	only	in	an	unhealthy	way,	in	that	she	was	now	slightly	green.
“You	are	 saying	 that	 if	 I	 Send	you	 to	 the	Tearsheet	DTAP,	 I	will	have	 the
számológép	returned	to	me	immediately.”

He	 smiled.	 “Send	me	 to	 the	Tearsheet.	Once	 I	have	 returned,	 I’ll	 issue	 a
recall	code	to	have	the	zamaligope	returned	to	you.”

“And	if	I	don’t	Send	you?	What	happens?”
He	shrugged.	“The	ODEC’s	not	much	good	to	us	if	it’s	not	helping	us	to

accomplish	our	stated	goals.	The	team	members	will	be	considered	redundant
and	their	employment	terminated.”

“You	will	fire	me?”	she	said,	struggling	to	regain	her	derisive	demeanor.
He	shook	his	head.	“Negative.	But	your	zamlogap	is	almost	certain	to	get

lost	in	the	reallocation	of	physical	resources.	That	would	be	a	shame.”
“I’ll	do	it,”	she	said,	looking	grimly	at	the	table.	“I’ll	Send	you.”
Everyone	pushed	their	chairs	back	to	go.
“Dr.	Stokes,”	said	General	Frink,	“if	I	could	have	a	private	word	with	you.”
It	 sounded	 like	 more	 of	 an	 order	 than	 a	 request,	 so	 I	 scooted	 my	 chair

forward	 again	 and	doodled	on	my	notepad	while	 the	others	 filed	out	of	 the
room.	Les	was	the	last	to	go,	and	pulled	the	door	closed	behind	him.	He	tried
to	make	eye	contact	as	he	did,	but	I	wouldn’t	give	him	that	victory.

It	was	 just	me	 and	General	Octavian	Frink	now,	or	 rather	me	 and	 a	 flat-
panel	 screen	 displaying	 an	 oversized	 rendering	 of	 his	 face	 from	 some	 secure
videoconferencing	facility	in	Washington.

“Yes,	General	Frink?”
“You’re	an	intelligent	woman,”	Frink	said.	“You	have	to	have	realized	that

this	 is	an	incredibly	expensive	and	roundabout	way	to	raise	what	amounts	to
pocket	change,	by	the	standards	of	the	Trapezoid.”

“The	thought	had	crossed	my	mind,”	I	admitted.
“Nevertheless,	what	Les	 just	 said	 to	you	all	 is	 an	empty	 threat.	DODO	is

not	going	to	get	shut	down.	Its	management	may	be	changed	but	it	will	keep
on	going.”

“Why?”	I	asked.	“Is	it	because	you	want	cheap	plutonium?”
“I	won’t	 lie	to	you.	There	is	certainly	a	 lot	of	 interest	 in	that.	But	even	if



we	 can	 never	 get	 the	 Asset	 to	 turn	 lead	 into	 plutonium,	 this	 project	 keeps
going.	It	is	distressing	that	you	have	bungled	this	bucket-burying	project	to	the
extent	 that	you	have.	There	 is	no	way	 that	 this	passes	 a	 cost-benefit	 analysis
even	if	you	get	the	bucket	and	sell	the	book	tomorrow.	But	we	are	learning,
Dr.	 Stokes.	 Painful	 as	 this	 trial-and-error	 phase	may	 be,	DODO	 is	 building
institutional	knowledge	of	how	we	can	conduct	diachronic	operations	 in	the
future—and	how	our	adversaries	may	be	conducting	them	even	as	we	speak.”

It	wasn’t	the	first	time	that	someone	in	my	chain	of	command	had	dropped
a	 hint	 that	 foreign	 powers	might	 have	 their	 own	 equivalents	 of	DODO.	 It
explained	a	lot	about	how	willing	Frink	and	others	were	to	keep	backing	such
an	unlikely	enterprise.

“Well,	I	am	glad	that	we	are	making	progress,	however	haphazardly,”	I	said.
“It’s	the	haphazard	part	I	would	like	to	work	on,”	Frink	said.	“There	is	far

too	much	unpredictability	and	randomness	 in	 these	 .	 .	 .	DEDEs	 .	 .	 .	 for	my
taste.”	 I	 had	 to	 give	him	 credit	 for	 nailing	 the	pronunciation.	 “It	 is	 for	 that
reason	 that	 I	 am	 going	 to	 bring	Roger	 Blevins	 into	 this	 in	 a	 more	 serious
way.”

The	general	paused,	and	I	could	tell	he	was	awaiting	some	sort	of	reaction
from	me.

Which	wasn’t	 something	he’d	have	done	 if	he’d	been	expecting	a	negative
reaction.	No,	he	was	expecting	me	to	 jump	out	of	my	chair	 in	 transports	of
joy.	He	was	 expecting	 it	 because	 his	 old	 school	 chum	Blevins	 had	 prepped
him	for	it—told	him	of	the	superb	mentor/pupil	relationship	we	had	enjoyed,
or	some	such	bullshit	malarky.

Instead	 I	was	 frozen.	 Like	 a	 deer	 in	 the	 headlights.	Not	 one	of	my	more
admirable	 qualities.	 Later,	 when	 I	 was	 going	 through	 hand-to-hand	 combat
training	 with	 military	 experts,	 I	 heard	 a	 lot	 about	 the	 predator/prey
relationship,	and	how	it	was	the	natural	instinct	of	many	to	freeze	up	when	in
the	grip	of	a	more	powerful	animal.	It	turns	out	you	can	train	yourself	to	fight,
or	to	run	away;	but	I	hadn’t	been	through	such	training	at	the	time.

“I’ve	 been	 discussing	 it	 with	Roger,”	 Frink	went	 on.	He	 seemed	 a	 little
nonplussed	by	my	reaction,	but	 soon	enough	worked	himself	back	up	to	his
usual	 brute	 intensity.	 “He	 speaks	 highly	 of	 you,	 but	 we	 have	 arrived	 at	 a
consensus	that	it	might	not	hurt	to	have	a	couple	of	greybeards	in	the	loop—
people	 who	 know	 their	 way	 around	 history	 and	 dead	 languages	 and	 such.
Constantine	Rudge	is	still	following	along,	but	he’s	busy	and	can	only	put	so
much	time	into	it.	So	I	have	asked	Roger.	And	he	has	expressed	a	willingness



to	 take	a	 leave	of	absence	 from	his	position	at	Harvard	so	that	he	can	throw
himself	 into	 DODO	 with	 a	 higher	 level	 of	 commitment.	 It’ll	 take	 a	 few
months	for	him	to	disentangle	himself,	but	he’s	on	it.	I	wanted	you	to	be	the
first	 to	know,	Stokes.	Given	your	warm	relationship	with	him,	 I	expect	 this
will	be	a	load	off	your	mind.”

“Thanks	 for	 letting	 me	 know,	 General	 Frink,”	 I	 said.	 “Will	 there	 be
anything	else?”

“I	look	forward	to	hearing	good	news	from	your	end	in	a	few	hours,”	Frink
said.	“Les	is	a	good	man.	When	he	says	he’s	going	to	crush	it—it’s	time	to	pop
some	popcorn	and	pull	up	a	chair.”

“I’ll	get	popping,	then,”	I	said.

LETTER	FROM

GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
Your	Grace—pardon	me	the	rude	beginnings,	but	it’s	a	terrible,	terrible	thing
that’s	 happened,	 I	must	write	quickly	 to	 tell	 you	 all	 and	 I	warn	you	now,	 it
may	 be	 the	 last	 letter	 you	 shall	 ever	 receive	 from	me,	 for	 reasons	 that	 will
become	clear	as	you	are	reading.

Tristan	Lyons	 returned	 again,	 still	 without	 success,	 but	with	 a	willingness
now	to	be	honest	with	me.	But	the	truth	he	shared	was	foul	enough	to	kill	an
ogre,	and	that	was	just	the	beginning	of	the	woes.

As	I	told	you	before,	he	comes	from	an	era	in	which	magic	has	been	blotted
out	entirely.	Sure	he	and	his	brethren	are	attempting	to	resuscitate	it,	but	it’s
only	one	witch	he	has	to	work	with,	and	it’s	a	horrible	situation	she’s	in	from
the	sound	of	it.	Lives	like	a	prisoner,	she	does,	under	their	watch	all	the	time
for	they	want	her	kept	safe	else	their	work	comes	to	naught.	So	very	 limited
her	life	sounds.	And	the	worst	of	it	is	the	work	itself!	They	instruct	her	on	all
the	magic	she	may	do,	and	’tis	only	ever	Sending	they	want	her	for,	which	as
you’ve	 heard	 myself	 and	 my	 sister	 Breda	 tell	 you,	 is	 exhausting	 and	 often
frustrating,	for	there	are	so	many	particulars	to	be	kept	in	mind,	and	the	risk
of	 lomadh—and	 you	 haven’t	 the	 satisfaction	 of	 accomplishment,	 for	 by	 its
very	nature,	the	results	are	not	where	you	are.



And	 even	 worse	 than	 that,	 ’tis	 a	 strange	 mechanical	 chamber	 she	 must
spend	 her	 time	 in,	 the	 only	 place	 magic	 will	 function	 in	 their	 age.	 Tristan
described	it	somewhat	to	me	and	for	all	the	pride	in	his	voice—’tis	his	creation
—it	sounds	a	right	horror,	so	it	does.	So	this	poor	witch	is	living	under	nasty
circumstances,	 and	 more	 than	 that:	 she	 is	 nearly	 two	 hundred	 years	 old!
Magically	preserved	she	is.	So	for	all	those	years	she	survived,	aging	slowly,	in
a	world	with	no	magic,	making	friends	and	then	watching	them	die	of	old	age
.	.	.	while	she	waited	patiently	for	the	time	to	come	for	her	to	spend	her	day	in
a	 horrible	 little	 room	 doing	 unpleasant	 tricks	 on	 demand	 for	 a	 secret
government.

For	that’s	the	other	part	of	his	confession:	Tristan	and	his	lot	aren’t	bringing
magic	back	for	the	good	of	the	world,	or	for	magic’s	own	sake,	but	because	his
government	(what	rules	over	the	nation	full	of	Irish	who	speak	English)	wants
to	use	magic	to	spy	upon	and	check	the	power	of	other	kingdoms.	Now	I’ve
nothing	against	that,	sure	we’re	doing	it	ourselves,	right	now,	and	who	doesn’t?
But	it’s	nothing	to	the	glory	of	magic,	it’s	nothing	to	the	artistry	or	craft,	and
worst	of	all,	 it’s	a	horrible	 life	 they’re	giving	this	witch,	by	the	sound	of	 it.	 I
asked	Tristan	was	she	happy,	and	he	said	not	especially,	but	he	thinks	that	is
due	to	she’s	Hungarian	and	they’re	not	a	merry	race.	And	he	has	a	point.	Still,
very	sad	I	was	to	think	of	the	state	of	affairs.	Not	at	all	as	I’d	imagined	it,	when
first	he	told	me	their	aim	was	to	bring	back	magic.

But	 all	 of	 that	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the	 horror	 to	 come.	 For	 Tristan’s
crew	is	an	evil	one,	and	never	was	there	more	evidence	of	that	than	the	story
of	Lester	Holgate.	’Tis	a	fell	tale	I’m	about	to	impart	to	you,	so	I	hope	you	are
nursing	some	potent	spirits	to	get	you	through	it.

Tristan	was	giving	it	a	rest	with	Sir	Edward.	As	soon	as	he	arrived	and	told
me	and	Rose	all	(for	didn’t	I	summon	Rose	to	be	a	witness	to	his	story	too),	he
went	 from	 the	Tearsheet	Brewery	with	Rose.	 She	was	 friendlier	 to	him	now,
given	as	how	he	had	spoken	with	us	more	openly,	as	he’d	promised.	In	fact,	she
had	 offered	 to	 introduce	 him	 to	 other	 witches	 around,	 of	 whom	 she	 knows
more	than	I,	having	family	here.	She	is	about	to	be	married	off	to	a	gentleman,
pleasant	enough,	but	very	dull,	and	it	appealed	to	her	sense	of	adventure	to	be
assisting	 a	 handsome	 fella	 from	 the	 future,	 especially	 in	 the	 name	 of	magic.
The	 plan	 was	 that	 Rose	 would	 take	 him	 to	meet	 her	mother	 and	 aunts,	 as
they’re	 a	 whole	 family	 of	 witches	 (like	 Breda	 and	 myself),	 with	 the
grandmother	out	on	the	Fulanham	estate	by	the	Sheppards	Bush	Green.	So	it’s
an	overnight	trip	he	had	left	on,	and	didn’t	I	feel	like	a	mother	seeing	her	son



off	to	the	wars?
No,	in	fact,	I	didn’t.	A	bit	of	a	relief	it	was.
So	there	I	was	on	my	lonesome	upstairs	at	the	tavern,	taking	the	rare	chance

to	air	out	the	closet	and	the	bedding,	when	suddenly	there	was	a	shimmer	in
the	corner	of	 the	room	and	there’s	another	naked	fella,	with	his	hair	cut	 in	a
peculiar	 way.	He’s	 about	 as	 tall	 as	 Tristan	 but	 thinner,	 less	 imposing	 (good
teeth	 though),	 and	 he	 falls	 to	 the	 floor	 moaning	 like	 they	 do.	 He	 most
certainly	 does	 not	 seem	 familiar,	 telling	 me	 he’s	 only	 on	 this	 one	 Strand—
something	strange	is	afoot	here,	one	of	those	things	that	Tristan	would	call	an
Anomaly.

As	 soon	 as	 he	 could	 speak,	 he	 looks	 around	 the	 closet	 like	 it’s	 Newgate
Prison	and	he’s	no	 idea	how	he	got	condemned	to	be	 there.	 “Have	a	 seat,”	 I
say,	 and	pat	 the	mattress	 beside	me,	 but	Mr.	Anomaly	 looks	 nauseated	 and
stays	where	he	is,	covering	his	shaft	but	feigning	not	to.	I	give	him	a	moment
to	collect	himself,	chuck	an	extra	set	of	drawers	and	shirt	at	him	and	wait	for
him	to	dress	himself	 (he’s	not	 so	much	 to	 look	at,	 a	wee	bit	 soft	around	 the
waist	 like	a	bride	he	is).	As	it	happens	we’ve	collected	some	of	Ned	Alleyn’s
fancier	 costumes	 from	 Dick	 Burbage,	 should	 Tristan	 ever	 have	 occasion	 to
chat	up	the	Court	Witches,	or	courtly	associates	of	Sir	Edward,	in	nicer	places.
But	Tristan	was	wearing	his	regular	costume	that	day,	so	the	fancier	one	was	at
hand,	 and	 I	 gave	 it	 to	 this	new	 fella.	 Such	 a	mess	he	made	of	putting	 it	 on,
you’d	 think	 he	 was	 from	 the	 Indies.	 “Can’t	 you	 lace	 a	 doublet?”	 I	 asked	 in
amazement,	and	he	doesn’t	even	seem	to	hear	me	as	he’s	trying	to	figure	out
what	the	devil	to	do	with	the	codpiece.	I	barely	keep	myself	from	crying	with
the	 laughter,	 but	 finally	 we	 get	 him	 dressed,	 and	 then	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 a
quarter	 hour	 after	my	 hands	 have	 been	 all	 over	 him	 to	 help	 him	 dress,	 he
looks	at	me	directly.

He’s	not	a	bad-looking	fellow	but	it’s	city	air	he	breathes	a	lot,	I’m	guessing,
not	 like	 our	 Tristan,	 for	 his	 complexion	 is	 sallow	 like	 a	 hatter’s	 (although
fashionably	 pale)	 and	 he	 squints	 a	 bit	 like	 a	 tailor.	 He	 carries	 himself	 well
enough	but	unsteady	he	seems	to	be,	as	if	a	permanent	amazement	he	is	trying
to	 hide.	And	 his	 hair,	Your	Grace—’tis	 a	 thing	 best	 not	 spoken	 of,	 but	 I’ll
speak	of	it	anyway,	as	there	is	much	worse	to	come,	and	as	it	enters	into	the
narrative	in	a	small	way.	The	whole	time	we	were	struggling	with	the	doublet
his	colorless	limp	hair	kept	straggling	down	over	his	brow	and	nervous	he	was
in	tucking	it	away.

And	didn’t	I	then	remember	a	thing	that	Tristan	had	told	me,	concerning



his	unlovable	colleague,	Les	Holgate:	“He	employs	a	surfeit	of	Product.”	I’d	no
idea	what	he	meant	by	it,	but	he’d	said	it	as	if	revealing	it	was,	of	something
important	 concerning	 the	man.	 So	 I	 had	 pressed	Tristan	 for	 an	 explanation
and	didn’t	he	say,	“That	means	his	hair	is	gelled	until	it’s	hard	and	shiny	as	a
beetle’s	 back.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 pomade	 that	 some	 in	 my	 time	 use.”	 Tristan,
understanding	that	none	of	this	“Product”	or	pomade	would	be	Sent	with	him,
had	grown	out	his	own	hair	and	had	it	trimmed	in	accord	with	our	fashions,	so
that	 conspicuous	 he	wouldn’t	 be.	 But	 this	 fellow	 hadn’t	 done	 so	much.	And
since	his	Product	has	 stayed	behind	 in	 the	 chamber	whence	he’d	been	Sent,
wasn’t	his	hair	now	all	over	the	bloody	place	and	a	court	fool	he	seemed	to	be.

“Les	Holgate,”	I	say.
“The	same,”	he	says,	and	he	holds	his	outstretched	hand	toward	me.	I	look

at	it,	wondering	if	I	am	expected	to	kiss	it,	which	I’ve	no	intention	of	doing.	So
I	wait.	After	a	moment,	he	drops	it	onto	his	lap.	“You	must	be	Gráinne.”	He
pronounces	it	wrong	and	he	knows	it.

“Why	must	I?	And	what	business	is	it	of	yours	if	I	am?”
“I’m	a	colleague	of	Tristan	Lyons.	You	know,	from	the	future?”
“I	know.”
“I’m	here	to	help	him	with	his	deed.”	He	pats	his	hands	on	the	bombast	of

his	 hosen,	 then	 crosses	 his	 arms,	 then	 puts	 his	 arms	 akimbo,	 as	 if	 arms	 are
something	he’s	just	acquired	and	hasn’t	yet	worked	out	what	they’re	good	for.

“A	colleague,	are	you	now?”	 I	ask.	 “Let’s	have	you	prove	 it.	Tell	me	a	bit
about	his	deed,	and	why	he	would	be	needing	your	help,	and	what	kind	of	help
you’re	intending	to	give	him.”

“We	have	no	time	for	that,”	he	says,	frowning.	To	be	honest	he	looks	almost
confused	that	I	would	be	questioning	him.	Quite	peremptory	he	seems	to	me.

“I	have	no	time	for	foolishness,”	I	retort.	“These	are	dangerous	times	and	I
dare	not	take	a	stranger	at’s	word.	I’m	needing	evidence	you’re	Tristan’s	fellow.
Tell	true.”

Mr.	 Anomaly	 harrumphed	 a	 bit	 at	 that.	 Then	 he	 pushed	 his	 hair	 back,
rubbed	 his	 hands	 together,	 and	 said	 briskly,	 “We	 are	 trying	 to	 disincent	 Sir
Edward	 Greylock	 from	 investing	 in	 the	 Boston	 Council.	 Tristan	 has	 tried
speaking	 to	 him	 on	 multiple	 occasions	 but	 the	 results	 we	 seek	 have	 yet	 to
eventuate.”

“And	those	results	are?”	I	asked.
Irked	he	looked,	as	if	it	were	an	imposition	to	speak	of	it.	“The	removal	of	a

certain	building	forty	years	from	now	in	Massive	Shoe	Hits.”



I	continued	to	question	him	in	this	vein,	with	his	impatience	and	irritation
compounding,	until,	despite	his	queer	language	and	displeasing	attitude,	I	had
satisfied	 myself	 that	 he	 was	 indeed	 on	 Tristan’s	 crew,	 and	 served	 the	 same
masters,	with	the	same	ends	in	mind.

“So	what	exactly	are	you	here	to	do?”	I	concluded	my	questioning.
“We’ve	figured	out	a	better	way	to	change	Sir	Edward’s	mind	about	where

to	 put	 his	 money,”	 he	 says.	 “Since	 Tristan	 was	 already	 here,	 in	 1601,	 we
couldn’t	give	him	the	new	instructions,	so	we’ve	called	an	audible	and	made	an
unplanned	 insertion.	 I’ve	 got	 some	 specific	 plans	 to	 enact,	 and	 I	 need	 your
help	just	like	you’ve	been	giving	it	to	Tristan.”

“As	long	as	you	understand	what	I	have	not	been	giving	to	Tristan,”	I	say,
for	 his	 talk	 of	 insertions	 was	 putting	me	 on	my	 guard.	He	 was	 not	 near	 so
comely	as	Tristan	and	I	didn’t	want	him	to	be	making	any	 insertions	on	my
person.	But	he	gave	me	a	strange	look,	as	if	he	hadn’t	the	faintest	idea	what	I
was	referring	to.	“Certes,”	I	said,	letting	it	go.	“I	am	in	league	with	Tristan	so
by	association	I	am	in	league	with	you.	Be	stating	your	intentions,	O	man	from
the	future.”

“I’m	going	to	put	Sir	Edward	between	a	rock	and	a	hard	place.	Make	him	an
offer	he	can’t	refuse.	Turn	up	the	heat.”

“All	right,”	I	said	cautiously.
“Yeah.	Here’s	the	plan.	The	Constable	of	this	parish?	St.	Mildred’s?”
“I	know	what	parish	we	are	in,”	I	told	him.
“He’s	poor.	Easily	corrupted,”	he	tells	me.	I	reckon	he	must	know	this	from

his	history	books—and	don’t	 I	 know	 it	 from	my	own	 life!	 “Introduce	me	 to
that	Constable.	And	then,	separately,	introduce	me	to	one	Simon	Beresford—
the	father	of	Sir	Edward’s	fiancée.”

“Why’s	that,	then?”	I	asked.
“Well,	Sir	Edward	uses	this	whorehouse,	right?”
“Once	or	twice,”	I	said.
“There’s	a	girl	here	he	likes,	Tristan	told	me.”
“That	would	be	Morag.	Bit	of	a	gymnast	she	is.”
“We	have	to	get	the	Constable	to	inspect	the	whorehouse	while	Sir	Edward

is	here	with	her—and	Sir	Edward’s	future	father-in-law	is	with	him	on	a	ride-
along.”

“On	 a	what?”	 I	 asked.	 I	 did	 not	 like	 his	 attitude	 or	 his	 strange	 accent	 or
queer	way	with	words	and	phrases.

I	did	not	like	the	notion	that	Tearsheet	would	be	inspected,	but	in	truth,	all



the	bawdy-houses	are	targets	occasionally	and	isn’t	Tearsheet	overdue	for	it,	on
account	of	my	magic	fending	it	off	so	long.	Often’s	the	time	a	parish	constable
will	 squeeze	 a	 whoremonger	 for	money.	 Constables	 are	 given	 power	 but	 no
money	at	all,	and	so	usually	held	by	somebody	with	a	high	enough	opinion	of
themselves,	 who	 happens	 to	 be	 short	 on	 coin.	 “Well	 enough,”	 I	 said.	 “But
Simon	Beresford?	The	father-in-law-to-be?”

“Yeah,	 I	 don’t	 know	where	 to	 track	him	down.	He’s	 a	 lord	 or	 something.
Knows	 the	 Queen.	 We	 have	 to	 get	 him	 to	 go	 with	 the	 Constable	 on	 the
inspection.”

“And	why	would	he	do	such	a	thing?”
“So	that	he	can	report	to	Queen	Elizabeth	which	of	her	courtiers	was	caught

in	the	whorehouse.”	He	seemed	chuffed	with	himself	for	this	idiot	scheme.	His
arms—when	he	wasn’t	using	them	to	push	his	hair	out	of	his	eyes—hung	more
casually	at	his	sides	now,	as	if	he’d	grown	accustomed	to	them.	He	was	finding
his	sea	legs,	as	Your	Grace’s	men	might	say.

“Hardly	seems	like	something	a	gentleman	would	care	to	do,”	I	pointed	out.
“Good	way	to	win	points,”	himself	said	confidently,	in	that	tone	that	says:	he

has	 made	 up	 his	 mind	 about	 it,	 and	 therefore	 any	 new	 information	 or
suggestion	has	the	weight	of	mist.	“Also,	if	we	drop	a	hint	that	his	future	son-
in-law	might	be	one	of	those	in	the	brothel,	then	Simon	Beresford	will	have	a
pressing	need	to	see	for	himself	who	comes	out	of	the	brothel	door	during	the
raid.”

I	 shrugged.	 “There	 are	 hidden	 exits	 on	 every	 floor	 for	 the	 customers	 to
leave	unnoticed,”	I	said.	“Constables	have	sought	them	out	for	years	and	never
found	them,	it’s	a	matter	of	great	pride	at	Tearsheet.	Morag	knows	those	exits
same	as	any	of	us,	she’ll	take	Sir	Edward	out	of	there	to	safety.”

“No	she	won’t,”	said	Les	Holgate.	“I’ll	be	blocking	the	exit	on	that	floor.	Sir
Edward	can	only	get	out	if	I	let	him.”

I	 wasn’t	 so	 sure	 about	 trusting	 this	 fellow	 now,	 he	 had	 such	 a	 different
sensibility	to	him	than	your	man	Tristan.

He	goes	on:	“I’ll	show	up	at	the	same	time	as	Beresford	and	the	Constable.
You	should	be	in	the	whorehouse	and	protest,	make	a	fuss,	follow	us	around.
When	we	find	Sir	Edward	and	Morag,	you	make	enough	of	a	fuss	to	distract
the	 Constable,	 and	 I’ll	 pull	 Edward	 aside	 and	 offer	 him	 a	 get-out-of-jail-free
card:	he	can	run	out	the	front	door	and	be	seen	by	Simon	Beresford,	and	kiss
his	 social-climbing	marriage	 goodbye	 forever.	Or,	 I’ll	 get	 him	 out	 safely	 and
Simon	Beresford	will	never	know	he’s	there—but	I’ll	only	do	that	 if	he	signs



his	name	to	an	oath,	that	he	will	never	fund	the	Boston	Council,	no	questions
asked.	Got	it?”

Absurd,	 I	 thought	 it.	 Dull-witted.	 Absolutely	 mental.	 But	 I	 nodded,
grimacing.

So:	that	was	the	plan.	That	is	not	what	happened.

This	 scheme—this	 accursed	 scheme!—was	 easy	 enough	 to	 begin	 because	 of
how	the	stars	were	aligned.	I	spoke	to	Morag,	and	explained	a	little	of	what	we
were	up	to—not	about	Les	Holgate	being	from	the	future	or	such	details,	just
that	we	needed	to	blackmail	her	newest	customer	and	she’d	be	recompensed
for	 her	 cooperation.	 Pym	 the	 owner	 has	 a	 strict	 no-blackmailing	 policy	 at
Tearsheet,	but	 it	only	applies	 to	blackmail	 that	he	knows	about,	 and	Morag
(being	Scottish)	is	resourceful.	To	my	request,	she	laughs	and	says,	“Well,	Sir
Edward	and	I	do	have	a	special	little	romp	planned	for	tomorrow	afternoon.	If
you	want	to	catch	him	in	the	act,	this	will	be	the	act	to	catch	him	in.	This	will
be	an	act	for	all	the	ages	to	speak	of.”	And	she	laughs	with	such	abandon	that	I
can’t	help	but	be	a	wee	bit	curious,	suspicious	even,	of	what	she’s	on	about,	so
I	ask	her.

“What	are	you	on	about?”	I	ask	her.
She	sobers	right	up,	although	her	eyes	look	like	the	laughter	will	still	come

spilling	 out	 of	 them.	 “Ach,	 I	 might	 have	 no	 morals,	 but	 I	 certainly	 have
manners,”	 she	 says.	 “I’ll	not	 reveal	a	gentleman’s	proclivities.”	 (For	doesn’t	 she
like	to	show	off	her	schooling	with	these	fancy	new	words.)	“But	I	know	he’ll
be	arriving	here	just	as	the	bells	toll	two,	so	come	at	half-two	and	you’ll	get	at
least	as	much	as	you’re	seeking.”	And	we’d	have	to	pay	her	well	for	that,	 for
it’s	true	her	 lips	are	generally	as	tight	as	her	character	 is	 loose.	She’s	the	one
the	 fellas	 ask	 for	when	 it’s	 especially	 secret	 they	need	 to	be.	 She	valued	her
reputation	 that	 way,	 so	 hard	 up	 for	money	 she	must	 have	 been,	 if	 she	 was
willing	to	play	our	game	with	us.	Now	I’ll	always	wonder	about	that.

’Twas	 easy	 enough	 to	 find	 the	Constable,	 as	 he’s	 also	 the	manager	 of	 the
bear-baiting	pit,	 so	he’s	 always	 around	Southwark.	The	Constable	 is	 a	 funny
enough	fella,	perhaps	on	account	of	his	line	of	work.	His	assistants,	who	feed
the	bears	and	file	down	their	teeth,	are	large	fellas,	and	fierce,	but	he’s	entirely
different.	 Mild	 and	 obsequious	 at	 once,	 he	 is,	 and	 doesn’t	 he	 smile
deferentially	even	as	he	regrets	to	inform	you	that	he’ll	be	taking	advantage.

I	 did	 him	 a	 good	 turn	 once.	 The	 bears	 don’t	 take	 to	 himself	 or	 his	 lads
much,	yet	he’s	the	one	keeps	them	alive	and	healthy,	for	isn’t	a	bear	a	terrible



expensive	thing	to	come	by?	Anyhow,	I	reasoned	with	a	bear	whose	wounds	he
was	salving,	and	the	bear	stopped	trying	to	smack	him.	So	he	owed	me	a	favor
for	a	couple	of	years	now.	This	turned	out	to	be	useful.

Les	 Holgate	 believed	 the	 Constable	 would	 leap	 spurs-first	 at	 the
opportunity	 to	 intimidate	 Pym,	 the	Tearsheet	 brewer.	He	 did	 not	 take	 into
account	that	the	Constable	was	less	inclined	to	upbraid	brewers	than	bears,	for
an	 upbraided	 brewer	 is	 less	 likely	 to	 pass	 you	 a	 pint.	 It’s	 a	 good	 thing	 the
Constable	was	under	a	compliment	to	me,	for	he	only	agreed	to	Les’s	scheme
as	a	kindness	to	myself.	So	in	the	end,	he	did	agree	to	put	on	his	constabulary
cap	and	go	inspecting	the	“tavern”	the	next	afternoon.

Les	Holgate	next	wished	me	 to	go	with	him	 to	 find	 this	Simon	Beresford
and	induce	him	to	come	along	with	us,	but	’twould	take	more	of	my	time	than
I’d	a	wish	to	give	it.	So	I	declined,	but	(believing	I	was	still	abetting	a	scheme
that	Tristan	was	a	part	of)	I	did	offer	to	find	out	Simon	Beresford’s	location,	so
that	Les	might	go	and	fetch	the	fellow	his	own	self.

This	 I	 did,	 the	 next	 day	 (Les	 Holgate	 having	 slept	 on	 a	 tavern	 bench
overnight	and	whinging	all	the	next	morning).	Simon	Beresford	was	on	London
Bridge	seeking	to	purchase	a	new	hat.

As	soon	as	Les	Holgate	had	set	out	for	the	Bridge,	up	to	my	own	closet	I
went,	and	sought	out	Tristan	by	scrying,	as	I	knew	he	and	Rose	should	be	on
their	way	back	through	the	city,	headed	my	way.	It	seemed	to	me	they	were	by
the	Paris	Gardens.	I	sent	to	Rose	as	much	of	this	message	as	I	could,	which	was
hard	to	communicate	since	she	wasn’t	expecting	me	to	try	to	reach	her:	“Your
man	Les	Holgate	has	arrived	and	plans	to	use	extortion	to	accomplish	the	task
at	Tearsheet.”	So	 I	hoped	Tristan	would	have	at	 least	a	notion	 that	mischief
might	be	afoot.

Then	I	went	back	into	the	tavern	and	sat	back	with	a	mug	of	Tearsheet	Best
Bitter,	 the	 finest	 ale	 you	 can	 find	 outside	 of	 Ireland,	 and	waited	 to	 see	who
would	 return	 first.	 It	 was	 quiet	 in	 there	 for	 the	 time	 of	 day,	 perhaps	 half	 a
dozen	drinkers.	I	had	no	personal	need	to	see	the	scheme	succeed,	and	guessed
it	would	be	a	 lark	to	watch.	But	I	did	feel	the	slightest	bit	of	unease	deep	in
my	gut,	and	I	hoped	Tristan	would	return,	as	he	had	a	gravity	to	him	that	put
me	at	ease,	while	this	Holgate	fella	made	me	a	bit	squeaky-bummed.

No	surprise	it	was	that	Les	Holgate	returned	first,	with	a	confused-looking
older	fella	who	had	to	have	been	Simon	Beresford.	He	was	dressed	in	the	old
style,	all	in	elegant	black,	prudish	but	not	quite	Puritan	(for	then	his	daughter
wouldn’t	have	been	one	of	Elizabeth’s	ladies,	of	that	I’m	confident).	His	ruffle



was	pretentious—as	if	his	head	sat	on	a	fancy	platter	that	just	happened	to	be
balanced	 right	 on	 the	 top	 of	 his	 neck.	 Hard	 to	 imagine	 a	 fellow	 like	 that
shopping	for	himself	on	London	Bridge,	but	it	takes	all	sorts.	I	heard	his	voice
out	in	the	street,	old	enough	for	childish	treble.	He	was	asking	someone	for	an
explanation.	Answers	were	 coming	both	 from	Les	Holgate	 and	 from	 a	 third
voice	I	recognized	as	belonging	to	the	Constable.

In	the	tavern	I	was,	as	they	approached,	and	wasn’t	the	doorway	open	to	let
in	the	glorious	autumn	day,	so	they	stood	in	the	door	backlit.	Proprietor	Pym
recognized	 the	Constable	by	his	 silhouette,	 and	cursed	under	his	breath.	He
went	out	 the	door,	 shooing	 at	 them,	 and	made	 a	 fuss	 about	 letting	 them	 in,
even	 as	 the	 old	 fella	 protested	 he	 had	no	 interest	 in	 setting	 foot	 in	 such	 an
establishment.	I	followed	Pym	out	just	to	keep	an	eye	on	things.

So,	here	we	 all	 are	 standing	on	 the	gravel	 street,	 just	 outside	 the	brewery
door,	with	 throngs	of	people	pushing	by	us	going	 to	 the	 theatre	or	 from	the
bear-baiting.	We	were	myself,	 the	Constable,	 Les	Holgate,	 Simon	Beresford,
and	Proprietor	 Pym.	 Inside	 upstairs,	 of	 course,	were	Morag	 and	 Sir	 Edward,
carrying	on	blissfully	unawares.

The	Constable	 shoulders	Pym	out	 of	 the	way	 and	 strides	 into	 the	 tavern,
where	right	off	all	the	customers	make	a	bit	of	a	fuss,	like	hens	in	a	coop	when
the	farmer	comes	in	after	dark.

“Stay	outside,	sir,”	says	Les	Holgate	to	Simon	Beresford.	“It’s	not	a	proper
place	for	a	gentleman	like	yourself	to	be	seen.	Stay	here	and	note	who	comes
out.”	And	 then	 he	 rushes	 in	 after	 the	Constable.	 I	 follow	 after	 him.	And	 so
leaving	Master	Pym	and	Simon	Beresford	 outside	 on	 the	 street	 (with	 Simon
Beresford	 so	dismayed	and	perplexed	 to	 find	himself	here	 at	 all),	 the	 trio	of
the	Constable,	Les	Holgate,	and	myself	are	rushing	through	the	tavern	to	the
steep	steps	that	lead	to	the	rooms.	We’re	not	making	noise	ourselves,	but	the
tavern	regulars	are	making	noise	enough	to	surely	alert	everyone	on	the	floor
above.	 The	 wenches	 in	 the	 tavern	 duck	 under	 tables,	 until	 they	 realize	 the
Constable	 isn’t	 after	 them	 at	 all,	 then	 they	 either	 return	 to	 their	 work	 or
scurry	out	the	hidden	door,	just	to	be	safe.

Now	up	the	steep	stairs	it	is	we’re	going:	Constable,	Les	Holgate,	myself.	It
isn’t	 too	 dark	 at	 all	 on	 the	 landing,	 not	 on	 a	Harvest-season	 afternoon	with
unwonted	 bright	 sun	 outside	 shining	 in	 through	 a	 small	 open	 window.	 The
upstairs,	as	perhaps	I’ve	described	to	Your	Grace,	has	a	narrow	corridor	with
rooms	 off	 either	 side,	 first	 a	 couple	 of	 rooms	 big	 enough	 for	 private
conferences,	 and	 then	 beyond	 them,	 four	wee	 curtained-off	 closets	 for	more



intimate	congress.	It’s	Morag’s	closet	we’re	wanting,	and	that’s	the	first	curtain
to	 the	 right	 after	 the	meeting	 rooms.	 It’s	 the	 largest	 of	 the	 lot,	 some	 three
strides	square,	with	a	mattress	on	the	floor,	and	a	curtained	window	what	looks
out	over	the	street.

We	 rush	 past	 the	 two	 meeting	 rooms,	 both	 with	 doors	 ajar	 letting	 light
through	 the	windows,	both	empty	 (it’s	day,	 and	 these	are	 the	 sorts	of	 rooms
more	used	to	candlelight).	Following	Les	Holgate’s,	commands,	aren’t	I	tugging
at	the	Constable’s	sleeve	and	complaining	of	his	being	here.

We	come	to	Morag’s	curtained	doorway.	Les	Holgate	tugs	open	the	curtain.
And	there’s	 the	unglazed	window	with	 the	afternoon	sunlight	 tempered	only
slightly	 by	 a	 linen	 kerchief,	 so	 we	 can	 see	 clear	 as	 if	 we	were	 standing	 in	 a
market	 square.	 The	 Constable,	 Les	 Holgate,	 and	 myself	 fill	 the	 cramped
doorway,	with	me	cackling	 like	an	angry	hen—until	 I	 see	what	 is	happening
inside	the	wee	room,	and	then	my	voice	does	fail	me.

Your	Majesty,	I	can	scarce	bring	myself	to	write	what	we	do	see	there.	For
it	 is	 not	 Morag	 there	 with	 Sir	 Edward,	 but	 Sir	 Edward	 with	 a	 third	 party
altogether.	 From	 Morag’s	 tone	 the	 day	 before,	 I	 confess	 I	 had	 expected	 a
surprise.	But	I	had	assumed	it	might	be	another	wench.

It	is	not.	’Tis	a	man,	and	he	and	Sir	Edward	are	at	it	with	each	other,	which
is	a	hanging	offence	here.	Morag	is	not	even	present.	She	was	but	a	cover	for
them	 to	 be	 together.	 The	 two	 men	 freeze	 and	 stare	 up	 at	 the	 three	 of	 us
crowded	at	the	doorway	so,	and	quickly	part.

Les	 Holgate	 looks	 very	 surprised,	 but	 I	 ken	 he	 doesn’t	 understand	 how
dreadful	this	situation	is.	Tristan	told	me	that	in	their	age,	 it’s	only	the	most
religious	 of	 zealots	 (belonging	 largely	 to	 sects	 of	 churches	 that	 do	 not	 even
exist	in	our	day)	who	are	much	bothered	about	buggery.	In	his	day,	’tis	lawful
and	 unremarkable—even	 in	 London!	 So	 I’m	 thinking	 Les	Holgate	 does	 not
understand	 that	 he	 is	 looking	 at	 two	 dead	 men.	 Unless	 we	 can	 bribe	 the
Constable	with	a	lot	of	money	straightaway.

But	I’ll	be	honest,	that’s	not	the	only	thing	that	shocks	me.	It	is	the	fellow
Sir	Edward’s	buggering	that	shocks	me	more.	For	a	famous	bloke	it	is.	A	very
famous	bloke.

There	 is	 a	 commotion	back	down	 the	 corridor,	 of	 somebody	 climbing	up
the	 stairs	 in	 a	 hurry,	 clear	 enough	 to	 hear	 due	 to	 our	 amazed	 silence.	 The
Constable	 is	 goggle-eyed,	 and	 finally	 he	 says,	 “I	 cannot	 believe	 what	 I	 am
seeing.	The	heralds	and	 the	chronicles	will	never	 let	us	hear	 the	end	of	 this.
Never.”	 Myself,	 I	 can’t	 stop	 staring	 at	 the	 two	 men.	 At	 the	 one	 man	 in



particular.	For	that	man—the	famous	man—is	my	lover.	Who	I	believed	until
that	moment	hadn’t	a	secret	from	me	in	all	the	world.

The	scuffling	on	the	stairs	has	turned	into	footsteps	beating	their	way	down
the	 short	 corridor,	 and	 suddenly	 there’s	 a	 heaving	Tristan	Lyons,	who	 grabs
Les	Holgate	and	 shoves	him	back	down	 the	corridor	 toward	 the	 steps.	 “You
fucking	moron,”	he	 says,	but	 then	 immediately	 turns	his	 attention	back	 into
the	room.	Pushes	the	Constable	out	of	the	way,	he	does,	and	sees	the	two	on
the	ratty	mattress.	He	points	 to	my	darling,	 sitting	there	staring	at	me	wide-
eyed	and	naked	beside	Sir	Edward,	and	asks,	“Who	is	that?”

I	could	barely	make	myself	speak	the	words.	“That,”	I	said,	“is	Christopher
Marlowe.”

Tristan	 frowned	 in	 confusion.	 “Christopher	Marlowe	 is	 dead.	He	 died	 in
1593	in	a	pub	brawl.	It’s	almost	the	only	thing	I	know	about	him.”

Kit	and	I	are	staring	at	each	other	with	a	shared	look	of	stupidity	I	did	not
think	either	one	of	us	capable	of.	“A	counterfeit	death,	it	was,”	I	say,	my	chest
tight.	“Staged,	for	convenience	sake.	He	was	a	spy,	so	he	was—”

“Gracie,”	says	Kit	in	a	quiet,	warning	voice.
“Sure	 it	 came	 out	 after,	 everyone	 knows	 you’re	 a	 spy	 by	 now	 anyhow,”	 I

said.	And	explaining	to	Tristan:	“I	had	just	been	Sent	from	Ireland,	and	so	in
love	with	him	I	fell,	and	him	with	me,	we	would	do	whatever	we	asked	of	each
other.”	 Those	 huge,	 beautiful	 brown	 eyes	 of	 his	 bored	 deep	 into	 mine	 as	 I
spoke,	as	 I	gave	away	 the	 secret	 I	had	kept	 for	years,	kept	even	 (I	pray	you
forgive	me)	from	you,	Your	Majesty:	“’Twas	the	greatest	bit	of	magic	I	have
ever	done.	He	 told	me	 they	needed	 to	 counterfeit	 a	wound	 that	would	 give
him	 the	 freedom	 of	 seeming	 to	 have	 died,	 but	 it	 must	 be	 so	 thoroughly
accomplished	 that	 even	 a	 physician	 examining	 his	 body	 would	 reckon	 him
dead.	So	they	claimed	there	was	a	pub	brawl,	and	a	spell	of	protection	didn’t	I
put	on	him,	that	when	he	was	stabbed,	he	seemed	dead	but	wasn’t,	although	he
was	close	to	the	shadows	for	awhile.	Then	I	spirited	him	away	and	nursed	him
back	to	health	in	secret.”	And	still	those	eyes	how	they	looked	at	me,	and	how
I	looked	at	them.	“And	for	these	eight	years	gone,”	I	went	on,	“in	secret	I	have
loved	him	 and	he’s	 loved	me.	 I	 knew	he	had	 other	 dalliances	 and	 I	was	 not
jealous	of	him.	But	 the	secreting	of	 it—oh,	Kit—the	concealment,	 in	my	own
home—”

Before	Kit	could	respond,	or	I	could	say	anything	else,	Tristan	pushed	me
aside	into	the	room	and	grabbed	the	Constable	by	the	back	of	his	collar.	The
Constable	had	been	 staring	 at	 the	 two	men	 all	 this	 time,	 and	while	 I	 hadn’t



been	listening	to	him	on	account	of	my	own	confessions,	I	realized	now	he	was
muttering	over	and	over	again	how	all	of	it—their	impending	deaths	as	well	as
this	 revelation—would	 shake	 the	 city,	 would	 shake	 the	 nation,	 to	 its	 very
roots.

Tristan	lightly	slapped	the	Constable’s	cheek	to	get	his	attention.	“The	two
sodomites	must	be	released	unconditionally	at	once,”	he	said.	To	Sir	Edward
he	said	firmly,	“Get	your	clothes	on.	While	you’re	at	it,	open	your	purse.	You
will	reward	the	Constable	handsomely	for	this	act	of	mercy	on	his	part,	and	in
exchange,	 the	 Constable”—and	 here	 he	 released	 the	 Constable’s	 collar	 but
only	to	grab	his	shoulder	and	turn	him	squarely	to	face	him—“the	Constable
will	never	speak	a	word	of	anything	that	has	happened	today.”

“But	that	is	Kit	Marlowe,”	repeated	the	Constable	in	awe,	gaping	still.	Then
turning	 to	 Tristan,	 does	 he	 offer	 up	 this:	 “He	 was	 arrested	 for	 heresy	 just
before	his	death.	Did	you	know	that?”

“Atheism,”	 clarified	Kit	 promptly,	 for	 sure	 he	 hates	 it	when	people	 think
heresy	suggests	he	was	a	believer	in	some	sect.

“They	meant	 to	put	him	on	 trial,”	 said	 the	Constable.	 I	 realized	 from	his
obsequious	tone	that	he	was	collecting	his	wits	now,	and	expecting	Tristan	to
reward	him	for	this	information.	“All	of	England	was	waiting	to	hear	what	he
said	at	 the	 trial.	There	was	no	pub	brawl.	He	was	 assassinated	 to	keep	 from
spilling	state	secrets,	secrets	all	of	London	was	waiting	breathlessly	to	hear.	He
can	finally	spill	them,	now	he	is	alive!”

“No	 he	 cannot,”	 said	Tristan	 very	 firmly,	 as	my	 da	 used	 to	 speak	 to	me
when	I	was	a	wee	lass	throwing	a	tantrum	and	he	needed	me	to	shut	it.	“You
are	about	 to	be	given	a	 lot	of	money	 to	agree,	 for	 the	 rest	of	your	 life,	 that
Marlowe	died	in	1593.”

The	Constable	 had	 recovered	 from	 his	 amazement,	 and	was	 ready	 to	 see
reason.	 “I’ve	certainly	heard	 that	 rumour,”	 says	he.	 “If	you’ll	 show	me	where
it’s	written	in	gold,	I’ll	happily	swear	to	it.”

“I	have	no	gold	with	me,”	fretted	Sir	Edward.	“But	I	do	have	plate	enough
back	 at	my	 lodgings.	 If	 I	 am	 allowed	 to	 dress,	 and	 somebody	 shows	me	 the
back-exit,	the	Constable	may	follow	me—”

Listening	to	him,	I	felt	something	beginning	to	move	in	my	chest.	Nothing
good,	nothing	pleasant.	Jealousy	was	a	foreign	thing	to	me,	I’d	no	experience	of
it	 ever	 in	my	 life,	 not	 that	 I	 could	 recall,	 and	 so	 a	moment	 it	 took	me,	 to
realize	the	name	of	this	horrible	feeling.	Sir	Edward	must	have	sensed	my	gaze
on	 him.	 He	 glanced	 in	 my	 direction,	 and	 then	 casually	 away	 again,	 as	 if	 I



counted	for	nothing.	Jealousy	at	once	bred	with	rage	inside	of	me,	and	made
such	 an	 inward	 clamour	 that	 I	 heard	 the	 next	 bit	 of	 the	 conversation	 as
through	a	hailstorm.

Les	Holgate,	having	 recovered	 from	being	 shoved	down	the	corridor,	now
pushed	 back	 in,	 stepping	 between	 me	 and	 Sir	 Edward	 and	 shouldering	 Sir
Edward	down	onto	the	mattress.	He	then	stumbled	over	Sir	Edward’s	flailing
legs	and	was	obliged	to	steady	himself	at	the	far	wall	by	the	window.	He	spoke
to	Tristan.	 “Stay	on	 task.	This	other	guy’s	not	 important.	All	 that	matters	 is
making	 sure	 Sir	 Edward	 doesn’t	 give	 his	money	 to	 the	Boston	Council.	The
rest	 of	 it,	 these	 other	 people,	 it’s	 a	 sideshow.	 You,”	 he	 continued,	 to	 Sir
Edward,	 “your	 future	 father-in-law	 is	 standing	 outside.	You	 do	 as	we	 say,	 or
he’s	 going	 to	know	you’re	 a	 sodomite	 and	you	won’t	 get	 to	marry	your	 rich
girlfriend.”

“And	what	is	it	you	want	of	me?”	asked	Sir	Edward,	scrambling	to	stand.
“Swear	on	the	Bible	not	to	give	any	of	your	money	to	the	Boston	Council.”
“Abort,”	 said	Tristan	crossly,	as	Sir	Edward	gaped,	perplexed.	 “This	 is	not

the	time	or	the	way,	Les.	You’ve	royally	fucked	this	up.	For	now,	for	today,	we
pay	off	the	Constable	and	everyone	disappears	out	the	back	way.	You	and	I	go
straight	 back	 to	 the	 ODEC.	 But	 first,	 you	 need	 to	 go	 downstairs	 and	 tell
Beresford	there	was	nobody	here.	You’ve	botched	this.”

“I	haven’t!”	Holgate	said.	“You’ve	been	totally	 ineffectual	 for	all	 the	times
you’ve	come	here.	I’ve	come	here	once,	and	look:	results!”	He	gestured	round
the	wee	room.

“Abort,”	repeated	Tristan.	He	reached	to	a	peg	on	the	wall	and	threw	the
clothes	that	hung	there—shirt	and	drawers	and	a	very	fine	vest	it	was—at	Sir
Edward,	and	spoke	to	him:	“You,	sir,	go	out	the	back	way	with	the	Constable,
and	pay	him	whatever	 is	required	for	your	own	good.	You”—Tristan	turned
his	eye	on	Kit	now—“will	vanish.	Disappear.	Wherever	you’ve	been	hiding,	go
back	 to	 hiding	 there.	 Sir	 Edward	 will	 keep	 your	 secret.	 Will	 you	 not,	 Sir
Edward?”

“Naturally,”	said	wan	Sir	Edward,	looking	ever	so	much	more	wan.
“This	 is	 the	 perfect	 moment	 to	 demand	 submission,”	 said	 Les	 Holgate	 to

Tristan.
“Shut	up,”	 said	Tristan,	 almost	 fatigued	he	 sounded,	 and	not	bothering	 to

look	Holgate	full	on.	“Don’t	you	get	this	situation?	If	these	two	men	go	outside
and	are	revealed	to	Simon	Beresford,	there	will	be	such	a	scandal—”

“Exactly!”	trumpeted	Les	Holgate.	“That’s	why	this	 is	the	perfect	moment



to	make	demands	of	Sir	Edward!	That’s	our	leverage—their	wish	to	avoid	that
scandal!”

“That	scandal	cannot	happen,”	said	Tristan,	in	a	low,	quiet	growl.	“We—you
and	I—we	cannot	let	it	happen.	The	consequences	are	too	great	for	us	to	allow
it	to	happen.	It’s	on	us,	it’s	not	on	him.”

Exasperated	 Holgate	 looked.	 “You	 idiot,	 by	 saying	 that	 in	 front	 of	 him,
you’ve	 just	 lost	our	best	bargaining	chip.	 If	he	even	understands	what	you’re
talking	about.”

“Oh,	I	do,	sir,”	said	Sir	Edward,	as	he	dressed	with	shaking	hands.	He	was
trying	 to	 calm	 his	 breathing,	 and	 his	 color	 was	 returning	 somewhat.	 “You
yourselves	do	not	want	 this	 to	be	revealed.	Therefore	I	need	not	pay	you	to
prevent	you	from	revealing	it.”

“You	do	have	 to	pay	me,	 however,	milord,”	 the	Constable	 reminded	 him,
with	 a	 neighborly	 chuckle,	 and	waving	 a	 finger	 at	 him	 all	 affably-like.	 “As	 I
have	no	hesitation	to	reveal	it.”

“Neither	 do	 I,”	 said	 Les.	 “This	 man”—it’s	 Tristan	 he	 means—“does	 not
speak	for	me.”

“Yes	I	do,”	said	Tristan.	“I	have	operational	command	here.”
“He	doesn’t,”	Les	assured	Sir	Edward.	“Listen,	Ed,	I	don’t	want	your	money,

I	want	your	compliance.	I’m	revealing	you	to	Simon	Beresford	unless	you	agree
to	my	demands.	He’s	right	below	this	window.”	And	he	called	at	once:	“Simon
Beresford!	Lord	Simon	Beresford!”

“Shut	 up,”	Tristan	 commanded	 of	 Les	Holgate,	 and	 immediately	 stepped
right	over	Kit,	snatched	Sir	Edward	by	the	arm,	and	hauled	him	back	toward
the	 door,	 while	 the	 poor	 fool	 sputtered	 in	 amazement	 that	 he	 was	 being
trundled	about	so.

Shutting	up	was	not	of	 interest	to	Les	Holgate,	who	continued	to	call	out:
“Lord	Beresford!	There’s	 a	 fellow	up	here	who	 looks	 a	heck	of	 a	 lot	 like	Sir
Edward	Greylock.”

“Sir	Edward	Greylock?	Up	there?”	cried	the	older	man’s	voice	from	below,
and	horrified	it	was	he	sounded.	“Sir	Edward!	Pray	reveal	yourself,	sir!”

“Of	course	he	won’t	reveal	himself,”	called	Les.	“You’d	better	come	up	here
and	see	for	yourself.”

Moving	with	the	swift	and	sleek	efficiency	of	a	wolf,	did	Tristan	now	fling
an	arm	around	Les	Holgate’s	neck	and	get	Les’s	throat	nestled	in	the	crook	of
his	 elbow.	 With	 his	 other	 hand	 he	 pressed	 forward	 on	 his	 captive’s	 head,
shoving	 him	 deeper	 into	 the	 trap.	 Les’s	 voice	 dried	 up	 into	 a	 squawk.	 His



eyelids	fluttered.	And	then	he	went	altogether	limp.	Tristan	let	him	down	onto
the	mattress	like	a	sack	of	grain,	and	devoted	a	moment	to	arranging	him	on
his	side.

“What	have	you	done!?”	the	Constable	demanded.
“He’s	fine.	I	put	him	to	sleep	with	a	vee	choke.	Now	I’m	putting	him	in	the

recovery	position,”	Tristan	 explained.	 “He’ll	wake	up	 in	 a	 few	minutes.”	He
stood	up	and	turned	to	face	Sir	Edward,	who	by	now	was	sufficiently	dressed
that	he	could	move	about	 in	the	streets	without	drawing	overmuch	attention
to	himself.	“Go	with	the	Constable	out	the	hidden	exit,”	Tristan	commanded.
“Give	him	a	 lot	 of	money	 and	do	not	 set	 foot	 in	 this	 building	 again.	Never
speak	to	anyone	in	this	room	again,	except	for	me	when	I	come	to	find	you	at
the	Bell.	At	that	time	you	will	agree	to	obey	my	further	instructions	to	make
sure	there	is	no	further	scandal.	Do	you	understand?”

Sir	Edward	nodded,	looking	ill	at	ease.	Tristan	stepped	back	to	the	window
and	showed	himself	at	the	casement.	“Pray	pardon	us,	m’lord,”	he	called	down.
“There	has	been	a	confusion.	There	is	no	Sir	Edward	anyone	up	here.”

“Who	are	you?”	came	the	agitated	voice	from	below.	“What	in	the	name	of
Heaven	is	going	on	up	there?”

“’Tis	nothing	to	do	with	you,	milord,”	Tristan	returned,	and	gestured	at	me.
I	understood	at	once	and	joined	him.	This	took	me	past	Kit,	who	reached	out	a
hand	toward	me,	but	 I	 slapped	 it	away.	 I	had	a	score	 to	settle	with	him;	but
there’d	be	time	for	that	later.

“Is	 that	Milord	 Simon	Beresford?”	 I	 asked,	 using	my	best	London	 accent.
Tristan	backed	away	into	the	room,	leaving	me	to	hold	Beresford’s	attention.
Like	Juliet	with	Romeo.	Not	an	easy	performance,	what	with	the	jealousy	and
rage	in	my	heart	and	the	squabbling	behind	me:	Tristan	again	commanding	Sir
Edward	 and	 the	 Constable	 to	 leave	 by	 the	 back	 way,	 the	 two	 of	 them
protesting	they	didn’t	know	where	the	back	way	was,	Kit	scrambling	to	collect
and	don	his	drawers	and	shirt,	offering	to	show	them	the	back	way	as	soon	as
he	was	dressed.	He	only	knew	the	back	way	because	of	all	 the	 times	he	had
visited	 me	 here	 and	 taken	 such	 delight	 in	 me.	 And	 now	 he	 was	 using	 the
knowledge	 he	 had	 of	me	 to	 save	 that	 ponce	 of	 a	 so-called	 gentleman?	Why
should	he	care	if	Sir	Edward	be	saved	or	not?	’Twas	the	shock	he	was	causing
upon	myself	that	should	be	chief	amongst	his	worries!

“And	what	 shall	 we	 say	 when	 the	 likes	 of	 you	 are	 seen	 loitering	 about	 a
bawdy-house?”	I	meanwhile	asked	down	to	Beresford	with	a	smile.

“’Tisn’t	 a	 bawdy-house,”	 Pym	 shouted	 up	 at	 me	 in	 annoyance.	 “’Tis	 a



respectable	establishment	and	you	know	well!”
“Politely	waiting	your	turn,	 is	 it?”	I	grinned	at	Simon	Beresford.	“Don’t	be

shy,	come	on	up!”
The	man’s	face	reddened.	“I	will	not	set	foot	in	a	place	of	ill	repute.”
“Oh,	 but	milord,	 it’s	marvelous	 repute	 we	 have,”	 I	 informed	 him	 cheerily.

“Sure	nobody’s	got	better	repute	than	the	girls	of	Tearsheet	Brewery.	It’s	the
talk	of	London,	so	it	is.	Just	ask	the	proprietor,	that’s	him	beside	you.”

Pym	was	scowling	up	at	me.	“What	mischief	are	you	up	to	there,	Gracie?”
I	 give	him	a	playful	 smile.	 “A	bit	naughty	 I’m	being,”	 I	 sing	out.	 “Pardon

me,	and	I’ll	stop	it	now.”	I	turned	away	from	the	window.
“Show	them	the	back	exit,”	mutters	Tristan	to	me.	“Take	Marlowe	too.”
So	now	I’m	to	be	saving	Kit	and	the	fellow	he	betrayed	me	with.	As	I	again

brush	past	Kit,	he	has	finished	donning	his	undergarments,	and	he	reaches	his
hand	for	mine	again	and	this	 time	I	grasp	 it,	 tight,	 so	 tight	as	 if	 I	will	never
release	him,	for	in	truth	all	I	care	about	is	getting	him	to	safety.

Him,	 yes,	 but	 not	 Sir	 Edward.	 For	 what	 benefit	 is	 there	 in	 securing	 Sir
Edward’s	safety?	It	keeps	him	free	to	continue	his	dalliance	with	my	love,	and
it	keeps	him	free	to	pledge	his	money	where	Tristan	doesn’t	wish	it.	Suddenly
as	clear	as	day,	I	see	the	single	stroke	that	will	bring	succour	to	both	Tristan
and	myself.

As	 Kit	 and	 I	 approach	 Sir	 Edward	 so	 that	 I	 may	 lead	 us	 all	 from	 the
building,	I	bend	over	a	moment,	rise	up	quick,	and	then	quicker	still,	I	make
that	stroke.

Sir	Edward	puts	both	of	his	hands	 to	 the	close	of	his	velvet	vest.	A	dizzy
spell	 takes	 him	 and	 doesn’t	 he	 reach	 out	 with	 one	 of	 his	 hands	 to	 steady
himself	against	the	doorway.	The	hand	is	red,	and	makes	a	bloody	print	on	the
wall.

Tristan	 takes	 this	 in,	 his	 face	 a	 handsome	 study	 in	 consternation,	 and	 his
clever	mind	soon	arrives	at	the	only	possible	explanation.	He	looks	at	me	and
sure	I	show	him	that	bloody	dagger	still	in	my	hand.	’Twas	the	very	weapon	he
himself	had	wrested	from	my	dim	fella	on	his	 first	arrival,	and	kicked	across
the	floor	to	me.	I’d	snatched	it	up	then	to	prevent	further	violence,	and	hadn’t
its	owner	stormed	out	of	the	place	without	reclaiming	it.	Since	then,	I’d	got	in
the	habit	of	carrying	it.	Its	sheath	was	bound	to	my	leg	under	my	skirts.	It	had
found	a	home,	just	now,	in	Sir	Edward’s	heart.

Tristan’s	amazed	to	learn	it’s	capable	of	murder	I	am	(not	knowing	a	thing
of	my	life	back	home,	and	the	uses	Your	Grace	has	put	me	to	over	the	years),



and	so	silent	he	is,	as	we	watch	Sir	Edward	settle	to	the	floor,	looking	a	bit	like
Juliet	at	the	end	of	that	detestable	tragedy.	He	hardly	has	as	much	of	a	beard
as	Saunder	Cooke	himself.

“Well	there,”	I	say	to	Tristan,	“he	won’t	be	funding	the	Boston	Council	any
more,	will	he?”

I	see	in	the	corner	of	my	eye	that	Kit—more	concerned	than	heartbroken,
and	a	good	thing	too!—is	ushering	the	Constable	out	of	the	room.	One	of	Sir
Edward’s	 legs	 has	 kicked	 out	 near	 me,	 so	 I	 wipe	 the	 dagger’s	 blade	 on	 his
drawers	and	slide	it	 into	the	sheath	on	my	leg,	 just	to	keep	it	handy.	Then	I
get	up,	stepping	well	clear	of	the	pool	of	blood	that’s	been	burbling	out	of	Sir
Edward,	and	follow	them	out.

In	 the	 shuffle	of	bodies	 in	 the	 corridor,	Kit	 arranges	himself	 to	be	beside
me.	“I’d	sooner	slay	myself	than	break	your	heart,	dearest,”	he	whispers	urgent
in	my	 ear.	 “That	man	was	 nothing	 to	me,	 I	was	 just	 using	 him	 to	 get	 some
information	for	Her	Majesty.	I’ll	explain	my	secrecy	and	make	it	up	to	you	as
soon	as	we	are	out	of	here.”	He	kissed	my	cheek	and	I	confess,	Your	Grace,	it
made	me	wobbly.	Never	was	there	a	lovelier	set	of	lips	to	be	kissed	than	my
dear	Kit’s.

Pardon	me	for	that	distraction.	Back	to	the	events	now.
For	 a	moment,	 every	one	of	 us	wants	 the	 same	 thing:	 to	 get	 down	 to	 the

ground	 floor.	 For	 different	 reasons	 everyone	 wants	 it,	 but	 still	 there	 is	 a
cooperation	that	wasn’t	there	before,	and	so	in	very	short	order	we	are	there.
The	tavern	is	deserted;	people	left	when	all	the	shouting	started	and	the	blood
began	sheeting	down	’tween	the	floorboards.	A	crowd	it	is	now	gathered	in	the
street	just	outside.	Although	the	front	door	to	the	street	is	open,	we	can’t	see
out	into	the	glare,	so	no	way	to	know	if	Simon	Beresford	is	there.	This	hardly
matters	 now,	 for	 the	 most	 important	 thing	 now	 is	 that	 Kit	 Marlowe	 is
recognized	by	nobody.

The	 secret	door	 for	which	we’re	headed	 is	 in	 the	back	 corner	behind	 the
bar,	meaning	we	must	cross	by	the	front	door	to	reach	it.	Tristan	is	in	the	lead,
then	the	Constable	clutching	at	him,	so	he	won’t	be	separated	from	the	man	in
charge,	who,	in	the	absence	of	Sir	Edward,	is	the	likeliest	one	to	pay	him	off.
Just	behind	them	comes	myself,	clutching	hands	with	Kit.

Now	 enters	 Proprietor	 Pym	 through	 the	 front	 door,	 blinking	 in	 the
unaccustomed	darkness.	I	turn	to	greet	him,	to	assure	him	that—as	mad	as	it
might	 seem	 to	 say	 it—all	 this	 chaos	 is	 about	 to	 be	 resolved,	 with	 the	 one
unfortunate	detail	that	the	Constable	will	be	learning	of	one	hidden	exit.	But



certain	I	am	that	Pym	will	prefer	this	to	his	establishment	being	revealed	as	a
trysting	place	for	sodomites.

As	I	watch	Pym’s	face,	his	eyes	adjust	to	the	dim,	and	land	upon	the	half-
dressed	Kit	Marlowe.	Kit’s	 not-being-dead	was	 as	much	 a	 shock	 to	him	as	 it
was	to	the	Constable.	But	he	collects	himself	almost	at	once,	turns	to	me	and
says,	“Gracie,	do	you	have	this	in	hand?”

“I	do.	We’re	taking	them	out	the	below-exit.	None	will	ever	see	him.”
I	 think	he	will	be	pleased,	but	he	shakes	his	head.	 “Know	you	not	 that	 in

Deptford,	at	the	alehouse	where	Marlowe	staged	his	death—”
“It	weren’t	an	alehouse,”	I	said.	“It	was	a	gentlewoman’s	private	home,	who

rented	out	 rooms.	What	about	 it?”	 I	ask,	with	a	queer	worried	 feeling	 in	my
innards.	I	glance	over	to	Tristan	to	see	how	he	is	faring	with	the	door.

The	 hidden	 door	 here	 hides	 perfectly	 in	 plain	 sight,	 for	 it	 cannot	 be
detected	 by	 the	 eye,	 only	 by	 touch.	 Tristan	 is	 running	 his	 hands	 over	 the
paneling,	trying	to	find	it.	And	as	he	does,	Pym	finishes	his	thought:	“They	say
business	in	Deptford	quadrupled	on	account	of	people	going	to	see	where	the
famous	Christopher	Marlowe	was	murdered.	So	imagine	what	this	will	do	for
us!”	 And	 he	 grabs	 for	 Kit,	 meaning	 to	 push	 him	 outside	 into	 the	 curious
Southwark	crowd	forming	around	the	door	of	the	tavern—most	of	whom	will
know	him	by	sight.

Now,	Kit	knows	his	way	around	a	fight,	but	he’s	not	expecting	this,	and	so
before	he	registers	it,	Pym’s	fist,	big	as	a	hamhock,	has	closed	around	his	arm,
just	above	the	elbow.	Kit	looks	like	a	boy	who’s	been	caught	in	the	middle	of
some	mischief	by	a	fat	schoolmaster.

Tristan	 has	 opened	 the	 hidden	 door.	 The	 Constable	 has	 lost	 no	 time	 in
scurrying	through	it;	I	can	hear	him	rattling	down	the	narrow	case	of	wooden
stairs	beyond	it.	That’ll	take	him	down	a	short	tunnel—an	expanded	kitchen-
sewer,	to	call	it	by	its	proper	name—to	a	ditch	that	runs	along	the	side	of	the
brewery.	 ’Tis	what	 remains	 of	 a	 creek	 that,	 I	 fancy,	 used	 to	wind	 through	 a
field	to	the	Thames;	now	it	is	imprisoned	between	narrow	vertical	banks	that
have	been	built	to	either	side	as	the	city	has	grown	up	round	it,	and	it’s	been
half	 covered	 over	 with	 platforms	 and	 bridges.	 It	 matters	 not	 whether	 the
Constable	turns	left	or	right	along	that	ditch;	either	way	he	can	slosh	for	some
little	distance	through	the	nameless	collection	of	fluids	that	oozes	through	it,
and	choose	his	moment	to	clamber	back	up	to	the	level	of	the	street.	So	he’s
sorted.

Having	seen	to	that,	Tristan	is	turning	back	around	into	the	room.	He	sees



how	it	is	with	Pym	and	Kit.	And	he	sees,	as	I	do,	that	there	is	no	earthly	way
he	can	reach	them	before	Pym	drags	Kit	outside.

“Pym.	Yer	mad,”	 I	 say,	 “don’t	make	me	 use	 this.”	And	 I	 let	 him	 see	 the
dagger	as	I	draw	it	out	from	beneath	my	skirt.

That	stops	him,	for	a	moment.
“No,”	Kit	says,	“don’t	go	to	the	gallows	on	my	account,	Gracie.”	A	pleasant

thing	to	say,	but	it	has	the	unfortunate	effect	of	bolstering	Pym’s	confidence	a
bit.	Pym	gives	me	a	sneer	as	if	to	say	“you	wouldn’t	dare,”	and	drags	Kit	one
step	 closer	 to	 the	 sunlight.	 I	 follow,	 closing	 the	distance—just	 in	 time	 to	be
slammed	to	the	floor	by	one	who’s	 just	come	flying	down	the	stairs.	Before	I
know	it	I’m	face	down	on	the	boards	with	a	knee	in	the	small	of	my	back	and
my	arm’s	being	twisted	the	wrong	way.

“Got	it!”	announces	Les	Holgate	as	he	pries	the	dagger	out	of	my	fingers.
And	 that’s	 all	he	has	 time	 to	 say	before	he’s	 cut	down	by	a	meaty	punch

from	 Tristan.	 Les	 Holgate	 has	 awakened	 from	 the	 “vee	 choke”	 only	 to	 be
rendered	unconscious	again	by	a	more	kinetic	approach.	Feeling	his	knee	come
off	my	back,	I	spring	up	onto	hands	and	knees	and	turn	to	look	at	the	exit,	just
in	time	to	see	Kit,	still	firmly	in	Pym’s	grip,	silhouetted	in	the	bright	light	of
the	sun.

It	is	now	impossible	to	keep	Kit	secret.	Christopher	Marlowe	is	about	to	be
exposed	to	 the	world,	and	 it’s	as	a	direct	 result	of	magic	being	used	 to	Send
someone.	If	there	be	a	hundred	men	standing	outside	the	tavern,	I	warrant	at
least	 three	 score	 will	 know	 his	 face.	 And	 I	 know	 what	 that	 means,	 with	 a
profundity	Tristan	surely	lacks.	Voices	outside	the	tavern	begin	to	cry	out	in
amazement,	“Christopher	Marlowe!	’Tis	Christopher	Marlowe!”

As	Tristan	 steps	 toward	 them,	 in	 a	 bootless	 attempt	 to	 avoid	 calamity,	 I
reach	out	and	catch	his	hand	to	pivot	him	around,	even	as	I’m	making	for	the
secret	 exit.	He	understands,	 and	 follows.	As	we	 stumble	 down	 the	 stairs,	we
can	hear	voices	in	the	crowd	calling	Kit’s	name.

A	 wee,	 dank	 tunnel	 conducts	 us	 to	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 sewer-ditch-creek.
Tristan’s	doubled	over	from	the	stench,	which	is	a	good	thing	since	there’s	not
enough	 headroom	 for	 him	 anyway.	 I	 lead	 him	 toward	 the	 Thames.	 As	 we
scurry	 along,	 I	 note	we	 are	 being	 accompanied	 by	 an	 impressive	 number	 of
rats	who	seem	to	have	the	same	idea.	Their	squeaking	is	drowned	out	by	the
rumble	 and	 clamour	 of	 the	 coming	 lomadh.	 I	 knew	 it	was	 coming	 the	 same
way	you	know	when	lightning’s	in	the	air.



I	 knew	 that	 this	 could	 happen,	 Your	 Grace,	 have	 always	 known	 it,	 in	 my
bones;	sure	every	witch	knows	it	as	well	as	fish	know	swimming.	We	see	traces
of	 it	 in	 the	 everyday	 glamour	 that	 accompanies	 our	 spells.	 But	 isn’t	 lomadh
compared	to	glamour	what	the	firing	of	a	cannon	is	compared	to	a	wee	candle
flame?

There	are	certain	changes	that	must	not	be	made	through	magic,	and	while
this	 is	 true—has	 always	 been	 true—with	 even	 the	 most	 benign	 of
entertainments,	 it	 is	 far	more	 true	 and	 far	more	dire	with	 Sending,	 for	 then
you’ve	put	one	person	in	a	place	where	they	don’t	know	the	way	of	things,	and
are	 like	 to	 make	 some	 dreadful	 change,	 and	 it	 takes	 an	 áireamhán	 plus
common	sense	 to	guard	against.	When	 the	worlds	cannot	bear	 the	weight	of
one	Strand	suddenly	altering	that	abruptly	from	the	others,	it	is	lomadh,	as	if
you’ve	snapped	off	a	twig	upon	a	hearth	broom:	it	is	broken,	gone,	and	cannot
be	redeemed.	So	it	was	that	moment.

As	soon	as	the	public	saw	Christopher	Marlowe	alive,	 this	broke	the	twig.
But	that	image	is	too	soft.	For	it	wasn’t	a	snap,	rather	the	very	world	seemed	to
erupt.

It’s	news	you’ll	hear	soon	that	there	was	a	fire	at	the	Tearsheet,	leading	to
the	 collapse	 of	 it	 and	 the	 neighboring	 buildings	 too,	 with	 many	 lives	 lost.
’Tisn’t	wrong,	that.	But	’tisn’t	complete	either;	’tis	but	a	story	they	are	telling
to	 be	 making	 sense	 of	 what	 they	 cannot	 understand.	 Fire	 there	 was,	 or
something	akin	to	fire.	But	cold	there	was	too,	bitter	cold,	and	bursts	of	wind
that	 struck	 like	 fists,	 and	 inhalations	 that	 made	 stout	 buildings	 shrink	 into
themselves	 like	a	dried	 leaf	crumpled	 in	 the	hand.	But	 this	was	more	 than	a
mere	trick	of	the	air.	The	very	fabric	of	the	world	was	misbehaving.	Think	of
how	’tis	when	vomiting,	in	the	moment	just	before	the	muck	in	your	stomach
rushes	up	your	gorge,	when	’tis	as	though	your	entire	body	is	clenching	itself,
trying	to	turn	itself	inside	out	like	a	stocking.	Now	in	your	mind’s	eye	see	the
Tearsheet	 and	 the	 neighboring	 buildings—the	 entire	 neighborhood—the
ground	 itself	 and	 the	 air	 above	 it,	 the	 very	 ether,	 all	 doing	 likewise.	Tristan
and	I	were	thrown	down	so	hard	that	we	skidded,	and	drew	ourselves	up	to	our
feet	only	when	the	river	came	after	us	as	if	’twere	alive.

Those	fortunate	enough	to	be	outside	the	lomadh	could	save	themselves	by
running	fast	enough,	and	never	looking	back.	Nearly	knocked	down	we	were,
by	several	who’d	tried	to	get	clear	by	leaping	off	the	embankment	and	into	the
ditch.	Those	on	the	 inside,	 such	as	my	poor	Kit,	and	Pym,	and	Les	Holgate,
were	quickly	snuffed	out	with	barely	time	to	scream—or	so	I	tell	myself,	as	I



don’t	 like	 to	 imagine	what	worse	 fates	might	 have	befallen	 them.	But	 didn’t
those	in	between—neither	to	one	side	nor	the	other	of	the	lomadh,	but	caught
in	the	fringes	of	it—suffer	in	the	most	dreadful	ways.	Impossible	monstrosities
their	 bodies	 became,	 like	 two-headed	 calves	 you	 sometimes	 see	 stillborn	 at
home	(not	among	Your	Grace’s	cattle	but	often	enough	around	Lough	Swilly
or	Killybegs),	 and	 then	out	of	 that	 impossibility,	decaying	 like	 rotten	 fish	 in
sunlight,	flesh	coming	off	so	quickly	it	fizzed	and	sprayed,	and	those	it	sprayed
on	caught	it	like	leprosy	and	went	down	to	fates	of	the	same	nature.	A	mercy
it	was	that	flames	consumed	what	remained.

Milady,	never	have	I	believed	in	the	priest’s	tales	of	Hell,	discounting	it	all
as	a	load	of	bollocks.	But	if	the	lomadh	has	occurred	in	other	times	and	places,
surely	it	explains	where	stories	of	Hell	originated.	Any	soul	unversed	in	magic,
who	 wasn’t	 knowing	 the	 true	 nature	 of	 what	 they	 witnessed,	 would	 try	 to
explain	what	Tristan	and	I	saw	by	claiming	that	the	mouth	of	Hell	itself	had,
for	a	moment,	opened	upon	this	mortal	coil.

But	 only	 for	 a	 moment.	 After	 that,	 just	 a	 fire	 it	 was.	 And	 who’s	 to	 say
whether	 ’twas	 a	 ravage	 or	 a	 blessing,	 for	 it	 burned	 to	 ashes	 many	 an
abomination	spawned	of	the	lomadh.	So	it	seems	to	me	now,	upon	reflection.
But	in	the	moment	I	could	not	help	thinking	of	Kit	and	Morag	and	Pym	and
the	 other	 wenches	 of	 the	 Tearsheet.	 No	 sooner	 had	 we	 got	 clear	 of	 the
catastrophe	than	I	wished	to	return,	in	case	any	of	them	might	be	saved.	We
were	down	in	that	filthy	ditch	yet	and	I	began	looking	about	for	a	handhold	I
might	 use	 to	 climb	 up	 to	 the	 street.	 I	 saw	 none,	 and	 it’s	 more	 and	 more
exasperated	I	became,	until	all	of	a	sudden	there’s	a	hand	right	in	front	of	my
face,	 reaching	down.	 It’s	 a	hand	 in	a	white	kid	glove,	 expensive,	 immaculate.
My	 gaze	 follows	 the	 arm	 upward	 until	 I’m	 looking	 into	 a	 man’s	 face.	 He’s
above	me	on	the	pavement,	squatting	down,	offering	his	hand	to	pull	me	up.	A
yellow	beard,	waxed	and	groomed	to	a	sharp	point,	and	the	fanciest	and	most
fetching	hat,	with	a	gorgeous	plume	on	it.	It’s	for	the	first	time	now	that	I’m
seeing	both	of	Athanasius	Fugger’s	eyes,	for	doesn’t	he	have	the	queerest	habit
of	keeping	his	hat	pulled	down	low	and	cocked	to	one	side.	I’m	struck,	in	the
midst	of	all	the	chaos	and	lamentation	of	the	lomadh,	by	a	peculiarity	of	the
man’s	face.	The	pupil	of	the	 left	eye—the	one	he	prefers	to	hide	behind	his
hat—is	larger	than	the	other.	Stuck	open,	as	it	were.	You	might	say	it	were	an
odd	 thing	 for	me	 to	 attend	 to	 in	 such	 circumstances,	but	 for	 some	 reason	 it
struck	me	clearly	in	the	moment.

I	reached	up	and	lay	my	palm	upon	his	and	felt	his	strong	grip.	Putting	his



legs	and	his	back	into	it,	he	drew	me	up	out	of	that	ditch	and	got	me	safe	up
to	the	street.	For	the	first	time	now	I	could	see	the	fire	and	smoke	burgeoning
from	what	was	left	of	the	Tearsheet.	That	held	my	attention	while	he	squatted
down	 again,	 and	 helped	 Tristan	 just	 as	 he’d	 helped	 me.	 For	 which	 Tristan
thanked	him,	in	that	clipped	and	wary	manner	that	passes	between	men	who
are	not	sure	of	each	other’s	intentions.

By	 the	 time	 we	 worked	 our	 way	 back	 round	 to	 the	 Tearsheet’s	 former
entrance,	there	was	nothing	left	of	tavern	or	of	brewery.	People	had	scattered,
coughing,	bleeding,	dazed,	gibbering	like	madmen.	I	saw	old	Simon	Beresford
staggering	confusedly	down	the	street.	Not	one	other	member	of	our	party	was
to	 be	 seen.	 Les	Holgate	was	 no	more.	No	more	Morag,	 or	 Pym.	The	 other
wenches	of	the	bawdy-house.	And	worst	of	all,	at	least	for	me	although	of	no
note	to	another	soul:	no	more	Kit	Marlowe.

And	of	course,	no	more	Tearsheet	Brewery,	the	only	place	in	London	where
ever	I	was	safe.

Diachronicle	
DAY	390

In	which—finally—we	seem	to	learn	from	experience

TRISTAN	STAGGERED	OUT	OF	THE	ODEC	in	a	terrible	state.	He	was	bruised	and
his	hair	disheveled,	his	eyes	bloodshot	 and	his	 skin	almost	grey.	 I	 felt	 a	 little
sick	seeing	him:	whatever	happened,	it	could	have	been	worse,	and	thank	God
it	wasn’t.	I	reached	for	the	intercom	button,	then	drew	my	hand	back.	He	did
not	look	in	the	mood	for	a	conversation.	We	could	only	chew	our	thumbnails
and	speculate	as	he	put	himself	through	decontamination.

When	 he	 emerged,	 I	 did	 not	 resist	 the	 impulse	 to	 embrace	 him.	 But	 he
caught	me	up	short	as	my	arms	reached	around	him,	and	politely	pressed	me
away	 from	 himself.	 He	 gestured	 gingerly	 to	 his	 left	 forearm.	 “Hairline



fracture,”	he	whispered	hoarsely.	“Possibly.”
“Let’s	go	to	the	emergency	room,”	I	said,	reaching	for	his	good	arm,	but	he

shook	his	head.
“Debrief	first.	Call	the	Odas.”
“They	can	meet	us	in	the	ER—”
“Here.	Now.”	He	staggered	down	the	hall	toward	the	toilets.
I	 telephoned.	Rebecca	 said	 they	 could	 be	 there	 in	 ten	minutes.	 Erszebet

came	with	 them,	 for	Rebecca	had	been	 soothing	her	 after	 the	drama	of	 the
morning.

Tristan	sequestered	himself	in	the	conference	room,	on	a	video	conference
to	Frink,	until	the	others	had	arrived.	When	finally	it	was	the	five	of	us,	and
the	 video	 screen,	 so	 long	 the	 bane	 of	 our	 existence,	 had	 been	 shut	 off	 and
unplugged,	he	glanced	about	 the	 table	at	us,	 then	 looked	down	briefly,	 then
back	up	and	said	in	a	heavy	voice,	“Les	Holgate	is	dead.”

“Excellent,”	said	Erszebet	immediately,	before	the	rest	of	us	could	so	much
as	draw	breath.	“He	deserved	it.”

Tristan	gave	her	an	angry	look.	He	seemed	about	to	say	something	but	then
contained	himself.

“That’s	horrible,”	I	said.	“Who	killed	him?”
He	 shook	his	head.	“It	wasn’t	 a	who,	 it	was	 a	what.”	He	 took	 a	moment,

briefly	pressed	his	good	hand	to	his	forehead,	and	began	again.	“He	arranged	a
scheme	that	had	elements	he	hadn’t	considered	or	thought	out.	I	tried	to	foil	it
but	there	were	unforeseeable	complications.	And	then	.	.	.”	He	looked	at	a	lost
for	words.	“The	brewery	blew	up.	Everyone	inside	of	it	was	killed.”

“There	was	an	explosion?”	Frank	Oda	asked.
“No!”	 Tristan	 said	 firmly.	 “Something	 I	 can’t	 describe.	 Explosion,

implosion,	turning	inside	out,	being	put	through	a	blender,	fire,	ice	.	.	.	worse
things	too.”

Erszebet	 looked	 solemn,	 and	 sighed.	“Diakrónikus	nyírás,”	 she	 said	 quietly.
“Diachronic,	mmm	.	.	.”	She	made	a	broad,	sideways	chopping	gesture	with
both	hands.	“Shear.	Diachronic	Shear.	There	 is	 a	 separating.”	She	 shook	her
head.	 “I	 even	 tried	 to	warn	Les	Holgate	 because	his	 ideas	were	 so	 extreme.
Very	bad.	I	have	heard	of	it	but	never	seen	it.”

“What	does	it	mean	exactly?”	asked	Frank	Oda.
“And	what	do	we	do	about	it?”	Tristan	followed.
“Can	we	go	back	on	another	Strand	and	fix	it	somehow?”	asked	Frank	Oda.
Her	eyes	widened	slightly,	and	she	shook	her	head.	“Oh.	No.	No,	it’s	over.



His	existence—the	existence	of	everything	caught	up	in	the	Shear—it	is	gone
forever,	across	all	Strands.	You	cannot	even	go	to	 look	for	him.	He	is	gone.
Full	stop.”

“That’s	horrible,”	I	said	again.
“Why?	He	was	a	terrible	person,”	said	Erszebet.	And	then,	softening:	“But	I

am	sure	there	were	innocent	people	destroyed	too.	It	is	very	sad	for	them	and
their	families.”	She	looked	thoughtful.	“I	thought	perhaps	this	was	apocryphal
because	I	never	met	anyone	who	had	experienced	it.	The	last	one	in	Europe
was	Paris,	1777.	I	suppose	by	my	time	everybody	knew	better	than	to	risk	it.”

“Who	 else	 was	 lost	 in	 this	 Diachronic	 Shear?”	 Rebecca	 asked.	 “Gráinne
must	have	survived	or	you	could	not	have	gotten	back	here.”

Tristan	 looked	 as	 if	 another	 hundred-pound	 weight	 had	 settled	 upon	 his
shoulders.	“She’s	not	the	one	who	Sent	me	back,”	he	said.	“After	the	chaos,
the	 young	 English	 witch	 named	 Rose	 found	 me	 and	 offered	 to	 return	 me
here.”

“We’ve	lost	Gráinne?”
He	grimaced.	“She’s	not	dead.	She’s	not	even	physically	injured,	but	I	think

there’s	other	damage.	As	well	as	killing	Les,	the	lomadh	took	Gráinne’s	lover,
and	her	boss,	and	of	course	destroyed	the	Tearsheet	itself,	which	has	been	her
home	for	 ten	years.	She’s	an	unwed	Irishwoman	in	Elizabeth’s	London.	The
Tearsheet	was	her	sanctuary.	When	I	last	saw	her	she	was	hysterical.”

“Of	course	she	was,”	said	Erszebet	quietly.	She	had	gone	quite	pale	and	still.
“It	is	a	horrible	thing	to	be	torn	from	your	security.	This	poor	woman.”

Something	didn’t	add	up.	“How	could	you	leave	her	in	that	condition?”	I
asked.	For	all	of	Tristan’s	mysterious	ways,	I	knew	him	well	enough	to	know
that	he	would	not	simply	abandon	Gráinne.

“She’s	being	looked	after,”	Tristan	said,	“at	least	temporarily.”
“Who’s	looking	after	her?”
“Athanasius	Fugger.”
There	was	a	long	pause	while	we	absorbed	that.
“You	left	her	in	the	hands	of	a	Fucker!?”	Erszebet	exclaimed.
“Why	would	he,	of	all	people—”	I	began.
“I’ll	 tell	 you	 what	 I	 know,”	 Tristan	 said.	 “He	 was	 there.	 On	 the	 scene.

Close	 enough	 to	 see	 it,	 far	 enough	 away	 that	 he	 didn’t	 get—involved,	 or
whatever	you	call	it—in	the	Diachronic	Shear.	He	must	have	followed	me	and
Gráinne.	He	helped	us	up	out	of	 the	ditch.	He	accompanied	us	back	 to	 the
scene	 of	 the	 fire.	 Gráinne	 was	 losing	 it.	 Fugger	 puts	 an	 arm	 around	 her



shoulder,	 draws	her	 in,	 she’s	 sobbing	on	his	 shoulder.	He	 looks	up	 at	me—
there’s	something	very	weird	about	his	gaze—and	says,	‘I	believe	it’s	time	for
you	to	go	back	to	where	you	belong.	You	know	another	witch	who	can	do	it.
Go	and	reflect.’	And	he	nodded	at	the	fire,	then	looked	back	at	me	in	a	very
serious	way.	‘I’ll	see	to	her,’	he	added,	nodding	at	Gráinne,	and	then	he	turned
his	back	on	me.	That	was	the	last	I	saw	of	them.”

“‘Go	back	to	where	you	belong	.	 .	 .	go	and	reflect	 .	 .	 .’”	I	repeated.	“He
knows.”

“They	 all	 know,”	 Erszebet	 spat.	 “All	 of	 the	 Fuckers.	 They	 always	 have.
How	do	 you	 think	 I	 have	 survived	 all	 these	 years	without	my	own	means?
The	Fuckers	knew	I	was	temporally	indentured	and	saw	to	it	that	I	remained
alive	and	functional.	They	know	everything.”

“Well,	 this	 particular	 one	 knew	 something,	 that’s	 for	 damn	 sure,”	 Tristan
said.	“In	a	weird	way,	I	trust	him	to	look	after	Gráinne,	at	least	temporarily.	It
almost	 felt	 like	 Athanasius	 Fugger	 came	 to	 the	 Tearsheet	 to	 clean	 up	 my
mess.”

“Our	mess,”	I	corrected	him.
“Les	Holgate’s	mess,”	Erszebet	said.
“Anyway,	Gráinne’s	part	of	that	mess	and	Fugger’s	overall	vibe	was	like	I	got

this,	 fool,	 get	 out	 of	 here.	 So	 I	 got	 out,	with	Rose’s	 help.	 I	 don’t	 know	what
Rose	really	thinks	of	this	project	either	now,	but	she	at	least	was	calm	enough
to	realize	that	there	was	no	benefit	to	anyone,	for	me	to	remain.	That’s	why
she	Sent	me	back.	 I	wouldn’t	 call	 it	 a	working	 relationship	yet.”	Tristan	 sat
back	in	his	chair,	wincing	from	the	arm	injury,	and	sighed.	“Anyway,	so	let’s
avoid	 1601	 London.	 Maybe	 go	 to	 early	 1602	 and	 see	 how	 Gráinne	 has
recovered	and	if	she’s	still	willing	to	work	with	us.”

Frank	 Oda	 had	 been	 gazing	 thoughtfully	 into	 space.	 “If	 Sir	 Edward
Greylock’s	existence	has	been	obliterated	across	the	multiverse,”	he	said,	“that
should	 mean	 the	 maple	 syrup	 boiler	 does	 not	 come	 into	 existence	 in	 any
Strand.”

Erszebet	 considered	 this.	 “There	 is	 possibly	 some	 other	 Strand	 where
another	investor	might	be	approached	to	fund	it,	but	I	would	say	you	are	most
likely	correct.”

“How	 long	 will	 it	 take	 you	 to	 calculate	 that	 likelihood?”	 Tristan	 asked
Erszebet.

Immediately	the	standard	look	of	contempt.	“How	can	I	tell	you?”	she	said.
“I	have	been	tricked.	Les	Holgate	stole	my	számológép.”	And	then	a	look	of



horror	came	over	her	face	just	as	it	occurred	to	myself	and	to	the	Odas:	“Now
we	may	never	recover	it.”

Tristan	looked	weary.	“I	missed	that—what?”
“Your	 rude	 boss	 in	 Washington	 with	 the	 big	 table,	 he	 forced	 me	 into

sending	Les	Holgate	back	to	that	DTAP	by	stealing	my	számológép,	and	now
it	is	lost.”	She	was	so	distressed	by	this	realization	that	she	was	enervated,	and
so	seemed	oddly	calm.	“This	means	I	will	never	perform	magic	again.”

Tristan,	exhausted,	misread	her	meaning.	“Are	you	saying	you	quit?”
She	 clearly	 had	 not	 been	 thinking	 that—until	 he	 said	 it.	 “I	 cannot	work

without	my	 számológép,”	 she	 said	 harshly.	 “It	 is	 gone.	Because	 of	 very	 bad
people.	So	yes,	I	will	quit.	This	is	all	hülyeség.”	She	rose	from	the	table.

“Where	 are	 you	 going?”	 asked	 Tristan,	 not	 even	 turning	 to	 look	 at	 her.
“Where	 do	 you	 intend	 to	 live	 and	 work	 and	 pass	 your	 time?	 You’re	 an
immigrant	without	a	legal	identity	and	pretty	much	no	marketable	skills.”

She	paused	at	the	door.	“Your	boss	is	a	terrible	man,”	she	said,	sounding	on
the	verge	of	tears.

“He	did	 a	 terrible	 thing,”	Tristan	 agreed	unhappily.	 “And	 a	 terrible	 price
has	been	paid	for	it.”

“But	your	walking	away	right	now	does	nothing	for	you,”	I	added.
“I	 cannot	 Send	 anyone	 without	 my	 számológép!”	 she	 said.	 “It	 is	 too

dangerous!”	For	a	moment,	I	could	see	the	very-very-very	old	woman	peering
out	from	her	stormy,	youthful	eyes.

“I	might	be	able	to	help	you	with	that,”	said	Frank	Oda.	“I	was	starting	to
get	the	hang	of	it.	Give	me	a	few	days	and	I	might	have	something	to	show
you.”

Erszebet	gave	him	a	wearied,	disbelieving	look.
“Meanwhile,”	I	said,	treading	gently,	“you	do	not	need	the	számológép	to

Send	me	 back	 to	 the	 1640	Cambridge	DTAP,	 and	we	 are	 so	 very	 close	 to
accomplishing	 this	 thing.	 Please	 do	 not	 abandon	 us	 quite	 yet.	 You	will	 get
your	share	of	 the	money.	We’ll	 find	your	passport	 in	Les’s	 things.	We’ll	buy
you	new	plane	tickets	to	Hungary,	if	we	must.	You’ll	never	have	to	speak	to
Frink	again.”

There	 was	 a	 long	moment	 as	 she	 stood	 in	 the	 doorway,	 troubled.	 Then
whatever	 was	 going	 on	 inside	 her	 resolved	 itself,	 and	 she	 nodded	 once,
decisively.	“All	right,”	she	said.	“I	am	not	happy	to	be	doing	this,	but	I	will
help	you	complete	the	mission	with	the	psalm	book.	But	let	us	do	it	now,	and
be	done	with	it	already.”



I	have	already	described	the	events	of	my	DEDE	enough	times—for	indeed,
I	had	lived	through	them	enough	times!—that	I	need	not	recount	them	now
in	detail.	 I	now	knew	what	to	expect	so	well,	knew	the	nuances	of	all	 these
people	who	thought	that	they	were	meeting	me	for	the	first	time	(although	as
usual	 Stephen	 Day,	 the	 printer,	 commented	 that	 there	 was	 something	 very
familiar	about	me).

Having	been	clothed	by	Mary	Fitch,	hauled	by	Goodman	Griggs,	ferried	by
the	 handsome	 brothers,	 having	 conned	 Hezekiah	 Usher	 and	 Stephen	 Day,
having	avoided	the	lechery	of	the	cooper	.	.	.	having	done	all	of	these	things	as
efficiently	 as	 possible,	 I	 headed	 out	 on	 the	 Watertown	 Road	 in	 the	 soggy
August	 air,	 sealed	bucket	under	my	arm,	using	 the	 shovel	 as	 a	walking	 stick
.	.	.	praying	that	this	time,	I	would	not	see	that	fucking	boiler-foundation.

I	 did	 not.	The	 erasure	 of	 Sir	 Edward	Greylock	 from	Elizabethan	London
had	likewise	erased	all	his	possible	investments,	including	this	one.

Heartened	 by	 this,	 I	 measured	 out	 the	 length	 of	my	 arm	 away	 from	 the
boulder,	and	dug	the	 length	of	my	arm	in	depth.	The	clam	and	oyster	 shells
seemed	like	old	friends	as	I	unearthed	them.	I	settled	the	bucket	in	the	hole,
shoveled	all	the	soil	back	in,	stamped	it	down	with	unwonted	exuberance,	and
headed	back,	a	final	time,	toward	Cambridge.

And	 then	 as	 ever,	 returning	 through	 the	 town,	 across	 on	 the	 ferry,	 back
along	the	oxcart	path,	to	the	home	of	Goody	Fitch.	A	final	conversation	with
her	 and	 her	 young	 daughter	 Elizabeth	 about	 working	 with	 us.	 And	 then
home.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

AUGUST	22

Temperature	 89F.	 Dusty,	 dry.	 Barometer	 steady.	 Lettuce	 bolted.	 Kale
ready	to	harvest	but	will	be	too	bitter.	Perennial	herbs	in	fine	form.	Asters
magnificent.

It	 finally	 happened	 today.	 In	 the	 former	 vegetable	 garden,	 which	 had
been	dug	up	so	often	earlier	in	the	summer	but	lately	lay	unmolested	while



Tristan	went	to	the	London	DTAP.	We	gathered	around	it.	Mel	dug	a	hole.
Tristan	has	 one	 arm	 in	 a	homemade	 sling	he	had	 fashioned	 from	 two	T-
shirts	tied	together,	and	could	not	dig;	Erszebet	was	in	stockings	and	heels;
Mel	 insisted	Frank	 and	 I	 are	 age-exempted.	 So	 she	dug	 it	 all	 herself.	No
doubt	it	gave	her	satisfaction,	for	all	the	times	she	had	to	bury	it	before.

And	there	it	was.	The	barrel.	Quite	small,	and	very	old,	and	soft	around
the	edges	where	damp	had	found	its	way	into	the	wood.	But	not	rotted	away.
That	cooper	knew	his	business.

I	have	not	been	to	a	DTAP.	I	was	not	in	residence	during	Erszebet’s	first
few	 weeks	 exploring	 her	 powers	 in	 the	 ODEC.	 Other	 than	 seeing	 her
transform	herself,	 this	was	my	 first	 concrete	 experience	 of	magic.	 I	 have
seen	 that	 plot	 dug	 up	 a	 dozen	 times,	 and	 it	 has	 never	 contained	 a	 small
well-sealed	 barrel	 containing	 an	 unspeakably	 valuable	 seventeenth-
century	hymnal.

Until	today.

Diachronicle	
DAYS	391–436	 (SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER,	YEAR	1 )

In	which	we	sell	a	book

THE	CATASTROPHIC	DEDE	FROM	WHICH	Les	never	returned,	and	the	recovery
of	 the	Bay	Psalm	Book	from	Frank	and	Rebecca’s	backyard,	occurred	at	 the
beginning	of	the	final	week	of	August.	Not	until	early	October	did	we	actually
bank	 the	 money.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 General	 Frink	 continued	 to	 sign	 our
paychecks,	 for	our	 recovery	of	 the	book	had	 saved	our	bacon	politically.	As
with	 General	 Schneider,	 Les	 Holgate’s	 death	 was	 deeply	 and	 sincerely
regretted,	 but	 apparently	 considered	 to	 be	 just	 one	 of	 those	 things	 that
happened	 when	 patriots	 went	 into	 harm’s	 way	 for	 the	 defense	 of	 their



homeland.
So,	September	was	a	month	of	unruffling	all	the	legal	feathers,	getting	the	i’s

dotted	and	the	t’s	crossed.	Frink’s	brain	trust	concocted	a	story	to	explain	Les
Holgate’s	disappearance.	It	wasn’t	a	very	convincing	story,	but	 it	didn’t	need
to	be;	 friends	and	 family	of	people	who	worked	 in	clandestine	 service	knew
that	mysterious,	unexplained	death	was	something	that	happened.

There	was	a	no-casket	memorial	service	for	him.	This	was	attended	by	his
family—including	his	uncle,	Roger	Blevins,	who,	like	Tristan	and	myself,	flew
down	 from	Boston.	There	was	 (obviously)	 no	 interment,	 but	 at	 the	 solemn
reception	 afterward,	 in	 a	 bland	 conference	 room	 with	 recessed	 fluorescent
lights,	we	were	fortified	with	bad	institutional	coffee	and	Royal	Dansk	butter
cookies.	Tristan	and	I	were	there	to	represent	the	Cambridge	office;	the	others
had	sent	cards	and	flowers.	I	had	hoped	to	avoid	Blevins.	Our	turbulent	past
included	 two	 incidents	 of	 sexual	 harassment	 that	would	 have	 sufficed	 to	 get
any	 other	man	 fired.	 Somehow,	 however,	 he	 cornered	me	 at	 the	 hazelnut-
flavored-cream	dispenser,	all	smiles	and	smarm.

“I’m	sorry	for	your	loss,”	I	said,	refraining	from	direct	eye	contact.
“It’s	terrible,”	he	said,	slightly	hurried,	as	if	to	get	the	formalities	out	of	the

way.	“But	I	must	say,	Mel,	it’s	good	to	see	you’ve	landed	on	your	feet.	I	don’t
need	 to	 tell	 you	 how	 concerned	 I	 was	 when	 you	 left	 the	 department	 so
suddenly.	 I	 was	 afraid	 your	 head	 was	 turned	 by,	 let’s	 say,	 non-professional
considerations.”	He	gestured	vaguely	toward	Tristan.	Tristan	pivoted	and	took
a	stride	in	our	direction.	I	hadn’t	told	him	about	the	harassment,	but	he	knew
how	to	read	me,	and	he	seemed	to	have	an	overdeveloped	damsel-in-distress
radar.

“I	have	no	regrets,”	I	said,	deciding	to	skip	the	creamer.
“Oh,	neither	do	 I,”	Blevins	 said.	“It’s	 a	 far	better	 fit	 for	you.”	The	 insult

didn’t	need	to	be	spelled	out:	You	were	going	nowhere	in	academia.
“It’s	 an	 excellent	 fit,”	 I	 heard	 Tristan	 say	 from	 over	 my	 right	 shoulder.

Blevins’s	eyes	rose	 to	see	him.	Tristan	rested	his	hand	on	my	upper	arm	and
squeezed	gently.	“This	woman	is	the	most	talented	linguist,	translator,	scholar,
and	researcher	I’ve	ever	encountered.	And	a	brilliant	team	player.	Worth	her
weight	 in	 plutonium.	 Thank	 God	 we	 ended	 up	 with	 her.”	 Reader,	 I	 do
believe	I	blushed	the	slightest	bit	with	pleasure.

Blevins	gave	us	both	a	forced	smile,	as	if	somebody	were	tightening	his	belt
without	his	consent.	“I’ve	been	a	mere	advisor	until	now,	as	you	know,	and
my	 involvement	 is	 to	be	 ramped	up,	or	 so	 I’m	 told,”	he	 said,	with	a	glance



across	 the	 room	 at	General	 Frink,	who	was	 offering	 his	 condolences	 to	 Les
Holgate’s	mother.	It	was	a	classic	Blevins	move—making	it	seem	as	though	he
was	 being	 drawn	 unwilling	 into	 the	 project,	 affecting	 a	 sort	 of	 patrician
befuddlement.

Tristan’s	 hand	 almost	 imperceptibly	 tightened	 around	 my	 arm.	 “So	 I’m
informed,”	he	said.

“I’ve	 been	working	with	General	 Frink	 and	Dr.	Rudge	 for	 years	 on	 the
precursors	 to	DODO,	 always	 on	 the	 assumption	 it	would	 peter	 out.	Never
saw	 myself	 as	 the	 cofounder	 of	 a	 new	 department.	 But	 life	 takes	 us	 to
surprising	places!”

Tristan’s	 grip	 now	 tightened	 considerably.	 Shut	 up,	 Stokes!	 “When	 I
approached	you,	sir,	you	refused	involvement	in	DODO,”	he	said.

“Not	 exactly,	 Colonel	 Lyons,”	 said	 Blevins,	 always	 happy	 to	 seem	wiser
than	 anyone	 else.	 “I	 was	 just	 making	 it	 clear	 that	 I	 wasn’t	 right	 for	 that
particular	role.	Which”—and	here	he	had	the	audacity	to	reach	out	and	pat	my
left	arm—“clearly	was	the	right	move,	as	it	left	a	space	open	for	our	Mel	here
to	fill.	I	knew	my	skills	would	be	better	applied	elsewhere,	as	is	proving	to	be
correct.”	He	smiled.	“I	look	forward	to	working	with	you.	Just	like	old	times,
Mel.”

WE	HAD	MADE	no	preparations	whatsoever	for	actually	selling	the	book.	We’d
hardly	even	thought	about	 it.	Once	it	was	 in	our	hands	we	realized	that	 this
was	 going	 to	 be	 complicated.	 The	mere	 existence	 of	 DODO	was	 a	 highly
classified	secret,	 so	we	couldn’t	very	well	 sell	 it	openly.	To	make	a	 long	and
tediously	legal	story	short,	we	ended	up	establishing	a	private	trust	to	act	as	a
front	operation	for	DODO.	It	was	called	the	East	House	Trust,	and	the	story
was	that	it	was	the	legal	owner	and	custodian	of	Rebecca	and	Frank’s	house,
with	 the	 two	of	 them	being	 its	 trustees.	As	 such,	 the	 trust	 now	became	 the
legal	owner	of	the	book,	which	had,	after	all,	been	discovered	on	the	property.
Rebecca	and	Frank	named	Tristan	and	me	officers	of	the	trust,	with	authority
to	 conduct	 certain	 business	 operations,	 and	 on	 that	 authority	we	 opened	 an
account	at	a	bank	in	Harvard	Square	and	rented	a	large	safe	deposit	box	where
we	placed	 the	book	 for	 safekeeping	while	we	entered	 into	negotiations	with
various	auction	houses.	Expert	advice	was	that	we	would	get	the	highest	price
in	New	York	or	London,	and	that	we	should	wait	for	a	few	weeks	so	that	the
auction	 house	 could	 advertise	 the	 book	 and	 spread	 the	 word	 to	 collectors



around	the	world.
So	it	was	that	in	the	first	week	of	October,	Tristan	and	I	flew	down	to	New

York,	he	carrying	the	book	in	a	locked	metal	briefcase.	Sitting	in	the	window
seat,	I	gazed	out	at	the	fall	colors	sweeping	down	across	the	countryside	from
the	north.	The	 forests	 of	Connecticut	were	 nearing	 their	 peak	 in	 a	 glorious
carpet	 of	 fiery	 red.	 I	 couldn’t	 help	 thinking	of	Goody	Fitch,	who	had	been
dead	 for	over	 three	hundred	years,	 but	who	 to	me	was	 every	bit	 as	 alive	 as
Rebecca	and	Erszebet	and	the	others.	After	all,	with	the	assistance	of	Erszebet
and	the	ODEC,	I	could	go	and	visit	her	anytime	I	wished,	and	so,	to	me,	she
really	was	alive.	How	would	she	and	the	others	in	the	colonial	Boston	DTAP
look	upon	the	changing	of	the	leaves?	Probably	as	a	warning	of	bitter	cold	and
hard	times	to	come.

The	auction	house	was	on	Fifth	Avenue,	across	from	Central	Park,	and	not
too	 far	 from	 the	Met.	The	 neighborhood	was,	 of	 course,	where	 the	 richest
people	lived,	and	had	been	living	for	a	long	time,	and	so	as	we	walked	into	the
establishment	 and	 conducted	 our	 business	 with	 the	 proprietors,	 I	 had	 the
comforting	sense	that	we	had	come	to	the	right	place.

Our	copy	of	the	Bay	Psalm	Book	was	the	fourteenth	and	last	item	on	a	list
of	high-priced	antiquities	that	were	auctioned	off	over	the	course	of	a	couple
of	hours.	I’d	grown	up	in	a	family	that	respected	books	and	old	things,	but	I’d
never	experienced	anything	remotely	like	this	auction.	Sitting	there	in	my	new
skirt	 suit	 from	Lord	&	Taylor	and	my	mom’s	best	 strand	of	pearls,	watching
the	 rich	 people	 and	 their	 representatives	 bid	 millions	 of	 dollars	 on	 various
ancient	artifacts,	was	a	view	 into	another	world	as	 strange	 to	me	as	anything
we	could	have	visited	through	the	ODEC.

The	 Bay	 Psalm	 Book	 had	 clearly	 attracted	 the	 attention	 of	 several	 well-
heeled,	 highly	 motivated	 collectors,	 and	 so	 the	 bidding	 was	 intense.	 In
moments	it	had	blown	through	our	expected	price	of	five	million	dollars	and
shot	upwards	from	there.	Not	until	we	got	above	ten	million	did	bidders	begin
dropping	out.	It	came	down	to	a	bidding	duel	between	a	collector	 from	Los
Angeles,	who’d	been	sitting	in	the	front	row	the	whole	time,	and	a	man	who
had	walked	into	the	auction	house	and	taken	a	seat	at	the	back	only	moments
before	the	bidding	had	started.	In	the	end,	the	latter	won,	calmly	nodding	to
the	auctioneer	whenever	the	man	from	LA	raised	his	bid.	The	entire	process
had	lasted	less	than	a	minute.	The	book	sold	for	fourteen	million	dollars.

I	assumed	that	payment,	and	the	physical	handover	of	the	book,	would	be
taken	care	of	 later,	with	 the	buyer	and	 the	auctioneer	 involving	 lawyers	 and



bankers	and	so	on.	But	after	the	auction	finished	and	the	room	cleared	out,	the
man	who	had	bought	 the	Bay	Psalm	Book	walked	up	 the	 aisle,	pocketing	 a
phone	 on	 which	 he	 had	 just	 finished	 making	 a	 call.	 He	 was	 dressed	 in	 an
impeccable	 dove-grey	 suit,	 with	 a	 vest	 under	 the	 jacket	 that	 gave	 it	 a
distinctive	look—either	retro	or	fashion-forward,	I	had	no	idea.	He	was	in	his
fifties,	well	 built,	 trim.	He	was	 groomed	meticulously	 but	 a	 bit	 oddly,	with
sideburns	 that	were	 longer	 than	 the	 norm.	He	wore	 rimless	 eyeglasses	with
tinted	lenses.	This	detail	had	been	noticeable	when	he	had	first	walked	in	from
the	 street.	 I’d	 guessed	 at	 the	 time	 that	 the	 lenses	 were	 those	 photochromic
things	that	darken	automatically	in	sunlight,	and	that	they	would	lighten	over
the	course	of	a	few	minutes	indoors.	But	they	had	not	changed;	his	eyes	were
still	just	barely	visible	behind	a	grey	screen	of	tinted	glass.

Tristan	and	I	were	 standing	 in	 the	aisle	as	 this	man	walked	by	us.	“If	you
would	just	give	me	a	minute,”	he	said,	on	his	way	by.	We	were	too	surprised
to	 answer,	 so	 he	 looked	 back	 over	 his	 shoulder	 with	 a	 slightly	 bemused
expression.	“I	won’t	be	long.”

“Of	 course,”	 Tristan	 said,	 just	 to	 be	 polite.	 But	 I	 sensed	 he	 was	 a	 little
uneasy.	We	were	here	under	cover,	pretending	that	DODO	didn’t	exist,	that
we	were	just	representatives	of	the	East	House	Trust.	Our	job	was	to	hand	the
book	to	the	auctioneer,	watch	what	happened,	and	get	out.	Not	to	socialize.
We	had	a	flight	back	to	Boston	in	a	couple	of	hours,	and	a	dinner	date	with
our	colleagues.	But	it	would	be	bad	manners	to	bolt	out	of	the	place,	ignoring
a	man	who	had	just	handed	over	fourteen	million	dollars,	and	so	Tristan	and	I
drifted	to	the	back	of	the	room	while	the	buyer	conducted	a	discussion	with
the	auction	house	 staff.	We	 looked	out	 the	windows	at	Central	Park,	which
was	 glorious,	 approaching	 peak	 color.	 Strollers	 and	 bicyclists	 were	 out
enjoying	the	crisp	autumn	day,	and	park	employees	were	out	in	force,	raking
up	leaves	and	fallen	branches.

“Beautiful	day,	isn’t	it?”	said	the	buyer,	as	if	reading	my	thoughts.
Tristan	and	I	turned	away	from	the	window	to	see	him	approaching	us.	He

was	holding	the	Bay	Psalm	Book	on	which	he	had	just	spent	fourteen	million
dollars.	“My	name	is	Frederick,”	he	announced.	Then	he	casually	tucked	the
book	under	his	left	arm,	as	if	it	were	a	paperback	he’d	just	bought	in	an	airport
bookstore,	and	extended	his	right	hand	to	shake.

“Mel,”	I	said,	since	it	seemed	we	were	operating	on	a	first-name	basis.
“Tristan,”	 said	 my	 companion.	 We	 shook	 hands	 with	 Frederick.	 Still

keeping	the	book	tucked	under	his	arm,	he	pulled	a	nice	pair	of	gloves	out	of



the	pockets	of	his	overcoat	and	pulled	them	on	while	moving	toward	the	exit.
Tristan	 held	 the	 door	 open	 for	 him,	 and	 for	me.	A	 fortuitous	 gap	 in	 traffic
enabled	us	to	cross	Fifth	Avenue,	and	a	few	minutes	later	we	were	strolling	in
the	park	together.

“Where	on	earth	did	the	East	House	Trust	find	this	remarkable	specimen?”
Frederick	 asked.	He	moved	briskly.	Tristan	kept	up	with	ease;	 I	had	 to	 step
lively	in	my	borrowed	heels.

“Respecting	the	confidentiality	of	 the	trustees,	 I’ll	 treat	 that	as	a	rhetorical
question,	Frederick,”	Tristan	answered.

Frederick	slowed	to	a	stop	and	turned	toward	us.	“It’s	new,”	he	remarked.
Both	of	us	must	have	looked	goggle-eyed.	This	amused	him.	“The	trust,	I

mean.	Only	established	a	few	weeks	ago.	Oh	no,	I	wasn’t	referring	to	the	book.
The	 book	 is	 obviously	 quite	 old!”	 He	 pulled	 it	 out	 from	 his	 armpit	 and
opened	it	up,	flipping	curiously	through	a	few	pages.

“You	are	correct	on	both	counts,	Frederick,”	I	said.	I	found	it	strange	to	be
looking	at	those	pages,	darkened	and	mottled	with	the	passage	of	hundreds	of
years,	which	I	had	seen	fresh	from	the	printing	press	only	a	few	weeks	earlier.
To	 be	 quite	 honest,	 it	 gave	 me	 a	 feeling	 of	 satisfaction	 that	 bordered	 on
smugness.	DODO	had	come	together,	as	I’ve	explained,	in	a	crazily	haphazard
and	chaotic	fashion,	with	many	twists	and	turns,	and	a	few	tragedies,	that	we’d
never	foreseen.	But	it	had	come	together.	I	had	traveled	back	in	time,	on	many
occasions.	I	had	achieved	my	mission.	Proof	of	that	was	right	in	front	of	me,	in
Frederick’s	gloved	hands,	and	in	the	enormously	swollen	bank	account	of	the
East	House	Trust.

Frederick	 turned	 his	 back	 on	 us,	 a	 bit	 rudely,	 and	 resumed	 walking.	 He
forked	 off	 the	 main	 path	 onto	 a	 smaller	 trail	 that	 rambled	 off	 through	 a
wooded	section	of	the	park.	We	followed	him,	kicking	through	fallen	leaves.
He	said,	“I	suppose	you’re	going	to	tell	me	that	this	was	discovered	squirreled
away	in	the	attic	or	something,	and	once	the	East-Odas	understood	its	value,
they	decided	to	form	the	trust	in	order	to	manage	the	financial	ramifications.	I
suppose	that	story	hangs	together	reasonably	well.”

Lagging	half	a	pace	behind	him,	Tristan	and	I	exchanged	a	glance.	It	was	a
bit	 difficult	 to	 hear	 him,	 because	we	were	 approaching	 an	 area	where	 some
groundskeepers	were	cleaning	up	fallen	branches	and	leaves,	tossing	the	debris
into	 a	 gasoline-powered	 chipper	 that	 reduced	 everything	 to	 confetti	 and
hurled	it	into	the	back	of	a	truck.	It	was	noisy.	Frederick	drew	to	a	halt	not	far
away	from	this	machine	and	turned	to	face	us	again.



I	 understood.	 Or	 I	 thought	 I	 did.	 He	 wanted	 to	 speak	 to	 us	 privately,
without	fear	of	surveillance	microphones	picking	up	his	words,	and	so	he	had
moved	to	a	noisy	environment.

“Do	 you	 know	 anything	 about	 markets?”	 Frederick	 asked.	 “Given	 your
professional	 backgrounds,	 Dr.	 Melisande	 Stokes	 and	 Lieutenant	 Colonel
Tristan	Lyons,	I’m	guessing	not	really.	Oh,	you’ve	read	the	odd	article	in	the
business	 section	 of	 the	New	York	Times,	 and,	 as	 educated	 persons,	 you	 have
some	general	background	on	which	to	draw.	I	like	to	think	I’m	a	bit	more	up
to	speed	on	such	things,	as	being	related	to	my	profession.”

“What	profession	is	that,	Frederick?”	Tristan	asked.
Frederick	had	tucked	the	book	under	his	arm	again—a	habit	I	found	quite

annoying	 given	 the	 rarity	 and	 fragility	 of	 that	 artifact.	 No	 book	 collector
would	have	treated	it	so	cavalierly.	This	had	freed	his	hands.	Turning	slightly
away,	he	reached	up	and	removed	his	shaded	eyeglasses,	folded	them	up,	and
slid	 them	carefully	 into	 the	breast	 pocket	of	 his	 overcoat.	 For	 a	moment	he
squinted	against	the	bright	golden	sunlight	of	the	New	York	autumn,	showing
creases	around	his	eyes.	He	blinked	a	couple	of	times	and	then	turned	to	face
us.	 “The	 sort	 of	 profession,”	 he	 answered,	 “that	 places	me	 in	 a	 position	 to
spend	fourteen	million	dollars	on	a	book.”

“Touché,”	Tristan	said.	Then	his	face	went	slack	with	amazement.	He	was
staring	 at	 Frederick.	 I	 turned	 to	 look	 in	 the	 same	 direction,	 but	 didn’t	 see
anything	 to	 explain	 Tristan’s	 reaction.	 There	 was	 something	 odd	 about
Frederick’s	 eyes,	 which	 took	 me	 a	 moment	 to	 process.	 They	 were
asymmetrical.	His	left	pupil	was	dilated	to	the	point	where	the	blue	iris	could
scarcely	 be	 seen,	 but	 the	 right	 pupil	was	 constricted,	 as	 you’d	 expect	when
outdoors	in	broad	daylight.

“It’s	 simple,”	 Frederick	 said,	 “but	 it’s	 not.	 Supply,	 demand,	 individual
transactions,	 such	as	 the	one	we	have	engaged	in	today—child’s	play,	on	the
level	of	a	sidewalk	lemonade	stand.	But	when	billions	of	them	are	integrated
over	 centuries—not	 so	 simple	 at	 all.	 The	 resulting	 flows	 of	 information,
encoded	as	fluctuations	in	prices,	shifts	in	markets,	are	far	beyond	the	ability	of
any	one	human	mind	to	comprehend.	Which	is	why	such	things	are	best	left
in	 the	hands	of	professionals	with	 the	 requisite	 training	and,	 if	 I	may	 say	 so,
lineage.	Good	day.”

Frederick	 turned	 his	 back	 on	 us	 and	 walked	 directly	 toward	 the	 wood
chipper.	The	 crew	members,	 distracted	 by	 their	work	 and	 rendered	 deaf	 by
their	hearing	protectors,	didn’t	 see	him	coming	until	he	was	 just	a	 few	yards



away.	Then,	 sizing	him	up	 as	 a	 gentleman	of	 a	 certain	bearing,	well	 attired,
they	straightened	up	and	regarded	him	with	a	kind	of	wary	curiosity.	Frederick
acknowledged	them	with	a	polite	nod,	then	took	a	step	closer	to	the	roaring
maw	of	the	machine	while	reaching	under	his	arm.	Suddenly	I	knew	what	was
about	to	happen,	but	I	could	not	believe	it.

Glancing	 back	 over	 his	 shoulder	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 Tristan	 and	 I	 were
watching	him,	Frederick	pulled	the	Bay	Psalm	Book	out	from	under	his	arm
and	 gave	 it	 an	 underhand	 toss	 into	 the	 chipper.	 The	machine	made	 a	 brief
coughing	sound—as	did	I—and	we	saw	a	spume	of	white	confetti	spray	into
the	back	of	the	truck.

Frederick	walked	away	into	the	park.
“There	 goes	 one	 strange	 fucker,”	 Tristan	 remarked.	 “Let’s	 go	 home,

Stokes.”

THE	 APOSTOLIC	 CAFÉ	 had	 expanded	 its	 offerings	 to	 include	 Euclid’s	 Grill—
casual	buffet	by	day,	 fine	dining	by	night,	 served	in	the	former	nave.	Tristan
and	I	went	directly	 there	 from	the	airport	 that	evening.	Waiting	 for	us	were
Frank,	 Rebecca,	 Erszebet,	 and	 the	 newest	 member	 of	 our	 little	 band,
Mortimer	 Shore.	 Mortimer	 was	 the	 historical	 swordfighter	 whom	 Rebecca
had	 recruited	 from	 the	 park,	 and	who	had	 trained	Tristan	 in	 the	 use	 of	 the
backsword.	He	was	a	tall,	rangy	Californian	with	a	mop	of	wavy	dark	hair	and
a	 bushy	 beard	 that	 as	 often	 as	 not	 framed	 an	 easy	 smile.	 He	 was	 double-
majoring	in	metallurgy	and	computer	science	at	MIT,	but	Tristan	had	talked
him	into	putting	his	academic	career	on	hold	so	that	he	could	go	full-time	as
DODO’s	systems	administrator	and	in-house	swordfighting	expert.	These	four
had	 already	 grabbed	 the	 big	 booth	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 restaurant,	 reserved
under	the	name	of	the	East	House	Trust.	Resting	in	an	ice	bucket	nearby	was
a	magnum	of	champagne	that	looked	expensive.	To	judge	from	the	high	fives
and	 hugs	with	which	 they	 greeted	 us	 (yes,	 even	 from	Rebecca),	 they	were
already	well	into	it.	We	hadn’t	told	them	the	weird	story	about	Frederick	yet,
and	it	wasn’t	clear	that	we	needed	to.

Julie	the	Smart-ass	Oboist	(who	always	seemed	to	be	our	waitress)	uncorked
the	magnum	and	 came	 to	our	 table	 to	pour	 flutes	of	 champagne	 for	Tristan
and	me,	and	we	went	through	several	rounds	of	toasts.	Erszebet,	looking	like
she’d	been	born	with	a	glass	of	bubbly	 in	her	perfectly	manicured	hand,	was
determined	 to	 teach	 everyone	 how	 to	 toast	 properly,	 in	 the	 traditional



European	style:	you	had	to	look	each	person	straight	in	the	eye	as	you	clinked
glasses	 with	 them.	 She	 was	 looking	 more	 cheerful	 than	 I’d	 have	 expected,
given	 that	 her	 precious	 számológép	was	 still	 locked	up	 in	 some	vault	 in	 the
Trapezoid.	 I	 said	 as	 much	 to	 her.	 She	 allowed	 as	 how	 she	 was	 so	 very
(grudgingly)	chuffed	by	the	success	of	the	venture,	and	her	role	in	it,	that	she
had	decided	to	delay	her	relocation	to	Hungary	until	we	were	able	to	replace
her,	by	bringing	forward	through	time	more	witches	to	work	in	the	ODEC.

Tristan	got	to	the	bottom	of	his	champagne	glass	pretty	quickly.	He	still	had
a	haunted	look	about	him,	as	if	he’d	seen	a	ghost	in	Central	Park.	Not	really
the	champagne	type,	he	raised	one	hand	and	hailed	the	Smart-ass	Oboist.

“What	can	I	get	you?”	Julie	asked.
“The	usual,”	he	said,	his	attention	already	on	the	dinner	menu.
She	faltered,	her	face	pinkening	slightly.	“I’m	sorry,”	she	said.	“I	feel	like	I

should	know	what	that	is,	but	the	memory	escapes	me	.	.	.”
“Old	Tearsheet	Best	Bitter!”	he	said,	glancing	up.
She	frowned.	“I	don’t	think	we	have	that,”	she	said.	“Is	it	an	import?”
He	gave	her	an	Eagle	Scout	smile,	but	his	tone	was	firm.	“You	know.	I’ve

been	ordering	it	since	this	place	opened.	You	definitely	carry	it.”
“All	 right,”	 she	 said	 with	 a	 skeptical	 smile,	 writing.	 “T-e-a-r-s-h-e-e-t?

Bitter?”
“That’s	right,”	said	Tristan.
We	 all	 perused	 the	 menu,	 until	 she	 returned	 a	 moment	 later	 with	 the

announcement	that	they	did	not	carry—and	had	never	carried—Old	Tearsheet
Best	Bitter.	Tristan	half	stood	up	and	looked	incredulously	over	at	the	barman,
who	shrugged	broadly,	indicating	he	had	never	heard	of	that	ale.	That	ale	he’d
been	pouring	Tristan	for	years.

Erszebet	 tugged	 at	 Tristan’s	 sleeve,	 pulling	 him	 back	 down	 into	 his	 seat.
“This	 is	 the	 Diachronic	 Shear,”	 she	 said	 quietly.	 “There	 is	 no	 Tearsheet
Brewery.	After	September	of	1601,	there	never	was.”

“That’s	 almost	 as	 big	 a	 tragedy	 as	 losing	 Les	 Holgate,”	 Tristan	 muttered
under	his	breath.

IT	WAS	ODDLY	intimate	yet	oddly	formal,	the	six	of	us	sitting	around	a	proper
dining	 table	 that	 was	 not	 littered	 with	 coffee	 cups,	 whiteboard	 markers,
handheld	devices,	and	notepads.	That	we	were	holding	actual	silverware,	and
napkins	 larger	than	a	coaster.	That	we	allowed	a	stranger	to	approach	us	and



do	something	exquisitely	mundane:	serve	us	a	meal	that	was	not	delivered	in
to-go	containers	or	 rewarmed	 in	a	microwave.	That	we	ate	 slowly,	 savoring
our	food	and	relaxing	in	the	hum	of	conversation	around	us,	and	feeling	a	part
of	the	human	race—or	at	least,	that	fraction	of	the	human	race	that	frequented
the	Apostolic	Café.

As	we	ate,	we	reviewed	our	lessons	learned	about	the	use	of	time	travel,	all
of	which	Erszebet	felt	the	need	to	point	out	she	was	already	aware	of.

“Very	well,”	said	Tristan,	setting	down	his	fork.	“If	you	know	everything,
save	us	the	time	and	aggravation	and	tell	us	what	we	don’t	know	yet.”

She	 made	 a	 tch’ing	 sound	 and	 shook	 her	 head.	 It	 is	 fair	 to	 say	 her
condescension	toward	him	was	softening	now—a	little—into	something	more
resembling	 big-sister	 exasperation.	 “What	 you	 do	 not	 know	 is	 almost
everything.	Quite	 literally.	 Except	what	my	 számológép	 could	 anticipate	 on
any	given	Strand.”

“Clearly	we’re	still	in	the	learning	process	there,”	said	Tristan.	“We	need	to
think	in	a	little	more	depth	about	how	to	master	the	Strands.”

“You	 cannot	master	 the	 Strands,”	 said	 Erszebet.	 “It	 is	 like	 a	 doctor	 with
medicine.	You	 can	 only	 practice.	 And	 you	 cannot	 do	 even	 that	without	 the
számológép.”

“It	does	seem	to	me	there	are	discernible	algorithms	regarding	the	Strands,”
said	Frank	Oda.	He	touched	his	wife’s	wrist	gently	and	she	reached	down	to
the	floor	for	a	bookbag,	which	she	raised	and	handed	to	him.

“There	is	always,	what	is	the	term,	wiggling	room,”	corrected	Erszebet.
“It	 is	a	complexity	 theory	problem—a	branch	of	what	mathematicians	call

graph	theory,”	said	the	professor.
“Graph?	As	in	graph	paper?”	I	asked.
“Math	 geeks	 use	 the	 term	 differently,”	 Oda	 said,	 “to	 mean	 structures	 of

nodes	 connected	 by	 branches.	 Like	 a	 számológép,	 or	 Gráinne’s	 broom,	 or
Rebecca’s	heirloom.”

“Or	the	many	forking	Strands	of	history,”	Rebecca	said.
“Point	being,	a	lot	of	progress	has	been	made	in	recent	decades	around	just

these	sorts	of	problems,”	Oda	said.	Anticipating	an	objection	from	Erszebet,	he
added,	“Which	isn’t	to	say	there’s	no	more	‘wiggling	room,’	but	we	can	tackle
these	 questions	 now	 with	 well-tested	 algorithms,	 and	 graphical	 UIs.”	 He
opened	his	bag	and	reached	inside.

“We	 are	 better	 than	 any	 other	 humans	 at	 extrapolating	 from	 what	 the
Strands	tell	us.”



“That’s	true,”	said	Oda.	From	the	bookbag,	he	withdrew	an	iPad.	Rebecca
took	the	bag	from	his	lap	and	returned	it	to	the	floor	as	he	set	the	iPad	on	the
table	before	him.	“However,	computers	can	enhance	and	sharpen	the	abilities
you	already	have.	With	all	respect,	even	witches	can	benefit	from	an	app.”

Erszebet	looked	at	the	iPad.	“What	is	this?”
“It’s	a	present,”	said	Frank	Oda.	“I	would	not	insult	your	history	with	the

missing	számológép	by	calling	this	a	replacement	számológép,	so	let	us	say	it	is
your	quipu.”

“That	 is	a	computer,”	she	argued.	“It	 is	a	piece	of	machinery.	It	does	not
even	have	moving	parts.”

Oda	smiled	at	her,	undisturbed	by	her	attitude.	“I	took	the	premise	of	the
quipu,	 and	what	 you	 had	 shown	me	 of	 your	 számológép,	 and	 I	 designed	 a
program	 to	do	 algorithmically	what	 you	do	 intuitively.	Plus	 a	 graphical	user
interface	to	go	with	it!”	He	held	up	the	iPad	so	that	everyone	could	see	it.	On
the	 screen	 was	 a	 branching	 diagram	 that	 might	 best	 be	 described	 as	 a
mathematician’s	 attempt	 to	 reproduce	 the	 structure	of	 those	devices	used	by
the	witches.	Call	it	a	quipu,	a	broom,	or	a	számológép	if	you	will;	they	all	had
the	same	many-branched	structure,	and	so	did	 the	 thing	 that	Oda-sensei	had
rendered	 on	 this	 screen.	 It	 was	 a	 constellation	 of	 small	 gleaming	 figures	 in
various	 shapes	 and	 colors,	 like	 a	 Christmas	 tree;	 the	 structure	 that	 held	 it
together	was	a	snarl	of	 fine	colored	 lines.	He	dragged	his	 finger	on	the	glass,
and	 the	 thing	 rotated	 around,	 showing	 that	 it	 was	 three-dimensional;	 he
swiped,	he	zoomed,	he	tapped,	and	things	happened.	“It’s	a	work	in	progress,”
he	said	shyly,	“but	with	time	and	resources,	we	should	be	able	to	build	it	out.”

Erszebet	 looked	profoundly	 insulted.	“You	are	 saying	you	can	 replace	me
with	a	machine?”

“Not	you.	Your	számológép,”	he	said.	“Except	even	better.”
Every	 so	 often,	 Frank	 said	 exactly	 the	 right	 thing.	This	was	 one	 of	 those

times.	Erszebet’s	face	softened.	She	reached	out	for	the	iPad.	He	handed	it	to
her.	She	pulled	it	into	her	lap	and	gazed	at	it	in	fascination.	Her	fingers	began
to	move	across	the	glass,	halting	at	first,	but	quickly	gaining	fluency.

“Dude,	that’s	sick,”	said	Mortimer	reverently.
“That’s	beautiful,”	said	Julie	the	Smart-ass	Oboist,	pausing	at	our	table	with

a	 pitcher	 of	 red	 ale	 and	 a	 platter	 of	 onion	 rings.	 “That	 looks	 like	 my
grandmother’s	Yao	 Jìsuàn	 qì”—and	 before	 any	 of	 us	 could	 think	 to	 question
her,	she	had	moved	on	to	deliver	her	burden	to	a	table	of	bearded	CS	nerds
scholars.



Oda-sensei	 went	 on:	 “If	 we’d	 had	 something	 like	 this	 in	 place,	 fully
realized,	for	the	Bay	Psalm	Book	gambit,	for	instance,	it	might	have	predicted
the	possibility	of	the	maple	syrup	boiler	being	there	if	we	didn’t	first	go	back
to	 the	earlier	DTAP	and	deal	with	Sir	Edward	Greylock	 and	his	 investment
schemes.	It	might	have	predicted	the	danger	of	Christopher	Marlowe	being	in
the	Tearsheet	Brewery	that	day.”

“It	would	take	forever	to	imagine	all	such	possibilities!”	I	objected.
“It’s	 not	 just	 about	 imagining,”	 he	 replied.	 “We	 can	 integrate	 this	 with

historical	databases,	and	we	can	improve	those	databases	as	we	go	back	in	time
and	learned	what	actually	happened.”

“I	don’t	know,”	I	 said.	“We	have	all	 just	had	a	very	 sobering	 lesson	as	 to
why	nobody	should	rely	on	diachronic	 travel,	ever,	and	 instead	you	respond
by	saying,	‘Oh,	let’s	find	a	way	to	rely	on	diachronic	travel.’”

“I’m	 pretty	 beat	 up,”	 Tristan	 admitted.	 “But	 I’ll	 bet	 the	 first	 person	 to
survive	an	airplane	crash,	a	hundred	years	ago,	was	pretty	beat	up	too.	You	can
limp	away	 from	 the	crashed	airplane	 saying,	 ‘Man	wasn’t	meant	 to	 fly,	 I	 am
done	with	this,’	or	you	can	be	saying,	‘I	just	learned	how	to	do	it	better	next
time.’”

“What’s	the	point	of	it?	Why	even	bother?”	I	asked.	“We	went	to	all	of	that
effort,	and	people	died,	so	we	could	make	fourteen	million	bucks.	We’d	have
been	money	ahead	if	we’d	just	founded	a	tech	start-up	instead.”

“There	are	other	powers	in	this	game	too,”	Tristan	said,	“who	can	do	what
we	can	do,	and	who	most	definitely	think	there’s	a	point.	We	can’t	let	them
have	a	monopoly	on	this	kind	of	force.”

“So	it’s	back	to	the	Magic	Gap	argument.”
“In	a	word,	yes.”
Erszebet	had	been	oblivious	 to	 the	 conversation	 ever	 since	 she	had	 seized

the	iPad,	but	now	she	broke	in	with	a	question	for	Frank.	“So	many	different
colors	and	shapes	of	little	blobs!	What	is	this	one?	The	little	white	cloud	with
the	question	mark?”

“That’s	where	the	system	is	telling	us	it	needs	more	input.”
“Input?”
“Information	about	something	that	happened	in	the	past.”
“It	 knows	 about	 known	 unknowns?”	 Tristan	 asked.	 I	 gave	 a	 little	 snort,

thinking	he	was	making	a	joke	at	poor	Les	Holgate’s	expense,	but	it	seemed	he
was	serious.

“Yes,”	Oda-sensei	responded,	“this	is	a	case	where	we	would	have	to	send	a



DOer	back	to	collect	information.”
“Holy	crap,”	Tristan	said.	“How	much	computational	power—”
“More	 than	can	 fit	 in	an	 iPad,”	Frank	answered,	cutting	him	off.	“This	 is

linked	to	a	small	cluster	running	in	the	cloud.	But	it’s	still	just	a	toy.	It	needs
to	be	scaled	up	radically.	To	be	really	useful,	it	will	take	an	immense	amount
of	computing	power.”	With	an	almost	impish	smile,	he	added,	“We’re	gonna
need	a	bigger	quipu.”



PART
THREE



EXCERPTS	FROM
SENATE	INTELLIGENCE	COMMITTEE	HEARING

ON	PROPOSED	EXTENSION	OF	BLACK-BUDGET	FUNDING
PROGRAM	FOR	DIACHRONIC	OPERATIONS

DAYS	573–576	(LATE	FEBRUARY,	YEAR	2)

SENATOR	 HATCHER:	 Professor	 Oda,	 I	 draw	 your	 attention	 to	 this	 rather	 large
document	 that	 was	 produced	 by	 DODO	 staff	 during	 the	 post-mortem
analysis	 phase	 from	 the	 Les	 Holgate	 tragedy.	 Are	 you	 the	 author	 of	 the
section	of	the	report	entitled	“Diachronic	Shear:	A	Layman’s	Guide”?

FRANK	ODA:	Yes,	I	am.
HATCHER:	To	be	frank,	as	a	confirmed	 layman,	 I	 found	that	your	explanations

only	 made	 me	 more	 perplexed	 than	 I	 was	 to	 begin	 with.	 I	 have	 some
questions	about	this.

ODA:	I’ll	try	to	be	of	service.
LIEUTENANT	COLONEL	LYONS:	Senator	Hatcher,	if	I	may	just	insert	a	brief	remark

—
HATCHER:	You	may.
LYONS:	This	phenomenon	isn’t	well	understood	by	anyone	just	yet.	All	we	know

is	that	it	exists.	We’ve	seen	it	ourselves,	and	witches	have	attested	to	it.	So
any	scientific	hypothesis	should	be	regarded	as	preliminary.

HATCHER:	 Thank	 you	 for	 that	 careful	 hedging,	 Lieutenant	 Colonel	 Lyons.	 I’m
sure	that	your	subordinates	appreciate	your	paternal	concern	for	their	well-
being.	But	I	wish	to	address	Professor	Oda	if	that	is	fine	with	you.

LYONS:	Of	course.	Thank	you,	Senator	Hatcher.
HATCHER:	Professor	Oda,	would	you	be	so	good	as	to	explain	the	relationship	of

Jell-O	to	Diachronic	Shear?
ODA:	Excuse	me,	Senator.	Jell-O?
HATCHER:	Yes,	it	says	here	on	page	793,	third	paragraph,	that	the	properties	of

Jell-O,	as	 in,	Jell-O	brand	gelatin	desserts,	have	something	to	tell	us	about
the	 structure	of	 the	universe.	And	 I	 found	 that	 to	be	a	 somewhat	unusual
statement	from	a	man	of	science.	I	was	wondering	if	you	might	elucidate	it.

ODA:	Yes,	I	remember	that	section.	Traditionally	we	have	tended	to	think	of	the
past,	 present,	 and	 future	 as	parts	 of	 a	 single	 continuous	 line—a	 thread,	 if
you	will.

HATCHER:	And	if	I	may	just	interrupt	you	there,	Professor	Oda,	we	have	already
been	over	this	topic	of	quipus	and	so	on	ad	infinitum,	so	we	don’t	need	to



belabor	 any	 more	 the	 idea	 that	 it’s	 not	 just	 a	 single	 thread	 but	 a	 whole
network	of	them.	I	think	that	I	understand	it	as	well	as	any	non-scientist	can
understand	such	a	thing.	Just	as	I	felt	I	was	achieving	some	level	of	comfort
with	that	idea,	you	jumped	to	Jell-O.	My	great	state	happens	to	be	home	to
no	 fewer	 than	 three	 different	 state-of-the-art	 industrial	 facilities	 that	 are
part	of	the	supply	chain	for	Jell-O	brand	gelatin	desserts	and	so	naturally	my
interest	was	piqued.	But	I’ll	be	darned	if	I	can	follow	your	reasoning	here.

ODA:	 If	 you	 have	 ever	 observed	 the	 properties	 of	 Jell-O,	 such	 as	 a	 molded
dessert	made	of	that	substance—

HATCHER:	I	have,	Professor	Oda,	on	many	occasions	on	the	campaign	trail.
ODA:	You’ll	know	that	it	is	flexible	and	deformable,	up	to	a	point.	You	can	tap	it

with	your	spoon	and	it	will	jiggle.	You	can	stretch	it.	But	if	you	overdo	it,	the
material	will	rupture.	A	crack	will	form,	just	like	a	crack	in	a	block	of	stone.
Later	on,	the	crack	may	heal	itself—the	gelatin	can	knit	itself	back	together.

HATCHER:	Especially	if	you	reheat	it.
ODA:	Exactly.	Which	is	not	true	of	cracks	in	granite	and	other	brittle	materials.
HATCHER:	It	is	truly	a	marvelous	property	of	Jell-O.
ODA:	You	could	say	so,	yes.
HATCHER:	 But	 what	 is	 the	 relationship	 to	 this	 dreaded	 phenomenon	 of

Diachronic	Shear?
ODA:	 Viewed	 from	 the	 standpoint	 of	 the	 many-worlds	 interpretation	 of

quantum	mechanics,	you	could	think	of	the	past	as	being	not	a	single	thread
but—

HATCHER:	A	quipu,	yes,	we’ve	been	over	that.
ODA:	 When	 the	 quipu	 becomes	 sufficiently	 vast,	 it	 becomes	 instructive	 to

transition,	in	our	thinking,	to	a	different	mode,	a	continuous	as	opposed	to
discrete	model,	 in	which	all	of	the	threads	effectively	merge	into	a	block	of
stuff	that	I	am	likening	to	Jell-O.	When	we	send	DOers	back	in	time	to	carry
out	DEDEs,	 it’s	 like	 tapping	the	Jell-O	with	a	spoon	and	making	 it	 jiggle	a
little	 bit.	 It	 creates	 internal	 stresses	 that	 the	 material	 is	 capable	 of
withstanding.	But	if	we	try	to	change	too	much,	too	fast—

HATCHER:	It	cracks?
ODA:	Yes.
HATCHER:	It	just	splits	wide	open.
ODA:	Just	for	a	moment.	But	unlike	a	Jell-O	dessert	on	your	plate,	the	space-

time	continuum	cannot	simply	fall	apart.	It	is	self-healing.	The	cracks	must
be	sealed	immediately.	If	you	are	far	away	from	the	crack,	then	you	are	safe



—it’s	like	being	far	away	from	an	earthquake.	But	if	you	are	unlucky	enough
to	 be	 right	 along	 the	 crack	 boundary,	 then	 you	 are	 in	 for	 a	 bad	 time.	 The
universe	needs	to	decide	whether	you	are	going	to	go	on	existing	or	not.

HATCHER:	 You’re	 referring	 here	 to	 the	 so-called	 Tearsheet	 Brewery.	 What
happened	in	that	scenario?

ODA:	You	might	think	of	the	Tearsheet	Brewery	as	like	a	lettuce	leaf	embedded
in	 a	 Jell-O	molded	 salad.	Because	 of	 the	unfortunate	 chain	 of	 events,	 this
piece	of	lettuce	was	yanked	out	of	the	Jell-O	and	ceased	to	exist.	A	vacancy
was	 left	 in	 its	wake,	which	self-healed	with	the	most	terrible	consequences
for	those	unlucky	enough	to	be	near	it.

HATCHER:	Terrible	consequences,	indeed.	Thank	you,	Dr.	Oda.	Madame	Chair,	I
yield	my	time.

CHAIRMAN	ATKINSON:	Are	there	any	further	questions	for	Dr.	Oda	at	this	time?
No?	Very	well,	you	may	step	down,	Dr.	Oda.

SENATOR	COLE:	Madame	Chair,	in	light	of	Dr.	Oda’s	remarks	I	would	like	to	call
Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons	back.

[REDACTED]

SENATOR	COLE:	.	.	.	the	descriptions	of	the	Tearsheet	Brewery	event	are,	in	sum,
so	bloodcurdling,	and	the	benefits	of	this	mission	so	trivial	in	comparison—
the	recovery	of	an	old	book	from	a	cask	in	Dr.	Oda’s	backyard!—that	it	must
call	into	question	why	we	are	being	asked	to	spend	the	taxpayers’	money	on
this	 sort	 of	 undertaking	 at	 any	 level,	 to	 say	 nothing	 of	 the	 exorbitant
requests	embodied	in	this	proposed	budget.

CHAIRWOMAN	 ATKINSON:	 I	 would	 like	 to	 thank	my	 distinguished	 colleague	 for
that	impassioned,	eloquent,	and	thorough	statement.	Was	there	a	question
for	Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons?

COLE:	Why	should	we	spend	the	taxpayers’	money	on	building	a	device	that	will
only	expose	this	great	nation	to	additional	risk?

LIEUTENANT	 COLONEL	 LYONS:	 Thank	 you,	 Senator	 Cole.	 For	 high-level	 strategic
questions	I	might	refer	you	to	General	Frink,	but	I’m	happy	to	address	your
question	on	a	more	nuts-and-bolts	level.	As	you	point	out,	we	need	to	keep
the	costs	as	low	as	possible	while	minimizing	risk	and	maximizing	benefits.
From	 a	 cost	 point	 of	 view,	 I’ll	 remind	 the	 committee	 that	 the	 only	 work
being	 actively	 funded	 right	now,	 and	 for	 the	next	 few	months,	 is	CRONE:
Chronodynamic	 Research	 for	 Optimizing	 Next	 Engagement.	 We	 have	 cut



back	the	number	of	DEDEs	to	the	bare	minimum	needed	to	sustain	progress
and	 we	 have	 limited	 those	 to	missions	 of	 an	 exploratory	 or	 experimental
nature.	Most	of	our	 current	budget	 is	devoted	 to	pathfinding	work	on	 the
Chronotron,	a	device	whose	entire	purpose	will	be	to	minimize	risk.

COLE:	To	minimize	risk,	you	say.
LYONS:	Yes,	Senator.	That	is	its	purpose.
COLE:	 Both	Dr.	Oda	 and	General	 Frink	 in	 their	 earlier	 testimony	 praised	 the

Chronotron	 as	 a	 tool	 that	 would	 enable	 DODO	 to	 plan	 future	 missions.
Would	you	concur?

LYONS:	Yes,	it	duplicates	the	functionality	of	the	quipus	or	other	similar	devices
used	by	witches	to	navigate	the	different	Strands	of	history,	and	combines
that	with	 a	 colossal	 database	of	historical	 facts.	 If	we’d	had	 it	 earlier,	we’d
have	 planned	 our	 first	DEDEs	 differently	 and	 gotten	 results	more	 quickly
and	more	safely.

COLE:	Or	perhaps	chosen	some	different	DEDE	altogether?
LYONS:	 Yes,	 it’s	 quite	 possible	 that	 with	 a	 functioning	 Chronotron	 we	might

have	been	able	to	 identify	something	both	easier	and	more	profitable	than
recovering	a	Bay	Psalm	Book.

COLE:	This	is	precisely	what	concerns	me	about	building	the	Chronotron.
LYONS:	 I’m	 sorry,	 Senator	 Cole.	 Why	 would	 you	 be	 concerned	 about	 DODO

having	 a	 tool	 that	 would	 enable	 us	 to	 make	 more	 informed	 choices?	 As
opposed	to	just	winging	it?

COLE:	When	you	just	wing	it,	you	are	aware	of	the	risk	and	the	uncertainty,	and
inclined	to	be	more	cautious.	When	you	have	a	high-tech	tool	giving	you	an
illusion	 of	 omniscience,	 I	 am	 concerned	 that	 it	 will	 lead	 to	 greater	 risk-
taking.

LYONS:	I	would	argue	that	more	information	is	always	better.	I	would	make	an
analogy	to	using	computers	to	predict	the	weather.	Back	in	the	days	when	all
we	had	was	a	weathervane	and	a	barometer,	a	ship’s	captain	had	to	make	his
best	 judgment	about	what	 the	weather	was	going	 to	do,	 and	 trust	his	 gut.
Now	that	we	have	weather	satellites	and	computerized	forecasts,	the	captain
can	make	informed	decisions.

COLE:	 It	 is	 an	 attractive	 analogy,	 but	 it’s	 self-serving,	 since	 we	 all	 know	 that
those	 satellites	 and	 computers	 actually	 work	 most	 of	 the	 time.	 You’re
likening	the	Chronotron	to	 familiar	 technology	that	we	trust.	How	close	 is
the	Chronotron,	really,	to	deserving	that	trust?

LYONS:	 As	 of	 today,	 about	 halfway	 through	 the	 CRONE	 phase,	 we	 have	 the



individual	 processing	 units—the	 QUIPUs,	 or	 Quantum	 Information
Processing	 Units—running	 according	 to	 spec,	 and	 we’re	 developing	 the
manufacturing	capability	to	produce	them	in	larger	numbers.	By	linking	just
a	few	of	them	together	we’ve	been	able	to	achieve	more	accurate	results	than
the	quipu-like	item	Erszebet	was	using—

ERSZEBET	KARPATHY:	My	 számológép,	which	has	 now	been	 lost	 because	 of	 the
incompetencies	and	manipulations	of	this	government.

ATKINSON:	Ms.	Karpathy,	you	are	out	of	order.
COLE:	 Yes,	 thank	 you,	Ms.	Karpathy,	we	have	 already	noted	 your	 remarks	 on

this	topic	several	times.
KARPATHY:	My	comments	have	not	yielded	results.
ATKINSON:	Order!	Order!

[REDACTED]

(NEXT	DAY)
SENATOR	EFFINGHAM:	.	.	.	moving	on	to	Line	539	of	the	proposed	budget,	unless

my	 eyes	 deceive	 me,	 you	 wish	 to	 allocate	 twelve	 full-time	 positions	 to
historians?

MELISANDE	STOKES:	In	order	for	the	Chronotron	to	do	its	job	it	has	to	have	a	vast
database	of	historical	 facts	 in	memory.	Going	back	 to	 the	weather	analogy
from	yesterday,	 you	 can	build	 a	 computer	 that’s	 really	 good	at	performing
the	mathematical	calculations	needed	to	predict	weather,	but	it’s	going	to	be
totally	 useless	 unless	 you	 can	 feed	 it	 real-time	 information	 about	 actual
weather	 conditions.	Which	 is	why	we	need	weather	balloons	 and	 satellites
and	 so	 on—to	 supply	 that	 data.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 the	 Chronotron,	 we	 have
these	QUIPUs	 that	know	how	 to	do	 the	math,	but	 they’re	useless	without
historical	data.

EFFINGHAM:	I	believe	we	covered	this	in	Lines	420	through	487,	which	describe
a	program	to	extract	 this	 information	directly	 from	digitized	history	books
already	in	the	Library	of	Congress.

STOKES:	 Yes,	 that	 covers	 ninety	 percent	 of	 it,	 but	 some	 books	 contain
ambiguous	 material	 that	 confuses	 our	 natural	 language	 processing
algorithms.	When	 that	happens,	 the	 offending	passage	 can	be	 sent	up	 the
line	to	a	human	reader	who	can	try	to	parse	it.	For	obvious	reasons	we	think
that	historians	will	do	the	best	job.



EFFINGHAM:	Very	well,	but	it	appears	that	their	cost	is	being	split	with	another
subprogram	called	.	.	.	DORC?

STOKES:	We	should	probably	come	up	with	a	different	name	for	it,	but	DORC	is
the	 Diachronic	 Operative	 Resource	 Center.	 Colonel	 Lyons	 and	 I	 had	 to
improvise	our	own	training	program	when	we	learned	how	to	speak,	dress,
and	behave	 in	colonial	Boston	and	Elizabethan	England.	As	DODO’s	scope
of	operations	expands	to	other	DTAPs	.	.	.

EFFINGHAM:	Ah,	yes,	 thank	you	 for	 jogging	my	memory,	Ms.	Stokes.	DORC	 is
like	the	Starfleet	Academy,	 if	I	may	indulge	myself	with	a	reference	to	Star
Trek.

STOKES:	The	Hogwarts.
EFFINGHAM:	 Yes,	 the	 training	 ground	 where	 DOers	 will	 acquire	 the	 requisite

skills.
STOKES:	Those	budget	entries	begin	around	Line	950.
EFFINGHAM:	Yes,	my	aide	has	found	it	for	me.
STOKES:	 It	makes	 sense	 to	 split	 the	historians’	 time	so	 that	 they	 can	help	out

with	DORC	activities.
EFFINGHAM:	This	is	quite	a	large	section	of	the	budget	and	I	may	need	additional

time	to	go	through	it	.	.	.

[REDACTED]

SENATOR	EFFINGHAM:	Line	1162	jumps	out	at	me.	Why	do	you	need	to	spend	so
much	money	on	swords?

LIEUTENANT	COLONEL	LYONS:	It	turns	out	that	they	are	more	expensive	than	you
might	think.	They	have	to	be	hand-made	from	special	kinds	of	steel.

EFFINGHAM:	You	are	missing	the	point	of	my	question,	Colonel	Lyons.	Let	me
rephrase:	 this	 seems	 to	 imply	 that	 you	 are	 assembling	 a	 squad	of	warriors
and	assassins.

LYONS:	Probably	not	assassins	per	se	because	of	the	risk	of	Diachronic	Shear.
EFFINGHAM:	You	can’t	just	go	back	and	kill	Napoleon.
LYONS:	It	would	be	a	terrible	idea.
EFFINGHAM:	Renewing	my	question	.	.	.
LYONS:	 People	 back	 then—people	 of	 the	 upper	 classes—carried	 swords	 and

other	 edged	 weapons	 all	 the	 time.	 And	 they	 knew	 how	 to	 use	 them.	 Any
DOer,	 at	 least	 any	 male	 DOer,	 who	 went	 back	 pretending	 to	 be	 such	 a
person,	but	who	had	no	skill	with	using	a	sword,	would	be	as	conspicuous	as



someone	who	couldn’t	mount	a	horse	or	speak	the	language.
EFFINGHAM:	Are	you	expecting	some	of	your	DOers	to	engage	in	swordfights?
LYONS:	I	had	to	do	it	several	times	during	my	DEDE	in	London.
EFFINGHAM:	But	that	was	before	you	had	the	Chronotron—it	was	an	improvised

DEDE.
LYONS:	Wars,	battles,	and	duels	are	important	events.	In	some	cases,	depending

on	what	 the	 Chronotron	 tells	 us,	we	may	 need	DOers	who	 are	 capable	 of
effecting	 that	 kind	 of	 change—or	 at	 a	 minimum,	 staying	 alive	 in	 such
environments.

EFFINGHAM:	It	sounds	dangerous.
LYONS:	It	is,	by	definition.	Only	a	small	minority	of	DOers	will	be	fighters.	They

make	a	big	splashy	impression	in	the	budget	because	we	have	to	buy	them
training	equipment.

EFFINGHAM:	But	the	majority	will	have	other	specializations?
LYONS:	 Yes.	As	 an	 example,	during	 the	 current	CRONE	phase,	 our	 efforts	 are

focused	on	making	discreet	insertions	into	certain	DTAPS,	trying	to	develop
and	nurture	our	relationships	with	KCWs—

EFFINGHAM:	With	what?
LYONS:	Known	Compliant	Witches.
EFFINGHAM:	 Ah.	 Yes.	 This	 takes	 us	 back	 to,	 er,	 Line	 345	 or	 thereabouts.

Developing	the	witch	network.	The	subway	map.
LYONS:	Yes,	like	the	subway	map	that	tells	us	how	we	can	route	our	DOers	from

one	DTAP	 to	 another	 and	 eventually	 get	 them	home	 safe.	Obviously,	 this
relies	on	having	friendly	relationships	with	witches.

EFFINGHAM:	Who	tend	to	be,	shall	we	say,	peculiar	individuals.
ERSZEBET	KARPATHY:	I	find	your	tone	offensive,	Senator.
CHAIRWOMAN	ATKINSON:	Order!
EFFINGHAM:	Go	on,	Colonel	Lyons.
KARPATHY:	Are	you	ignoring	me?	I	said	I	find	your	tone	offensive.	I	do	not	even

want	to	be	here,	I	am	here	only	out	of	the	goodness	of	my	heart,	but	all	of
you,	all	of	these	millions	of	dollars	and	plans	to	rule	the	planet	and	all	that,
do	you	understand	that	all	of	it	depends	on	me?	And	yet	you	use	that	tone
with	me?	Who	do	you	think	you	are?

EFFINGHAM:	It’s	all	right,	Madame	Chair.	Now,	Ms.	Karpathy—
KARPATHY:	Don’t	“Ms.	Karpathy”	me.	Apologize	for	your	tone.
EFFINGHAM:	I	apologize,	Ms.	Karpathy.
KARPATHY:	I	do	not	accept	your	apology.



EFFINGHAM:	Why	not?
KARPATHY:	You	do	not	sound	at	all	sincere	about	it.	It	does	not	count	if	it	is	not

sincere.	 I	am	going	to	 leave	this	room	and	I	want	you	to	think	about	what
happens	 if	 I	 do	 not	 return.	 Then	 when	 I	 do	 return,	 I	 expect	 you	 will
apologize	appropriately.

MELISANDE	STOKES:	Tristan,	shall	I—?
LYONS:	Yeah.
ATKINSON:	Let	the	record	show	that	Ms.	Erszebet	Karpathy	has	left	the	hearing

room	without	 authorization	 at	 1723	hours	 accompanied	by	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes.

EFFINGHAM:	Colonel	Lyons,	you	were	saying?
LYONS:	Erszebet	has	just	given	you	an	excellent	example	of	why	we	require	very

specialized	agents	to	win	over	witches.	They	don’t	want	money.	They’re	not
the	sort	to	join	us	on	behalf	of	Truth,	Justice,	and	the	American	Way.	Every
witch	has	her	own	agenda	 for	why	 she	might	or	might	not	help	us.	 So	we
need	to	be	able	to	find	witches,	but	then	also	to	win	them	over.	Sometimes
that	 can	 be	 a	 complicated	 undertaking,	 involving	 a	 series	 of	 actions	 that
require	various	sets	of	skills.

EFFINGHAM:	I	suspect	I’m	not	the	only	one	in	the	room	who	would	appreciate	an
example	of	what	you	mean.

LYONS:	 Okay,	 recently	 we	 wanted	 to	 establish	 a	 foothold	 in	 the	 Balkans	 for
reasons	 that	 General	 Frink	 can	 explain	 if	 you	 need	 to	 know,	 so	 we	 did
research	to	anticipate	where	a	witch	was,	and	then	we	Sent	back	one	of	our
agents	to	find	the	witch.	Well,	he	found	her,	and	she	did	agree	to	Send	him
back	 here,	 but	 she	 wasn’t	 interested	 in	 being	 on	 call	 for	 us,	 so	 to	 speak,
unless	we	made	it	worth	her	while.	Her	husband	was	imprisoned,	so	she	told
our	DOer	that	if	he	could	get	the	husband	out	of	prison,	she’d	work	with	us.

EFFINGHAM:	Why	didn’t	she	just,	you	know,	use	magic	to	get	him	out?
LYONS:	With	respect,	magic	isn’t	the	same	thing	as	omnipotence,	Senator.	It’s	a

hereditary	 skill	 set,	 really,	 that’s	 all.	Anyhow,	our	 fellow	who	we	Sent	back
there,	 his	 language	 skills	 are	 first-rate	 and	 he’s	 a	 tremendous	 athlete	 and
good	at	problem-solving,	but	he’s	not	much	of	a	schmoozer	and	he	doesn’t
have	 the	skills	 that	would	assist	 in	a	 jailbreak.	So	 the	witch	Sent	him	back
here,	but	said	she	didn’t	want	to	hear	from	DODO	again	unless	we	could	get
her	 husband	 out	 of	 jail.	 If	 we’d	 had	 somebody	 who	 specialized	 in	 picking
locks	 or	 was	 a	 general	 escape	 artist	 or	 whatever,	 we	 could	 have	 Sent	 that
person	back.	We	didn’t	have	anyone	 like	that,	so	we	had	to	try	bribing	the



prison	guard,	but	we	did	not	succeed.
EFFINGHAM:	Bribe	them	with	what?	According	to	this	document,	you	can’t	take

anything	back	in	time	with	you.
LYONS:	That’s	correct.
EFFINGHAM:	So	what	did	you	try	to	bribe	him	with?
LYONS:	Um.	Mel—Dr.	Stokes—she	went	back	because.	She	was	willing	 to	 try.

Bribing	him	with.	What	she	brought	with	her.
EFFINGHAM:	Her	body?
LYONS:	Yes.
EFFINGHAM:	You’re	saying	she

[REDACTED]

LIEUTENANT	COLONEL	LYONS:	The	utter	failure	of	this	effort	led	us	to	conclude	we
needed	an	actual	sex	worker,	or	at	least	somebody	capable	of	passing	as	one.

SENATOR	EFFINGHAM:	I	yield,	Madame	Chairwoman.
CHAIRWOMAN	ATKINSON:	I	recognize	Senator	Villesca.
SENATOR	 VILLESCA:	 Colonel	 Lyons,	 I	 hope	 you	 appreciate	 that	 prostitution	 is

illegal	in	this	great	country	of	ours,	except	in	certain	rural	parts	of	Nevada.
LYONS:	 The	 prostitute	 would	 be	 plying	 her	 trade	 in	 sixteenth-century	 Balkan

territory,	sir.	Or	possibly	his	trade,	based	on	Dr.	Stokes’s	reception.	Anyhow,
we	haven’t	found	one	yet.

VILLESCA:	You’re	saying	you	want	to	use	taxpayer	money	to	recruit	prostitutes.
LYONS:	That’s	not	a	typical	example,	sir.	We	need	people	with	specific	skill	sets

like	masons	 and	 soldiers	 and	people	with	 specific	 athletic	 abilities,	 and	we
need	people	who	can	blend	in—like	I	said,	schmoozers.	Actors.	Whatever	it
takes.

GENERAL	FRINK:	Madame	Chairwoman,	if	I	may?
ATKINSON:	Proceed.
FRINK:	With	all	due	 respect,	Senator	Villesca,	 it’s	not	 like	 taxpayer	money	has

never	been	used	to	hire	prostitutes	before.	I	know	you’re	aware	of	that.

[REDACTED]

(NEXT	DAY)
GENERAL	FRINK:	 .	 .	 .	 an	 ongoing	 theme	 in	 the	 last	 few	 days’	 deliberations	 has

been	 the	 need	 for	 wisdom	 and	 discretion	 in	 future	 DODO	 operations.



Senator	Hatcher	has	reminded	us	of	the	need	to	avoid	any	future	incidents
such	 as	 the	 one	 in	 which	 Les	 Holgate	 sacrificed	 his	 life	 for	 his	 country.
Senator	Cole	has	expressed	concern	that	a	fully	functional	Chronotron	may
lead	 us	 into	 taking	 risks	 we	 might	 not	 otherwise	 consider.	 With	 Senator
Effingham,	 we’ve	 had	 an	 illuminating	 discussion	 of	 the	 importance	 of
learning	 from	 the	 wisdom	 of	 experienced	 professional	 historians.	 Finally,
Senator	Villesca	has	spoken	with	great	passion	and	eloquence	of	the	need	to
maintain	 moral	 standards	 that	 we	 can	 all	 be	 proud	 of.	 It	 is	 for	 all	 these
reasons	that	I	am	pleased	to	introduce	Dr.	Blevins	of	Harvard	University	as
the	 new	 acting	 head	 of	 the	 Department	 of	 Diachronic	 Operations.	 He
replaces	Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons,	who	is	being	reassigned	to	command	of
DODO’s	 “boots	 on	 the	 ground”	 operational	 unit,	 and	who	will	 henceforth
report	to	Dr.	Blevins.	Though	the	academic	world	knows	Roger	Blevins	as	a
peerless	 scholar,	 those	of	us	with	 security	 clearances	 are	 aware	of	his	 long
service	to	his	country	as

[REDACTED]

SENATOR	HATCHER:	.	.	.	even	for	one	of	your	distinguished	credentials,	this	is	an
important	career	transition,	Dr.	Blevins,	and	so	I	would	like	to	be	the	first	to
congratulate	you.	Frankly,	I	am	pleased	to	see	that	you	are	being	moved	off
of	the	Advisory	Board.	I	myself	am	on	more	advisory	boards	than	I	can	even
remember,	and	not	one	of	them	ever	asks	me	for	advice.

DR.	BLEVINS:	 I’ve	 had	 similar	 experiences,	 Senator,	 and	 this	 is	 why	 I	 took	 the
unusual	 step	 of	 establishing	 an	 office	 within	 DODO	 headquarters	 in
Cambridge,	and	spending	time	there	on	a	regular	basis.	I’ll	now	hand	that	off
to	 Dr.	 Rudge,	 who	 I	most	 certainly	 will	 be	 asking	 for	 advice	 on	 a	 regular
basis.

HATCHER:	How	do	you	see	 that	 facility	developing	as	we	 transition	out	of	 the
CRONE	phase?	What	does	it	look	like	in	a	year?	Two	years?

BLEVINS:	As	a	very	special	hybrid	of	tech	start-up,	liberal	arts	college,	and	Special
Forces	base.	Our	present	thinking	suggests	we’ll	need	about	a	dozen	kinds	of
specialists,	divided	 into	classes,	such	as	tracker,	 fighter,	entertainer,	and	so
on.	All	 of	 them	will	 need	 immersive	 training	 in	 the	 language	 and	 ethos	of
whatever	DTAP	 they	 go	 to.	Meaning	we	 also	 need	 to	 hire	 people	 to	 train
them	 in	 those	 things—manners,	 customs,	 how	 to	 put	 on	 and	 take	 off
clothes,	fighting	styles.	All	of	that	falls	under	the	heading	of	the	Diachronic



Operative	 Resource	 Center,	 whose	 acting	 director	 will	 be	my	 student,	 Dr.
Melisande	Stokes.

SENATOR	 EFFINGHAM:	 The	 budget	 and	 head	 count	 envisioned	 for	 DORC	 are
impressive.

BLEVINS:	The	personnel	 expenses	add	up	as	quickly	as	 the	 technical	 expenses.
That’s	why	the	budget	is	as	large	as	it	is.	We	obviously	can’t	outsource	any	of
these	 services,	 given	 that	 there	 is	 evidence	 that	 the	 governments	 of
[REDACTED]	and	[REDACTED]	are	already	engaged	in	this	kind	of	training
program.	Whoever	works	for	us	has	to	be	kept	very	close	to	the	mothership,
as	it	were,	and	that	kind	of	loyalty	doesn’t	come	cheap.

EFFINGHAM:	How	do	you	know	that	[REDACTED]	and	[REDACTED]	are	ahead
of	us	in	this?

BLEVINS:	That’s	classified,	Senator,	even	for	the	purposes	of	this	hearing.
EFFINGHAM:	Be	that	as	it	may,	I	question	whether	a	linguistics	student	with	no

management	experience	is	equipped	to	manage	a	department	of	that	size.
BLEVINS:	Yes.	Most	of	the	day-to-day	burden	of	HR,	facilities,	and	so	on	will	fall

under	 the	 Conventional/Contemporary	 Operations	 Department	 for	 which
we	have	been	fortunate	 to	recruit	a	very	able	manager	 in	Macy	Stoll.	With
those	managerial	and	administrative	tasks	out	of	the	way,	Dr.	Stokes	will	be
free	 to	 concentrate	 on	 the	 historical	 and	 linguistic	 research	 that	 is	 her
specialty.

HATCHER:	 Well,	 I’m	 in	 no	 position	 to	 assess	 the	 technical	 requirements	 and
their	 associated	 costs—I’ll	 leave	 that	 to	 my	 honored	 colleagues	 on	 this
hearing	 committee	 with	 more	 expertise	 in	 this	 field,	 such	 as	 Senator
Effingham—but	 having	 compiled	 different	 staffs,	 for	 different	 purposes,
over	 the	 years,	 I	 certainly	 feel	 capable	 of	 assessing	 your	 personnel	 hiring
goals.	 So	 I	will	 be	 submitting	my	opinion	 that	 the	budget	 you	 seek	 is	 tied
into	your	laying	down	very	clear	goals	for	who	exactly	you	wish	to	hire,	and
why.	That	includes	reports	on	all	potential	witches	you’d	be	working	with	in
other	DTAPs.	Can	you	do	that	for	me?

BLEVINS:	I’ll	see	to	it	that	Dr.	Stokes	writes	up	something	specific,	as	soon	as	she
has	calmed	Ms.	Karpathy.

HATCHER:	Out	of	curiosity—a	curiosity	I	suspect	is	shared	by	other	members	of
this	panel—how	exactly	does	one	calm	Ms.	Karpathy?

BLEVINS:	 It	 always	 seems	 to	 help	 to	 listen	 to	 her	 spend	 a	 few	 uninterrupted
minutes	besmirching	the	reputations	of	certain	people,	with	Colonel	Lyons
being	a	particularly	frequent	target	of	abuse.



HATCHER:	 Is	 it	accurate	 to	describe	her,	 then,	as	a	 truculent	and	abusive	 team
member?

LIEUTENANT	COLONEL	LYONS:	 If	 I	may,	Madame	Chair,	 it	 is	 accurate	 to	describe
her	 as	 the	 only	 witch	 available	 to	 us	 at	 the	 present	moment.	 That	 pretty
much	trumps	any	other	description.

GENERAL	 FRINK:	 What	 Colonel	 Lyons	 is	 trying	 to	 say,	 Senator,	 is	 that	 unlike
politicians,	her	job	security	does	not	depend	on	other	people’s	approval.

BLEVINS:	 Not	 that	 General	 Frink	 is	 suggesting	 there’s	 anything	 inappropriate
about	politicians	having	that	dependency.

FRINK:	Yeah,	that’s	right.	Thank	you	for	clarifying	that,	Dr.	Blevins.
BLEVINS:	So	to	get	back	to	the	point,	you’re	asking	us	to	create	two	things.	First,

a	personnel	profile	of	our	most	desired	hires.	We’re	happy	to	do	that.	I	can
create	a	template	as	soon	as	this	hearing	is	adjourned.	Colonel	Lyons	and	Dr.
Stokes	 can	 help	 me	 out	 as	 their	 schedules	 allow.	 Second,	 a	 template	 for
recording	how	we	determine	who	to	approach	as	a	potential	KCW.

HATCHER:	 That	 works	 for	 me.	 I	 yield	 the	 floor	 to	 my	 colleagues	 for	 further
questions.

FROM	LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK
TO	ALL	DODO	DEPARTMENT	HEADS

DAY	581	(MARCH,	YEAR	2)

After	 several	grueling	days	of	 congressional	hearings,	 I	 am	pleased	 to
announce	 that	 DODO’s	 budget	 has	 been	 approved	 and	 sent	 on	 to
POTUS	 for	 signature.	 All	 DODO	 staff	 are	 to	 be	 thanked	 for	 their
hard	work	over	the	difficult	months	since	the	tragic	and	heroic	demise
of	 our	 friend	 and	 colleague	 Les	 Holgate.	 During	 that	 span	 of	 time
DODO	 has	 been	 stripped	 down	 to	 the	 bare	 metal,	 as	 it	 were,	 and
rebuilt	into	a	new	kind	of	organization	that	we	can	all	be	proud	of.

New	 resources	 and	 responsibilities	 naturally	 bring	 organizational
changes	in	their	wake.	Effective	immediately,	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	is	the
overall	 head	of	 the	Department	of	Diachronic	Operations,	 reporting



directly	to	me,	with	a	dotted	line	to	Dr.	Constantine	Rudge	at	IARPA.
To	 him	 will	 be	 reporting	 the	 heads	 of	 various	 subdepartments,	 as
bulleted	below:

-	 	 Dr.	 Melisande	 Stokes,	 acting	 head	 of	 the	 Diachronic	 Operative
Resource	Center.

-	 	 Macy	 Stoll,	 head	 of	 C/COD	 (Conventional/Contemporary
Operations	Department).

-		Dr.	Frank	Oda,	head	of	Research.
-		Lieutenant	Colonel	Tristan	Lyons,	head	of	Diachronic	Operations,

which	for	obvious	reasons	will	be	organized	and	run	along	the	lines
of	a	military	unit.

With	Dr.	Blevins’s	change	in	status,	the	Advisory	Board	is	reduced,
at	 least	 temporarily,	 to	 one	 member,	 that	 being	 Dr.	 Constantine
Rudge.

I	hope	that	the	rest	of	you	will	 join	me	in	welcoming	Ms.	Stoll	to
the	organization.	Her	long	experience	managing	operational	matters	in
various	 civilian	 and	 military	 environments	 will	 no	 doubt	 prove	 of
enormous	value	to	DODO	during	the	coming	era	of	rapid	expansion.

Top-level	direction	on	DODO’s	mission	will	be	supplied	during	a
meeting	within	the	next	few	days	at	the	Trapezoid.

Best	wishes	to	all	of	you	and	may	God	bless	America.

Gen.	Octavian	Frink

ABOUT	ME

NAME:	Mortimer	Shore

OFFICIAL	TITLE:	Systems	Administrator

UNOFFICIAL	 TITLES:	What’s-his-name,	 the	 Tall	Guy	with	 the	 Beard,	 the	 Sword
Geek,	the	IT	Guy,	Hey,	What	the	F***	Happened	to	my	Email?



BIO:	 Hey	 all,	 as	 DODO	 keeps	 expanding	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 lot	 of	 colorful
rumor	floating	around	about	how	I	came	to	work	here	and	so	I	thought	I	would
tell	the	whole	story.

TL;DR:	I	got	recruited	out	of	a	park	to	prevent	Tristan	from	getting	his	ass	kicked
in	a	swordfight	and	they	found	out	I	was	a	CS	major.

EDIT:	This	 is	mostly	about	computers.	 If	you	are	visiting	 this	page	because	you
are	a	DOer	and	you	think	you	might	be	about	to	get	into	a	swordfight,	scroll	to
the	end.

So,	 as	 you	 can	 probably	 tell	 from	 my	 appearance	 and	 mannerisms,	 I	 am
California	born	and	bred,	my	father	and	his	father	before	him	(heh)	worked	in
commercial	 building	 construction	 in	 SoCal,	 punching	 out	 Home	 Depots	 and
parking	garages	and	making	enough	money	to	put	me	in	a	private	school	when	I
turned	out	to	be	kind	of	a	screw-up	academically.	Turned	out	I	was	just	bored
and	over-medicated	LOL	so	they	cut	off	my	Adderall	and	put	me	on	the	robotics
team	where	I	made	the	mistake	of	telling	them	I	knew	how	to	weld	(because	of
my	dad’s	company)	and	so	then	I	was	just	the	welding	slave	for	a	long	time	until
they	finally	let	me	start	writing	code.	Long	story	short,	I	ended	up	at	MIT	doing
both,	 which	 is	 to	 say,	 metal	 and	 code.	 The	 code	 part	 of	 it	 is	 pretty	 self
explanatory:	an	MIT	CS	major	can	pretty	much	always	get	a	job,	a	fact	that	was
important	to	my	dad	who	was	paying	a	lot	of	money	to	put	me	through	school.

As	 you	 have	 probably	 noticed	 if	 you	work	 at	DODO,	 I	 hang	 out	 near	 the
server	 room.	During	my	 first	 six	months	 at	DODO	 I	 spent	most	 of	my	 time
setting	up	ODIN,	the	Operational	DODO	Intranet.	If	 that	sounds	 like	a	 long
time,	let	me	just	say	that	getting	a	full-featured	wiki	to	run	under	Shiny	Hat	is
no	picnic!	I	still	put	out	IT	fires	and	help	people	with	their	email,	etc.	when	not
working	with	Dr.	Oda	 on	 the	Chronotron.	We’re	 recruiting	more	 IT	 staff	 to
keep	our	 systems	 stable	 and	 secure,	 so	pretty	 soon	 I’ll	 hopefully	 be	 a	 full-time
Chronotron	geek.

A	word	 about	metal.	 The	 substance,	 not	 the	 genre	 of	music	 (though	 I	 like
both!):

This	 is	 the	 part	 of	 my	 story	 that	 seems	 to	 cause	 the	 maximum	 amount	 of
confusion	and	rumor	among	new	hires	at	DODO	and	so	this	is	the	part	you’ll
want	to	read	if	you	are	having	trouble	understanding	why	a	newly	minted	MIT
CS	major	 is	helping	people	with	their	email	 for	a	small	gov’t	agency	instead	of



making	a	zillion	dollars	in	a	start-up	LOL.
My	dad	was	a	civil	engineering	major	with	a	minor	in	metallurgy	and	so	this

runs	in	the	family—a	lot	of	commercial	buildings	are	made	out	of	steel,	and	in
California	where	earthquakes	are	a	problem	there	are	a	lot	of	rules	around	what
kinds	 of	 steel	 to	 use,	 how	 to	 weld	 it	 properly,	 etc.	 I	 picked	 a	 lot	 of	 this	 up
through	osmosis	when	I	was	a	kid,	and	when	I	was	doing	robotics	in	high	school,
and	 the	 smart	 kids	 wouldn’t	 let	 me	 write	 code,	 I	 ended	 up	 doing	 a	 lot	 of
industrial	 art:	 robots	with	 flame	 throwers,	 rotating	 blades,	 etc.	 So,	 I	 ended	up
doing	a	double	major	in	Comp	Sci	and	metallurgy.

At	 this	point	I	could	say	a	 lot	about	 steel.	A	LOT.	But	I’m	not	going	to.	 If
you	want	to	talk	about	steel	FOR	A	LONG	TIME,	come	by	my	desk	with	some
beers	LOL.	Point	is,	I	am	a	steel	geek.

When	you	are	a	steel	geek	you	inevitably	end	up	talking	about	swords.	Sort	of
like	when	you	are	a	climber	you	end	up	talking	about	Mt.	Everest.

I	got	interested	in	swords	when	I	put	some	crappy	homemade	blades	on	one
of	my	robots	and	they	kept	breaking/bending	and	I	couldn’t	understand	why.

My	 interest	 in	 swords	 led	 to	 an	 interest	 in	 swordfighting.	 Not	 modern
fencing,	 which	 is	 cool	 and	 everything	 but	 totally	 different.	 I	 mean	 historical
swordfighting	with	actual	things	that	look	like	swords.

As	 a	 freshman	 I	 joined	 a	 LARPing	 group	 that	 did	 foam	 fighting	 on	 the
Esplanade,	 but	 that	 was	 just	 a	 gateway	 drug	 to	 a	 real	 HEMA	 (Historical
European	Martial	Arts)	group	that	fought	with	real	steel	blades	(blunt	obviously)
using	documented	historical	techniques.

During	 one	 of	 our	 practices	 I	 was	 approached	 by	 Rebecca	 (East-Oda)	 who
asked	me	 a	 lot	 of	 questions.	Not	 the	usual	 dumb	questions	 like	 “is	 that	 a	 real
sword?”	but	 like	 super	nitty-gritty	questions	 that	 clued	me	 in	 something	weird
was	going	on.	She	took	me	back	to	her	and	Frank’s	house	and	NDAed	me,	and
like	ten	minutes	later	I	was	with	Tristan	teaching	him	the	Four	Grounds	and	the
Four	Governors	of	George	Silver,	the	Elizabethan	backsword	master	who	hated
Italian	rapier	fighters	with	an	unquenchable	fiery	hate	LOL.

Later	I	found	out	I	had	passed	a	background	check,	and	after	I	had	peed	in	a
jar	and	all	the	other	stuff	I	was	sworn	in	and	have	been	working	for	DODO	ever
since—I	 guess	 seven	 or	 eight	months	now.	 I	 am	 responsible	 for	 having	 set	 up
most	of	DODO’s	basic	IT	infrastructure	such	as	the	intranet,	the	wiki,	etc.	but
don’t	hate	on	me	because	it	was	all	supposed	to	be	temporary	LOL.

Dr.	Frank	Oda	was	also	kind	enough	to	take	me	under	his	wing	and	get	me	in
on	the	ground	floor	of	the	Chronotron	project.	DISCLAIMER	RE	THAT:	I	am



not	a	physicist	and	so	all	of	the	quantum	mechanics	underlying	the	chipset	of	the
QUIPUs	 (the	 Quantum	 Information	 Processing	 Units)	 is	 totally
incomprehensible	to	me.	All	I	know	about	it	is	that	it	runs	really,	really	fast	and
solves	 problems	 that	 would	 take	 forever	 using	 traditional	 non-quantum
computation.

Fortunately	 for	 dumbass	 computer	 scientists	 like	 me,	 at	 one	 end	 of	 each
QUIPU	 unit	 there’s	 a	 connector	 where	 you	 can	 jack	 in	 a	 plain	 old	 Ethernet
cable,	 and	 from	 that	 point	 onwards	 it	 just	 looks	 like	 a	 traditional	 computer,
albeit	a	really	fast	and	weird	one,	to	the	outside	world.	All	of	the	cables	from	all
of	the	QUIPUs	(as	of	this	writing,	128	of	them—soon	to	be	256)	feed	into	the
Chronotron	itself	which,	never	mind	what	people	say	about	it,	 is	JUST	A	BIG
OLD	COMPUTING	CLUSTER	that	happens	to	be	tied	in	to	a	lot	of	historical
databases,	etc.	Which	is	more	my	speed.

In	layperson’s	terms:	if	it	has	to	be	dunked	in	liquid	helium	to	work,	I	don’t
understand	it.	If	it’s	in	a	rack	with	fans	blowing	on	it,	that’s	a	different	story.

—IF	YOU	ARE	ABOUT	TO	BE	IN	A	SWORDFIGHT—
This	comes	up	a	lot	and	I	am	working	on	upgrading	the	relevant	wiki	pages,	but
people	seem	to	end	up	here	anyway	LOL.

My	basic	 advice:	DON’T	DO	IT!	 It	 is	 ridiculously,	 fantastically	dangerous.
Modern	people	are	calibrated	for	a	whole	different	level	of	danger	acceptance.

Admittedly,	 an	 unfortunate	 precedent	 was	 set	 by	 Tristan’s	 getting	 into	 a
rapier-vs.-backsword	duel	in	DTAP	1601	LONDON.	This	is	fully	documented
in	the	relevant	after-action	reports,	which,	as	our	roster	of	DOers	has	expanded
to	include	others	in	the	“Fighter”	class,	have	achieved	somewhat	legendary	status
within	DODO.	But	 this	 IN	NO	WAY	suggests	 that	 swordfighting	works	 as	 a
standard	operating	procedure.

If	you’re	in	the	process	of	getting	“trained	up”	to	carry	out	a	specific	DEDE
(Direct	Engagement	for	Diachronic	Effect),	you’ll	know	that	each	DTAP	has	a
highly	localized	weapons	environment.	What	is	true	in	one	DTAP	might	not	be
the	case	in	another	that	is	fifty	years	or	fifty	miles	away	from	it.

So,	you	have	to	start	by	knowing	exactly	what	weapon	type(s)	can	be	carried
by	 an	 individual	 of	 your	 assumed	 social	 class	 in	 your	DTAP	without	 freaking
people	out.

Since	you’re	going	back	naked,	you’ll	have	to	score	weapons	after	arriving.	If
you’re	fortunate	enough	to	be	visiting	a	well-established	node	in	DODO’s	witch
network,	there	may	be	some	weapons	waiting	for	you	there.	In	my	copious	spare



time	LOL	I	plan	to	visit	those	DTAPs	to	inspect	the	available	weapons	with	the
modern	eye	of	a	trained	metallurgist	and	to	check	them	for	fatal	flaws.	But,	never
mind	what	you’ve	seen	on	the	History	Channel,	these	people	really	didn’t	know
dick	about	steel	and	so	most	of	it	is	crap,	and	likely	to	break	at	the	worst	possible
time.

If	you	are	“breaking	trail”	in	a	new	DTAP,	then	once	you	have	evaded	pursuit
and	 stolen	 some	 clothes,	 you’ll	have	 to	 acquire	 your	weapons	 in	whatever	way
you	 can	 (“proceeding	 adaptively”	 LOL).	 This	means	 evaluating	 them	 through
visual	 inspection	 and,	 if	 possible,	 by	 subjecting	 them	 to	 certain	 simple	 tests
which	I	can	explain	to	you—eventually	I’ll	document	these	on	the	wiki.

Assuming	you	have	a	good	sword,	you’ll	have	to	know	how	to	fight	with	 it.
Which	starts	by	defending	yourself	from	the	other	guy.	Which	means	you	have
to	 know	 how	 he	 fights.	 Which	 means	 learning	 the	 martial	 arts	 techniques
prevailing	 in	 your	 DTAP.	 One	 day,	 I	 hope	 we’ll	 have	 a	 vast	 library	 of	 every
known	 historical	 swordfighting	 system,	 but	 as	 with	 so	 many	 other	 things	 at
DODO	we	are	just	getting	started—just	scratching	the	surface.	Here’s	what	we
are	currently	sort	of	good	at:

-		Late	medieval	backsword	(a	personal	fave)
-		Italian	rapier
-		Medieval	longsword

Come	 and	 talk	 to	 me	 if	 you	 really	 think	 you	 need	 training/instruction	 in
these.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 it	 helps	 if	 you’re	 in	 some	 kind	 of	 decent	 physical
condition	and	you	know	where	your	body	is	in	space—we’ve	had	good	luck	with
wrestlers,	 circus	 acrobats,	 gymnasts,	 and	 dancers.	 People	 who	 spend	 all	 day
looking	at	pixels,	not	so	good.

Stay	tuned	on	ODIN	for	more	relevant	pages	as	I	have	time	to	write	’em!
Peace	out
Mortimer

DODO	WHITE	PAPER

BRIEF	NOTES	ON	“WENDING”
(formerly,	“super-witches”)
BY	REBECCA	EAST-ODA



Submitted	to	ODIN	archive,	Day	580

(Note	 to	 readers:	 Please	 consider	 this	 a	 temporary	 placeholder	 in
lieu	 of	 a	 more	 thoroughly	 researched	 document	 to	 follow.	 I	 am
feeling	an	urgency	to	head	off	the	increasing	use	of	the	term	“super-
witch”	and	replace	it	with	a	more	reasoned	approach.	—REO)

KCWs	Fitch	 (colonial	Boston)	 and	Gráinne	 (Elizabethan	London),
while	employing	similar	techniques	in	most	respects,	exhibited	a
marked	 difference	 in	 their	 understanding	 and	 utilization	 of
Strands.
As	 best	 as	 we	 can	 make	 out,	 Goody	 Fitch	 had	 a	 general

knowledge	 that	 multiple	 Strands	 existed,	 sufficient	 for	 her	 to
conduct	practical	magical	operations.
Gráinne,	by	contrast,	appears	 to	have	had	an	additional	ability

that	 Goody	 Fitch	 didn’t	 (and	 perhaps	 couldn’t	 even	 have
imagined).	 Namely,	 she	 had	 the	 ability	 to	 shift	 her	 stream	 of
consciousness	from	one	Strand	to	another,	effectively	 inhabiting
different	 versions	 of	 her	 body	 on	 different	 Strands.	 Gráinne
jumped	“sideways”	from	one	to	another	as	it	suited	her	purposes.
In	 this	 manner	 she	 was	 able	 to	 encounter	 and	 re-encounter
Tristan	 on	 different	 Strands	 and	 thereby	 to	 collaborate	 more
mindfully	and	effectively	with	him	as	he	repeated	the	same	DEDE.
“Wending”	is	a	term	used	by	Gráinne	to	describe	this	behavior.
Erszebet	 seems	 to	 be	 somewhere	 in	 between	 Fitch	 and

Gráinne.	She	understands	the	concept	of	Wending	and	can	speak
about	 it,	 but	 seems	 to	 consider	 it	 a	 little	 beyond	 the	 pale	 of
normal	magical	practice.	Further	conversations	will	be	needed	to
better	understand	her	misgivings	on	the	topic.	I	can	think	of	two
possible	 explanations:	 (1)	 it	 is	 somehow	 dangerous	 or
disagreeable,	 so	 Erszebet	 doesn’t	want	 to	 do	 it,	 or	 (2)	 Erszebet
simply	 lacks	 the	 required	 degree	 of	 magical	 power	 and	 skill;
understandable	given	she	came	of	age	as	magic	was	waning.
The	second	hypothesis	has	led	some	within	DODO	to	posit	the

idea	 that	 Gráinne	 is	 a	 “super-witch”	 with	 a	 degree	 of	 magical
power	that	places	her	head	and	shoulders	above	other	witches.
The	 “super-witch”	 concept	 is	 now	 beginning	 to	 influence



DODO’s	 planning	 process,	 as	 some	 members	 of	 the	 staff	 have
begun	looking	for	others	of	this	type.	It	is	supposed,	for	example,
that	 Winnifred	 Dutton	 (1562	 Antwerp)	 may	 be	 another	 “super-
witch.”
The	purpose	 of	 this	 document	 is	 to	 discourage	 further	 use	 of

the	“super-witch”	idea	for	which	we	really	have	no	firm	evidence
yet,	 and	 instead	 request	 that	 DODO	 staff	 use	 the	 terminology
“Wending”	 to	describe	the	specific	behavior	we	want.	The	ability
to	Wend	will	undoubtedly	make	a	Known	Compliant	Witch	(KCW)
a	more	effective	collaborator,	and	so	 let	us	seek	out	KCWs	who
know	 how	 to	 do	 it,	 rather	 than	 making	 the	 “super-witch”
distinction	 which	 is	 not	 supported	 by	 evidence	 and	 which	 is
pejorative	 to	Erszebet	Karpathy—the	one	witch	we	actually	have
to	work	with	in	the	present	day.

Diachronicle	
DAY	584	 (EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	2)

In	which	everything	expands

AS	 DODO	 EXPANDED,	 THE	 ORGANIZATIONAL	 hierarchy,	 and	 its	 attendant
bureaucracy,	evolved	accordingly.	It	was	both	electric	and	irritating	to	witness
a	 corporation	 blooming	 around	 us,	 leaving	 us	 sometimes	 marooned	 in	 the
middle	of	it.	I	was	grateful	for	Mortimer,	the	IT	geek	specialist,	who	brought	a
touch	of	whimsy	to	the	chunks	of	 that	bureaucracy	he	managed.	Even	more
grateful	than	I	was	Rebecca,	whom	DODO	decided	to	hire	given	that	she	was
frequently	underfoot	anyhow,	not	only	asking	lots	of	intelligent	questions	but
frequently	 answering	 them.	 She	was	 also	 very	 good	with	 Erszebet,	 and	 that
could	 be	 said	 about	 nobody	 else	 except	 myself,	 who	 was	 increasingly
beleaguered	with	procedural	 developments.	Once	Mortimer	 got	 the	 intranet
(ODIN)	up	and	running	it	began	to	take	up	too	much	fucking	bandwidth	a	lot
of	my	time.



It	also	altered	how	we	did	things.	Within	a	matter	of	months	Tristan	and	I
went	from	being	almost	Siamese	twins	to	actually	seeing	each	other	in	person
only	 at	 the	 (snazzy	new)	 snack	bar	or	 the	occasional	 lunch	out;	most	of	our
engagement	was	via	ODIN	channels.	This	had	an	odd	effect	on	our	friendship:
after	 the	electricity	of	 first	meeting,	 there	had	been	a	 frisson	between	us	 that
we	 never	 acknowledged	 (although	 it	 was	 strong	 enough	 for	 others	 to
comment	 upon)—but	 we	 certainly	 enjoyed	 it.	 (Or	 at	 least,	 I	 confess	 to
enjoying	 it,	 and	 to	 perceiving	within	 him	 clues	 that	 he	 did	 as	well.)	 Then,
spending	so	much	time	together,	we	grew	accustomed	to	our	closeness,	so	that
we	went	from	not-quite-first-date	to	old-married-couple	almost	seamlessly.

Until	ODIN	came	along.
Once	Tristan	became	just	an	icon	on	the	nearest	screen,	I	often	forgot	that

he	was	a	living,	breathing,	winsome	Male,	and	so	when	we	would	encounter
each	 other—in	 the	 copy	 room,	 grabbing	 a	 handful	 of	 grapes,	 waiting	 for	 a
meeting	with	Blevins	.	.	.	that	initial	electricity,	that	exquisitely	repressed	well-
hello-there	energy,	erupted	all	over	again,	and	never	quite	settled	because	we
were	never	in	each	other’s	presence	continuously	for	quite	long	enough.

THE	ONE	EXCEPTION	was	in	early	March	of	the	second	year.	Tristan	and	I	flew
to	DC	for	a	meeting	with	General	Frink	and	Dr.	Rudge	at	 the	Trapezoid.	I
will	only	detail	the	mental	take-away,	but	the	emotional	and	visceral	takeaway
was	that	I	got	to	spend	two	entire	plane	rides	alone	in	a	private	plane	with	a
hot	bad-ass	dude	handsome	gentleman,	who	crossed	his	legs	carefully	when	I
looked	at	him	too	long	and	who	could	make	me	grin	inwardly	(only	inwardly,
I	assure	you)	merely	by	uttering	my	surname	in	a	particular	tone.	Now	that	I
know	there	will	never	be	such	plane	rides	again,	I	wish	to	state	that	despite	the
violation	of	DODO’s	baroque	 sexual	harassment	policy,	 it	 really	 is	 a	 fucking
shame	regrettable	that	we	did	not	make	better	use	of	that	privacy.

But	I	digress.	Back	to	the	mental	takeaway:
Based	on	Oda-sensei’s	most	recent	estimates,	the	goal	became	to	have	a	fully

functioning	Chronotron	by	the	end	of	the	year,	at	which	point	we	would	be
able	 to	 undertake	 formally	 planned	 DEDEs—DODO’s	 chartered	 purpose.
Meanwhile,	 we	 would	 postpone	 any	 outcome-oriented	 missions.	 No	 more
moneymaking	 gambits,	 etc.	After	 the	Chronotron	was	 online,	we	would	 be
able	to	run	such	missions	far	more	safely	and	efficiently.

In	the	meantime,	those	of	us	on	the	payroll	would	not	be	idle.	Do	not	think



it,	reader!	As	well	as	the	office-speak	mumbo-jumbo	to	become	familiar	with,
there	were	still	certain	diachronic	jaunts	it	was	deemed	safe	to	undergo,	those
being:

First	and	above	all,	to	seek	out	and	convert	witches	and	other	abettors,	thus
creating	a	network	of	Known	Compliant	Witches	(KCWs)	and	safe	houses.

Second,	 to	 fill	 in	 the	data	gaps	 the	Chronotron	noted	 as	 it	was	uploading
digitized	information	from	primary	and	secondary	historical	material—in	other
words,	 factoid-finding	missions	 (what	 did	 a	 particular	 intersection	 in	Rome
look	 like	 in	44	BC;	how	 large	were	daikon	 in	pre-modern	 Japan;	where	did
George	Washington	sleep	the	night	of	11	January,	1779,	etc.).	Not	only	was
this	useful	for	the	Chronotron	data	workers,	but	it	would	also	help	us	to	break
in	new	recruits	with	low-stakes	missions.

Third	 (in	 a	 similar	 vein),	 to	make	 reconnaissance	missions	 to	DTAPs	we
knew	 would	 be	 important	 for	 future	 work.	 Chief	 amongst	 these	 was
Constantinople	 circa	 1203	 (more	 on	 that	 in	 a	 moment)	 and	 Renaissance
London,	both	of	which	would	be	major	hubs	within	the	KCW	network.

Fourth,	 we	 were	 free	 to	 rove	 for	 the	 purposes	 of	 counterintelligence:	 to
keep	an	eye	on	potential	diachronic	activities	of	our	strategic	rivals.	Not	that
the	identity	of	those	rivals	had	been	shared	with	us.

As	 to	Constantinople.	That	 jewel	 in	 the	 crown	of	 the	Byzantine	Empire.
That	continent-straddling	 stronghold	of	 the	Eastern	Orthodox	Church.	That
famously	inviolable	walled	city	ruled	by	generations	of	interbred	usurping	nut-
jobs	a	pantheon	of	families	so	tortuously	intertwined	as	to	be	the	basis	of	our
modern	adjective	byzantine.	This	was	a	fantastically	complex	city	with	a	wide
range	of	languages	and	cultures,	so	it	was	required	to	build	up	a	large	database
including	not	 just	 linguistics	but	maps,	etiquette,	 cultural	practices,	weapons,
and	other	things	that	our	DOers	would	need	to	know	in	order	to	function	in
that	time	and	place—the	time	being	circa	1203,	the	Fourth	Crusade	(not,	for
the	history	buffs	among	you,	the	siege	a	few	days	later,	or	the	occupation,	or
the	 final	 shitstorm	 destruction	 of	 the	 city,	 but	Galata	 Tower).	 A	 lot	 of	 that
research	 fell	 into	 my	 lap,	 in	 my	 role	 as	 head	 of	 the	 amusingly	 named
Diachronic	Operative	Resource	Center.

The	 DNI	 (that	 would	 be	 Frink)	 wished	 to	 stabilize	 certain	 national	 and
ethnic	frontiers	in	Eastern	Europe,	the	Balkans,	and	Turkey	that	had	begun	to
show	 considerable	 GLAAMR—an	 indication	 that	 Someone	 Else	 might	 be
conducting	 diachronic	 operations	 in	 an	 effort	 to	 shift	 them.	 Between
Erszebet’s	 iPad	Quipu	 (her	 IQ,	 as	 it	were)	 and	 Frank	Oda	 tapping	 into	 the



elemental	quipus	of	the	Chronotron,	we	were	able	to	calculate	backwards	that
our	best	counter-action	was	to	move	a	particular	Orthodox	relic	from	one	tent
to	 another	 in	 the	Byzantine	Emperor’s	 army	camp	when	his	 army	 fled	 from
the	Crusaders	after	the	siege	of	Galata	Tower.

Regarding	 the	 developments	 of	 the	 witch	 network:	 as	 well	 as
Constantinople	 1203,	we	 also	 sought	KCWs	 in	 a	 range	 of	 intermediate	 eras
and	 locations	 where	 we	 perceived	 it	 would	 be	 easier	 for	 us	 to	 conduct
operations	 (or,	 as	 I	 might	 have	 said	 before	 I	 learned	 to	 talk	 the	 talk,	 “do
things”).	New	ODECs	were	being	built,	but	as	we	had	only	one	witch—who
was	temperamental	on	the	best	of	days—we	had	to	“leverage”	(General	Frink’s
term)	Erszebet	by	having	her	Send	DOers	to	familiar	locations:	pre-1851	safe
houses	 where	 we	 had	 KCWs	 who	 could	 then	 forward	 our	 agents	 onward
through	the	network.

The	“trunk	 line”	of	 the	network,	 so	 to	 speak,	was	 to	be	anchored	at	one
end	in	1203	Constantinople	and	on	the	other	in	1602	London,	where	we	had
re-established	 connections	 with	 Gráinne	 and	 her	 friend	 Rose.	 Thanks	 to
Rose’s	intercession,	we	now	had	access	to	a	secure	safe	house	on	the	outskirts
of	the	city,	equipped	with	clothes,	weapons,	and	other	DOer	resources.	The
other	major	 stop	 on	 the	 line	 needed	 to	 be	Antwerp	 circa	 1560,	 for	 reasons
beyond	the	scope	of	this	narrative.	I	had	attempted	to	cultivate	a	relationship
there	with	one	Winnifred	Dutton,	 an	English	witch	 resident	 in	 that	DTAP.
Knowing	 her	 own	worth	 (she	 had	 admirably	 influential	 family	 relations	 and
appeared	capable	of	Wending),	 she	was	standoffish	toward	my	initial	queries;
eventually	 she	decided	she	would	assist	us	 in	exchange	 for	a	certain	hard-to-
find	herb	known	as	kalonji.

Rather	conveniently	for	us,	kalonji	grew	in	profusion	in	the	palace	garden
of	Blachernae	.	.	.	in	thirteenth-century	Constantinople.

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes

on	private	ODIN	channel,	15:32:37



DAY	584	(EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	2)

Dr.	Stokes:
...

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes

on	private	ODIN	channel,	15:32:59
DAY	584	(EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	2)

Dr.	Stokes:
...

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes

on	private	ODIN	channel,	15:33:07
DAY	584	(EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	2)

Dr.	Stokes:
...

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes

on	private	ODIN	channel,	15:52:34
DAY	584	(EARLY	MARCH,	YEAR	2)

Dr.	Stokes:
Disregard	previous	posts.	I	had	to	find	Mortimer	Shore	(on	the	roof

of	the	building	engaging	in	what	appeared	to	be	a	sword	duel)	and	get
him	to	explain	to	me	the	proper	usage,	in	the	modern	world,	of	what	I
call	the	“return,”	and	he	denominates	the	“enter,”	key.
I’m	losing	track	of	the	different	types	of	DOers.	Could	I	trouble	you

or	Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons	to	post	a	canonical	taxonomy?
Cordially,

Roger



DODO	MEMORANDUM

CANONICAL	TAXONOMY	OF	DIACHRONIC	OPERATIVE	TYPES
BY	LTC	TRISTAN	LYONS
POSTED	Day	585

For	clarity	 in	 internal	communication	and	record-keeping,	please	employ	 these
terms,	and	these	terms	ONLY,	when	referring	to	different	types	or	categories	of
DOers.	If	you	think	of	some	other	new	category	that	needs	to	be	added,	please
see	me	or	Dr.	Stokes	before	editing	this	list.

FORERUNNER
(deprecated	 synonyms:	 SUICIDE	 BOMBER,	 DEAD	 MAN
RUNNING,	SCHNEIDER)
One	 who	 is	 Sent	 to	 a	 DTAP	 in	 which	 DODO	 has	 no	 Known
Compliant	 Witch,	 safe	 house,	 or	 other	 contacts/infrastructure
whatsoever.	 Considered	 the	 most	 elite	 and	 difficult-to-recruit
subclass	 of	 DOer,	 Forerunners	 must	 possess	 all	 the	 skills	 of	 a
STRIDER	(see	below)	combined	with	those	of	a	FIGHTER,	LOVER,
or	CLOSER.

FIGHTER
(deprecated	synonyms:	CONAN,	WARRIOR)
One	who	specializes	 in	missions	where,	 to	put	 it	politely,	martial
attributes	 are	 of	 the	 essence.	 Since	 every	 DTAP	 has	 a	 unique
environment	 surrounding	 weapons,	 fighting	 styles,	 and	 martial
culture,	 competence	 in	 fighting	 is	 only	 a	 part	 of	 the	 skill	 set
required	to	be	a	successful	Fighter.	It	is	equally	important	to	know
how	and	when	to	fight.

LOVER
(deprecated	synonyms:	REDACTED)
Seems	 self-explanatory.	 But	 to	 counter	 some	 misconceptions,
actually	having	sex	is	not	part	of	the	job	description.	We	prefer	to
focus	on	 the	unique	combination	of	personal	charm,	appearance,
and	 social	 skills	 needed	 to	 influence	 historical	 decision	 makers
who	have	been	identified	as	“libido-motivated.”



CLOSER
A	 new	 category	 best	 described	 as	 LOVER	 without	 the	 carnal
element.	 One	 who	 is	 highly	 skilled	 at	 changing	 someone’s	 mind
without	hurting	or	seducing	them.

STRIDER
(deprecated	synonyms:	SNAKE	EATER)
Wilderness	survival	expert.

SPY
Specialist	in	stealthy,	unobtrusive	observation	and	(since	we	can’t
bring	notes/sketches	home	with	us)	memorization.

SAGE
Subject	 matter	 expert,	 such	 as	 a	 historian	 or	 linguist,	 sent	 to	 a
DTAP	to	investigate	a	specific	question	of	interest	to	DODO.

MACGYVER
Typically	a	biologist,	chemist,	materials	scientist,	or	engineer	with
exceptional	 aptitude	 for	 building	 devices,	 concocting	 medicines,
etc.,	using	natural	and	man-made	substances	available	in	a	given
DTAP.

MEDIC
Medical	professional	with	additional	 training	 required	 for	practice
in	pre-modern	conditions.

A	final	note:	the	above	are	not	mutually	exclusive.	More	often	than	not,	a	given
DOer	will	fit	into	more	than	one	of	these	categories.

Post	by	LTC	Tristan	Lyons	on
“Recruiting”	ODIN	channel

DAY	620	(EARLY	APRIL,	YEAR	2)

As	has	been	noted	repeatedly	by	Dr.	Blevins	and	others	higher	up	the
chain	of	command,	recruitment	of	DOers	has	proceeded	more	slowly
than	 we	 would	 like.	 Finding	 people	 with	 the	 right	 combination	 of



security	 clearance,	 skill	 set,	 and	 physical	 attributes	 is	 a	 very
demanding	 challenge.	 I’ve	 lost	 track	 of	 the	 number	 of	 promising
candidates	we’ve	had	to	reject	because	of	dental	work	alone.
As	DORC	continues	 to	staff	up	new	HOSMAs	 (Historical	Operations

Subject	Matter	Authorities)	and	trainers,	we’ll	 increasingly	be	able	 to
“grow	our	own”	DOers	by	selecting	promising	candidates	and	training
them	 in	 the	 requisite	 languages	 and	 skills.	 We’ve	 already	 seen
progress	 in	 that	 area	with	 new	HOSMAs	 coming	 online	 almost	 daily,
specializing	in	the	languages	and	cultures	of	late	medieval	Europe	and
the	Byzantine	Empire.	But	a	DOer	can	only	learn	a	language	so	fast.
In	the	meantime,	we	are	therefore	going	to	have	to	rely	on	a	small

number	 of	 extremely	 exceptional	 people	who	 just	 happen	 to	walk	 in
the	 door	 with	 all	 the	 capabilities	 we	 need—needles	 in	 a	 very	 large
haystack.	Fortunately,	General	Frink	and	Dr.	Rudge	have	been	active	in
connecting	 us	 to	 the	 existing	 recruitment	 networks	 that	 the	 United
States	Government	and	 its	allies	have	established	 in	 the	military	and
intelligence	 sectors,	 giving	us	 broader	 access	 to	 the	 aforementioned
haystack	and	enabling	us	to	search	through	it	more	efficiently.
I’m	 pleased	 to	 announce	 that	 today	 we	 have	 signed	 our	 first	 two

DOer	 recruits:	 Chira	 Lajani	 and	 Felix	 Dorn.	 Both	 were	 recruited
specifically	with	an	eye	towards	the	upcoming	kalonji	DEDEs,	which	as
you	all	know	 is	 the	 linchpin	of	our	plan	for	establishing	a	really	solid
safe	 house	 in	 1562	 Antwerp.	 Because	 of	 her	 unusual	 linguistic	 skill
set,	 we	 also	 believe	 that	 Chira	 will	 be	 DODO’s	 pathfinder	 in	 1200
Constantinople,	 which	 is	 projected	 to	 be	 the	 focal	 point	 of	 many
diachronic	operations	in	the	first	year	or	two	of	DODO’s	operations.
Chira	 and	 Felix	 came	 to	 us	 through	 very	 different	 recruitment

pathways.	Chira	 first	came	to	 the	attention	of	U.S.	 Intelligence	 talent
scouts	 active	 in	 the	 Syrian	 refugee	 community.	 Considered	 too
physically	 conspicuous	 for	 conventional	 intelligence	 work,	 she	 was
brought	 to	our	attention	as	someone	fitting	the	“Lover”	profile.	Felix,
by	contrast,	is	an	old	friend	and	mentor	of	mine	whom	I	recruited	over
a	beer.	Their	dossiers	are	available	on	 the	ODIN	system	 for	 those	of
you	 curious	 to	 know	more	 about	 our	 newest	 colleagues.	 Please	 join
me	 in	 making	 Chira	 and	 Felix	 feel	 welcome	 in	 the	 Department	 of
Diachronic	Operations!

—Tristan



DODO	HUMAN	RESOURCES

PERSONNEL
DOSSIER

FAMILY	NAME:	Lajani
GIVEN	NAME(S):	Chira	Yasin
ALIAS(ES):	Cyl
AGE:	24
CLASS:	Lover
HEIGHT:	5′3″
EYES:	Brown
HAIR:	Brown
COMPLEXION:	Medium/olive
DISTINCTIVE	FEATURES:	Mole	near	left	clavicle
ETHNICITY:	Kurd
NATIONALITY:	Syrian
LANGUAGE	FLUENCY	RATINGS:
Kurdish:	5
English,	Zaza-Gorani,	Turkish:	4
Farsi,	Syrian,	and	Iranian	Arabic:	3
Bulgarian,	Greek:	2
NOTE:	 Following	 immersive	 training	 in
medieval	Hebrew	as	 preparation	 for	 kalonji
DEDE,	 subject	 scored	 2.5	 fluency	 rating	 in
that	 language,	however	 the	score	 is	at	best
speculative	 given	 our	 uncertain	 knowledge
base.

RELIGION:	Non-observant	Muslim
CITIZENSHIP:	 Stateless,	 being	 fast-tracked	 for
U.S.	citizenship

BIOGRAPHY:	Upper-middle	class	secular	Muslim
from	 Kobani	 (Ayn	 al-Arab).	 At	 the	 age	 of	 16,
lived	 in	 United	 States	 (Issaquah,	 Washington)



for	 9	 months	 as	 part	 of	 a	 foreign	 exchange
program.	 Attended	 Cornell	 University.
Psychology	major,	 Dance	minor.	 Dropped	 out
in	 sophomore	 year	 when	 parents	 publicly
decapitated	by	 IS	 forces.	Pretended	to	be	 ISIS
sympathizer	on	social	media,	 flew	to	 Istanbul,
traveled	 overland	 to	 border	 region	 with
intention	 of	 crossing	 Syrian	 border.	 En	 route,
fell	in	with	and	entered	into	sexual	relationship
with	 male	 MI6	 agent	 also	 masquerading	 as
ISIS	 recruit.	 With	 him,	 crossed	 border	 into
Syria	 and	 returned	 to	 Kobani	 to	 protect
younger	 sister	 (15)	 and	 brother	 (13).	 During
subsequent	military	operations,	escaped	 from
Kobani	with	her	siblings	and	crossed	back	into
Turkey,	 made	 way	 overland	 to	 Bodrum,
crossed	 over	 to	 Greek	 island	 of	 Kos	 in
inflatable	 boat,	 joined	 refugee	 community	 on
Kos.	 There	 recognized	 the	 body	 language	 of
American	DODO	recruiter	who	was	posing	as	a
refugee.	 Approached	 him.	 Her	 story	 cross-
checked	 with	 accounts	 on	 file	 from	 the	 MI6
agent.	 Agreed	 to	 work	 for	 DODO	 in	 exchange
for	her	and	her	siblings	being	fast-tracked	for
American	citizenship.

SKILL	SET:	Besides	languages	(above)	and	keen
assessment	 of	 body	 language	 (above),
extremely	fit,	hardy,	able	to	stay	calm	in	high-
stress	 and	 physically	 challenging
circumstances;	 dancer	 (modern,	 jazz,
bellydance);	 history	 and	 affect	 suggests
aptitude	 for	 emotional/psychological
persuasiveness	 and	 manipulation.	 Well-
spoken	 with	 broad	 Western-style	 liberal	 arts
education.	 Appealing	 face	 and	 figure	 by	most
cultures’	metrics.

LIMITATIONS:	 Minimal	 self-defense	 or	 martial



arts	 experience.	 Incapable	 of	 being
inconspicuous	 or	 subtle,	 even	 when	 wearing
burka.	 Do	 not	 send	 on	 missions	 requiring
stealth	or	delicate	negotiations.	Comfortable	in
cosmopolitan	and	suburban	settings;	rural	and
slum	settings	not	so	good.

DODO	HUMAN	RESOURCES

PERSONNEL
DOSSIER

FAMILY	NAME:	Dorn
GIVEN	NAME(S):	Felix	John
ALIAS(ES):	N/A
AGE:	31
CLASS:	Strider
HEIGHT:	5′9″
EYES:	Hazel
HAIR:	Brown
COMPLEXION:	Light
DISTINCTIVE	 FEATURES:	 Appears	 to	 squint
(actually	has	20/15	vision);	slight	stutter	on	the
letter	L

ETHNICITY:	American	of	Austrian/German/Dutch
heritage

NATIONALITY:	U.S.
LANGUAGE	FLUENCY	RATINGS:
American	English:	5
German:	4
French,	Spanish:	3



NOTE:	As	part	of	preparation	for	kalonji	DEDE,
underwent	 immersive	 training	 in	 medieval
Hebrew	(fluency	rating	1.5),	Byzantine	Greek
(2),	and	medieval	Dutch	(2).

RELIGION:	Non-observant	Lutheran
CITIZENSHIP:	American
BIOGRAPHY:	Raised	in	middle-class	home	in	CT,
father	 owned	 auto	 shop,	 mother	 a	 nurse,
formerly	 for	 Médecins	 Sans	 Frontières.
Dyslexic.	 Majored	 in	 PhysEd	 at	 UConn,
emphasis	 on	 cross-country	 and	 wilderness
survival	 skills.	 Former	 USA	 Olympic	 track	 &
field	team,	took	bronze	in	Marathon.	Worked	at
Outward	 Bound,	 involved	 in	 various	 “extreme
sports”	 activities	 including	 cliff	 jumping,	 rock
climbing,	Parkour.

RECRUITMENT:	Personal	contact	by	LTC	Tristan
Lyons,	 whom	 he	 met	 while	 leading	 a	 rock-
climbing	 expedition	 (Lyons	 14	 at	 the	 time).
They	became	friends,	and	continued	to	engage
in	 wilderness-oriented	 athletic	 activities
together.

SKILL	 SET:	 Extremely	 fit,	 hardy,	 capable	 of
functioning	 under	 punishing	 physical
circumstances	 (natural	 or	 man-made).
Physically	 nondescript	 enough	 to	 “blend	 into
crowd”	in	most	Caucasian	populations.	Decent
MacGyver-like	 capabilities.	 Loyalty
unshakable.

LIMITATIONS:	 Dyslexic,	 not	 comfortable	 in
conversationally	 dependent	 situations.	 More
comfortable	 in	 rural	 than	 urban/suburban
surroundings.



Post	by	Mortimer	Shore	on
“General”	ODIN	channel

DAY	622

Hey	all,
In	 the	wake	of	yesterday’s	 incident	 in	 the	cafeteria	 line,	Macy	Stoll

has	asked	me	to	post	a	few	safety	tips	that	y’all	should	keep	in	mind
until	 such	 time	 as	 we	 can	 print	 up	 posters,	 establish	 training
programs,	etc.
Just	 as	 background,	 the	 requirement	 for	 Fighter-class	 Diachronic

Operatives	 (DOers)	 to	 achieve	 and	 maintain	 proficiency	 in	 various
historical	martial	arts	styles	entails	wearing,	transporting,	storing,	and
using	 a	wide	 range	 of	 historical	weapons	 and	weapon	 simulators	 on
premises.	No	single,	blanket	policy	can	cover	all	such	cases,	but	here
are	some	general	rules:

-		Scabbards	are	trip	hazards!	Glance	down	before	stepping	behind	a
swordfighter.

-		Assume	all	blades	are	razor	sharp.
-		If	you	see	something	falling	out	of	a	scabbard,	don’t	try	to	catch	it.

DODO	WHITE	PAPER

UDET:	OR,	DIACHRONIC	MISSION	DURATION
BY	REBECCA	EAST-ODA

Submitted	to	ODIN	archive,	Day	622

The	 recent	 influx	 of	 funding	 and	 new	 personnel	 has	 led	 DODO
staff	 to	 look	more	deeply	 into	certain	aspects	of	how	diachronic
operations	 are	 conducted	 that	 hitherto	 we	 had	 just	 taken	 for
granted.	 In	 particular,	 the	 need	 to	 schedule	 complex	 missions,
such	 as	 the	 upcoming	 kalonji-related	 DEDEs,	 has	 forced	 us	 to
think	 in	 greater	 detail	 about	 the	 duration	 of	 missions	 and	 how
many	can	be	scheduled	in	a	given	span	of	time.
Most	of	DODO’s	experience	has	centered	on	the	colonial	Boston

and	Elizabethan	London	DEDEs	conducted	last	year	by	Dr.	Stokes



and	LTC	Lyons	respectively.	Both	of	these	were	of	relatively	brief
duration.	 Dr.	 Stokes	 was	 able	 to	 accomplish	 her	 tasks	 in	 the
course	of	a	single	day.	With	 the	exception	of	 the	 first	 repetition,
LTC	Lyons’s	DEDE	was	 a	 “sleepover”	 in	which	 he	 had	 to	 spend
one	 night	 at	 the	 DTAP.	 In	 all	 of	 these	 cases,	 the	 responsible
witches	(KCWs	Karpathy,	Fitch,	and	Gráinne)	acted	 in	a	way	that
preserved	 “Unity	 of	DOer-Experienced	Time,”	hereinafter	UDET.
The	 idea	 of	UDET	 is	 simple	 and	 can	 be	 quickly	 explained:	 if	Dr.
Stokes	 experienced	 eight	 hours	 of	 elapsed	 time	 during	 her
mission	in	colonial	Boston,	then	the	same	span	of	time	separated
her	being	Sent	by	Karpathy	from	the	ODEC	to	the	DTAP	and	her
reappearance	 in	 the	 ODEC	 upon	 being	 returned	 home	 by	 KCW
Fitch.	Likewise,	when	LTC	Lyons	spent	approximately	twenty-four
hours	 in	 the	 1601	 London	 DTAP,	 the	 same	 amount	 of	 elapsed
time	 occurred	 between	 his	 being	 Sent	 there	 and	 his	 being
“Homed”	 by	 KCW	 Gráinne.	 UDET	means	 that	 from	 the	 point	 of
view	of	the	DOer	as	well	as	observers	in	the	facility,	it	is	as	if	the
DOer	 walked	 through	 a	 door	 into	 another	 room,	 spent	 eight	 or
twenty-four	hours	there,	and	then	walked	back	through	the	same
door.
This	does	not	pose	a	serious	inconvenience	for	short	missions.

By	contrast,	however,	the	nature	of	the	kalonji	DEDE	is	such	that
it	cannot	be	accomplished	in	less	than	approximately	two	months.
For	 those	 unfamiliar	 with	 the	 premise	 of	 this	 DEDE,	 a	 short
explanation	 follows:	 we	 are	 attempting	 to	 recruit	 Winnifred
Dutton,	a	potential	KCW	in	Antwerp	circa	1560.	The	only	way	we
have	found	to	motivate	her	is	by	supplying	her	with	samples	of	an
herb	called	kalonji,	which	 is	rare	and	nearly	unobtainable	 in	her
time	 and	 place.	 We	 have	 found	 a	 source	 for	 kalonji	 seeds	 in
Constantinople	 circa	 1200,	 which	 is	 a	 DTAP	 of	 interest	 to	 us
anyway.	The	current	plan	of	 record	 is	 to	send	one	DOer	 to	1200
Constantinople	to	obtain	the	seeds.	She	will	then	hand	them	off	to
a	wilderness	 survival	 expert	 (Strider	 class)	who	will	 carry	 them
overland	to	Belgium	and	sow	them	in	a	known	location	where	we
think	that	 they	will	 thrive.	 It	should	then	be	possible	to	visit	 that
location	 circa	 1560	 and	harvest	 the	 herb	 in	 the	wild.	 The	 plan’s
primary	 drawback	 is	 that	 the	 overland	 journey	 from



Constantinople	to	Belgium	is	projected	to	take	two	months,	and	it
will	have	to	be	repeated	on	at	least	three	Strands	in	order	for	it	to
“take.”	Our	Strider	will	therefore	have	to	experience	a	total	of	at
least	six	months	of	(our)	elapsed	time	in	that	DTAP.
If	the	mission	is	performed	in	a	way	that	preserves	UDET,	then

the	Strider	will	indeed	be	absent	for	a	total	of	six	months.
If,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 we	 can	 arrange	 for	 the	 Strider	 to	 be

“Homed”	from	1200	Belgium	only	a	few	minutes	after	he	is	Sent
to	1200	Constantinople,	 then	 the	entire	series	of	missions	could
be	conducted	in	less	than	a	day,	as	time	is	perceived	by	those	of
us	 here	 in	 modern-day	 Boston.	 The	 Strider	 would	 still	 be	 six
months	older	at	the	end	of	it,	and	would	have	six	months’	worth	of
memories	 from	 his	 journeys,	 but	 the	 clock,	 as	 far	 as	 DODO	 is
concerned,	would	only	have	advanced	a	few	hours.
The	latter	procedure	is	obviously	a	more	efficient	use	of	time	as

far	 as	 DODO	 is	 concerned.	 Moreover,	 to	 the	 extent	 DODO	 is
engaged	 in	 a	 competition	 versus	 the	 diachronic	 operations
agencies	of	foreign	powers,	we	must	assume	that	our	adversaries
are	making	use	of	 such	optimization	wherever	possible	 and	are
getting	their	jobs	done	that	much	more	quickly.
This	 is	 a	 topic	 that	 has	 been	 on	 several	 people’s	 minds	 for

some	months	now	and	that	has	been	brought	to	the	front	burner,
as	it	were,	by	the	kalonji	DEDE	planning	process.	Initial	attempts
to	 raise	 the	 question	 with	 KCW	 Erszebet	 Karpathy	 proved
unavailing,	as	the	very	idea	of	it	made	very	little	sense	to	her	and
could	 seemingly	 gain	 no	 purchase	 on	 her	 mind;	 she	 could	 not
make	heads	or	tails	of	what	it	was	that	we	were	asking	her	to	do,
much	less	express	an	opinion	on	it,	and	repeatedly	accused	us	of
being	 de-mented	 or	 insane.	 As	 the	 overall	 emotional	 tone	 was
becoming	counterproductive,	I	was	asked	to	work	with	her	on	the
topic,	 since	 I	 have	 known	 her	 for	 longer	 than	 most	 DODO
employees,	and	she	trusts	me	on	the	basis	of	the	belief	that	I	am
descended	 from	 witches	 and	 that	 I	 have	 some	 latent	 magical
ability.	 The	 results	of	my	 inquiry	are	detailed	below.	A	 top-level
summary	is	that	DEDE	time	compression	does	not	appear	to	be	a
practical	 option,	 largely	 because	 witches	 have	 great	 difficulty
even	understanding	the	idea,	and	consider	it	to	be	reckless,	far-



fetched,	 and	 childish.	 The	 best	 analogy	 I	 can	 think	 of	 is	 how	 a
modern	 physicist	 would	 react	 if	 you	 approached	 him	 and
proposed	to	travel	at	greater	than	the	speed	of	 light.	Mixed	with
this	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 how	Chopin	would	 react	 if	 you	 proposed	 to
play	a	piano	by	striking	it	with	a	sledgehammer.

Detailed	Analysis
Witches’	objections	to	DEDE	time	compression	(to	the	extent	they
can	 even	 fathom	 the	 idea)	 can	 apparently	 be	 broken	 down	 into
two	general	categories:	one,	the	asymmetry	between	Sending	and
Homing	 a	 time	 traveler,	 and	 two,	 the	 risk	 of	 something	 akin	 to
present-day	Diachronic	Shear.

1.	SENDING/HOMING	ASYMMETRY:
Non-witches	are	apt	 to	 think	of	 “Sending”	 (moving	a	DOer	 from
an	 ODEC	 back	 in	 time	 to	 a	 DTAP)	 and	 “Homing”	 (the	 reverse
process)	as	the	same	thing,	but	it	turns	out	that	from	the	witch’s
point	of	view	they	are	entirely	different	spells.	The	contrasts	are
explained	in	the	following	table.

SENDING HOMING
Back	in	time Forward	in	time
Once	 Sent	 to	 the	 past,	 the	 DOer Once	 Homed	 back	 to	 the
can	 take	actions	 that	might	affect present	day,	the	DOer’s	actions
the	 present-day	 reality	 of	 the cannot	affect	the	past	reality	of
Sending	 witch,	 the	 DOer the	Homing	witch,	etc.
him/herself,	etc.
The	 DTAP	 is	 terra	 incognita	 to The	 destination	 is	 perfectly
both	 the	 Sending	 witch	 and	 the familiar	 to	 the	 DOer	 but
DOer,	 must	 be	 extensively unknown,	 and	 nearly
researched	 beforehand	 from unimaginable,	 to	 the	 Homing
historical	 documents,	 maps,	 and witch,	 for	 whom	 it	 is	 in	 the
scrying. distant	future.
The	 DOer	 is	 moving	 from	 their The	 DOer	 is	 moving	 from	 a
natural	 time	 and	 place	 to	 one place	 where	 they
where	 they	 are	 an	 unnatural fundamentally	 do	 not	 belong,
intrusion. back	 to	 their	 natural	 time	 and



place.

For	 these	 reasons,	 witches	 think	 of	 Sending	 and	 Homing	 as
asymmetrical,	 and	 fundamentally	 different,	 spells.	 Sending	 is
much	more	difficult,	 first	of	all	because	 it	entails	more	advance
prep	work	 if	 it	 is	 not	 to	 produce	 a	 random	 result,	 and	 secondly
because	it	means	working	against	the	natural	flow	of	time.
An	 analogy	 might	 be	 made	 to	 a	 rubber	 band	 connecting	 the

DOer	to	their	natural	time	and	place.	When	the	DOer	is	Sent	to	a
past	 DTAP,	 the	 rubber	 band	 is	 stretched,	 which	 requires	 more
effort	and	more	focus	on	the	witch’s	part	if	the	DOer	is	not	to	end
up	in	the	wrong	place.	When	the	same	DOer	is	Homed,	it	 is	as	if
their	 connection	 to	 the	 DTAP	 is	 simply	 severed	 by	 the	 Homing
witch.	The	“rubber	band”	yanks	 the	DOer	unerringly	back	 to	 the
ODEC	 from	 which	 they	 were	 Sent.	 Indeed,	 if	 this	 were	 not	 the
case,	 diachronic	 operations	would	 not	 be	 possible	 at	 all.	 In	 the
case	of	Dr.	Stokes’s	colonial	Boston	DEDE,	how	could	KCW	Fitch
possibly	 have	 returned	 Dr.	 Stokes	 to	 the	 ODEC	 in	 modern-day
Boston—a	time,	place,	and	environment	beyond	her	imagining—if
not	for	this	“snap-back”	effect?
The	“rubber	band”	feature	of	Homing	is	therefore	fundamental

to	DODO’s	ability	to	do	anything	at	all.	But	there	is	a	catch:	if	the
DOer	 has	 experienced	 eight	 hours,	 or	 seventeen	 days,	 in	 the
DTAP,	 the	 “rubber	 band”	 yanks	 them	 back	 to	 the	 ODEC	 eight
hours	or	seventeen	days	after	they	departed.
Compressing	mission	time	by	returning	the	DOer	to	an	earlier

moment	 is,	 therefore,	 not	 simply	 a	matter	 of	 using	 the	Homing
spell	 in	 a	 different	way—turning	 the	knobs	 to	different	 settings,
as	 it	were.	 It	would	require	a	different	spell	altogether.	And	 the
witch	performing	it	would	have	to	have	some	prior	familiarity	with
the	 future	 DTAP	 in	 order	 to	 “aim”	 the	 DOer	 in	 the	 correct
“direction.”

2.	SHEAR	RISK:
Witches	 appear	 to	 have	 a	 nose	 for	 situations	 apt	 to	 produce
Diachronic	Shear.	Mission	duration	compression	seems	to	be	one
of	those.	If	a	homebound	DOer	can	be	Homed	back	to	the	“wrong”



time	 (i.e.,	 earlier	 than	 the	 natural	 snap-back	 time)	 then	 they
could	just	as	well	be	sent	home	before	they	departed,	which	would
lead	 to	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 two	 copies	 of	 the	 same	 DOer	 were
existing	in	the	same	time	and	place.
Other	absurd	or	paradoxical	situations	could	be	 imagined.	Let

us	 say	 that	 a	 twenty-year-old	 DOer	 were	 Sent	 back	 to	 a	 DTAP
where	 they	 lived	 for	 sixty	 years,	 then	Homed	 to	 a	 point	 in	 time
only	a	fraction	of	a	second	after	their	departure.	From	the	point	of
view	of	an	observer	in	the	ODEC,	it	would	be	as	if	the	twenty-year-
old	were	instantaneously	replaced	by	an	eighty-year-old.
Such	possibilities	are	deeply	distressing	to	witches,	who	seem

to	see	in	them	a	kind	of	moral	and	aesthetic	abomination.
To	 sum	 up,	 it	 appears	 that	 the	 idea	 of	 compressing	 mission

duration	 is	 a	 non-starter.	 From	 the	 witches’	 point	 of	 view,	 it
requires	 getting	 a	 compliant	 witch	 in	 the	 distant	 past	 to
undertake	an	unfamiliar	spell	of	extreme	difficulty,	all	to	achieve
an	end	result	that	is	viewed	as	both	insanely	risky	and	viscerally
repugnant.
We	are,	therefore,	stuck	with	UDET	for	the	foreseeable	future,

and	 it	 seems	 safe	 to	 say	 that	 our	 adversaries	 are	 in	 the	 same
boat.	DODO	personnel	planning	 the	kalonji	 seed	DEDE,	or	other
time-consuming	 missions,	 will	 have	 to	 take	 that	 reality	 into
account.	Fortunately,	we	have	 the	 luxury	of	 time	at	 the	moment
since	we	are	awaiting	the	completion	of	the	Chronotron.

DODO	MEMORANDUM

POLICY	ON	OFFICIAL	JARGON	AND	ACRONYM	COINAGE
BY	MACY	STOLL,	MBA
POSTED	Day	623

Now	that	I’ve	had	time	to	settle	in	to	my	new	role	as	head	of	C/COD	(that	is
DODO’s	 Conventional/Contemporary	 Operations	 Department,	 for	 those	 of
you	 who	 have	 been	 tucked	 away	 in	 exotic	 DTAPs	 during	 the	 recent



organizational	upgrades),	I’m	beginning	to	see	opportunities	for	optimizing	and
perfecting	 the	 way	 DODO	 operates	 on	 a	 day-to-day	 basis.	 In	 coming	 weeks
we’re	 going	 to	 be	 challenging	 ourselves	 to	 implement	 new	 procedures	 and
policies	that	will	help	ensure	that	the	taxpayers	get	the	most	for	their	hard-earned
dollars,	 even	 though	 hopefully	 none	 of	 them	 will	 ever	 know	 of	 DODO’s
existence.

Communications	 becomes	 all-important	 in	 a	 large	 organization.	 Informal
practices	that	worked	well	when	it	was	just	a	few	friends	sitting	around	a	table	at
the	Apostolic	Café	may	no	 longer	be	well	adapted	 to	a	 large	agency	 that	 spans
not	only	the	globe,	but	most	of	recorded	history	as	well.

In	that	spirit	I	would	like	to	take	up	the	subject	of	jargon	and	acronyms.
Now,	before	any	of	you	old	DODO	hands	beats	me	 to	 it,	 I’ll	 stipulate	 that

jargon	and	acronyms	are	a	staple	of	many	large	modern	organizations,	especially
in	the	military	and	intelligence	sectors,	where	documents	sometimes	look	like	a
bowl	 of	 alphabet	 soup.	 I	 know	 that	 perfectly	 well	 from	 my	 twenty	 years	 of
experience	in	such	environments.

Even	so,	I	was	taken	aback	when	I	first	came	to	the	Department	of	Diachronic
Operations	 and	 began	 to	 experience	 a	whole	 new	world	 of	 exotic	 terminology
and	 funny	 strings	 of	 letters.	 Diachronic	 Shear,	 Strands,	 ODECs,	 QUIPUs,
DOers,	and	more!	Now,	some	of	these	I	think	are	clear	and	good	terms	to	use,
such	as	DOer,	which	is	self-explanatory,	and	DEDE,	which	I	now	understand	is
just	an	alternate	 spelling	of	“deed.”	But	 in	 some	cases	 I	do	sort	of	get	 the	 idea
that	 a	 very	 clever	 person,	 perhaps	 someone	 from	 an	 advanced	 academic
background	where	wordplay	is	a	kind	of	sport,	is	trying	to	have	a	teeny	little	joke
at	my	expense.	And	maybe	also	trying	to	poke	fun,	in	a	sly	way,	at	the	military
world	that	has	brought	us	so	many	brave	defenders	of	our	freedoms	such	as	LTC
Lyons	and	the	late	General	Schneider.	For	example,	lately	we	have	begun	to	see
DORC	for	Diachronic	Operative	Resource	Center	and	DOOSH	for	Diachronic
Operative	Occupational	Safety	and	Health.	Perhaps	those	of	you	who	have	been
putting	 so	 much	 of	 your	 creative	 energies	 into	 dreaming	 up	 these	 hilarious
acronyms	might	consider	putting	yourselves	into	the	shoes	of	Dr.	Blevins	when
he	has	to	give	a	tour	of	the	facility	to	a	senator	or	a	general,	or	a	foreign	visitor
from	one	of	our	allies,	and	 finds	himself	having	 to	explain	why	such	 terms	are
stenciled	on	doors	and	bandied	about	on	official	 letterhead.	It	certainly	doesn’t
send	the	message	that	all	the	brainpower	we’ve	gathered	together	under	this	roof
is	being	applied	in	the	most	productive	manner,	does	it?

To	impose	a	little	order	on	all	of	this	creative	chaos,	and	to	ensure	that	none



of	 the	 taxpayers’	money	 is	 wasted	 as	 the	 result	 of	 inefficient	 communications,
I’m	putting	 into	place	a	new	Policy	on	Official	 Jargon	and	Acronym	Coinage.
You’ll	find	full	details	and	procedures	in	the	attached	PowerPoint	deck,	which	I
encourage	 you	 all	 to	 peruse	 at	 your	 leisure.	 Existing	 acronyms,	 where	 widely
adopted,	 can	of	 course	be	 “grandfathered	 in,”	but	 those	of	 you	 seeking	 to	 add
new	terms	to	DODO’s	specialized	lexicon	will	need	to	abide	by	the	procedures
spelled	out	in	the	deck.

Exchange	of	posts	between	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes

and	LTC	Tristan	Lyons	on	private	ODIN
channel

AFTERNOON	AND	EVENING,	DAY	623

Post	from	Dr.	Stokes:
Re:	POOJAC	(Policy	on	Official	Jargon	etc.	.	.	.)
Tristan—do	you	want	to	break	the	news	to	her,	or	should	I?

Reply	from	LTC	Lyons:
Stokes,	I	know.	Everyone’s	talking	about	it.	Shut	up.	The	first	one	who
calls	it	POOJAC	to	her	face	is	going	to	come	off	either	as	a	malcontent
or	a	snitch.	If	it’s	the	former,	you’re	going	to	end	up	on	a	PEP.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
PEP?

From	LTC	Lyons:
Try	 to	 keep	 up,	 Stokes.	 PEP	 =	 Performance	 Enhancement	 Plan.	 It’s
what	you	get	assigned	to	when	you	are	in	trouble.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
First	I’ve	heard	of	it.	Has	“PEP”	gone	through	POOJAC?

From	LTC	Lyons:
What	you’re	not	getting	is	that	THIS	IS	ALL	PUBLIC.	It	doesn’t	matter
how	 secure	 the	 Shiny	 Hat	 operating	 system	 is,	 Stokes,	 when	 the



subpoena	 comes	 through	 from	 the	 Inspector	 General,	 all	 of	 what
you’re	writing	ends	up	in	public.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Just	making	an	observation.

Post	by	Macy	Stoll,	Head	of	C/COD,
on	“General”	ODIN	channel

DAY	623

All,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 some	 confusion	 brewing	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 my
memorandum	 concerning	 the	Policy	 on	Official	 Jargon	 and	Acronym
Coinage.	 While	 I	 am	 aware	 that	 the	 letters	 spell	 out	 POOJAC	 (a
nonsense	 word—don’t	 waste	 your	 time	 Googling	 it!),	 this	 is	 not	 an
approved	 substitute	 for	 the	 full	 name	 of	 the	 aforementioned	 Policy.
Remember,	 the	entire	point	of	 the	Policy	 is	 to	establish	an	approved
procedure	for	coining	new	terminology,	and	so	to	refer	to	the	Policy	as
POOJAC	is	in	and	of	itself	a	violation	of	the	Policy.
You	can	easily	spell	out	the	full	name	of	the	Policy,	or	copy-paste	if

you	are	in	that	much	of	a	hurry.
I	 realize	 that	 it’s	 something	 of	 a	mouthful	 to	 use	 in	 conversation.

Around	the	office,	we	have	taken	to	calling	it	the	Jargon	and	Acronym
Policy,	and	I	encourage	the	rest	of	you	to	follow	suit.

Follow-up	from	Stoll,	two	hours	later:
In	the	wake	of	a	very	respectful	and	sensitive	exchange	of	feelings	with
Dr.	 Oda,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 amend	 the	 above	 to	 “Acronym	 and	 Jargon
Policy.”	 Please	 refer	 to	 DODO’s	 Diversity	 Policy	 for	 more	 on	 these
matters,	which	we	take	extremely	seriously.

Follow-up	from	Stoll,	one	hour	later:
I	have	been	made	aware	that	our	Diversity	Policy	is	still	being	drafted.	I



assumed	 we	 had	 one	 in	 place	 already,	 but	 the	 unusual	 operational
environment	 of	 DODO	 apparently	makes	 it	more	 complicated.	 In	 the
meantime	let’s	all	just	use	common	sense,	please.

AFTER	ACTION	REPORT

DEBRIEFER:	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes
DOER:	Chira	Yasin	Lajani
THEATER:	Constantinople
OPERATION:	Antwerp	witch	recruitment
DEDE:	Obtain/secure	viable	kalonji	seeds	for	later	p/u
DTAP:	Blachernae	Palace,	Constantinople,	August	1202
STRAND:	Fourth	and	last	repetition	of	this	DEDE
Note:	Will	avoid	undue	repetition	of	physical	details,	etc.	from	previous	three	Strands.

Erszebet	Sent	Chira	via	ODEC	#2	at	11:15	of	Day	626,	without	incident.
Chira	materialized	in	the	unlit	brick	bathhouse	of	the	women’s	apartments	of

Blachernae	Palace.	We	had	already	confirmed	a	witch	in	Blachernae	on	previous
Strands:	Basina,	illegitimate	granddaughter	of	Empress	Irene	(née	Bertha).

Chira	arrived	in	the	dark	hours	of	the	morning	but	moonlight	shone	in	to	give
illumination	 to	 the	 room.	 (She	 has	 drawn	 detailed	 diagram	 of	 bathhouse,
scanned	 and	 converted	 to	 3-D	 renderings;	 refer	 to	 DORC	 Cartographic	 and
Architectural	 Database.)	 General	 setting:	 large	 striated-brick	 hall	 with	 marble
baths	heated	from	below,	running	water	available	via	lead	pipes.

From	prep	research	combined	with	past	Strand	experience,	she	knew	that	for
efficiency	in	plumbing,	the	laundry	was	beside	the	bathhouses,	and	a	connecting
room	between	the	two	held	cabinets	with	clean	shmatas/drab	shifts	 to	be	worn
by	women	working	 in	 either	 chamber.	After	waiting	 in	 the	 shadows	 to	 ensure
that	 the	 coast	was	 clear,	 she	moved	quietly	 to	 this	 cabinet	 and	donned	one;	 it
would	pass	as	a	servant’s	nightdress.

Chira	 found	 a	 small	 amphora,	 filled	 it	 with	 water,	 and	 carried	 it	 from	 the
bathhouse	 to	 the	 stairs	 for	 the	 Empress’s	 apartments.	Nearing	 the	 foot	 of	 the
stairs,	 she	 encountered	 two	 armed	 Varangian	 Guards	 (for	 more	 on	 what	 we
know	of	 the	arms	and	armor	of	 this	 class	of	 fighter,	 refer	 to	Mortimer	Shore’s



MARS	 [Martial	Arts	Research	Summary]	 #12).	 She	 approached	 them	carrying
the	amphora.	They	challenged	her	in	accented	Greek;	she	identified	herself	as	a
new	servant	of	Basina’s,	sent	to	fetch	her	mistress	scented	water	for	a	headache.
The	taller	guard	was	about	to	let	her	go,	but	the	shorter	one	expressed	skepticism
and	proposed	accompanying	her	back	upstairs.

Speaking	 in	 what	 might	 have	 been	 a	 Norman	 dialect,	 the	 taller	 Varangian
rebuked	the	shorter	one.	Chira	cannot	understand	circa	1200	Norman,	beyond
some	ability	 to	pick	out	French	and	Anglo-Saxon	 loan	words.	Having	been	on
this	DEDE	several	times	now,	she	is	fairly	certain	that	the	topic	of	conversation
was	a	woman	named	Candida.	Body	 language,	 facial	 expression,	 tone	of	voice,
and	one	unmistakable	Anglo-Saxon	word	all	suggested	that	the	short	Varangian
was	 seeking	 an	 excuse	 to	 visit	 Candida	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 for	 the
purposes	of	sexual	intercourse,	and	that	the	taller	Varangian	disapproved	of	it.

The	short,	horny	Varangian	disagreed	with	this	assessment	and,	as	proof	of	its
inaccuracy,	 suggested	 he	 remain	 below	 while	 the	 tall	 one	 accompany	 Chira
upstairs	 to	Basina.	Tall	 one	 agreed	 to	 this	 and	marched	Chira	up	 three	broad,
shallow	 flights	 of	marble	 steps,	 finally	 arriving	 at	 tall,	 decorated	 double	 doors,
visible	 as	 a	 tangerine-colored	 sunrise	 was	 coming	 in	 through	 windows
overlooking	the	stairwell.

At	 this	 point,	more	Varangian	Guards	 challenged	 them,	 speaking	 in	Anglo-
Saxon,	which	Chira	also	does	not	speak.	After	a	brief	conversation,	during	which
Chira’s	physical	endowments	were	obviously	being	closely	assessed,	she	and	the
tall	Varangian	were	 allowed	 into	 the	 antechamber	 of	 the	 apartments,	made	 of
marble	 with	 serpentine	 inlaid	 heavily	 in	 patterns	 on	 the	 floor;	 high	 ceilings;
eunuchs	 in	 abundance.	 Chira	 was	 handed	 over	 to	 one	 of	 them,	 and	 tall
Varangian	was	 dismissed.	The	 eunuch	 took	her	 into	 a	 chamber	with	windows
overlooking	a	courtyard.

This	room	had	golden-tiled	ceilings	and	smelled	of	incense.	A	woman	in	her
early	thirties	(Basina)	was	in	the	central,	extremely	ornate	bed;	there	were	smaller
beds	along	the	walls,	and	four	younger	women	dressed	in	long	silk	gowns	were
preparing	 Basina’s	 jewelry	 and	 wardrobe	 for	 her.	 They	 looked	 startled	 by	 the
early	morning	 intrusion.	The	 eunuch	presented	Chira	 to	Basina	 saying,	 “Your
Ladyship,	this	woman	was	found	by	guards	at	the	bottom	of	the	stairs,	claiming
she	was	your	handmaiden.”

Basina	stared	at	Chira	with	a	slightly	mocking	air,	as	if	she	could	not	believe
an	assassin	had	been	stupid	enough	to	approach	from	such	a	direct	route.	Chira
met	 the	 look	 calmly,	 held	 out	 the	 amphora,	 and	 said,	 “The	 scented	water	 for



your	 headache,	 m’lady.”	 She	 spoke	 with	 a	 small	 reassuring	 smile,	 and	 then
winked	at	Basina.

Basina	showed	no	reaction	at	all	to	the	wink.	After	a	few	more	heartbeats,	she
instructed	the	eunuch,	“Leave	her	here	and	wait	outside.”	The	eunuch	released
her	and	left.

Before	the	door	had	closed,	the	four	young	women	had	surrounded	Chira	at	a
distance	of	perhaps	a	yard,	each	with	a	hand	on	the	eating-knife	at	her	belt	(see
Mortimer	Shore’s	MARS	#19	for	more	on	these;	they	are	short	blades,	nominally
for	cutting	food	during	meals,	not	considered	weapons,	but	obviously	capable	of
being	used	as	such).

“What	 are	 you	wearing	under	 that?”	 asked	Basina	of	 the	 shift.	 “That’s	 from
the	bathhouse.	I	would	never	dress	my	servants	so	poorly.”	She	had	a	low	voice
and	spoke	slowly,	sounding	sardonically	amused.

Chira	set	down	the	amphora	and	in	one	smooth	gesture	pulled	the	shift	over
her	 head;	 it	 dropped	 to	 the	 ground	 at	 her	 feet,	 leaving	 her	 nude.	 Basina
continued	 to	 stare	 at	 her,	 now	 a	 little	 appraisingly.	 “I	 see,”	 she	 said.	 Her
attendants	sniggered	slightly	but	she	made	a	harsh,	wordless	noise	of	disapproval
and	they	all	instantly	went	silent.	Finally	Basina	asked,	“Are	you	a	gift?	Who	sent
you?”

“Someone	who	would	be	your	friend,”	said	Chira.
Basina	smiled,	then	chuckled	like	a	contented	hen.	“Everyone	wants	to	be	my

friend,”	she	said.	“Most	of	them	bore	me.”
“I	am	sent	from	someone	who	will	not	bore	you,”	Chira	said.	“But	I	am	under

instructions	to	reveal	more	only	when	we	are	alone	together.”
“We’re	 alone,”	 said	 Basina	 comfortably.	 “My	 women	 are	 nothing	 but	 an

extension	of	me.”
Adopting	 a	 very	 gentle	 tone	 of	 voice—almost	 sympathetic—Chira	 said,	 “I

have	 reason	 to	 believe	 that	 might	 not	 be	 true.”	 Basina	 frowned	 and	 sat	 up,
throwing	the	sheets	off	of	herself.	The	clutch	of	attendants	stepped	in	closer	and
brandished	their	eating-knives.

“Who	says	so?”	demanded	Basina.	Chira	met	her	gaze	and	said	nothing.	After
a	long	moment,	Basina	ordered	her	women,	“Check	her.”

Chira	then	submitted	to	a	body	cavity	search,	which	was	unpleasant	but	brief.
Once	they	found	nothing	on/in	her,	Basina	ordered	the	four	of	them	out	of	the
room.	They	protested,	shocked	and	angry,	but	she	grunted	at	them	and	they	left.

When	Basina	 and	Chira	were	 alone,	 there	was	 a	 long	pause.	 “I	detect	 some
glamour,”	said	Basina	at	length.	“Who	has	Sent	you?”



“Nobody	 you	 know,	 milady,”	 said	 Chira.	 “A	 company	 of	 good	 men	 and
women	who	seek	your	aid.	We	are	from	far	away,	in	every	possible	sense.”

Basina	 listened,	 took	a	moment—in	general	her	movements	and	words	were
slow	and	languid—and	then	said,	 in	a	bored	and	long-suffering	tone,	“What	is
desired	of	me?”

“A	clandestine	introduction	to	a	member	of	the	court.”
“It	is	a	rather	large	court,	girl,	can	you	be	more	specific?”
“There	 is	 a	 court	 apothecary	who	 is	 also	 responsible	 for	 the	maintenance	of

the	herb	gardens.”
“Let	me	guess,”	Basina	 said	with	a	 throaty	 laugh.	“Somebody	wants	kalonji.

It’s	always	kalonji.”
Chira	suppressed	surprise	and	asked,	“Who	else	wants	kalonji?”
“Everyone.	 Every	 witch	 I’ve	 ever	 met,	 especially	 Franks,	 since	 nobody	 can

seem	to	make	it	thrive	in	the	north.	Cyril	Arcadius—the	apothecary—would	be
a	very	wealthy	man	if	he	sold	it.	Then	he	could	buy	himself	as	many	ladies’	favors
as	he	liked.”

“He	prefers	the	barter	method,”	guessed	Chira.
“He	finds	it	romantic.”	Basina	laughed.
“I’m	prepared	to	barter,”	said	Chira.	“This	should	be	simple.”
“Honey-bee,”	Basina	said	in	a	knowing	voice,	“nothing	is	ever	simple.”
Although	 she	 was	 already	 fairly	 certain	 of	 what	 was	 coming,	 from	 her

experiences	on	the	first	three	Strands,	Chira	kept	a	blank	look	of	innocence	on
her	face	and	asked,	“What	isn’t	simple	about	Cyril	Arcadius?”

“He	likes	a	witch	to	be	performing	magic—any	little	spell,	nothing	dramatic
—while	he	 is	 taking	her.	Makes	him	feel	 like	he’s	 somehow	part	of	 the	magic-
making.	It’s	pathetic.”

This	 is	 not	 what	 Chira	 had	 expected,	 as	 on	 previous	 Strands	 Basina	 had
simply	alerted	her	to	various	peccadillos	of	the	apothecary’s,	none	of	which	fazed
her.	This	variation	posed	a	serious	problem,	however:

“I	am	not	a	witch,”	said	Chira.	“I	can’t	offer	that.”
Basina	shrugged.	“Well,”	she	said	after	a	moment,	“I	suppose	I	could	be	your

proxy.	If	you	will	be	my	proxy	for	another	matter.”
“Meaning?”
“I	am	expected	in	His	Majesty’s	chamber	this	evening,”	said	Basina.
Chira	knew	 from	DORC-prep	 that	 the	Emperor—Alexios	 III	Angelos—was

married	 to	 Euphrosyne	 Doukaina	 Kamatera,	 a	 first-class	 Alpha	 Bitch	 who,
despite	 being	 famously	 adulterous	 herself,	 would	 eviscerate	 anyone	 found



fiddling	with	her	wussy	husband’s	 tackle-box,	 especially	 since	 she’d	 only	 given
him	daughters.	That	is	not	what	surprised	Chira	about	the	news	of	this	dalliance.
Rather	it	was	this:	“Aren’t	you	.	.	.	a	kinswoman	.	.	.	of	his?”

“Honey-bee,”	said	Basina,	“it’s	the	imperial	court,	we’re	all	each	other’s	blood-
cousins.	 Why	 do	 you	 think	 everyone	 fights	 so	 dirty?	 I	 would	 prefer	 to	 be	 in
someone	 else’s	 bed	 tonight,	 that’s	 all,	 so	 I	 need	 somebody	 to	 distract	 His
Majesty,	 and	 I	 need	 it	 to	 be	 a	 stranger	 so	 she	 can	 vanish	 before	 Euphrosyne
hunts	her	down	and	gouges	her	eyes	out.”

“Is	the	Emperor	expecting	you?”
“I	was	 summoned	by	his	 cupbearer,	 so	 somebody	 is	 expecting	me,”	 she	 said.

“But	it	might	be	his	wife	trying	to	entrap	me.”
“Ah,”	said	Chira.
“Yes,”	 said	Basina.	 “If	 you	open	 that	wooden	 cabinet	over	 there,	 you’ll	 find

my	summer	gowns.	Help	yourself	to	any	but	the	purple	one.	I’ll	have	the	maids
oil	 and	 dress	 your	 hair	 to	 resemble	 mine,	 but	 I	 will	 not	 trust	 you	 with	 my
jewelry.”

“Very	well,”	 said	Chira,	wishing	DORC’s	 curriculum	 included	a	mandatory
anti-assassin	workshop.

“Spend	the	day	in	here.	You’d	be	underfoot	anywhere	else.”
Chira	dressed	herself	 in	the	most	modest	of	 the	several	gowns—all	garish	by

modern	 standards,	 with	 tremendous	 amounts	 of	 small	 garnets	 and	 turquoise
sewn	onto	the	fronts,	as	well	as	decorative	stitching	in	silver	and	gold	thread.	She
then	 received	 (grudging	 and	 ungentle)	 ministrations	 from	 Basina’s	 attendants,
who	attempted	to	goad	her	into	revealing	her	identity	until	Basina	told	them	to
shut	 it.	Chira	was	 left	alone	in	the	chamber	for	approximately	five	hours,	until
Basina	 and	 her	 entourage	 returned,	 the	 entourage	 tittering,	 Basina	 looking
pleased	with	herself.	In	her	hand	Basina	held	a	black	silk	drawstring	bag,	half	the
size	of	a	human	fist.

“That	was	 painless.	Here	 are	 your	 kalonji	 seeds,”	 she	 said,	 and	 tossed	 them
onto	Chira’s	lap.	“Keep	them	tied	to	your	belt,	or	better	yet,	your	wrist.”

“When	am	I	to	go	to	the	Emperor’s	chambers?”	Chira	asked.
“After	nightfall,”	said	Basina.	“One	of	his	eunuchs	will	come	with	a	summons.

Have	you	eaten	today?”
When	Chira	said	that	she	had	not,	Basina	sent	two	of	her	retinue	down	to	the

kitchens	to	bring	up	fruit	and	nuts	and	cheese,	further	cementing	the	attendants’
resentment.	 A	mediocre	 lute-playing	 eunuch	 came	 in	 to	 entertain	 them,	 until
Basina	 got	 tired	 of	 him	 and	 sent	 him	 away,	 and	 finally	 after	 the	 sun	 had	 set,



Basina	excused	herself	to	go	to	her	other	lover’s	bed.
“Do	 not	 abuse	 her,”	 she	 ordered	 her	 sulking	 retinue.	 “If	 I	 hear	 of	 any	 bad

behavior	on	your	part,	I’ll	have	you	flayed	by	that	Genoan	His	Majesty	keeps	in
the	cellars.”

She	departed,	leaving	Chira	alone	with	the	seething	attendants.	All	efforts	on
her	part	to	gather	intelligence	from	them	met	with	complete	failure	as	they	were
barely	 able	 to	 contain	 themselves	 from	 tearing	 her	 garments	 off	 her	 à	 la
Cinderella’s	stepsisters.

Finally	the	Emperor’s	eunuch	came	in	search	of	Basina.	When	the	attendants
presented	Chira	in	her	stead,	he	blinked	a	moment,	then	sighed,	then	rolled	his
eyes,	 shook	 his	 head,	 and	 lugubriously	 gestured	 her	 to	 follow	 him.	 The
attendants	were	pleased	by	this	response,	and	one	of	them	whispered,	“Surely	he
is	leading	you	straight	to	what	should	have	been	Basina’s	death.	Ha!”	Followed
by	a	Greek	term	with	no	perfect	translation	but	meant	in	essence,	“Sucker!”

The	 eunuch	 led	 her	 through	 such	 a	 maze	 of	 torch-and-lamp-lit	 stairwells,
corridors,	 halls,	 and	 yards	 that	 she	 became	 disoriented	 and	 is	 not	 able	 to
reconstruct	the	route	for	us	(shown	as,	literally,	a	gray	area	on	the	DORCCAD
rendering).	 But	 eventually,	 she	 was	 brought	 to	 a	 grand	 set	 of	 copper-faced
double	doors	with	 intricate	gold	chase-work	as	decoration.	The	eunuch	rapped
on	 one	 of	 these	 with	 a	 particular	 staccato	 rhythm,	 and	 in	 response	 the	 doors
swung	 outward	 toward	 them.	 Ahead	 of	 them	 was	 a	 very	 small	 vestibule,
candlelit,	with	 one	door	 to	 the	 right	 and	one	 to	 the	 left.	 (We	know	 from	old
maps—digitized	 and	 cleaned	 up	 in	 DORCCAD—that	 these	 led	 to	 the
Emperor’s	 and	 Empress’s	 respective	 bedchambers.)	 The	 eunuch,	 giving	 her	 a
mournful	look,	literally	shoved	her	into	the	vestibule	and	turned	his	back.	As	the
door	began	to	swing	shut,	a	smooth,	strong	hand	grabbed	Chira’s	arm	and	she
felt	a	slender	blade	press	against	her	carotid	artery.	As	her	self-defense	skill	set	is
of	the	flight-not-fight	variety,	she	froze.

“Finally,	Basina,”	said	a	woman’s	voice,	harshly	happy.	“Finally	I	have	caught
you	in	the	act.”

“I	 am	 not	 Basina,	 Your	 Majesty,”	 said	 Chira.	 “I	 am	 simply	 an	 entertainer
obeying	a	command	from	my	Emperor.”

There	was	some	cursing,	the	knife	blade	was	removed,	the	hand	loosened	its
grip,	 and	 she	 turned	 so	 that	 her	 back	was	 to	 the	 wall	 and	 she	 could	 face	 her
assailant	 in	 the	 candlelight.	 The	 Empress	 Euphrosyne	 was	 considerably	 older
than	her	but	still,	in	a	ravaged,	cougar-esque	sort	of	way,	definitely	pretty	hot.

“Who	 are	 you?	 You	 can’t	 go	 in	 there,”	 said	 Euphrosyne.	 “I	 know	 what



happens	when	a	whore	gives	an	emperor	a	son.	If	he	doesn’t	get	one	from	me,	he
doesn’t	 get	 one	 from	 anyone.	 Nobody	 is	 going	 to	 rob	 my	 daughters	 of	 the
throne.”

“I’m	 Jewish,”	 Chira	 said.	 “No	 son	 of	 mine	 would	 ever	 be	 allowed	 on	 the
throne,	no	matter	who	his	father	is.”

Euphrosyne	looked	surprised.	“He	would	never	bed	a	Jewess,”	she	said.
“He	saw	me	dance	at	a	feast	a	fortnight	back	and	made	inquiries.	We’ve	never

spoken	in	person,	but	he	has	already	paid	a	great	deal	and	I	am	tardy.	Given	I
am	no	threat	to	Your	Majesty,	may	I	attend	to	my	Emperor’s	wishes?”

Everything	 about	 Euphrosyne’s	 demeanor	 changed	 as	 this	 sank	 in.	 She
gestured	 to	 the	 door	 that	 led	 to	 the	 imperial	 bedchamber.	 “Go	on,	 then,”	 she
said.	“I	don’t	care	if	you	fuck	him.	In	fact,	fuck	him	thoroughly	so	I	don’t	have
to	worry	about	his	fucking	anyone	else	tonight.”

With	these	words	of	encouragement	she	opened	the	door	herself.	It	was	a	very
large	room,	marble	floors,	and	panels	of	marble	for	walls,	ceiling	of	glassed	gold-
leaf	tile	looking	burnished	in	the	flickering	light	from	a	dozen	beeswax	candles.
One	entire	wall	opened	on	to	a	balcony	that	overlooked	a	garden.

In	the	middle	of	the	room	was	the	single	piece	of	furniture:	a	 large	bed	that
appeared	to	be	carved	out	of	solid	turquoise,	and	on	this	sat	a	sickly	pale,	dark-
haired	man	who	did	not	look	at	all	what	Chira	expected	of	an	emperor.	He	was
wearing	a	nightshirt,	which	was	thick	white	silk	with	gold	thread	sewn	into	the
collar,	 cuffs,	 and	hems.	He	 looked	 up	 expectantly	when	he	 saw	her,	 and	 then
pulled	his	head	back	like	a	surprised	turtle.

“Where’s	Basina?”	he	demanded,	standing	nervously.
“Basina	 was	 ill	 tonight,	 Your	Majesty,”	 said	Chira,	 with	 a	 reassuring	 smile.

“She	sent	me	to	entertain	you	in	her	absence.”
“You’re	an	assassin,”	said	His	Majesty.
“Of	course	not,	Your	Majesty,”	said	Chira	pleasantly.	“I	am	here	entirely	for

your	pleasure.”
“No,	you’re	 an	assassin,	 you	must	be	 an	assassin,	 I’ve	never	 seen	you	before

and	you	came	in	here	without	my	eunuch.”
“Your	honored	wife	 sent	 the	 eunuch	 away	 in	 the	 antechamber,”	 said	Chira.

“She	wanted	to	speak	to	me	in	private	before	I	came	in	to	you.”
“Did	she	tell	you	to	assassinate	me?”
“Your	Majesty,”	said	Chira,	 looking	graciously	shocked.	“Of	course	not.	She

herself	is	so	solicitous	of	your	safety	that	she	would	not	allow	me	in	until	she	had
reassured	herself	of	my	benign	intentions.	She	has	deigned	to	allow	me	to	enter



your	bedchamber.”
“Prove	that	you	are	not	an	assassin,”	he	said,	not	moving	from	his	defensive

stance	by	the	side	of	the	bed.
Chira	 continued	 to	 smile	 at	 him,	 adjusting	 the	 tone	 of	 the	 smile	 to	 try	 to

reassure	and	calm	him.	She	shimmied	easily	out	of	Basina’s	long	royal-blue	robe,
which	 she	had	not	 fully	 secured	 specifically	 so	 that	 she	 could	 remove	 it	 easily.
Because	of	all	the	jewels	and	stiff	metallic	thread,	 it	 landed	inelegantly,	but	she
stepped	out	of	it	with	a	sinuous	grace,	presenting	as	much	of	herself	as	possible
directly	to	him.	She	slipped	the	drawstring	of	the	kalonji-seed	bag	over	her	wrist
and	palmed	it.	Entirely	unclothed,	she	smiled	invitingly	at	him,	crossed	to	him,
and	took	his	hand	with	her	free	one.	He	stared	at	his	hand	in	hers	as	if	this	was
an	experience	he	had	never	had	before.	She	examined	his	face.	He	seemed	on	the
verge	of	a	panic	attack.

“Would	Your	Majesty	like	to	examine	my	person	himself,	to	see	that	I	have	no
weapons?”

She	ran	his	hand	across	her	breasts,	and	then	down	her	belly	and	between	her
legs.	“Please	 inspect	as	carefully	as	you	would	 like,”	she	whispered	 into	his	ear,
and	closed	her	lips	over	his	earlobe.	He	began	to	tremble.

“If	you’re	not	an	assassin,	you	must	be	a	spy,”	he	said,	pulling	his	head	away.
“You	are	from	that	navy	of	so-called	Pilgrims	that	are	wintering	in	Zara,	aren’t
you?”

“I	do	not	know	what	you	speak	of,	Your	Majesty,”	she	said,	and	squeezed	his
hand	between	her	thighs.	He	made	a	confused	moaning	sound	but	tried	to	pull
his	hand	away.

“You’re	from	Montferrat,	aren’t	you?”
“I	have	never	heard	of	Montferrat,	Your	Majesty,”	 she	whispered,	and	again

closed	her	lips	upon	his	earlobe.	Then	she	licked	the	back	of	his	ear.
A	moment	 later	 he	was	naked	 atop	her,	 bucking	 away,	 and	 a	 few	moments

after	that,	with	a	loud	sob	of	relief,	he	finished	and	lay	panting	on	top	of	her.
Immediately	the	door	to	the	chamber	pushed	open,	and	Empress	Euphrosyne

stormed	in	with	two	large	Varangian	Guards	behind	her.	The	Emperor	did	not
bother	to	raise	his	head.

“Thank	you,”	said	Euphrosyne	briskly.	“Alexios,	get	off	of	her,	we’re	sending
her	home.”

Without	 further	 acknowledging	Chira,	 the	 Emperor	 rolled	 over	 on	 the	 bed
and	 lay	 staring	 up	 at	 the	 gold-tiled	 ceiling	 with	 a	 morose	 expression.	 The
Empress	 picked	up	Basina’s	 blue	 gown	 and	Chira	held	her	hand	out	 for	 it.	 “I



don’t	 think	 so,”	 Euphrosyne	 said	 with	 a	 laugh,	 and	 tossed	 it	 into	 a	 corner.
“Alexios,	I’m	giving	her	your	nightshirt	to	wear.”

The	Emperor	was	already	asleep.
Euphrosyne	 picked	 up	 the	 garment	 and	 tossed	 it	 to	 Chira.	 “Put	 that	 on

quickly,	Jewess.	These	men	are	taking	you	back	to	Pera.”
This	 was	 convenient	 enough,	 as	 the	 second	 part	 of	 Chira’s	 task	 was	 to	 get

across	 the	Golden	Horn	 to	Pera,	 to	 leave	 the	kalonji	 seeds	with	 another	witch
(KCW	 from	 previous	 Strands,	 but	 still	 a	 stranger	 in	 this	 one)	 in	 the	 Jewish
section	of	the	city.	Getting	an	armed	imperial	escort	was	not	how	she	had	done	it
in	previous	Strands,	but	this	would	take	less	effort	on	her	part.

One	of	 the	guards	offered	her	a	woolen	cloak	and	she	wrapped	 it	 round	her
shoulders.	She	allowed	them	to	take	her	down	various	flights	of	stairs	and	across
yards	 and	 gardens	 and	 halls	 and	 down	 corridors,	 until	 she	 was	 once	 again
disoriented.	Eventually	the	smell	of	briny	water	began	to	waft	past	her	nostrils,
so	 she	 was	 not	 surprised	 when	 they	 came	 to	 an	 enormous	 wooden	 gate	 that
opened	onto	a	street	at	the	edge	of	the	water.	There	was	a	boat	with	two	oarsmen
who	 wordlessly	 rowed	 them	 across	 the	 Golden	 Horn—the	 deep	 protected
harbor,	 less	 than	 two	 bowshots	wide,	 that	 led	 to	 the	 hilly	 northern	 suburb	 of
Pera,	in	the	shadow	of	Galata	Tower.

Upon	landing	at	the	foot	of	the	steep	hill	(not	an	official	dock,	although	there
were	 several	 in	 either	 direction),	 the	 oarsmen	 secured	 the	 boat,	 and	 the	 two
guards	got	out	and	then	hoisted	her	directly	to	the	shore.	Throughout	this	 she
had	maintained	her	firm	hold	on	the	kalonji-seed	bag	and	now	was	mindful	not
to	let	the	harbor	water	touch	it.

“Where’s	 your	 home?”	 asked	 one	 of	 the	 guards,	 with	 the	 clumsy,	 angry-
sounding	 accent	 of	 the	 Britons	 who	 made	 up	 such	 a	 large	 percentage	 of	 the
Varangian	force.

Suppressing	 a	 mischievous	 urge	 to	 address	 him	 in	 modern	 English,	 she
responded	in	Greek.	“It	is	directly	behind	the	synagogue,”	she	said.	“My	father	is
Avraham	ben	Moises.	I	will	show	you.”

The	three	of	them	marched	up	the	steep	hill	along	the	street,	which	was	not
very	broad	but	paved	with	stones	and	well	maintained.	About	halfway	up	was	the
synagogue,	 a	 large	 building	with	 a	 fenced	 garden.	Chira	 directed	 them	 to	 the
rows	of	neat	wooden	homes	behind	this,	all	dark	as	it	was	now	about	midnight.
In	the	middle	row	of	houses,	set	on	leveled-off	stone	foundations,	Chira	pointed
to	one	house	in	particular.

One	of	 the	 guards	 took	her	 by	 the	 shoulder	 and	 the	 other	 pounded	on	 the



door.
After	 a	 confused	moment,	 there	were	 voices	within	both	 this	house	 and	 the

surrounding	homes,	and	candlelight	appeared	 in	windows.	Eventually	 the	door
opened	and	a	man	barely	old	enough	to	be	Chira’s	father	opened	the	door.	He
sported	 a	 long	 beard,	 longish	 hair	 covered	 by	 a	 felt	 cap,	 and	 dark	 robes.	 A
woman,	obviously	his	wife,	stood	behind	him,	and	behind	her	were	the	shadowy
forms	of	several	children	ranging	in	age	from	approximately	seven	to	full-grown.

“What	 do	 you	 want?”	 asked	 the	 man	 in	 Greek,	 fearful,	 staring	 up	 at	 the
Varangian	Guard.

“We’ve	brought	your	daughter	back,”	said	the	guard,	sounding	bored.
“Our	what?”	the	man	said,	amazed.
“Your	daughter,”	repeated	the	guard,	in	a	warning	voice.
“All	of	our	daughters	are	here	with	us	already,”	the	man	said,	looking	alarmed

and	confused.
The	guard	took	a	step	forward	to	tower	over	him	in	the	doorway.	“To	disown

your	daughter	because	she	has	been	with	the	Emperor	is	to	disown	the	Emperor
himself,”	 he	 said	 warningly.	 “Either	 you	 receive	 her	 into	 your	 home	 or	 I	 will
bring	you	back	to	answer	to	His	Majesty	for	the	insult	directly.”

Looking	mystified,	and	a	bit	 spooked,	 the	man	stepped	back	 into	 the	house
and	somewhat	robotically	held	his	arm	out	 in	a	gesture	of	welcome.	The	other
guard	pushed	Chira	through	the	doorway.

“Abba,”	said	Chira	in	a	happy	voice,	throwing	her	arms	around	him.	And	then
turning	 to	 his	 equally	mystified	wife,	 “Eema!”	The	woman	 very	woodenly	 put
her	arms	around	her.

Then	 Rachel,	 the	 oldest	 of	 their	 daughters	 (late	 teens?),	 and	 Chira’s
connection,	gasped	as	if	remembering	or	realizing	something,	and	said,	“Oh,	my
dearest	 sister,	 I’m	 so	glad	 to	 see	you	 safely	home!”	She	 threw	her	arms	around
Chira	with	a	bear	hug.	To	her	younger	siblings,	she	said	emphatically,	“Is	it	not
wonderful	to	have	our	sister	home	again?”

They	gave	her	strange	looks.
“Pretend	you	know	her,	and	welcome	her	home,”	Rachel	whispered	fiercely	in

Hebrew.
The	 children	 immediately	 surrounded	 Chira	 and	 hugged	 her	 with	 feigned

enthusiasm.
“The	 Emperor	 thanks	 you,”	 said	 the	 senior	 guard	 to	 the	 father.	 “But	 the

Empress	requests	that	you	keep	your	daughters	closer	to	home	from	now	on.”
“Yes,	of	course,	sir,”	stammered	the	father.



The	other	guard	added,	“I’d	marry	this	one	off	as	soon	as	possible.	If	nobody
in	Pera	wants	her,	 I’ve	got	 some	connections	 in	 town	who	would	be	happy	 to
take	her	off	your	hands.	Get	a	great	price	with	those	tits.”

“I	.	.	.	I’ll	take	that	into	consideration,	thank	you,”	said	the	father.
This	man	 pulled	 back	 his	 helmet	 to	 give	 Avraham	 a	 clear	 view	 of	 his	 face.

“Name’s	Bruno.	Bruno	of	Hamlin,”	he	said	agreeably.	“You	can	ask	for	me	via
the	imperial	kitchens,	the	head	cook’s	a	kinsman	through	marriage.”	He	winked
at	 Chira	 and	 then	 turned	 his	 attention	 back	 to	 the	 father.	 “I’ll	 take	 fifteen
percent	commission.	Think	about	it.”

The	guards	left.
As	 soon	 as	 the	door	was	 closed,	 the	 younger	 children	pulled	 away	 from	her

and	 scurried	 behind	 their	 mother,	 as	 Chira	 turned	 to	 face	 the	 family.	 Rachel
looked	delighted,	but	 the	 father	 and	mother	were	 frowning	unhappily	 and	 the
younger	children	took	their	cues	from	this.

“Thank	you,”	said	Chira	in	Hebrew,	in	her	most	winsome	smile.	“I	apologize
profusely	 for	 the	 alarm	and	confusion	 I’ve	 just	 caused	you.	Please	 allow	me	 to
explain	the	peculiar	circumstances	of	our	meeting.”

She	 then	 revealed	 herself	 as	 working	 with	 a	 witch	 network.	 She	 shared	 as
much	 as	 she	 safely	 could,	 and	 requested	 their	 permission	 to	 leave	 the	 kalonji
seeds	with	them	until	her	associate	came	to	collect	them,	which	she	anticipated
would	be	within	a	day	or	two.	Persuasive	narrative	is	one	of	her	specialties;	due
to	her	innate	charisma	and	agreeable	demeanor,	by	the	time	she’d	finished,	the
entire	household	had	relaxed	and	adopted	a	more	welcoming	air.	The	family	(as
we	knew	from	previous	Strands)	has	a	commitment	to	protecting	fellow	witches,
and	agreed	readily	to	assist	her.	In	fact,	the	daughter	Rachel	pressed	her	for	more
information	 about	 the	 witch	 network	 she	 was	 working	 with,	 and	 expressed	 a
desire	to	go	adventuring	with	Chira	 in	other	times	and	places,	despite	Moises’s
quiet	disapproval.

“When	my	associate	Felix	comes	to	collect	the	bag,	you	may	speak	more	with
him	about	it,”	Chira	suggested.	“In	the	meantime,	please	be	kind	enough	to	send
me	back	to	my	own	home.”

“I	shall	do	that,”	said	the	mother.
“Oh,	eema,	please	let	me	try,”	said	Rachel.	“I	would	love	to	know	I	can	help

such	interesting	people	to	have	such	marvelous	adventures	out	in	the	world.”
The	mother	was	about	to	agree	but	Moises	interrupted.	“Your	mother	will	do

it,”	he	said.	“You	are	too	eager.”
Chira	smiled	at	Rachel.	“I	was	 like	you	at	your	age,”	she	said.	“Except	I	did



not	have	the	powers	you	have.	You	will	certainly	be	a	remarkable	force	for	good
in	the	world	if	you	make	your	mind	up	to	be	so.”	Rachel	looked	rapturous.

“You	 are	 welcome	 to	 invade	 our	 home	 but	 not	 our	 daughter’s	mind,”	 said
Moises	 curtly.	 “Sarah,	 send	 this	 woman	 back	 where	 she	 came	 from,	 before	 I
decide	to	follow	Bruno’s	advice	and	sell	her	off.”

At	05:10	 the	morning	 after	her	departure,	Chira	was	Homed	 to	ODEC	#2
uninjured.

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	Dr.	Melisande
Stokes

on	private	ODIN	channel
DAY	627	(MID-APRIL,	YEAR	2)

Have	 reviewed	 your	 After	 Action	 Reports	 on	 Chira	 Yasin’s	 series	 of
DEDEs	 in	 the	 Blachernae	 Palace.	 All	 are	 too	 long,	 editorialized,	 and
frankly	 tawdry.	Revise	 to	reflect	 the	professional	standards	of	DODO,
and	 see	 to	 it	 all	 future	 reports	 remain	within	 department	 guidelines
(brief,	containing	salient	facts	only).
Allowing	 a	 chatty	 tone,	 personal	 timbre,	 etc.	 to	 seep	 into	 your

reports	 is	 unprofessional,	 Dr.	 Stokes.	 As	 such	 it	 is,	 by	 the	 letter	 of
DODO	 policy,	 grounds	 for	 being	 placed	 on	 a	 Performance
Enhancement	 Plan,	 which	 I	 need	 not	 remind	 you	 may	 culminate	 in
demotion	or	dismissal.
It	 might	 behoove	 you	 to	 review	 the	 transcripts	 of	 the	 recent

congressional	hearings	during	which	we	were	raked	over	the	coals	by
various	 Red	 State	 senators	 for	 even	 suggesting	 that	 sexual	 activity
might	 be	 involved	 in	 diachronic	 operations.	 In	 the	 future,	 any	 DOer
actions	 of	 this	 nature	 are	 to	 be	 downplayed	 to	 the	 greatest	 extent
possible	that	is	consistent	with	accurate	record-keeping.	This	is	not	a
Nora	Roberts	novel.

—RB



AFTER	ACTION	REPORT

DEBRIEFER:	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes
DOER:	Felix	Dorn
THEATER:	Constantinople/Late	Medieval	Europe
OPERATION:	Antwerp	witch	recruitment
DEDE:	Retrieve	and	carry	viable	kalonji	seeds	across	Europe	for	sowing
DTAP:	Pera,	Constantinople,	September	1202;	Peerdsbos	Forest	(Antwerp),
Belgium,	November	1202
STRAND:	First	(out	of	a	projected	three)	repetition	of	this	DEDE

Erszebet	 Sent	DOer	Felix	Dorn	 from	ODEC	#2	 at	 08:10	 of	Day	 627.	DOer
landed	 safely	 in	Pera,	 retrieved	kalonji	 seeds	without	 incident,	 traveled	 for	 two
months	by	foot,	river,	and	stolen	horse	from	Constantinople	to	Belgium.	Many
adventures.	Did	not	die.	Arrived	 in	Peerdsbos	Forest,	 sowed	kalonji	 seeds,	was
Homed	by	Goedele,	our	KCW	of	that	DTAP.

Note:	Witch	Rachel	in	Pera	volunteered	for	diachronic	engagement	but	father
disapproved.

Dutifully	submitted,
Dr.	Melisande	“Reads	Less	Nora	Roberts	Than	Dr.	Blevins	Does”	Stokes

INTERNAL	MEMO
From:	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
To:	General	Octavian	Frink
Re:	Melisande	Stokes
Day	688,	14:12

General	Frink—
[REDACTED]

…



INTERNAL	MEMO
From:	LTC	Tristan	Lyons
To:	General	Octavian	Frink
Re:	Dr.	Blevins’s	recent	statements	re:	Melisande	Stokes
Day	688,	15:02

Dear	General	Frink:
[REDACTED]

…

INTERNAL	MEMO
From:	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
To:	General	Octavian	Frink
Re:	LTC	Lyons’s	response	to	my	(somehow	leaked)	memo	re:	Dr.	Stokes
Day	688,	15:39

Okie—
[REDACTED]

…

INTERNAL	MEMO/EMAIL
From:	General	Octavian	Frink
To:	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	and	Lieutenant	Colonel	Tristan	Lyons
Re:	Leaked	memos,	etc.
Day	689,	10:19

[REDACTED]
.	.	.	Coming	from	an	academic	background,	Dr.	Blevins,	you	should	know
better	than	to	consign	anything	to	writing.	I	will	have	to	redact	most	of	this
correspondence	 not	 due	 to	 security	 concerns	 but	 from	 sheer
embarrassment.
So	you	will	let	it	rest	there,	gentlemen.
General	O.	K.	Frink



Post	by	Felix	Dorn
on	“Recreation”	ODIN	channel

DAY	617

As	some	of	you	have	noticed,	I	am	not	much	of	a	talker,	but	I	just
wanted	to	mention	that	if	anyone	wants	to	join	a	barefoot	running
group,	meet	me	at	0430	tomorrow	at	the	Harvard	Bridge,	on	the
Cambridge	side.

Reply	from	LTC	Tristan	Lyons,	Day	619:
Well,	everyone,	maybe	this	isn’t	much	of	a	surprise,	but	response	has
been	muted	 to	 Felix’s	 “dawn	 barefoot	 running”	 group.	 Heavy	 spring
rains,	darkness,	and	muddy	conditions	have	been	cited	as	an	excuse.	I
just	 wanted	 to	 remind	 everyone	 that	 when	 you	 are	 Sent,	 you	 arrive
naked—which	 means	 barefoot.	 Your	 feet	 are	 probably	 larger	 than
average	for	the	DTAP,	so	stealing	shoes	isn’t	as	easy	as	people	make	it
sound.	 And	 we	 do	 prefer	 nighttime	 arrivals	 because	 there’s	 less
chance	of	being	noticed.	Participation	in	Felix’s	dawn	barefoot	running
group	is	a	breeze	by	comparison,	and	will	help	you	develop	skills,	grow
calluses,	and	build	up	a	tolerance	to	pain	that	will	serve	you	well	when
sprinting	away	from	an	unsecured	DTAP	(or,	worse	yet,	getting	clear	of
a	possible	Diachronic	Shear	event).	Cardio:	it’s	not	just	for	knights!

DODO	MEMORANDUM

CRITICAL	UPGRADE	TO	JOB	TITLES
BY	MACY	STOLL,	MBA
POSTED	Day	629

As	those	of	you	in	management	positions	are	already	aware,	it	is	essential	that	we
move	over	to	ISO	9000	compliant	 job	titles	 for	all	current	and	future	DODO
staff.	 It	 is	beyond	the	scope	of	 this	memo	to	enumerate	all	of	 the	benefits	 that
will	 accrue	 to	 DODO	 (and,	 by	 extension,	 the	 taxpayers)	 as	 a	 result	 of
organization-wide	ISO	9000	compliance,	but	those	of	you	who	are	curious	can
find	plenty	of	information	about	it	on	the	non-classified	Internet.



Making	this	especially	urgent	is	that	we	are	getting	pushback	from	concerned
parties	in	the	Trapezoid	about	having	a	staff	member	whose	job	title	is	“witch.”
The	word	simply	looks	bad	when	it	shows	up	in	a	spreadsheet	or	official	report.
Moreover,	since	it	is	gender-specific,	it	is	a	violation	of	our	Diversity	Policy	(or	at
least	it	will	be	when	that	policy	is	written!).

It’s	 time	 to	nip	 this	 in	 the	 bud,	 since	 it	will	 only	 become	 that	much	worse
when/if	we	recruit	more	staff	to	perform	the	same	function.

After	lengthy	consultations	with	Dr.	Oda	and	others,	we	have	settled	on	a	new
job	title,	which	has	been	fast-tracked	through	the	Policy	on	Official	Jargon	and
Acronym	 Coinage.	 That	 title	 is	 .	 .	 .	 (drum	 roll)	 .	 .	 .	 MUON,	 for	 Multiple-
Universe	Operations	Navigator.	We	believe	 that	 this	 acronym	encapsulates	 the
essential	 functions	 and	 duties	 of	 this	 all-important	 role	 without	 any	 of	 the
backward	and	sexist	connotations	that	have	raised	hackles	within	the	Trapezoid.

Later	 on	 we	 may	 establish	 additional	 gradations	 such	 as	 Junior	 MUON,
Senior	MUON,	etc.	but	for	now	this	is	unnecessary	as	we	only	have	one	of	them
on	payroll.

This	 title	 applies	 only	 to	 paid	 staff	 members	 living	 in	 our	 timeline.	 Terms
such	 as	 KCW	may	 still	 be	 employed	 when	 referring	 to	 individuals	 in	 past	 or
alternate	timelines.

Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff	on
“Recruiting”	ODIN	channel

Post	from	LTC	Tristan	Lyons,	Day	630:
I’ve	been	reading	Stokes’s	After	Action	Reports	on	Chira’s	Blachernae
Palace	 DEDE,	 and	 I	 want	 to	 start	 a	 conversation	 about	 Varangian
Guards.	 For	 those	 of	 you	 who	might	 not	 be	 up	 to	 speed	 on	 context,
these	are	fighting	men	from	Scandinavian	or	other	Northern	European
countries	 who	 were	 recruited	 to	 serve	 as	 palace	 guards	 and	 elite
troops	by	the	Byzantine	Empire.	I	had	read	of	them	in	history	books,	so
I	knew	of	their	existence,	but	reading	these	After	Action	Reports	really
drives	home	how	pervasive	their	presence	was	in	Constantinople	circa
1200.	 Best	 of	 all,	 they	 tend	 to	 show	 up	 in	 important	 places	 like	 the
Imperial	Palace	and	key	fortifications	like	the	Galata	Tower,	city	gates,
etc.



Why	 is	 this	 of	 interest	 to	 DODO?	 Well,	 it’s	 no	 secret	 that	 we	 are
having	 difficulty	 recruiting	 DOers	 capable	 of	 blending	 in	 in	 1200
Constantinople.	 The	 required	 combination	 of	 physical	 appearance,
cultural	literacy,	and	language	fluency	needed	to	“pass”	in	that	DTAP
is	 difficult	 to	 pull	 off—occasional	 miracle	 recruits	 like	 Chira
notwithstanding.
The	 ubiquitous	 presence	 of	 Varangian	Guards	 suggests	 a	 different

strategy,	at	least	for	male	DOers:	don’t	worry	about	trying	to	pass	as	a
native	 Byzantine.	 Instead,	 hide	 in	 plain	 sight.	 We	 can	 recruit	 DOers
who	can	pass	for	Northern	Europeans,	then	Send	them	back	and	look
for	 ways	 to	 infiltrate	 them	 into	 Varangian	 Guard	 units.	 Their	 lack	 of
fluency	 in	 the	 Greek	 language,	 ignorance	 of	 contemporary	 customs
and	etiquette,	etc.	then	becomes	a	natural	fit	with	their	cover	story.
This	strategy	presents	two	main	challenges	that	I	can	think	of:

1.	We	don’t	know	much	about	how	the	Varangian	Guards	were	actually
recruited.	If	we’re	lucky,	there’s	a	sort	of	labor	market	in	this	DTAP,
such	that	big,	healthy-looking	Northern	European	males	who	show
up	in	town	with	no	past	history	or	connections	can	get	recruited	into
these	 units	 without	 going	 through	 the	 Byzantine	 equivalent	 of	 a
background	check.	Now	that	Chira	is	finished	with	the	kalonji-seed
DEDEs	 and	 has	 established	 some	 familiarity	 with	 Constantinople,
maybe	we	can	Send	her	on	some	scouting	missions	 to	 learn	more
about	how	this	works.

2.	Even	if	it	works	for	a	DOer	to	show	up	in	Constantinople	from	parts
unknown,	with	no	connections	or	background,	he’s	not	going	 to	be
able	to	pass	for	a	Varangian	Guard	unless	he	speaks	the	language.
Leading	 to	 the	 question:	 What	 is	 the	 language	 that	 these	 guys
speak,	and	where	can	we	learn	it?	Stokes?

Reply	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes,	Day	630:
Tristan,	 the	Varangian	Guards	were	drawn	from	all	over	Scandinavia,
Northern	Europe,	and	Britain	over	a	span	of	centuries,	so	it	depends.
In	our	era	(1203)	the	majority	were	speaking	Anglo-Saxon.	But	some	of
the	ones	Chira	encountered	were	apparently	speaking	Norman,	which
is	a	transitional	dialect,	not	a	stable	language	as	we	normally	think	of
it.	As	you	probably	know,	the	Vikings	invaded	France,	were	bought	off



with	 Normandy,	 settled	 there,	 then	 used	 it	 as	 a	 base	 for	 invading
Britain	 and	many	 other	 places.	 The	most	 bad-ass	Normans	 crossed
the	Channel	with	William	the	Conqueror;	the	ones	that	stayed	behind
in	 Normandy	 spawned	 the	 generations	 who	 mostly	 enjoyed	 jousting
and	courtly	love,	etc.	.	.	.	This	+	Normans	and	Anglo-Saxons	obviously
detesting	each	other	=	surprising	to	find	Normans	in	the	1203	Anglo-
Saxon-centric	 Varangian	 Guards.	 But	 actually,	 we	 can	 use	 it	 to	 our
advantage:
If	we	train	DOers	to	speak	Anglo-Saxon,	 they	will	probably	blend	 in

just	 fine	 no	matter	 their	 accent,	 but	 they	 do	 run	 some	 risk	 of	 being
called	out—Anglo-Saxon	had	a	limited	geographical	spread	and	thus	a
limited	number	of	dialects,	most	of	which	are	probably	represented	in
the	 1203	 VG	 cohort.	 Someone	 speaking	 an	 eccentric	 variation	might
arouse	curiosity.	Small	chance,	but	a	chance.

However:	Variations	of	“Norman”	were	spoken	from	Greenland	to	the
Volga	and	 from	Sicily	 to	 the	Arctic	Circle.	 If	Normans	were	accepted
into	the	VG,	 then	a	DOer	could	 learn	any	kind	of	mash-up	passing	as
some	variant	of	Norman,	and	never	run	the	risk	of	being	called	out	for
lack	of	fluency—they	can	just	claim	they’re	from	some	other	clan	over
the	mountain.	There	would	be	too	many	variations	of	the	language,	and
too	few	native	speakers	in	residence,	for	anyone	to	get	wise.

From	Dr.	Roger	Blevins,	Day	631:
I	have	been	monitoring	this	exchange	with	some	interest.	LTC	Lyons’s
idea	seems	to	merit	further	development.
LTC	Lyons:	please	see	me	about	deploying	Chira	Yasin	on	scouting

missions	 to	 Constantinople	 so	 that	 we	 can	 better	 understand
procedures	for	recruiting	Varangian	Guards.	I	only	wish	that	she	were
less	conspicuous.	Can	we	put	her	 in	a	burka?	There	must	have	been
some	Muslim	presence	in	the	city	in	that	era.
Dr.	Stokes:	the	obvious	failure	mode	in	your	linguistic	analysis—for

Norman	or	Anglo-Saxon—is	 that	our	DOer,	claiming	 to	be	a	native	of
some	 specific	 region,	 might	 happen	 to	 cross	 paths	 with	 another
Varangian	Guard	who	actually	was	from	the	exact	same	location,	and
who	 would	 detect	 faults	 in	 our	 DOer’s	 accent,	 knowledge	 base,	 etc.
and	 become	 suspicious.	 Agreed:	 less	 likely	 with	 Norman	 than	 with
A/S,	 but	 not	 impossible.	 We	 can	 minimize	 the	 chances	 of	 that



happening	by	developing	a	cover	story	according	to	which	our	DOer	is
from	an	exceptionally	remote	and	obscure	part	of	the	Norman	world.
Please	move	this	to	the	top	of	your	priority	list.

DODO	REPORT

POTENTIAL	KCWs,	NORMANDY,	12th	Century
BY	MELISANDE	STOKES,	PH.D.
Submitted	to	ODIN	archive,	Day	645

OBJECTIVE:	Identify	potential	Known	Compliant	Witches	(KCWs)	in	remote
settlements	 in	 Normandy	 during	 the	 approximate	 span	 1050–1200,	 as	 a
preliminary	 step	 toward	establishing	a	DTAP	there/then.	Proposed	 function	of
that	DTAP:	to	serve	as	“Language	Camp”	for	Fighter-class	DOers,	giving	them
linguistic	and	cultural	proficiency	needed	to	pass	as	(Norman)	Varangian	Guards
in	the	1200	Constantinople	DTAP.
GENERAL	 BACKGROUND:	 Normandy	 in	 this	 era	 had	 been	 colonized	 by
transplants	 from	both	Scandinavia	 and	Anglo-Saxon-Danish-influenced	 regions
of	Britain	for	well	over	a	century.	It	had	not	yet	been	incorporated	into	France
but	 had	 been	 expanding	 its	 borders	 at	 France’s	 expense	 for	 some	 time.	 The
linguistic	 environment	was	 accordingly	 complicated	 and	 fluid.	The	population
was	largely	Christianized,	at	least	in	name	(nobility	very	much	so	by	1200).	Since
most	 were	 illiterate,	 essentially	 all	 of	 the	 available	 records	 fall	 into	 three
categories.	The	first	two	are	(1)	legal	records	and	(2)	chronicles/accountings	kept
by	the	feudal	 lords’	 stewards,	but	these	rarely	refer	 to	women	independently	of
their	marital	status.	The	more	fruitful	source	therefore	is	(3)	church	documents,
typically	 written	 by	 priests,	 friars,	 etc.	 in	 Latin	 or,	 less	 frequently,	 medieval
French.
METHODOLOGY:	 Review	 medieval	 church	 documents	 for	 points	 of
convergence	per	following	criteria:	(A)	references	to	heretical	leanings	per	church
fathers;	(B)	family	trees	featuring	illegitimate	but	non-ostracized	daughters	over
the	 course	 of	 several	 generations;	 (C)	 recorded	 activity	 suggestive	 of	 magic,
particularly	pertaining	to	crops,	 livestock,	weather,	and	ease	of	pillaging	nearby
adversaries;	 and	 (D)	 perceived	 non-conformity	 in	 local	 female	 individuals,



especially	those	as	found	in	(B)	above.

RESULT:	POTENTIAL	KCW	THYRA	OF	COLLINET
A:	“And	in	June	of	this	year	(1027)	was	Thyra	delivered	of	a	girl-child	of	no	known

sire,	 as	 Thyra	 herself	 had	 been	 twenty-two	 summers	 earlier,	 and	 her	 mother
Wilmetta	 before	 her,	 and	 yet	 was	 Emma	 the	 aunt	 of	 Thyra	 joyful	 to	 receive
Thyra	 and	 her	 bastard	 child	 to	 her	 hearth,	 and	 the	 child	 was	 christened
Beatrice.”	(ref	2876)

B:	“And	 in	April	 of	 this	 year	 (1046)	was	Thyra	again	deprived	of	 those	villainous
and	Satanic	objects	with	which	she	adorns	her	cousin’s	chamber,	and	scorned	to
replace	them	with	an	image	of	Our	Lord.	For	this	she	was	given	a	penance	of	ten
Hail	Marys	which	she	was	loath	to	perform,	but	said	she	would	rather	receive	a
lash,	at	which	the	priest	hastily	did	declare	her	free	of	all	sin.”	(ref	3486)

C:	 “And	 in	 this	month	 (August	 1050)	 did	Thyra	 of	Herb-lore	 cause	 great	 sorrow
upon	the	(mayor?)	of	the	village	of	Collinet	and	the	(lord?)	of	(?	Illegible)	for	her
scolding	at	their	crossing	her	when	she	wished	to	forage	upon	their	lands	for	select
herbs.”

D:	“And	in	this	month	(January	1061)	died	Thyra	of	Herb-lore,	and	the	valley	wept
at	her	passing	for	fear	of	the	famine	returning	that	they	credited	her	for	keeping
at	bay.”	(ref	6584)

Further	research	recommended,	as	incidental	accounts	in	1002,	and	throughout
the	1100s,	suggest	an	uninterrupted	lineage	of	witches	in	Thyra’s	family,	all	with
strong	 local	 and	 familial	 authority.	 (Rec	 search	 words:	 1137	Collinet:Maneld,
1191,	1192,	and	1195	Collinet:Rikilde,	and	1193	and	1197	Collinet:Imblen)

Exchange	of	posts	between
Dr.	Roger	Blevins	and	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes

on	private	ODIN	channel
DAY	650	(MID-MAY,	YEAR	2)

Post	from	Dr.	Blevins:



Dr.	Stokes,	I	am	hereby	directing	you	to	proceed	with	the	recruitment
of	the	potential	KCW	known	as	Thyra,	circa	1045.
As	 much	 as	 we	 need	 your	 energies	 behind	 the	 expansion	 of	 the

Diachronic	Operative	Resource	Center,	it	is	clear	that	you	are	the	best
qualified	of	our	existing	roster	of	DOers	to	undertake	this	mission,	and
so	I	suggest	that	you	delegate	some	of	your	present	responsibilities	to
others	 as	 you	 undertake	 the	 necessary	 training.	 Macy	 Stoll	 is	 an
obvious	candidate	 to	 shoulder	 routine	administrative	and	managerial
tasks	and	has	expressed	a	willingness	to	do	so.

Reply	from	Dr.	Stokes:
Understood.	As	busy	as	I	am	here,	 I	can’t	dispute	that	 I	would	be	the
best	person	to	act	as	Forerunner	in	this	DTAP,	barring	some	recruiting
breakthrough	in	the	next	couple	of	weeks.
I	anticipate	that	getting	up	to	speed	on	local	languages	and	customs

will	occupy	me	for	most	of	 the	summer,	with	 the	actual	DEDE	slated
for	August.	Meanwhile	Erszebet	can	be	putting	 in	 the	usual	research
needed	 to	 Send	 me	 to	 that	 DTAP	 with	 reasonable	 temporal	 and
positional	accuracy.
One	 thing	 about	 your	 message	 surprised	 me,	 and	 so	 I	 wanted	 to

double	 check	 to	 make	 sure	 there	 was	 no	 misunderstanding.	 You
specified	Thyra,	1045,	as	the	target	of	the	operation.	This	means	that
our	 DOers	 would	 be	 learning	 a	 dialect	 of	 Norman,	 and	 a	 set	 of
customs,	that	would	be	150	years	out	of	date	by	the	time	they	show	up
in	Constantinople	circa	1200.
My	 research	 indicates	 that	 Thyra’s	 descendant	 Imblen	 is	 also	 a

witch.	I	propose	we	have	a	higher	chance	of	success	in	this	endeavor	if
we	 send	 our	 “Varangian	 Guards”	 to	 1190s	 Collinet	 to	 study	 with
Imblen.	 They	will	 stand	 a	 better	 chance	 of	 both	 comprehending	 and
being	comprehended	if	they’ve	got	1200	Norman	French.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
Thanks	 for	 your	 illuminating	 feedback.	 For	 classified	 reasons,	 1045
works	better	for	us	than	the	1190s	do.	Assuming	language	immersion
will	indeed	work	for	Tristan,	let’s	send	him	back	there	ASAP.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
What	 are	 “classified	 reasons”?	 How	 could	 they	 be	 so	 classified	 that



neither	 Tristan	 (the	 probable	 DOer	 in	 question)	 nor	 myself	 (the
linguistic	historian	expressly	 in	charge	of	determining	these	matters)
is	being	told	about	them?
Can	we	CC	in	General	Frink	and	Dr.	Oda	to	this	thread	in	case	they

can	 shed	 light	 on	 either	 Chronotropic	 or	 top-level-strategic	 reasons
for	not	doing	the	sensible	thing	here?

From	Dr.	Blevins:
Mel,	 thank	 you	 as	 always	 for	 your	 spirited	 commentary.	 There	 is	 no
need	 to	 trouble	 either	 General	 Frink	 or	 Dr.	 Oda	 in	 this	 case.	 The
answer	is	straightforward:	training	our	“Varangian	Guard”	candidates
close	 to	 the	 time	of	 the	Constantinople	DTAP	 is	 dangerous	 because,
however	remote	their	“hometown,”	they	could	still	be	recognized.	That
is	 why	 to	 choose	 a	 spot	 not	 only	 temporally	 but	 also	 geographically
isolated	from	1200	Constantinople.
Other	issues	in	this	decision	are	above	your	pay	grade	so	you	don’t

need	to	know.

DODO	MEMORANDUM

CLARIFICATION	TO	DRESS	CODE
BY	MACY	STOLL,	MBA
POSTED	Day	653

The	distribution	of	DODO’s	newly	minted	dress	code	has	brought	in	a	flood	of
requests	for	clarification.	Until	such	time	as	this	document	can	be	reworded,	here
is	 a	useful	 rule	 of	 thumb:	DOers	 on	 active	missions	 are	 exempt	 from	all	 dress
code	provisions,	including	the	requirement	to	wear	anything	at	all.

LETTER	FROM

GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY



Winter	Solstice,	1601

Auspiciousness	and	prosperity	to	you,	milady!
I	pray	Your	Grace	will	forgive	my	few	months	of	silence,	for	wasn’t	it	in	a

terrible	 way	 I	 found	 myself,	 trying	 to	 secure	 safety	 and	 security	 after	 the
disaster	 of	 the	 lomadh.	 Rose	 it	 was	 sent	Tristan	 Lyons	 back	 to	 his	 era,	 and
wasn’t	I	glad	to	see	the	back	of	him	for	a	while.

But	 only	 for	 a	 while,	 Your	 Majesty.	 For	 I’ve	 landed	 on	 my	 feet,	 and
determined	 I	 am	to	 learn	 the	 truth	behind	what	Tristan	be	up	 to.	When	he
“told	me	everything,”	 truly	 ’twasn’t	 everything	at	 all,	 or	else	why	would	 that
right	arse	Les	Holgate	appear	and	make	such	a	muck	of	everything?	There	are
things	 going	 on	 in	 the	 future,	 and	 it’s	 to	 do	 with	 magic,	 and	 ’tis	 the	 least
Tristan	Lyons	can	do	but	be	fully	honest	with	me	at	last,	now	that	he	and	his
like	have	robbed	me	of	all	I	cherish	in	London.

But	as	 I	 said,	 it’s	 safety	 I’ve	 found	for	myself,	and	at	 the	merest	cost.	 I’ve
told	Your	Majesty	in	years	past	of	Francis	Bacon’s	society	of	Good	Pens	(’tis	a
pun	 on	 the	 male	 member,	 is	 what	 I’m	 thinking,	 given	 what	 I	 know	 of	 Sir
Francis).	 This	 group	meets	 at	Gray’s	 Inn,	 and	 composed	 of	 the	 brightest	 of
menfolk	 it	 is,	 them	 being	 intelligencers	 and	 counterfeiters,	 not	 to	 mention
secretaries,	 physicians,	 poets,	 theologians,	 apothecaries,	 and	 the	 occasional
natural	 philosopher,	 and	of	 these	 last	 few,	 doesn’t	 Sir	 Francis	 love	 to	debate
with	the	nature	of	the	universe,	 in	ways	that	seem	like	conversations	witches
might	have	with	each	other,	 if	witches	were	wont	to	waste	their	time	putting
into	 words	 things	 which	 go	 without	 saying.	 There	 are	 no	 witches	 in	 their
discourses	 and	 indeed	 no	 women	 at	 all!	 Like	 a	 bunch	 of	 turtles	 trying	 to
discuss	flight,	they	remind	me	of,	and	not	getting	all	of	it	correct,	neither.

But	sure	it’s	entertainment	enough.	Don’t	I	keep	my	mouth	shut	when	I’m
near	 them	and	pour	 the	ale;	 they	are	 the	best	minds	 in	London,	 and	one	of
them	natural	philosophers	with	a	mystical	bent,	one	Jacques	Cardigan	(a	mad
enough	 fellow	with	 a	mad	 enough	name!)	 has	 taken	me	 in	 as	 a	 servant,	 and
Your	Ladyship	will	understand	that	I	warm	his	bed	when	he	asks	for	me,	but
it’s	an	easier	life	than	posing	as	a	bawd,	so	it	 is.	Himself	 is	a	wealthy	enough
fella,	although	an	obvious	Catholic	(what	with	a	French	name	and	his	surname
coming	from	a	Catholic	shire	in	Wales,	he	can	hardly	hide	it,	can	he?),	so	he
keeps	out	of	politics	and	that	may	in	the	end	mean	I	must	move	on	to	other
quarters,	 for	to	be	of	use	to	Your	Grace.	But	for	now	it’s	safety	and	security
and	no	questions	asked—sure	he	thinks	he’s	landed	in	it,	here’s	a	pretty	Irish



refugee	who	will	give	him	pleasure	 in	exchange	for	room	and	board,	and	not
be	questioning	his	religion	neither!

He’s	 a	 summer	 house	 in	 Surrey,	 in	 Norwich,	 and	 we’ll	 be	 retiring	 there
come	 spring,	 if	 I’m	 still	 under	 his	 roof	 then,	 but	 through	 winter	 we’re	 near
enough	 to	Gray’s	 Inn.	Rose	 knows	my	 circumstances	 and	 conveyed	 them	 to
Tristan,	so	I’ve	let	him	know	I’m	pleased	to	continue	to	help	him	knot	his	net-
work	of	witches,	and	it	seems	to	have	grown	with	breathtaking	speed,	so	it	has.
I’ve	stopped	asking	him	questions	directly,	though,	and	it’s	trying	to	learn	a	bit
by	observation	I	am	now.	For	it	seems	to	me	that	he	knows	precisely	what	it	is
that	brought	magic	to	its	knees,	and	it	seems	to	me	that	if	I	might	know	it	too,
I	might	hoist	him	by	his	own	petard	(to	quote	that	poxy	playwright)—I	could
be	using	his	 own	 strategy	 of	moving	 around	 through	 time	 and	 space,	 not	 to
bring	back	magic	but	 to	prevent	 its	 cessation	 in	 the	 first	 place.	 I’ve	no	 idea
how	to	make	that	so,	and	it’s	cagey	enough	he’s	being	with	his	information,	but
I’ve	naught	else	to	do	with	my	time	now	that	I’m	away	from	Whitehall	circles,
so	I	mean	to	figure	it	out.

The	 one	 thing	 I’m	 knowing	 for	 certain	 is	 that	 in	 his	 ever-expanding
fellowship	of	witches,	Tristan	occasionally	runs	into	an	ornery	one	who	needs
to	be	coaxed	into	the	congregation	(and	sure	why	shouldn’t	they?	I	would	have
been	demanding	some	coaxing,	if	I	didn’t	foolishly	think	I	could	benefit	from
him	 as	much	 as	 him	 from	me.).	At	 this	moment	 of	 time,	 himself	 and	 some
other	DOers	are	romping	about	the	universe	trying	to	please	some	Wending
woman	 in	 Antwerp	 who	 lived	 some	 fifty	 years	 back	 (and	 who	 had	 some
connection	to	that	banker	fellow,	Gresham—and	therefore	somehow-or-other
to	my	new	 friend	Bacon,	 for	 didn’t	 Sir	Thomas	Gresham’s	 bastard	 daughter
marry	Sir	Francis’s	half-brother?	 Is	 right	 she	did.	And	of	course	 I’m	sure	 the
Fuggers	are	involved	in	all	of	this	somehow,	they	always	are.).

Truth	be	told,	I	don’t	even	know	if	I	should	be	taking	the	side	of	Tristan.
What	 does	 he	 need	 do	 in	 Antwerp	 fifty	 years	 back?	 Especially	 requiring
magic?	Was	there	something	about	that	time	and	place	that	contributed	to	the
corruption	of	magic?	And	why	make	use	of	a	witch	who	knew	the	forebears	of
the	menfolk	 I	 now	brush	 elbows	with?	A	pure	 coincidence	 is	 it,	 or	with	 his
future-knowledge	does	Tristan	plan	to	make	use	of	me	somehow,	and	my	new
friends?	So	many	questions,	Your	Grace!

So	 it’s	 learning	 about	 all	 that	 I	 intend	 to	 do,	 but	 not	 so’s	 Tristan	 would
notice	my	efforts.	In	fact,	I	intend	to	make	myself	excessively	useful	to	him,	in
the	hopes	that	he	includes	me	in	his	confidences.	(Perhaps	even	finds	cause	to



have	me	Sent	to	his	own	time!	Then	I	can	see	for	myself	what’s	what.)	He’s	a
grand	 lad,	 when	 he’s	 not	 scheming	 on	 behalf	 of	 his	 overlords,	 and	 I’ve	 a
fondness	for	him,	so	I	do.

With	all	good	wishes	to	ye,	milady,	Gráinne	formerly	of	London

DODO	HUMAN	RESOURCES

PERSONNEL
DOSSIER

FAMILY	NAME:	Overkleeft
GIVEN	NAME(S):	Esme	Claire
TITLE:	Doctor	(Ph.D.,	Bioinformatics)
AGE:	34
CLASS:	Closer/MacGyver
HEIGHT:	5′10″
EYES:	Blue
HAIR:	Chestnut
COMPLEXION:	Light,	freckled
DISTINCTIVE	FEATURES:	Crooked	nose,	bent	left
clavicle	(results	of	sports	injuries)

ETHNICITY:	Northern	European
NATIONALITY:	Belgian
LANGUAGE	FLUENCY	RATINGS:
Dutch,	French:	5
English,	Walloon:	4
German:	3

RELIGION:	 Atheist,	 from	 historically	 Catholic
family	 on	 mother’s	 side,	 historically	 Dutch



Reformed	Church	on	father’s
CITIZENSHIP:	Belgian	(EU)
BIOGRAPHY:	 From	 an	 academic	 family	 that
moved	among	various	university	towns	(mostly
Low	 Countries)	 while	 she	 was	 growing	 up.
States	that	this	nomadic	lifestyle	forced	her	to
acquire	social	skills	she	might	otherwise	have
neglected	 given	 a	 generally
introverted/intellectual	 personality.
Participated	 in	 various	 sports,	 with	 emphasis
in	 field	 hockey	 and	 track	 &	 field.	 Hobby:
sewing	 and	 textiles.	 Attended	 University	 of
Antwerp,	majored	 in	 biology.	While	 at	 school,
became	involved	in	local	chapter	of	Society	for
Creative	 Anachronism	 with	 emphasis	 on
making	period-correct	clothing.	Later	obtained
Ph.D.	 in	 bioinformatics,	 focusing	 on	 plant
biology,	 from	 Leiden.	 Obtained	 security
clearance,	 and	 thereby	 found	 her	 way	 into
Defense	Dept.	 personnel	 databases,	 as	 result
of	a	NATO	project	 to	design	upgraded	military
camouflage	 patterns	 in	 response	 to	 projected
botanical	shifts	resulting	from	climate	change.
When	 approached	 by	 DODO,	 was	 in	 London
seeking	 investors	 in	 an	 apparel	 start-up	 that
was	 a	 spinout	 of	 the	 camouflage	 project.
Agreed	 to	 put	 that	 project	 on	 ice	 in	 order	 to
accept	the	DODO	job.

SKILL	SET:	Athletic,	hardy,	uncomplaining,	with	a
winning	 personality	 and	 ability	 to	 adapt	 to
various	 social	 milieus.	 Keen	 eye	 for	 clothing,
textiles,	needlework	of	the	late	medieval/early
Renaissance	 era.	 Exceptionally	 strong
knowledge	 of	 botanical	 matters,	 especially	 in
Northern/Western	Europe.

LIMITATIONS:	Her	unusual	height	will	make	her
conspicuous,	 particularly	 in	 medieval



populations.

AFTER	ACTION	REPORT

DEBRIEFER:	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes
DOER:	Dr.	Esme	Overkleeft	(Closer)
THEATER:	NEER	(Northern	Europe	Early	Renaissance)
OPERATION:	Antwerp	witch	recruitment,	Part	C:	Harvest	kalonji	as	incentive
to	potential	KCW	Winnifred	Dutton
DEDE:	Recruit	Dutton	as	KCW
DTAP:	Peerdsbos	Forest	(Antwerp),	Belgium,	1562

Note:	A	previous	unsuccessful	recruitment	attempt	had	been	made	by	Dr.	Stokes
circa	Day	500.	The	encounter	ended	awkwardly.	Dutton	had	demanded	kalonji,
which	Stokes	 knew	nothing	 about,	 so	 recruitment	was	 abandoned	until	 a	 new
gambit	could	be	established	for	obtaining	some.	The	series	of	DEDEs	conducted
by	Chira	Yasin	 and	Felix	Dorn	 circa	 1200	had	 the	 effect	 of	 sowing	kalonji	 in
known	 locations	 in	 the	Peerdsbos	Forest	where	 conditions	were	 right	 for	 it	 to
thrive	and	remain	available	centuries	in	the	future.

Thanks	 to	 the	earlier	DEDEs	by	Dr.	Stokes,	Winnifred	Dutton	was	already
aware	 of	 us,	 and	 Overkleeft	 knew	 how	 to	 obtain	 clothes,	 make	 contact	 with
Dutton,	etc.

MUON	Erszebet	Karpathy	sent	Dr.	Overkleeft	 from	ODEC	#3	at	08:21	of
Day	818.

Having	 retrieved	 clothes	 stashed	 from	 Stokes’s	 previous	 efforts,	 Overkleeft
went	without	incident	to	fortress	at	which	DOer	Felix	Dorn	had	sowed	seeds	in
1202.	Discovered	 that	 360	 years	 later,	 a	 small	 but	 hardy	 patch	 of	 kalonji	 had
survived	 in	one	 south-facing	 exposed	 courtyard.	Esme	uprooted	one	plant	 and
took	 samples	 of	 leaves,	 removing	 viable	 roots	 and	 seed-buds	 so	 that	 Dutton
could	not	simply	establish	her	own	patch	of	kalonji.	Carried	these	to	the	home	of
Winnifred,	wife	of	Thomas	Dutton	(Thomas	Gresham’s	Antwerp	factor).

It	is	now	known,	and	was	an	open	secret	even	then,	that	Winnifred	had	been
married	 off	 to	 Dutton	 only	 to	 get	 her	 out	 of	 England,	 where	 she	 had	 been
Thomas	Gresham’s	 lover	 and	had	borne	him	a	natural	daughter,	Anne	 (twelve



years	old	at	time	of	this	DEDE).
Consequently	Dutton	was	 living	 in	a	comfortable	home	with	a	disinterested

“spouse,”	in	a	foreign	country,	deprived	of	her	lover,	and	except	for	the	task	of
raising	 her	 daughter	was	 very	 restless.	 She	 allowed	 the	 servants	 to	 bring	 Esme
into	the	home	at	once	and	was	delighted	to	receive	the	kalonji	plant,	the	merits
of	 which	 she	 immediately	 began	 to	 describe	 to	 both	 Esme	 and	 young	 Anne.
Without	 further	obstinacy,	 she	pledged	herself	 to	being	a	KCW	and	made	her
residence	available	as	a	safe	house.	Furthermore	she	encouraged	her	daughter	to
do	so	as	well,	which	Anne	agreed	to	eagerly.

Esme	Overkleeft	returned	without	incident	at	18:45.
Note:	It	is	already	marked	in	DODO	archives,	but	for	ease	of	reference,	here

is	additional	historical	context	(not	told	to	Winnifred	or	Anne,	of	course):	Anne
Gresham/Dutton	 will	 go	 on	 to	 marry	 Nathaniel	 Bacon	 (half	 brother	 of	 Sir
Francis),	with	whom	she	will	live	in	Norwich,	England.	Her	three	daughters,	all
witches,	 are	 roughly	 contemporaneous	 with	 Gráinne	 in	 London.	 Accordingly,
our	next	DEDE	will	be	to	reach	out	to	them	for	recruitment.

Diachronicle	
(C IRCA	DECEMBER,	YEAR	2)

In	which	Tristan	has	a	working	vacation

THE	 VILLAGE	 OF	 COLLINET	 STRADDLES	 a	 tributary	 of	 the	 river	 Dives,	 which
empties	into	the	English	Channel	a	few	miles	downstream.	The	actual	DTAP
was	 a	 copse	 of	 trees	 both	 leafless	 and	 evergreen,	 some	 half-mile	 from	 the
center	of	the	village	proper.

DODO	 now	 had	 a	 small	 operational	 group	 called	 TAST:	 the	 Tactical
Archaeological	Strike	Team.	As	the	name	implied,	they	combined	the	skill	set



of	 traditional	 archaeologists	 (digging	 holes	 and	 finding	 stuff)	 with	 those	 of
covert	intelligence	operatives—they	knew	how	to	get	in	and	out	of	potentially
hostile	locations	without	drawing	attention,	and	how	to	find	what	they	were
looking	 for	 in	 a	 hurry.	 You	 might	 not	 think	 of	 Normandy	 as	 a	 hostile
location.	But	because	of	France’s	 ancient	 and	 secret	 laws	banning	diachronic
operations,	 it	 was	 hostile	 to	 us.	 Anyway,	 TAST,	 zeroing	 in	 on	 a	 powerful
GLAAMR	centered	on	this	copse	of	trees,	had	been	able	to	carry	out	a	couple
of	midnight	 digs	 and	 verify	 that	 it	 had	 been	 the	 homesite	 of	 the	 lineage	 of
presumed	witches	we’d	seen	mentioned	in	various	church	documents.	It	was
classic	witch	 real	 estate:	 close	 enough	 to	 the	 village	 to	 allow	 commerce	 and
social	contacts	but	sufficiently	remote	to	afford	separation	and	privacy.

Erszebet	was	admirably	on	the	mark:	I	materialized	unobserved	right	at	the
copse,	 where	 the	 ground	was	mercifully	 dry,	 and	 after	 recovering	 from	 the
usual	 disorientation,	 I	 followed	 the	 scent	 of	woodsmoke	 to	 a	 hut	 some	 fifty
very	chilly	strides	away:	the	home	of	our	potential	KCW,	Thyra	of	Collinet.	I
had	 landed,	by	design,	 in	 late	 afternoon	 in	midwinter;	 in	 spite	of	 the	 risk	of
hypothermia,	I	elected	to	arrive	now	because	Thyra	would	likely	be	holed	up
in	front	of	her	fire.

As	we’d	come	to	expect,	Thyra—a	handsome	woman	of	some	forty	years,
brown	 hair	 gently	 greying—was	 not	 surprised	 by	 the	 arrival	 of	 a	 naked
stranger,	 although	 I	 cannot	 say	 she	was	 particularly	 pleased	 by	 it	 either.	 She
grudgingly	 allowed	me	 to	 enter	 her	 hut	 and	 warm	myself	 by	 the	 fire.	 She
muttered	to	herself.

“Pardon?	 Please	 repeat,”	 I	 said	 politely	 in	 Latin—the	 educated	 traveler’s
language	of	the	time.

Thyra	appraised	me	a	moment,	then	turned	back	to	the	fire.	“I	said”—now
in	slightly	stiff	Latin—“I	sensed	a	glamour	in	recent	days.	But	I	did	not	expect
somebody	 Sent.	 I	 cannot	 imagine	why	 anyone	wants	 to	 visit	 such	 a	 remote
location.”

“Would	 this	 language	 be	 easier?”	 I	 asked	 in	Anglo-Saxon;	 she	 gave	me	 a
confused	look.	“Let	it	be	Latin,	then,”	I	hastily	amended.	“Are	you	fluent?”

“Too	fluent	for	the	priest’s	 liking,”	she	said	with	a	reluctant	little	chuckle.
“If	you	speak	slowly	I	can	probably	understand.”

I	 was	 able	 to	 convey	 to	 Thyra	 our	 proposal:	 namely	 that	 young	 men,
apparent	warriors,	would	come	and	stay	with	her	from	time	to	time,	with	no
other	purpose	 than	 to	become	 familiar	with	 the	 local	 language	 and	customs.
They	would	 be	 disciplined	 and	well-behaved.	After	 a	 few	weeks	 she	would



Home	them.
“Pah,”	 she	 said,	 turning	 her	 attention	 back	 into	 the	 fire.	 “I	 do	 not	 like

young	men.	Why	not	Send	young	women?”
“The	men	could	be	your	house-help	while	 they	are	here,”	I	 said,	 looking

around.	“Chop	firewood	and	bring	it	in.	Fetch	water.	Fix	that	leak,”	I	added,
pointing.	 “Is	 that	 roof-beam	 rotting?	 Do	 you	 think	 it’s	 safe	 to	 wait	 until
spring?	What	kind	of	snow-load	do	you	get	here?”

With	a	dismissive	wave	of	her	hand,	 she	grunted.	“I	have	magic	 for	all	of
that.”

“Magic	can	be	tiring,”	I	said.	“If	the	young	men	were	here,	you	could	rest
all	the	time.	Order	them	around.”

Thyra	 made	 an	 exaggerated	 expression	 of	 hmm-maybe-I-should-think-
about-this-after-all,	and	after	a	moment	nodded	her	head.	“You	say	 they	are
warriors?”

I	nodded.
“I	have	no	weapons	 for	 them,	only	 some	 small	knives	 and	 an	 axe	 for	 the

chopping	of	wood.”
“They	are	not	here	to	act	as	warriors,”	I	clarified.	“They	are	here	only	to

learn	the	language.”
“What	if	we	require	them	to	act	as	warriors?”
That	brought	me	up	short.	“Why?”	I	asked.	“Are	you	at	war?”
She	shook	her	head.	“No,	but	there	has	been	some	concern	in	the	village

about	maybe	raids	from	boat-thugs	who	have	been	using	the	Dives	estuary	to
get	 to	 the	 interior	 from	 the	 seacoast.	 If	 these	 young	men	 could	 protect	 the
village,	this	would	make	them	more	attractive	guests.”

“I	can’t	promise	protection,”	I	said,	“since	there	is	no	guarantee	they’ll	be
here	if	such	an	attack	happens.	But	you	must	surely	agree	that	having	a	strong
young	man	around	is	better	than	not.”

Thyra	 shrugged.	 “It’s	 not	bad,”	 she	 said.	 “Not	 as	 good	 as	 a	 strong	young
woman,	though.”

Over	 the	course	of	 the	next	 few	minutes,	 I	could	 see	her	warming	to	 the
idea,	 and	 eventually,	 without	 actually	 having	 said	 yes,	 it	 was	 clear	 she	 was
amenable.

“How	might	you	vouch	for	these	visitors?”	I	asked.	“Their	presence	will	be
noticed	in	the	village.”

Thyra	 shrugged	 and	 gave	 a	 dismissive	 wave	 of	 her	 hand	 (a	 sort	 of	 early
medieval	 variant	 of	 Erszebet’s	 body	 language,	 now	 I	 think	 of	 it)	 and	 said,



“That	is	easy.	Much	trade	across	the	Channel,	there	is	nothing	strange	about
cousins,	friends	of	friends,	and	that	sort,	showing	up	from	Britain	and	Ireland.	I
shall	say	my	guests	are	such	people,	from	such	places.”

A	few	minutes	more	conversation,	and	she	was	willing	to	actually	speak	the
words,	“Yes,	 I	will	 take	 them”	 (which	put	my	 fledgling	 Inner	Bureaucrat	 at
ease).	 She	 even	 invited	 me	 to	 share	 her	 meal	 of	 rabbit	 stew	 with	 root
vegetables,	and	to	stay	the	night	before	she	Homed	me	the	following	morning.

Back	 at	DODO	HQ,	 I	 delivered	my	 good	news.	Tristan	 and	 I	 sat	 at	 the
same	computer	(be	still	my	heart,	I	suppose)	to	pore	over	the	feudal,	judicial,
and	church	chronicles	of	the	area,	seeking	references	to	raids	circa	1045.	We
found	nothing,	except	one	possible	indirect	reference	to	villagers	who	perished
during	altercations	with	bandits.	It	did	not	match	Thyra’s	description,	nor	was
it	 chronicled	 officially	 anywhere—it	was	 an	 ancillary	 comment	 in	 testimony
given	during	a	property	dispute.

“Well,	 that’s	 good,	 anyhow,”	 said	 Tristan.	 “Probably	 means	 I	 won’t
encounter	anything	while	I’m	there.”

I	entered	notes	 about	Thyra’s	dialect	 into	 the	 relevant	 linguistic	databases,
and	 sat	 with	 DORCCAD	 personnel,	 giving	 them	 sketches	 of	 the	 area	 for
entry	into	their	systems.

There	 was	 some	 chatter	 about	 timing,	 conducted	 over	 ODIN—and
occasionally	 in	person,	since	we	tried	to	dine	with	the	Odas	every	couple	of
weeks.	To	make	 a	 long	 logistical	 issue	 short,	 it	was	 determined	 that	Tristan
would	 go	 back	 to	 stay	with	Thyra	 four	 different	 times,	 for	 a	 fortnight	 each
time	(rather	than	going	back	twice	for	a	month	each—Frank	Oda	determined
this	to	be	stabler	with	Chronotron	calculations,	and	Erszebet	agreed	with	him).

Tristan	 already	 knew	 Anglo-Saxon,	 and	 I’d	 been	 prepping	 him	 on	 Latin
almost	 since	we	met	 (how	 can	 anyone	with	Western	 language	 interests	 not
know	Latin,	FFS?).	 So	he	needed	very	 little	prep.	Erszebet	Sent	him.	Thyra
had	secured	clothes	in	anticipation	of	his	coming	(he	was	Sent	in	spring).

Thyra	had	also	already	communicated	to	curious	villagers,	priests,	etc.	 that
Tristan	(her	supposed	kinsman)	would	be	sojourning	with	her	for	a	fortnight
so	they	might	exchange	news,	and	that	he	was	of	mixed	Danish/Anglo-Saxon
descent	originating	from	a	remote	part	of	England	(Tintagel—or	as	they	called
it	then,	Dintagel),	journeying	to	Normandy	to	seek	his	fortune	on	the	tourney
field.	This	would	explain	why	his	accent	was	unfamiliar	and	why	he	tended	to
use	 Britannic,	 Cornish,	 and	 Anglo-Saxon	 vocabulary.	 Since	 no	 one	 in	 the
settlement	had	been	to	that	part	of	England,	they	accepted	the	cover	story.



I	 KNOW	 THAT	 in	 the	 bowels	 of	ODIN,	 there	 is	 an	 official	DEDE	 report	 of
Tristan’s	 time	 there,	 for	 I	 wrote	 it	 myself;	 I	 know	 also	 that	 there	 is	 an
“incident	 report”	 that	 the	 well-intentioned	 but	 insufferably	 officious	 Macy
Stoll	required	him	to	write	as	well.	But	I	have	just	come	into	an	extra	measure
of	whale	oil,	 and	 there	 is	 ink	 enough,	 and	 I	 cannot	 sleep	 from	my	growing
anxiety,	so	it	pleases	me	to	recall	Tristan’s	telling	me	of	his	time	there,	and	one
element	in	particular.

When	he	arrived,	he	was	made	welcome	by	the	settlement	at	large,	and	all
manner	of	gifts	and	entertainment	pressed	upon	him.	Once	a	level	of	trust	was
established,	 he	 asked	 to	 learn	 their	 combat	 styles,	 and	 the	 men	 of	 the
settlement	were	pleased	 to	 show	off	 and	practice	with	him.	 It	was	 generally
limited	 to	 stick-fighting	 arts,	 as	 the	 locals	were	 rural	 villagers.	These	 sessions
also	allowed	him	to	work	on	language	immersion	more	fluidly,	imitating	not
only	the	vocabulary	but	the	cadence	and	pitch	of	able-bodied	young	males.	He
was	not	in	danger	of	“talking	like	a	girl,”	which	would	have	been	the	case	if
he’d	mostly	stayed	under	Thyra’s	roof.

He	was	Homed	after	two	weeks	(yes,	it	was	dreadfully	good	to	see	him,	and
yes,	 I	 did	 try	 to	 catch	 a	 peek	 of	 him	 before	 he	 disappeared	 into	 the
decontamination	 shower).	After	 about	 ten	days	of	downtime,	he	went	back;
another	 two	weeks,	 another	 ten	 days;	 a	 third	 fortnight,	 a	 third	 rest	 period.
During	the	rest	periods,	he	was	fully	debriefed	(usually	by	me)	and	all	lessons
learned	 were	 inserted	 into	 DORC’s	 linguistic	 database,	 so	 that	 future
“Varangian	 Guard”	 candidates	 could	 bone	 up	 on	 their	 Norman	 prior	 to
visiting	Thyra,	and	learn	the	language	that	much	more	quickly.

Then	 came	 the	 fourth	 and	 final	 repetition.	This	 is	 the	part	 I	most	 like	 to
remember	him	describing.

One	morning,	 shortly	before	dawn,	Tristan	and	Thyra	were	awakened	by
suspicious	noises.	Tristan	arose,	went	outside,	and	saw	a	longboat	moving	up
the	tributary	toward	the	village	center,	with	six	men	in	it.	He	grabbed	a	peeled
tree	 branch,	 at	 least	 an	 inch	 thick	 and	 about	 his	 own	height,	which	 he	 had
been	 intending	 to	 use	 to	 build	 Thyra	 a	 drying	 rack.	He	 ran	 to	 the	 village,
entered	the	church	through	its	narthex,	and	rang	the	bell	urgently	to	alert	the
villagers.	 And	 then	 he	 stayed	 in	 the	 church,	 realizing	 the	 strangers	must	 be
coming	 there	 to	 steal	 the	 only	 thing	 of	 value	 in	 the	 area:	 a	 reliquary	 of	 a
wrought	silver	cross,	about	a	handspan	across.	Embedded	in	a	decorative	gold
rosette	in	the	center	was	a	flake	of	white	enamel,	alleged	by	local	clerics	to	be
a	fragment	of	a	molar	formerly	belonging	to	St.	Septimus	of	Pontchardon,	an



early	missionary	who	had	been	martyred	by	the	Gauls.	Obviously	this	was	of
value	to	the	would-be	thieves	for	the	metal,	not	the	relic.	They	were	startled
by	 the	 bell	 as	 they	 approached	 the	 church	 entrance,	 more	 so	 because	 they
found	 themselves	 unexpectedly	 face-to-face	 with	 a	 large	 man	 brandishing	 a
stick.

Three	 of	 the	 men,	 armed	 with	 an	 axe,	 a	 steel-tipped	 lance,	 and	 a	 seax
(knife)—held	Tristan	 at	bay	 in	 the	narthex	while	 the	other	 three	 ran	up	 the
aisle	of	the	church	to	nab	the	reliquary,	which	lived	on	the	altar.	While	there,
they	 snatched	up	 a	 few	other	 odds	 and	 ends	 that	 had	 caught	 their	 eye—the
candelabrum,	 the	 communion	 cup,	 etc.	 These	 booty-carriers	 emerged	 from
the	church	first,	only	to	find	some	villagers—alerted	by	Tristan’s	ringing	of	the
bell—waiting	for	them	with	shovels,	rakes,	pitchforks,	and	knives.

These	 first	 intruders	were	 lightly	 armed	but	 their	 hands	were	 full	 of	 loot,
and	 they	were	 obliged	 to	 drop	 the	 valuables	 in	 order	 to	 defend	 themselves.
The	more	heavily	armed	men,	who	had	been	menacing	Tristan,	came	out	to
join	the	fray.	The	last	of	these	was	the	one	with	the	lance.	He	backed	toward
the	exit	of	the	building	while	keeping	the	weapon	leveled	at	Tristan	.	.	.	then
pivoted	toward	the	open	door	to	make	a	fast	departure.

However,	 the	 lance	 got	 hung	 up	 in	 the	 tiny	 doorway,	 in	 a	 manner
reminiscent	 of	 an	 early-twentieth-century	 slapstick	 film	 comedy,	 or	 so	 it
always	seems	when	Tristan	is	acting	it	out	for	new	recruits.	Seeing	an	opening,
Tristan	 advanced	 and	 delivered	 a	 “pool	 cue”	 style	 shot	 to	 the	 head	 of	 the
lance-man,	catching	him	by	his	ear	with	the	butt	of	his	staff.	The	man	sagged
toward	 the	 floor	and	dropped	his	weapon.	Tristan	grabbed	the	 lance,	but	he
himself	was	 the	next	person	 to	 fall	 victim	 to	 the	cramped	dimensions	of	 the
doorway,	as	he	 tripped	over	 its	high	 threshold	on	 the	way	out	and	 sprawled
across	 the	 pavement	 outside	 (it	 is	 a	 hoot	 to	 see	 him	 re-enact	 this	moment).
The	 lance	 was	 lost	 (it	 was	 still	 dark,	 the	 sun	 not	 having	 risen	 yet),	 but	 in
groping	 for	 it	 Tristan	 found	 himself	 grasping	 a	 boat	 oar	 that	 had	 apparently
been	carried	up	to	the	site	by	one	of	the	intruders,	perhaps	to	use	as	a	weapon.

The	melee	was	moving	in	the	general	direction	of	the	riverbank.	This	was	a
long	stone’s	throw	from	the	church;	the	intruders	struggled	to	fight	their	way
through	the	mob	of	a	dozen	or	so	villagers	who	were	haphazardly	beating	at
them	with	 farm	 implements,	 as	 though	not	 sure	 if	 the	point	was	 to	prevent
them	from	getting	back	into	the	church	or	to	prevent	them	from	escaping.

Tristan	 collected	 himself	 from	 his	 unintentional	 vaudeville	 routine,	 and
caught	 up	with	 the	 intruders	 as	 they	were	 attempting	 to	 board	 the	 boat	 to



make	 their	getaway.	By	now,	 they	had	dropped	all	 their	booty,	but	nobody
could	see	that	in	the	dark	yet.	A	villager	grabbed	the	gunwale	of	the	boat	with
both	hands	in	a	bid	to	prevent	them	from	getting	away	(presumably	with	the
reliquary).	The	axe-wielding	intruder	raised	his	weapon	high,	clearly	with	an
eye	toward	cutting	the	villager’s	fingers	off.

Tristan	 lunged	 toward	 them,	 swung	his	oar	 in	 a	wide	 arc,	 and	caught	 the
axe-man	in	the	gut,	knocking	the	wind	out	of	him	and	sending	him	sprawling
back	into	the	boat.	At	the	same	moment,	the	villager	holding	the	gunwale	did
a	belly-flop	into	the	river.	(I	am	trembling	with	suppressed	mirth	even	now	as
I	write	this,	recalling	the	many	times	I’ve	seen	it	all	acted	out	at	office	parties
when	Tristan’s	had	a	few.)

The	intruders	got	away	in	their	longboat.	Five	of	the	villagers	sustained	very
superficial	 wounds	 (Thyra	 healed	 them	 in	 an	 hour),	 and	 Tristan	 strained
ligaments	in	his	shoulder	when	he	slammed	the	oar	into	the	axe-man.	It	was
nothing	 serious,	 but	 as	 I	 said,	Macy	 Stoll	 ordered	 him	 to	write	 an	 incident
report	about	it.	(And	this	was	before	DODO’s	bureaucracy	had	bloated	up	out
of	 control.	 I	wonder	what	would	 happen	 if	 he	 did	 that	 now	 .	 .	 .	Well,	 I’ll
never	know.	Get	used	to	it,	Stokes.)

Once	the	sun	rose,	all	of	the	artifacts	were	recovered,	cleaned,	and	restored
to	 the	 church,	 and	 the	 village	 had	 a	 shared	 breakfast,	 during	 which	 the
children	 imitated	 the	more	 absurd	physical	moments	 of	 the	brief	 raid.	What
could	have	been	a	tragedy	was	transformed	into	a	playful	morning.

But	 if	 I	 told	 you	 the	 consequences	 of	 this	 minor	 skirmish,	 reader,	 you
would	absolutely	not	believe	me.

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	to	LTC	Tristan	Lyons
on	private	ODIN	channel

DAY	872	(MID-DECEMBER,	YEAR	2)

LTC	Lyons,	as	a	rule	I	don’t	keep	tabs	on	all	of	the	After	Action	Reports
on	the	various	DEDEs,	since	Diachronic	Operations	is	your	department



and	not	mine.	Medical	benefits,	however,	ARE	my	department.	In	that
vein,	 I	 note	 that	 you	 consulted	 an	 external	 physician	 upon	 the
conclusion	 of	 your	most	 recent	 visit	 to	 the	 1045	Normandy	DTAP.	 In
order	for	this	expense	to	be	approved,	I’ll	need	details	on	the	nature	of
the	injury,	whether	it	was	sustained	on	the	job,	and	why	DODO	medical
staff	were	unable	to	deal	with	the	problem	in-house.

Reply	from	LTC	Lyons:
NVM	I	will	just	eat	the	expense.

From	Macy	Stoll:
Your	 selflessness	 sets	 a	 brave	 example,	 but	 it’s	 not	 just	 about	 the
money.	By	 tracking	 these	 incidents	and	expenditures,	we	are	able	 to
optimize	 the	planning	and	budgeting	process,	unlocking	 the	ability	 to
hire	 additional	 medical	 staff	 to	 meet	 the	 needs	 of	 our	 growing
organization.	Also,	for	legal	reasons	we	need	thorough	documentation
of	all	on-the-job	injuries.

From	LTC	Lyons:
I	came	back	with	a	tweaked	shoulder.	Dr.	Srinavasan	checked	me	out
and	suggested	 I	consult	a	physical	 therapist	 to	get	 it	worked	on.	The
PT	 doc	 did	 some	 myofascial	 work	 and	 sent	 me	 home	 with	 some
exercises.	Everything	is	fine	now.	To	the	extent	that	this	is	relevant	to
budget	and	staffing,	we	might	benefit	from	having	a	physical	therapist
in	the	medical	section.

From	Macy	Stoll:
Thank	 you	 for	 the	 explanation.	 I	 still	 need	 to	 know	 whether	 the
shoulder	injury	was	contracted	in	the	workplace.

From	LTC	Lyons:
If	by	“workplace”	you	mean	Normandy	a	thousand	years	ago,	yes.

From	Macy	Stoll:
Thank	you	for	that	additional	clarification.	Given	the	unusual	nature

of	DODO,	that	does	indeed	constitute	a	workplace	injury.	As	such,	you
are	required	to	file	an	Incident	Report	crosslinked	to	Dr.	Srinavasan’s
outside	medical	specialist	referral	paperwork.



FROM	DR.	ROGER	BLEVINS	TO	LTC	TRISTAN	LYONS
CC:	LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK

DAY	874

Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons:
I	 am	 in	 receipt	 of	 an	 Incident	 Report,	 filed	 yesterday,	 describing

events	 that	 took	 place	 during	 one	 of	 your	DEDEs	 in	Normandy	 in
1045.	 The	 account	 is	 sketchy	 and	 appears	 to	 have	 been	 written	 in
haste,	or	perhaps	you	are	simply	accustomed	to	taking	a	casual	attitude
toward	 such	matters.	 In	any	case,	 if	 this	document	 is	 to	be	believed,
you	voluntarily	engaged	one	or	more	“historicals”	in	potentially	lethal
combat	during	this	DEDE.	For	the	benefit	of	LTG	Frink	(CCed	for
the	record)	this	DEDE	was	strictly	for	the	purpose	of	gaining	fluency
in	 the	 local	 language.	 It	 did	 not	 call	 for	 a	 Fighter-class	 DOer,	 and
engaging	 in	 combat	 was	 not	 part	 of	 the	 mission	 scope.	 During	 the
unscheduled	and	unauthorized	tussle,	you	sustained	injuries	that	later
required	expenditure	of	DODO	funds	on	an	outside	medical	specialist
lacking	security	clearance,	with	possible	risk	of	exposure	of	top-secret
information.

Please	 consider	 this	 a	 formal	 reprimand.	 As	 the	 head	 of	 the
operational	 wing	 of	 DODO,	 you	 set	 an	 example	 for	 the	 ever-
expanding	staff	of	DOers	who	serve	under	you,	and	as	such	you	must
be	held	to	a	higher	standard	of	professionalism	and	conduct	than	you
exhibited	in	this	case.

While	this	is	technically	grounds	for	being	placed	on	a	Performance
Enhancement	Plan,	or	 even	outright	dismissal,	 I	 am	willing	 to	make
an	 exception	 just	 this	 once.	 Please	 consider	 yourself	 on	 notice,
however,	that	further	such	lapses	in	judgment	will	be	treated	with	the
utmost	gravity.

With	that	disagreeable	task	out	of	the	way,	I	would	like	to	consider
the	matter	closed,	and	wish	you	the	best	returns	of	the	season.

Sincerely,



Roger	Blevins,	Ph.D.
Director,	Department	of	Diachronic	Operations

FROM	LTC	TRISTAN	LYONS	TO	DR.	ROGER	BLEVINS
CC:	LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK

DAY	875

Dear	Dr.	Blevins:
Concerning	 yesterday’s	 letter	 of	 reprimand,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 point

out	the	following	circumstances	that	may	help	clarify	matters	for	you
and	General	Frink.

-	 	 The	 “injuries”	 that	 I	 sustained	 consisted	 of	 a	 sore	 shoulder.	 The
“outside	medical	 specialist”	 is	 a	 local	 physical	 therapist.	 I	 told	her
that	 I	 had	 sustained	 the	 injury	 while	 practicing	 jiu-jitsu.	 She
accepted	 the	 story.	 There	 is	 no	 risk	 of	 leakage	 of	 classified
information.

-	 	 The	 “potentially	 lethal	 combat”	 consisted	 of	 swinging	 a	 boat	 oar
into	the	stomach	of	a	drunk	and	disorderly	Norman	who	was	about
to	chop	off	a	man’s	fingers.	To	describe	this	as	potentially	lethal	is
about	like	saying	that	I	got	up	this	morning	in	Boston	and	took	a
potentially	lethal	train	ride	in	to	work.

-		When	we	go	on	these	DEDEs,	we	have	to	blend	in,	and	behave	as
the	locals	expect	us	to	behave.	I	was	the	biggest	and	strongest	man
in	the	village	and	had	been	practicing	stick-fighting	with	the	locals
for	weeks.	For	me	to	have	stood	by	passively	during	this	disturbance
would	have	 raised	more	questions	 than	 taking	 the	minimal	 action
that	I	did.

Merry	Christmas,
LTC	Tristan	Lyons



Annotation,	handwritten	by	General	Frink	at	the	bottom	of	above	letter,
scanned	and	delivered	digitally

DAY	876

Gentlemen,
Xmas	is	four	days	away	and	we	should	be	focused	on	(a)	brotherly	love

and	 (b)	 turning	 on	 the	 Chronotron	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 new	 year.
Please	 consider	 this	 matter	 closed	 with	 no	 further	 repercussions,	 and
trouble	me	with	it	no	more.
Happy	Holidays
O.	K.	Frink

Exchange	of	posts	between
Dr.	Melisande	Stokes	and	LTC	Tristan	Lyons

on	private	ODIN	channel
DAY	879	(CHRISTMAS	EVE,	YEAR	2)

Post	from	Dr.	Stokes:
Subject:	Chinese	take-out?
My	turn	to	pay,	but	can	you	get	the	usual	and	I’ll	reimburse?	Meet	at
my	place.	(Trying	to	get	Erszebet	out	of	here	before	she	goes	nuclear
on	Blevins	again.)
I	 know	 you’re	 on	 the	 outs	with	Blevins,	 but	we	 should	 talk	 to	 him

about	 fast-tracking	 another	 resident	 witch.	 E	 has	 stayed	 far	 longer
than	she	agreed	 to;	 she’s	being	a	good	sport	 (by	her	standards),	but
I’m	tired	of	running	interference	every	time	Blevins	is	a	jackass	to	her.
There’s	 three	 or	 four	 who	 expressed	 interest	 (Rachel	 in
Constantinople,	etc.)	and	they’re	all	in	DTAPs	with	multiple	KCWs.	Talk
about	it	over	dinner?

—MS
PS:	Merry	Christmas.

Reply	from	LTC	Lyons:
STOKES!
1.	 Bad	 form	 to	 call	 your	 boss	 a	 jackass	 on	 a	 company	 messaging

system.



2.	Merry	Christmas.
3.	I	thought	you	were	heading	out	of	town	to	spend	time	with	family.
4.	 We’ve	 never	 brought	 a	 historical	 forward	 in	 time	 before.	 Can	 we
even	do	that?

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Tristan,
1.	 If	 we	 get	 to	 the	 point	 where	 said	 jackass	 is	 reading	my	 personal

messages	 to	 you,	 then	 we	 have	 bigger	 issues	 and	 we’re	 all	 done
here.

2.	And	Happy	New	Year.
3.	Canceled	the	trip.	Mom’s	showing	up	late	tonight,	we’ll	hang	out	at
my	place.	Too	much	going	on	here,	and	Erszebet	gets	a	 little	nutty
around	the	holidays.

4.	 You’re	 right	 that	 Sending	 a	 historical	 forward	 is	 different	 from
Homing	a	DOer	back	to	their	“natural”	time	and	place,	but	Erszebet
says	 it	 can	be	done.	Especially	 if	 the	Sending	witch	has	developed
familiarity	with	the	ODEC	by	Homing	a	lot	of	people	there.	We	have,
as	 of	 today,	 run	 fifty-five	 DEDEs	 in	 1200	 Constantinople.	 We	 have
used	 three	different	KCWs	 to	Home	all	 of	 our	DOers.	One	of	 them
(Rachel)	has	done	it	thirty-two	times	and	Erszebet	feels	she	has	our
ODEC	strongly	dialed	in.	We	should	consider	it.

—MS

From	LTC	Lyons:
OMW	with	the	usual.	Break	out	your	finest	chopsticks!

From	Dr.	Stokes:
OK	but	setting	a	knife	and	fork	for	E.	She	won’t	eat	otherwise.

—MS

Post	by	Mortimer	Shore	on



“General”	ODIN	channel
DAY	887	(NEW	YEAR’S	DAY,	YEAR	3)

Happy	 New	 Year,	 everyone!	 I’m	 still	 a	 little	 buzzed	 (heh)	 from	 the
festivities	 at	 Oda-sensei	 and	Rebecca’s,	 but	 now	 that	we	 are	 almost
FOUR	WHOLE	HOURS	 into	 the	 new	 year	 I	wanted	 to	 buckle	 down	 to
work	and	send	this	out.
As	we	 prepare	 to	 power	 up	 the	Chronotron	 for	 real	 (T-minus	 four

days	 and	 counting,	 huzzah),	 Dr.	 Oda	 recommended	 that	 I	 send	 out
some	 informal	 layman’s	 language	 on	What	 Exactly	 Is	 a	 Chronotron.
I’m	pretty	amped	about	this	(so	to	speak)	and	really	grateful	that	I’ve
been	able	to	move	away	from	the	SysAdmin	role	(a	big	hand	to	the	staff
who’s	running	all	the	stuff	I	used	to	manage,	especially	Gordon	Healey,
another	MIT	CS’ist	who	now	gets	asked	all	the	questions	about	email
servers,	 but	 hey,	 Gordie,	 I’m	 proof	 this	 place	 is	 all	 about	 job	 growth
LOL).
So	 just	 a	 reminder,	 I’m	 not	 qualified	 to	 explain	 WHY	 this	 works,

because	 that’s	 the	 physics	 part	 where	 I’m	 a	 bonehead,	 but	 here’s	 a
simplified	take	on	HOW	it	works:
The	 Chronotron	 is	 based	 on	 a	 theoretical	 model,	 which	 proposes

that	for	the	present-day	universe	that	we	all	live	in,	there’s	not	just	one
past,	 and	 not	 just	 several	 alternate	 pasts,	 but	 an	 infinite	 number	 of
them.	Similarly,	this	one	single	present	also	has	an	infinite	number	of
possible	 futures.	 But	 our	 relationship	 to	 these	 infinite	 pasts	 and
futures	isn’t	random—plausibility	throws	its	weight	around,	per	some
freaky	quantum	mechanics	stuff	that	Dr.	Oda	calls	Feynman	Diagram
History	Pachinko.	If	you’re	really	interested	in	the	details	of	that,	check
in	with	him	in	his	spare	time	(heh)	and	he	will	be	happy	to	expound.
The	QUIPUs	 (Quantum	Information	Processing	Units)	 that	make	up

the	 Chronotron	 are	 capable	 of	 dealing	 with	 the	 infinite-pasts-as-
weighted-by-plausibility	 calculations	 in	 SLIT	 (Something	 Less	 Than
Infinite	 Time).	 They	 know	 how	 to	 “renormalize”	 per	 plausibility
quotients,	 so	 that	 irrelevant	 pasts	 can	 be	 ignored	 and	 high-leverage
pasts	can	be	zeroed	in	on.	Thanks	to	all	the	input	from	our	fine	team	of
in-house	 historians,	 it	 can	 sort	 out	 what	 leads	 to	 what	 (and	 what
DOESN’T	lead	to	what)	with	more	accuracy	than	Google	directing	you
to	NSFW	porn	sites.



Diachronicle	
DAY	891	 (EARLY	JANUARY,	YEAR	3)

In	which	the	manifestly	obvious	takes	us	by	surprise

THE	CHRONOTRON	WAS	READY	TO	be	turned	on	and	used	for	the	first	time.
During	the	year	and	a	half	that	DODO’s	R&D	division,	under	Frank	Oda,

had	 been	 developing	 and	 testing	 the	 Chronotron,	 the	 rest	 of	 us	 had	 been
slowly	building	out	the	witch	network	through	many	DTAPs,	and	recruiting
HOSMAs	 (Historical	 Operations	 Subject	 Matter	 Authorities—what	 any
normal	person	would	call	professors)	for	DORC.	We	hadn’t	been	conducting
full-blown	 diachronic	 operations	 per	 se,	 but	 we’d	 been	 laying	 the
groundwork,	 recruiting	 new	DOers	 with	 painstaking	 care,	 training	 them	 in
languages	and	other	skills,	Sending	them	on	dry	runs	to	various	DTAPs	just	to
break	them	in.

The	ODEC	had	gone	through	two	complete	redesigns.	Four	copies	of	that
design	had	been	constructed	in	the	basement,	with	two	others	roughed	in	and
ready	to	be	 finished	as	 soon	as	 there	was	a	need	for	 them.	But	 there	was	no
need,	 for	we	 still	 only	 had	 a	 single	witch—or,	 in	 the	 jargon	 of	 the	 agency,
MUON.

The	exact	numbers	have	flown	from	my	memory,	but	on	the	day	that	we
booted	up	the	Chronotron,	our	head	count	looked	something	like	this:

DORC	(of	which	 I	was	 in	charge,	 and,	 reader,	how	often	does	one	have
the	 opportunity	 to	 say	 one	 works	 for	 the	 DORC	 of	 DODO?)	 comprised
about	 twenty	 full-time	HOSMAs,	 five	 support	 staff,	 and	 one	 hundred	 part-
time	 consultants,	 all	 security-checked	 and	 sworn	 to	 secrecy,	 not	 to	mention
five	 full-time	 DORCCAD	 technicians	 (this	 being	 our	 Cartographic	 and
Architectural	Database).	One	of	the	more	colorful	and	active	sub-departments
was	DoVE,	the	Department	of	Violence(s)	Ethnology,	which	was	responsible



for	 instructing	DOers	 in	historical	martial	 arts	 as	well	 as	 related	 skills	 such	as
riding,	armor,	and	making	improvised	weapons.	This	had	expanded	far	beyond
Mortimer	Shore’s	early	 training	sessions	 in	 the	park.	Under	 the	 leadership	of
Dr.	Hilton	Fuller,	an	Ivy	League	academic	with	a	passion	for	historical	martial
arts,	 it	now	operated	an	 in-house	dojo	as	well	 as	 a	 larger	 training	and	 riding
center	outside	of	Boston.

C/COD	(headed	up	by	Macy	Stoll)	had	a	head	count	of	nearly	a	hundred,
many	of	whom	seemed	 to	be	busy	 setting	up	other	DODO	facilities	around
the	world.	The	department	had	five	full-time	medical	professionals,	as	well	as
the	 usual	 complement	 of	 janitors,	HR	people,	 finance,	 IT,	 and	 the	 like.	 Its
largest	 single	 sub-department	 was	 the	 redundantly	 named	 Diachronic
Operations	 Security	Operations,	 under	Major	 Isobel	 Sloane,	 who	 had	 been
recruited	 “sideways”	 from	 a	 military	 police	 unit	 based	 in	 the	 Middle	 East.
People	 in	 the	 know	 pronounced	 it	 “doe-seck-ops,”	 but	 its	 acronym,
DOSECOPS,	 inevitably	 led	 to	 new	 hires	 pronouncing	 it	 “dose	 cops”	 and
referring	to	individual	members—who	did	actually	resemble	police	officers—
by	the	same	name.

R&D	(in	Frank	Oda’s	purview)	was	 the	 smallest	department,	 some	dozen
computer	 scientists	 and	 physicists,	 a	 few	 programmers,	 and	 an	 administrator.
Until	this	point	it	had	worked	on	the	Chronotron	to	the	exclusion	of	all	else,
but	Frank	had	some	other	ideas	he	was	itching	to	work	on.

Finally	 there	was	Diachronic	Operations,	under	Tristan.	This	was	 the	unit
that	 employed	 all	 of	 the	 actual	 DOers	 and	 Sent	 them	 on	missions.	 By	 this
point	 I	 think	 we	 had	 about	 twenty	 DOers	 who	were	 “good	 to	 go”—fully
trained	and	checked	out—plus	a	dozen	more	in	the	pipeline.	More	than	half	of
them	were	Fighters	or	Striders.	Those	classes	were	easier	to	recruit,	in	a	sense,
because	the	military’s	Special	Forces	units	had	already	done	the	work	for	us	of
combing	 through	 the	 entire	 population	 and	picking	out	 the	ones	who	were
suited	for	the	job.	We	just	had	to	sift	through	their	personnel	records	looking
for	 ones	 with	 the	 right	 combination	 of	 good	 teeth	 and	 unusual	 language
aptitude.	 Lovers,	 Closers,	 Spies,	 Sages,	 and	 the	 rest	 were	 under-represented
simply	because	 finding	 them	was	harder.	But	we	had	a	 few	of	 them	 in	each
category—enough,	 we	 felt,	 to	 “make	 a	 dent	 in	 the	 universe”	 once	 the
Chronotron	 came	 online	 and	 started	 telling	 us	 what	 we	 should	 actually	 do
with	them.

All	told—once	General	Frink’s	entourage	from	DC	had	been	bundled	in—
some	two	hundred	people	were	present	at	the	ceremony	where	we	booted	up



the	 Chronotron.	 And,	 by	 extension,	 the	 Department	 of	 Diachronic
Operations	 in	 its	 fully	 operational	 form.	 It	was	An	Event—the	 sort	 of	 thing
Macy	Stoll	excelled	at	organizing.	Erszebet	persuaded	me	to	get	a	haircut	and
borrow	one	of	her	skirts.	Tristan	wore	his	dress	uniform.	Frank	Oda	put	on	a
suit,	then	threw	a	white	lab	coat	over	it	to	conceal	some	moth	holes	that	he
didn’t	notice	until	he	put	it	on.	Even	Mortimer	found	a	necktie	and	a	pair	of
leather	shoes.

Merely	getting	all	of	those	people	into	the	building	without	causing	a	public
spectacle	 required	 some	 planning.	 We	 were	 still	 operating	 out	 of	 the	 same
dingy,	 nondescript	 industrial	 building	 in	 Cambridge.	 Outwardly	 this	 hadn’t
changed	at	all;	it	still	sported	the	same	graffiti	tags	and	vinyl	window	shades	as
when	I’d	 first	 seen	 it	 two	and	a	half	years	ago.	People	 in	 the	neighborhood,
when	they	noticed	it	at	all,	shook	their	heads	and	wondered	when	some	real
estate	developer	would	snap	it	up	and	turn	it	into	a	high-tech	office	building.
To	hide	the	fact	that	more	than	a	hundred	people	were	going	in	and	out	of	it
every	 day,	 Macy’s	 facilities	 team	 had	 built	 half	 a	 dozen	 secret	 entrances
connected	to	neighboring	structures	by	tunnels.	We	were	about	a	block	away
from	the	river	and	so	we	also	made	use	of	some	utility	passages	connecting	to
public	works	facilities	in	the	green	belt.	When	General	Frink	arrived,	he	was
in	 the	backseat	of	 a	 small	SUV	that	was	completely	nondescript	 save	 for	 the
fact	 that	 its	 rear	windows	were	 darkened,	 lest	 some	pedestrian	 at	 a	 stoplight
look	in	and	recognize	the	face	of	the	Director	of	National	Intelligence.

The	Chronotron	itself	was	not	physically	that	large,	but	the	space	in	which
Frank	 and	 his	 team	 had	 built	 it	 was	 obstructed	 and	 complicated	 by	 the
requirements	of	ventilation	and	power.	Between	the	ODECs	in	the	basement,
which	 still	 had	 to	 be	 jacketed	 in	 liquid	 helium,	 and	 the	 QUIPUs	 on	 the
second	floor,	which	also	ran	at	super-cold	temperatures,	this	building	was	one
of	 the	 largest	 cryogenic	 facilities	 in	 New	 England.	 A	 large	 fraction	 of	 its
interior	 volume	 was	 set	 aside	 for	 tankage,	 insulation,	 ducting,	 and	 safety
equipment.

Consequently,	we	didn’t	have	anything	like	enough	room	for	two	hundred
people	 in	 the	 actual	Chronotron	 room,	which	was	 up	 on	 the	 second	 floor.
The	only	people	physically	present	were	General	Frink,	Dr.	Rudge,	a	few	of
their	 top	 aides,	Blevins,	 the	 department	 heads—including	 yours	 truly,	 as	 the
head	of	DORC—and	some	of	Frank’s	senior	geeks.	Everyone	else	watched	it
from	their	offices	or	the	cafeteria	via	live	stream.

We’d	actually	had	a	small	celebration	of	our	own	at	the	Odas’	beforehand—



just	the	original	quintet,	plus	Mortimer	Shore,	of	whom	both	Odas	were	very
fond.	 By	 unspoken	 agreement	 we	 had	 always	 shielded	 Mortimer	 from	 too
much	 information	 about	DODO’s	 high-level	 political	 dysfunction,	 though	 I
often	wondered	if	he	used	his	sysadmin	privileges	to	eavesdrop	on	some	of	our
internal	disputes.	On	this	particular	morning,	as	I	looked	at	his	beaming	face,	it
didn’t	 seem	 likely.	Mortimer	 just	 thought	 it	was	 cool	 that	 the	 big	 kids	 had
invited	him	into	the	sandbox.

Then	 we’d	 all	 piled	 into	 Frank’s	 Volvo	 and	 gone	 to	 the	 office.	 General
Frink	 showed	 up	 twenty	 minutes	 later,	 right	 on	 schedule,	 and	 toured	 the
facility	with	Blevins	at	his	elbow,	ending	up	in	the	Chronotron	control	room
where	there	was	a	great	deal	of	fuss	over	the	powering-on	and	the	booting-up
of	the	machine.	As	we	had	actually	been	beta-testing	it	for	several	weeks,	this
was	largely	ceremonial,	but	Oda-sensei	still	looked	flushed	with	pleasure	and	I
did	 not	 begrudge	 him	 the	 moment.	 He	 “switched	 on”	 the	 Chronotron.
Actually	it	had	been	on	more	often	than	it	had	been	off	over	the	past	several
weeks.	 And	 it	 was	 in	 fact	 already	 running,	 so	 all	 he	 was	 really	 doing	 was
turning	on	a	fancy	workstation	that	was	connected	to	it.	But	that’s	ceremony
for	you.	As	a	grid	of	flat-panel	screens	came	alive	with	scrolling	text	windows
and	dancing	 infographics,	 everyone	 clapped	 and	 some	of	 the	 coders	 hooted.
Frink	 congratulated	Oda-sensei	 heartily,	 Blevins	 almost	 as	 heartily,	 and	 then
Tristan,	 Erszebet,	 and	myself	 with	 little	more	 than	 civil	 courtesy.	We	were
getting	used	to	this,	although	in	truth	it	pissed	me	off	saddened	me.

Adjacent	 to	 the	 control	 room	 proper	 was	 a	 secure	 conference	 room,
equipped	 with	 all	 manner	 of	 screens	 and	 VR	 and	 AR	 displays,	 where	 the
results	 of	 its	 analyses	 could	 be	 reviewed	 and	 cross-correlated	 with	 maps,
historical	 timelines,	 and	 diagrams	 of	 DODO’s	 network	 of	 safe	 houses	 and
KCWs.	 We	 filed	 into	 it	 once	 the	 Chronotron	 had	 been	 turned	 on,	 and
received	a	briefing	from	Blevins	on	the	projected	first	few	months	of	DODO’s
operations.	 These	 focused	 on	 what	 we	 were	 calling	 the	 Constantinople
Theater.

The	Constantinople	Theater	was	a	broad	canvas	of	safe	houses	and	planned
DEDEs,	all	having	to	do	with	limiting	Russia’s	power	in	the	Balkans	and	the
Black	Sea.	This	was	not	to	be	done	in	an	invasive	manner	that	would	alter	any
of	that	area’s	endlessly	turbulent	history,	but	in	a	subtle	way	to	ensure	a	lack	of
Russian	 hegemony	 in	 the	 future.	 This	 included,	 of	 course,	 massaging	 the
boundaries	of	the	East/West	schism	of	the	church.	But	there	was	far	more	to	it
than	that.	Hundreds	of	discrete	DEDEs	were	encompassed	in	this	plan.	We	did



not	yet	have	all	the	resources	required	to	accomplish	them.	But	we	knew	what
the	 first	 four	 or	 five	 gambits	were	 supposed	 to	 be,	 and	 so	 today,	we	would
move	en	masse	directly	from	the	Chronotron	down	to	ODEC	Row	to	send
Tristan	off	on	the	first	one.

I	say	“supposed	to	be”	because	Robert	Burns	was	right	on	the	money	about
best-laid	plans.

As	 if	 in	 a	medieval	 street	 festival,	 our	 clutch	of	 officials,	 aides,	 geeks,	 and
department	heads	followed	Blevins,	Rudge,	and	Frink	down	the	hallway	and
staircase	 to	 the	 basement,	 and	 were	 joined	 along	 the	 way	 by	 additional
historians,	DOers,	office	workers,	and	techies	emerging	from	the	spaces	where
they	 had	 been	 watching	 the	 live	 stream.	 The	 basement	 level	 had	 room	 to
accommodate	a	 few	more	 spectators.	Erszebet,	decked	out	as	only	 she	could
deck	herself	out,	awaited	us.

ODEC	 Row	 looked	 more	 like	 a	 medical	 facility	 than	 a	 magical
teleportation	 center.	 This	 was	 because	 of	 the	 need	 to	 preserve	 strict
epidemiological	 precautions.	 We’d	 improvised	 a	 working	 decontamination
suite	around	the	first	ODEC,	of	course,	but	the	more	recent	influx	of	funding
and	expertise	had	given	us	the	resources	to	do	it	right.

The	entire	basement	was	cut	in	half	by	a	wall	of	glass.	On	the	other	side	of
it,	 as	 we	 came	 in,	 was	 the	 bio-containment	 zone,	 subdivided	 into	 discrete
isolation	zones	for	each	of	the	ODECs.	They	all	shared	some	plumbing	in	the
form	of	 the	 sterilizing	 showers—“human	car	washes”	 in	Tristan’s	description
—that	all	DOers	passed	through	en	route	to	and	from	the	ODECs,	and	the	air
filtration	systems	that	ensured	not	even	a	virus	could	pass	across	the	barrier.	A
fully	 equipped	medical	 suite—sort	 of	 a	 compact	 trauma	 center—was	 tucked
away	 in	 one	 corner.	 It	was	 equipped	with	 x-ray	machines	 and	 an	operating
room	so	that	injured	DOers	could	be	treated	on-site,	immediately	and	secretly.
Next	 to	 that	 was	 a	 two-bed	 recovery	 ward.	 Compared	 to	 all	 of	 that,	 the
ODECs	 themselves—the	 four	 that	 were	 up	 and	 running,	 and	 the	 two	 that
were	only	roughed	in—occupied	only	a	small	footprint.	They	were	cylindrical
rooms,	 just	 big	 enough	on	 the	 inside	 for	 the	 Sending	witch	 and	 the	DOer,
larger	 on	 the	 outside	 because	 of	 the	 thickness	 of	 the	 cryogenic	 jackets	 and
electronic	systems.

Tristan—who	was	 en	 route	 to	 1203	Constantinople	 on	 Varangian	Guard
duty—had	 slipped	 out	 of	 the	 conference	 room	 early,	 come	 downstairs,	 and
passed	 through	 the	 airlock	 into	 the	 bio-containment	 zone.	 By	 the	 time	we
arrived,	 he	 had	 gone	 through	 the	 showers	 and	 was	 undergoing	 other



decontamination	procedures	 that	my	current	Victorian	 sensibilities	 forbid	me
from	discussing	on	the	page.

The	crowd	of	dignitaries	and	support	staff	tumbled	like	unmilled	corn	into
the	space	on	the	“dirty”	side	of	the	glass	wall.	General	Frink	was	positioned	in
direct	 view	 of	 ODEC	 #3	 and	 the	 pre-	 and	 post-DEDE	 bio	 equipment
surrounding	it.	Oda-sensei	was	just	off	to	Frink’s	side,	checking	the	ODEC’s
status	through	a	touch-screen	interface.

We’d	used	 all	 four	of	 the	 finished	ODECs	 sporadically,	 just	 to	make	 sure
they	all	worked.	It	was	expensive	to	keep	them	running	because	of	the	need
for	 liquid	 helium	 and	 electrical	 power.	Until	 today,	DODO	hadn’t	 had	 the
budget,	and	we	hadn’t	needed	them	frequently	enough	to	justify	leaving	them
on.	With	the	new	year	and	the	powering-on	of	the	Chronotron,	this	had	all
changed.	 Over	 the	 holiday	 weekend	 the	 technicians	 had	 been	 chilling	 the
whole	 system	 down	 to	 just	 above	 absolute	 zero	 and	 running	 tests	 on	 the
electronics.	 From	 now	 on,	 it	 would	 stay	 on	 24/7.	 This	meant	 keeping	 the
doors	 shut	 to	 limit	 heat	 loss	 and	 the	 excess	 usage	 of	 energy	 and	 cryogenic
fluids.	When	we	arrived	that	morning,	the	door	to	ODEC	#3	was	decorated
with	a	red	ribbon	tied	into	a	bow.	For	the	schedule	called	for	us	to	kill	time
with	another	ribbon-cutting	ceremony	as	Tristan	completed	his	preparations.
Blevins	droned	on	while	Erszebet	went	through	the	airlock	and	changed	into	a
disposable	 bunny	 suit	 and	 surgical	 mask—these	 were	 standard	 procedures,
needed	 to	 prevent	 re-contaminating	 Tristan	 during	 the	 moments	 that	 they
would	be	standing	together	in	the	ODEC.	She	emerged	in	the	space	between
the	 glass	 wall	 and	 the	 door	 to	ODEC	#3	 and	 picked	 up	 a	 sword	 that	 was
waiting	for	her	on	a	table.	It	was	a	sharp	one—a	Hungarian	saber.	Mortimer
had	 sourced	 it	 from	 eBay	 and	 honed	 it	 until	 it	 could	 slice	 through	 a
handkerchief	 in	midair.	 Erszebet	 had	 been	 training	with	 it,	 enough	 that	 she
could	 swing	 it	 without	 killing	 herself.	 At	 a	 signal	 from	 Frank,	 she	 raised	 it
above	her	head	and	drew	it	down	through	the	ribbon,	severing	it	in	one	quick
motion.	 At	 the	 same	 moment,	 Frank	 whacked	 the	 “enter”	 key	 on	 his
keyboard,	executing	a	command	that	made	all	the	lights	come	on.

ODECs	 #1	 through	 #4	 had	 been	 officially	 powered	 up.	 A	 round	 of
applause	swept	 through	the	crowd	on	the	“dirty”	side.	At	 the	same	moment
Tristan	finally	emerged,	wrapped	in	a	sterile	paper	jumpsuit.	This	created	the
amusing	impression	that	he	was	a	character	in	a	sitcom	who	had	just	made	his
entrance	on	the	set	and	was	getting	a	round	of	applause	from	the	audience.	He
saluted	General	Frink	 through	 the	glass	wall.	Frink	 saluted	back.	Tristan	 and



Erszebet	 moved	 toward	 the	 ODEC	 door.	 The	 crowd	 on	 the	 “dirty”	 side
pressed	 forward,	 trying	 to	 find	 space	 along	 the	glass	wall.	For	many	of	 these
people,	it	would	be	the	first	time	they	saw	the	ODEC	actually	in	use.	There’d
be	nothing	 really	 to	 see,	of	course,	except	 that	 two	people	would	go	 in	and
only	one	would	come	out.

Frank	had	switched	on	an	audio	link	so	that	he	could	talk	to	Erszebet	and
Tristan.	Standing	near	him,	 I	could	hear	 their	voices	 through	 the	 tinny	 little
speakers	built	into	the	monitor.

Tristan	 turned	 toward	ODEC	#3	 and	 reached	 for	 the	 button	 that	would
cause	it	to	open	its	door.

Just	before	his	hand	 touched	 it,	 there	was	 a	pounding	 from	within,	 and	 a
muffled	scream.

Tristan	and	Erszebet	glanced	at	each	other	with	concern.	“Open	 it,”	 I	 said
urgently,	but	Tristan	was	already	mashing	the	button.

As	the	door	hissed	open,	a	naked	young	woman	tumbled	out	of	the	ODEC,
clutching	her	head	 and	wailing	with	 fear.	As	 she	 curled	up	protectively,	her
wordless	 hysteria	 was	 interspersed	 with	 a	 few	 hyperventilated	 phrases	 of
medieval-era	Hebrew.

Tristan	sidestepped	and	pulled	a	hospital	gown	from	a	rack	of	them	hanging
nearby.	He	tossed	the	gown	on	top	of	the	hysterical	girl,	like	a	man	throwing
a	 blanket	 on	 a	 fire.	 Erszebet	 elbowed	 him	 away	 and	 adjusted	 the	 gown	 for
modesty.

Nudging	 Frank	 away	 from	 the	 control	 panel,	 I	 spoke	 firmly	 in	Hebrew:
“You’re	safe.	You	are	among	friends.	There	is	no	need	to	be	frightened.”

Relief	at	hearing	her	own	language	made	her	catch	her	breath.	Pulling	the
gown	around	her	body,	 she	 rose	 to	a	kneeling	position	and	 stared	about	 the
place,	 wide-eyed.	 Tristan	 dropped	 to	 one	 knee	 and	 pointed	 toward	 me.	 I
waved	to	her	and	caught	her	eye.	“You	are	safe,”	I	repeated,	and	then,	rifling
through	my	mental	 roster,	maintaining	eye	contact:	“Are	you	Rachel?	From
Pera?	Constantinople?	Daughter	of	Avraham?	Is	that	who	you	are?”

Clutching	 the	 gown	 to	 her	 front,	 she	 rose	 to	 her	 feet	 and	 padded	 over
toward	me.	For	a	moment	I	was	afraid	she’d	walk	straight	into	the	glass	wall,
but	Erszebet	put	a	restraining	hand	on	her	shoulder,	and	Tristan	darted	ahead
and	rapped	on	the	glass	with	his	knuckles.	She	slowed	as	she	approached,	and
stopped	with	her	face	only	inches	from	mine.

“Yes	.	 .	 .”	She	turned	her	head	and	glanced	around	the	space—not	to	the
ODEC	itself,	the	open	door	of	which	was	just	behind	her,	but	around	at	the



control	 panel	 and	 the	 scores	 of	 curious	 faces,	 in	 what	 must	 have	 been
extremely	curious	forms	of	dress.	She	gasped.	Electric	cables,	fluorescent	lights,
plastic	 chairs	 .	 .	 .	 every	 single	 thing	 in	 that	 room,	 other	 than	 the	 biological
reality	 of	 other	 human	beings,	was	 utterly	 alien	 to	 her.	Her	 eyes	 opened	 so
wide	 I	 could	 see	 the	whites	 all	 around	 the	 iris.	 I	 thought	 for	 a	moment	 she
would	faint.

Instead,	she	erupted	into	giggles.
“Ladies	and	gentlemen,”	Tristan	announced,	“looks	like	we’ve	got	ourselves

another	witch.”



PART
FOUR



INCIDENT	REPORT

AUTHOR:	Rebecca	East-Oda
SUBJECT:	Rachel	bat	Avraham—unauthorized	ODEC	use
THEATER:	C/COD
OPERATION:	Ribbon-cutting	ceremony
DTAP:	Cambridge,	MA,	present	day
FILED:	Day	896	(early	January,	Year	3)

Summary:	At	11:21:16	of	Day	891,	 the	 subject,	Rachel	bat	Avraham,	a	KCW
from	the	circa-1200	Constantinople	DTAP,	was	Sent	from	there	to	ODEC	#3
and	 materialized	 in	 normal	 physical	 condition.	 She	 was	 issued	 clothing	 and
placed	under	observation	in	the	medical	isolation	facility	adjoining	ODEC	Row.
She	was	debriefed	in	Hebrew	and	in	Greek	by	Dr.	Stokes	(head	of	DORC)	and
Dr.	 Lingas	 (in-house	 Byzantine	 Greek	 HOSMA)	 respectively.	 Initial	 briefing
focused	 on	 two	 topics	 of	 immediate	 concern,	 namely	 (1)	 whether	 any	 more
surprise	 visitors	 from	 1200	 Constantinople	 were	 to	 be	 expected,	 and	 (2)	 the
importance	of	immediate	medical	procedures	needed	to	protect	subject	from	our
diseases	and	vice	versa.	As	precautions	in	the	meantime,	Dr.	Oda	had	shut	down
all	 four	 operational	 ODECs,	 and	 ODEC	 Row	 had	 been	 placed	 under	 bio-
containment	lockdown.

Upon	 receipt	 of	 verbal	 consent	 from	 subject,	 medical	 staff	 began
administration	of	inoculations	required	to	protect	subject	from	modern	diseases
to	which	she	is	not	likely	to	have	immunity,	and	collected	samples	(swabs,	blood,
urine,	feces)	for	analysis	of	possible	historical	disease	agents.	Upon	examination,
subject	 had	 fully	 healed	 scars	 indicative	 of	 a	 past	 encounter	 with	 smallpox,
suggesting	 that	no	active,	 virus-shedding	 infection	was	 in	progress.	Subsequent
laboratory	 analysis	 detected	 low	 levels	 of	 intestinal	 parasites	 and	 gut	 flora	 of	 a
potentially	contagious	nature;	these	were	eradicated	through	orally	administered
medications	 and	 the	 subject	 given	 a	 clean	bill	 of	health	 following	 four	days	of
analysis	and	treatment.	The	inoculation	protocols	are	scheduled	to	continue	for
another	 two	 weeks,	 whereupon	 subject	 will	 be	 cleared	 to	 emerge	 from	 bio-
containment	 and	 mingle	 with	 the	 general	 population.	 Psychologically,	 subject
appears	normal,	other	than	some	natural	disorientation.



Results	 of	 debriefing:	 Subject	 is	 a	 seventeen-year-old	 resident	 of	 Pera,	 the
Jewish	neighborhood	lying	across	the	Golden	Horn	from	Constantinople	proper.
She	 is	 one	 of	 a	 small	 network	 of	 KCWs	 recruited	 by	 DODO	 and	 used
extensively	 for	 DEDEs	 conducted	 during	 the	 last	 two	 years	 while	 laying	 the
groundwork	 for	 full-scale	 diachronic	 operations	 slated	 to	 commence
immediately.	 She	 is	 well	 known	 to	 our	DOers,	 who	 from	 the	 very	 beginning
have	 commented	 on	 her	 marked	 curiosity	 about	 our	 time	 and	 place	 and	 her
frequently	 voiced	 desire	 to	 travel	 into	 the	 future	 and	 join	 us.	 She	was	 able	 to
reach	 ODEC	 #3	 through	 the	 assistance	 of	 her	 mother,	 another	 KCW	 in
Constantinople	who	agreed	to	carry	out	the	Sending.

Until	this	incident	occurred,	we	had	not	envisioned	that	a	security	breach	of
this	nature	was	a	realistic	threat.

1.		Sending	by	a	historical	witch	into	her	own	future	was	considered	extremely
difficult.

2.		There	was	no	place	in	the	present	day	where	magic	worked,	save	in	the
confines	of	an	“up	and	running”	ODEC.	Since	we	didn’t	leave	the
ODECs	up	and	running,	the	Sending	witch	had	no	fixed	target	to	“aim
at.”

Obviously,	these	two	assumptions	are	no	longer	valid.

1.		Our	KCWs	in	1200	Constantinople	have	had	so	much	practice	Homing
our	DOers	that	they	seem	to	have	developed	a	feel	for	how	to	access	the
modern	Boston	DTAP.

2.		The	policy	just	inaugurated	of	leaving	the	ODECs	running	24/7	has	given
the	Sending	witch	a	much	broader	and	more	stable	target	to	“aim	at.”

During	her	debriefing,	subject	admitted	that	she	had	become	aware	of	the	new
ODECs	and	the	“always	on”	policy	 slated	 to	go	 into	 force	at	 the	beginning	of
the	 new	 year.	 This	 leakage	 of	 information	 was	 not	 the	 result	 of	 one	 specific
disclosure	by	one	specific	DOer,	but	rather	a	pattern	of	information	that	she	had
assembled	through	numerous	conversations	with	various	DOers.	In	addition,	it
appears	 that	 subject,	 along	with	many	 other	witches,	 has	 the	 ability	 to	 extract
information	 from	 nearby	 persons	 through	 non-verbal	 techniques.	 That
combined	with	subject’s	intense	curiosity	and	drive	to	escape	what	she	sees	as	the
stifling	 confines	of	 a	 traditional	medieval	 Jewish	household	 led	 to	her	devising
the	plan	that	led	to	her	materializing	in	ODEC	#3.



General	remarks:	Subject	is	beginning	to	learn	modern	English	and	is	rapidly
becoming	familiar	and	comfortable	with	modern	technology,	conveniences,	etc.
It	will	be	some	time	before	she	can	move	about	freely	in	modern	society	without
supervision,	however,	nothing	in	principle	stands	in	the	way	of	her	doing	so.	It
should	go	without	 saying	 that	 she	carries	 in	her	head	classified	 secrets	 that	can
never	be	divulged	to	the	modern	world	at	large.	Likewise,	if	she	were	to	return	to
her	place	of	origin	and	divulge	information	about	the	future,	or	attempt	to	alter
the	 reality	 of	 that	DTAP	 in	 a	 heavy-handed	manner,	Diachronic	 Shear	would
likely	result.

For	her	own	protection,	she	will	remain	in	biological	isolation	for	another	two
weeks,	but	after	that,	top-level	direction	will	be	needed	in	order	to	determine	her
fate.

FROM	LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK
TO	DR.	ROGER	BLEVINS

DAY	900	(MID-JANUARY,	YEAR	3)

Blev,
I	was	 perusing	Mrs.	East-Oda’s	 report	 on	 the	 recent	 incident	 and

came	 across	 something	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 it	 that,	 to	 put	 it	 mildly,
startled	me:	Ms.	bat	Avraham	“has	 the	 ability	 to	 extract	 information
from	nearby	persons	through	non-verbal	techniques.”

Am	 I	 to	 understand	 that	 she	 is	 a	 mind	 reader?	 And	 that	 other
witches	 have	 the	 same	 ability?	 If	 so,	 then	 this	 document	 is	 an
extraordinary	 example	 of	 what	 is	 referred	 to,	 in	 the	 journalism
business,	as	“burying	the	lede.”

Yours	in	consternation	and	amusement,
Okie



FROM	DR.	ROGER	BLEVINS
TO	LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK

DAY	902

Okie,
I	 too	 noticed	 the	 passage	 you	 referred	 to	 in	 your	 letter,	 and	 was

doing	 some	 investigation	 before	 reporting	 further.	 I	 would
recommend	against	use	of	any	such	pulp-novel	terminology	as	“mind
reading”	but,	in	short,	it	does	appear	that	many	witches	have	enhanced
skills	around	sensing	others’	mental	states,	and	manipulating	same.	Of
course,	 like	 any	 other	 magical	 technique,	 it	 can	 only	 be	 used	 in	 an
ODEC,	or	in	a	pre-1851	DTAP.

In	a	larger	sense,	this	is	not	a	surprise.	For	reasons	I	needn’t	belabor
to	 you,	DODO	 has	 focused	 on	 one,	 and	 only	 one,	 form	 of	magic:
Sending	people	 to	other	DTAPs.	But	magic	has	many	other	possible
uses.	 Making	 an	 analogy	 to	 electricity,	 it’s	 as	 if	 Thomas	 Edison
devoted	his	entire	career	to	the	development	of	washing	machines	but
never	 put	 any	 effort	 into	 light	 bulbs,	 elevators,	 or	 the	myriad	 other
applications	 that	 surround	 us	 today.	 We	 know	 perfectly	 well	 that
witches	could	perform	other	kinds	of	magic;	we	 just	haven’t	put	any
resources	into	it	yet.

Blev

Post	by	LTG	Octavian	K.	Frink	to	Dr.	Roger
Blevins	on	private	ODIN	channel

DAY	903

Blev,	 I’m	 moving	 this	 over	 to	 the	 secure	 messaging	 system	 for
efficiency’s	sake.	I	got	your	letter.	To	put	it	bluntly,	exploitation	of	the
Sending	 type	 of	 magic	 has	 ballooned	 into	 an	 enormously	 expensive
and	cumbersome	operation.	All	worth	it,	I’m	sure—not	suggesting	that



the	taxpayers’	money	is	in	any	way	misspent	on	ODECs	and	so	on.	But
now	that	we	have	all	of	that	apparatus	up	and	running	we	need	to	look
for	other	opportunities	to	make	the	most	of	it.
It	 didn’t	 escape	 my	 notice	 that	 you	 mentioned	 the	 possibility	 of

manipulating	 others’	 mental	 states	 as	 something	 witches	 could	 do.
Let’s	drill	down	on	that.

Reply	from	Dr.	Blevins:
In	a	sense	 it’s	almost	common	knowledge,	Okie.	Historically,	witches
were	feared	and	mistrusted	for	just	such	abilities;	where	do	you	think
the	term	“bewitched”	originated	from?
We	 haven’t	 put	 much	 effort	 into	 this	 because	 it	 only	 works	 in	 an

ODEC,	 and	 it’s	 hard	 to	 imagine	 a	 practical	 application	 of	 such
techniques,	which	 depend	 on	 getting	 the	 subject	 into	 a	 cryogenically
isolated	telephone	booth	in	a	basement	in	Cambridge,	Massachusetts.
Also,	we	only	have	one	witch.

From	LTG	Frink:
Now	we	have	 two,	and	we	pretty	much	own	Rachel	bat	Avraham;	we
can’t	very	well	just	let	her	wander	around	free.	If	she	came	forward,	it
means	 others	 can	 do	 likewise.	 Let’s	 get	more	witches,	 and	 let’s	 put
’em	to	work.
I	 take	your	point	about	 the	ODEC.	Why	can’t	we	make	these	things

smaller?	More	 portable?	 That	 would	make	 their	 use	 for	 psy-ops	 far
more	feasible.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
As	to	your	first	point,	we’ve	been	contemplating	such	a	program	for	a
long	 time—which	 is	why	we	built	so	many	ODECs.	 I’ll	put	my	 foot	on
the	gas,	and	I’ll	spread	the	word	to	the	department	heads.
As	 to	 your	 second,	 my	 understanding	 is	 that	 they	 are	 impossibly

cumbersome	because	 of	 the	 cryogenics.	But	Dr.	 Oda	 is	 now	 surplus
personnel,	since	he	finished	the	Chronotron.	I’ll	try	to	draw	him	out	on
the	topic,	without	tipping	our	hand.

Follow-up	from	Dr.	Blevins,	a	day	later:
Okie,	 I	 had	 coffee	 with	 Dr.	 Oda,	 framed	 as	 a	 conversation	 about	 his
future	 at	 DODO.	 We	 had	 contemplated	 moving	 him	 to	 “emeritus”



status	to	get	him	out	of	the	way	without	sending	his	troublesome	wife
into	 a	 rage.	 In	 that	 capacity	 he	 would	 have	 the	 freedom	 to	 explore
independent	 research	 projects	 as	 long	 as	 they	 were	 relevant	 to
DODO’s	mission.	Without	any	prompting	 from	me,	he	mentioned	 that
he	had	ideas	on	building	an	ODEC	capable	of	working	at	non-cryogenic
temperatures.	The	technical	details	are	over	my	head	but	apparently	it
has	 to	 do	 with	 room-temperature	 superconductors	 and	 certain
advances	 in	 computer	 processing	 power	 that	 he	 has	 been	 tracking.
Sounds	like	this	could	possibly	lead	to	a	portable	ODEC—and	if	so	we
could	redirect	resources	from	diachronic	travel	to	psy-ops.
Unless	you	say	otherwise	before	COB	today,	I’ll	slide	him	over	to	the

new	role	and	encourage	him	to	pursue	the	idea.
Blev

Post	by	Macy	Stoll
on	“All	Employees”	ODIN	channel

DAY	905

Everyone,	Dr.	Blevins	is	extremely	busy	just	now	but	has	asked	me	to
reach	out	in	this	forum	and	shine	a	light	on	some	of	the	confusion	and
resulting	rumors	that	have	surrounded	the	recent	arrival	of	Rachel	bat
Avraham.
To	 clarify,	Rachel’s	 arrival	was	a	PLANNED	event—NOT	a	 security

breach.
There	 was	 indeed	 some	 surprise	 and	 confusion	 around	 the	 exact

timing,	 which	 is	 why	 some	 of	 you	 may	 have	 noticed	 startled
expressions	on	the	faces	of	LTC	Lyons	and	Ms.	Karpathy.	Rachel	was
scheduled	 to	 be	 Sent	 forward	 to	ODEC	#3	 on	 a	 different	 date	 in	 the
near	 future	 as	 part	 of	 a	 planned	 program	 of	 activities	 for	 which	 Dr.
Blevins	 has	 been	 laying	 the	 groundwork	 for	 some	 months	 now.
Because	of	some	understandable	confusion	around	calendars	(Julian



vs.	Gregorian),	 the	Sending	KCW	in	1200	Constantinople	did	 it	on	 the
wrong	day	and	so	Rachel	showed	up	ahead	of	schedule.
Now	 that	 the	cat’s	out	of	 the	bag,	Dr.	Blevins	has	asked	me	 to	 let

everyone	know	that	Rachel	is	just	the	first	in	a	series	of	“Anachrons,”
which	 is	 a	 term	 we	 will	 be	 applying	 to	 colleagues	 from	 earlier
historical	 epochs	who	will	 be	 coming	 forward	 to	 present-day	Boston
and	other	DODO	sites	 to	 collaborate	with	us.	The	exact	policy	 is	 still
being	 formulated,	 but	 we	 anticipate	 recruiting	 Anachrons	 in	 the
following	general	categories:

–		KCWs,	such	as	Rachel,	who	can	help	Erszebet	handle	the
anticipated	uptick	in	demand	for	Sending	personnel	to	various
DTAPs.

–		Subject	matter	authorities,	such	as	people	who	know	how	to
speak	a	particular	dialect	or	fight	in	a	particular	martial	arts
system	for	which	we	don’t	have	modern-day	expertise.	These	can
serve	as	valuable	adjuncts	to	the	existing	DORC	staff.

–		Evacuees	who	must	be	brought	forward	for	tactical	reasons,
typically	to	avoid	the	possibility	of	Diachronic	Shear.	This	might
happen	in	the	event	of	a	security	breach	leading	to	a	situation
where	someone	knew	too	much	about	their	future.

The	above	 is	not	 the	definitive	 list—the	 full	policy	document	 is	still
being	drawn	up.
Soon	Rachel	will	be	cleared	by	our	medical	staff	to	mingle	with	the

general	population,	and	when	that	happens	I	know	you’ll	all	join	me	in
making	her	feel	as	welcome	as	possible	in	her	new	home	and	era.

EXCERPT	FROM	TRANSCRIPT	OF	INTERVIEW
BETWEEN	DR.	MELISANDE	STOKES	(MS)

AND	RACHEL	BAT	AVRAHAM	(RBA)
DAY	904	(DAY	13	OF	RBA’S	MEDICAL	QUARANTINE)



NOTE:	Conversation	took	place	in	Hebrew,	translated	into	English.

MS:	 You’re	 looking	 stronger	 today.	 Dr.	 Srinavasan	 told	me	 you	 ate	 all	 of	 the
chicken	soup.

RBA:	 My	 shoulder	 [vaccine	 injection	 site]	 is	 no	 longer	 hurting	 and	 the	 chills
have	stopped.	Yes,	I	feel	better,	but	still	weak.

MS:	Would	you	like	me	to	tell	Dr.	Srinavasan	about	your	feeling	of	weakness?
Perhaps	he	should	know	about	it.

RBA:	No,	he	cannot	help.
MS:	Why	do	you	say	that?	Modern	medicine	can	do	things	that	would	surprise

you.
RBA:	 This	 I	 understand.	 I	 have	 seen	 it	 with	my	 own	 eyes.	 But	my	 feeling	 of

weakness	is	not	the	kind	of	thing	that	a	doctor	would	understand,	or	know
how	to	fix.	If	you	let	me	go	into	the	ODEC,	I	would	feel	strong	again.

MS:	Because	you	could	do	magic	there?
RBA:	 Yes,	 of	 course.	 You	 [non-magical	 persons]	 don’t	 understand.	 You	 think

that	witches	do	magic	only	at	certain	times,	when	we	perform	a	spell,	such	as
Sending.	Actually	we	are	doing	it	a	little	bit	every	moment,	even	when	we	are
sleeping.

MS:	I	have	heard	similar	things	from	Erszebet.	Only	when	she	is	in	the	ODEC
does	she	feel	completely	herself.

RBA:	I	can’t	wait	to	learn	better	English	so	that	I	can	talk	more	to	Erszebet.
MS:	 The	 computer	 can	 help	 you	 learn	 some	 basic	 parts	 of	 the	 language,	 and

when	you	get	out	of	quarantine	you’ll	learn	faster.
RBA:	I	have	been	reading	the	computer.
MS:	That’s	what	Mortimer	told	me.
RBA:	Who	is	Mortimer?
MS:	 You	 haven’t	 met	 him,	 he	 is	 one	 of	 the	 people	 who	 helps	 make	 the

computers	work.
RBA:	How	does	he	know	that	I	have	been	reading	the	computer?
MS:	 Do	 you	 remember	 our	 conversation	 the	 other	 day	 about	 how	 the

computers	are	linked	together	in	a	network?
RBA:	Yes,	of	course.	A	little	bit	like	the	network	of	Strands.
MS:	 A	 little	 bit,	 yes.	 Well,	 because	 of	 this,	 it’s	 possible	 for	 someone	 like

Mortimer,	who	 is	on	a	different	computer	 in	a	different	place,	 to	see	what
you	 have	 been	 reading.	 And	 he	 tells	 me	 that	 you	 have	 been	 looking	 at
Wikipedia	in	both	Hebrew	and	Greek.



RBA:	 The	 Hebrew	 hasn’t	 changed	 as	 much.	 There	 are	 many	 new	 words,	 of
course,	but	I	can	learn	those.	The	Greek	has	changed	more.	I	can	read	both
of	them,	anyway.

MS:	What	have	you	been	reading?
RBA:	The	future	of	Constantinople.
MS:	You	mean,	the	history?
RBA:	 (laughs)	To	you,	 yes.	But	 to	me	 it	 is	 the	 future.	 I	was	 reading	 about	 the

Fourth	Crusade.
MS:	To	you,	that	would	be	only	a	few	weeks	in	the	future.
RBA:	You	know	about	it?
MS:	Yes,	as	you	know	we	have	been	quite	interested	in	that	DTAP	and	so	I	have

read	many	historical	accounts.
RBA:	Then	perhaps	you	can	tell	me	what	happens	to	the	Jews	of	Pera,	after	the

Crusaders	cross	the	Bosporus	and	attack	Galata	Tower?	We	live	right	in	the
shadow	of	the	tower!

MS:	 There	 is	 no	 written	 documentation	 about	 that	 directly,	 but	 related
documents	 point	 to	 the	 Jewish	 community	 having	 dispersed	 without
incident,	probably	in	response	to	the	Catholic	presence.

RBA:	 (agitated)	 In	 the	 Levant,	 Catholics	 slaughtered	 legions	 of	 us!	 Are	 they
going	to	slaughter	my	family?	I	must	go	back	and	warn	them	and	tell	them
to	leave	before	the	trouble	starts!

MS:	 I’m	 sure	 they	 don’t	 slaughter	 your	 family,	 Rachel.	 Something	 else
happened.	 Your	 family,	 and	 everyone	 else,	 they	must	 have	 just	 chosen	 to
leave—without	 incident,	 or	 it	 would	 be	 recorded	 somewhere,	 right?	With
the	Jews,	everything	bad	is	always	recorded.

RBA:	So	is	everything	good.
MS:	No,	just	the	miracles.	So	there	are	no	miracles,	but	there’s	no	slaughter.
RBA:	I	should	warn	them.
MS:	You	chose	to	leave	them,	Rachel.	You	cannot	leap	back	and	forth	between

DTAPs.
RBA:	Why	not?	From	how	you	have	described	DODO	that	 is	 the	whole	point,

leaping	back	and	forth.
MS:	We	follow	instructions	on	what	to	do	and	not	to	do,	and	never	for	personal

reasons.	 It	 is	 always	 in	 the	 interest	 of	 the	 work.	 Otherwise	 things	 get
complicated.	When	we	started	speaking,	two	weeks	ago,	you	had	to	agree	to
stay	in	this	DTAP	before	I	could	tell	you	anything.	You	remember	that,	don’t
you?



RBA:	Oh,	 of	 course,	 and	 I’m	very	happy	 to	be	here,	 it	 is	 so	much	better	 even
than	the	most	exciting	magic	my	grandmothers	ever	did.	It	is	amazing.	And
all	of	you	seem	to	take	it	in	stride!	Even	Erszebet!	It	is	all	so	wonderful,	and
everyone	is	kind	to	me,	and	it’s	such	fun	to	see	how	everyone	is	clothed	and
I	 cannot	wait	 until	 I	 can	 try	 all	 the	 food,	 and	 this	medicine	 is	better	 than
magic,	if	I	were	this	sick	at	home	I	would	never	be	so	recovered	in	three	days!
All	these,	what	are	they	called,	innocuvations—

MS:	Inoculations,	and	vaccinations.	And	that	bag	up	there	that’s	attached	to	the
tube	 that	 goes	 into	 your	 arm,	 that	 has	 some	medicine	 that’s	 making	 you
better	faster.

RBA:	Yes!	Easier	than	magic!	I	do	not	like	the	hum	of	the	electricity	but	Erszebet
says	I	will	get	used	to	it,	and	so	I	cannot	imagine	even	Heaven	would	be	so
wondrous	as	this.

MS:	Then	I	hope	you	are	at	peace	with	staying	here.	And	helping	us.	Please	trust
that	your	family	will	be	safe	without	your	assistance.

RBA:	Very	well.	How	can	I	help?	Once	I	have	adjusted	to	being	here?
MS:	 The	 role	 of	 witches,	 here	 and	 now,	 is	 to	 Send	 agents	 back	 in	 time	 to

different	DTAPs.
RBa:	I	remember.	I	had	no	idea	the	world	was	so	enormous!
MS:	 Yes,	 even	 for	 us,	 with	 all	 our	 knowledge,	 it	 is	 a	 remarkable	 thing	 to

contemplate.	 So	 you	 Send	 us	 back	 in	 time,	 and	we	 do	 things,	 very	 subtle
little	 things,	 to	 prevent	 undesirable	 situations	 from	 happening.	 You	 don’t
need	 to	worry	about	what	 those	are.	That’s	 somebody	else’s	 responsibility.
You	just	need	to	perform	the	magic	of	Sending	them	back	in	time.

RBA:	Very	well,	that’s	easy	enough.	What	else?
MS:	That’s	all.
RBA:	That’s	all?
MS:	Yes.
RBA:	You	mean	that’s	all	Erszebet	does	every	day?	She	just	Sends	people?	Why

don’t	you	use	her	other	magic?
MS:	We	have	not	found	other	useful	applications	for	magic	in	today’s	world.
RBA:	What?!	How	is	that	possible?	It’s	magic!	Magic	is	always	useful!	That	is	like

saying	 you	 have	 no	 useful	 application	 for	 the	 sun	 because	 you	 found	 this
electricity	thing.

MS:	You	yourself	noted	how	remarkable	life	is	now,	that	in	many	ways	it	is	even
better	than	magic.

RBA:	It’s	better	in	a	different	way,	it’s	not	better	than	not	having	magic	at	all.



MS:	Because	magic	stopped	in	1851,	we	became	accustomed	to	living	without	it.
RBA:	So	Erszebet,	all	she	ever	does	is	Send	people?
MS:	Yes.
RBA:	No	wonder	she’s	so	grumpy.	That	must	be	very,	very	dull	after	a	while.
MS:	It’s	her	work.
RBA:	 I	have	never	heard	of	a	single	witch	 in	the	history	of	the	world	who	 just

had	to	do	the	exact	same	thing	over	and	over	and	over	again.	That	sounds
terrible.	The	Lord	would	never	subject	anyone	to	such	treatment.	Even	when
we	were	slaves	in	Egypt	we	had	more	variety	to	our	tasks	than	that.

MS:	Are	you	saying	you	do	not	wish	to	have	the	work?
RBA:	I	want	to	have	something	else	to	do	as	well.	I	am	an	excellent	witch	but	I

am	also	 skilled	 at	many	other	 things.	 I	 can	bake	bread,	 and	 I	 am	a	 superb
seamstress.	Perhaps	I	can	spend	some	time	Sending	people	and	some	time
baking	challah.

MS:	 I	will	 talk	to	Dr.	Blevins	about	your	suggestion.	 I	 like	 it.	Perhaps	 it	would
help	Erszebet	if	she	also	had	a	pastime.

RBA:	 No,	 not	 a	 pastime,	 something	 real,	 something	 useful.	 I	 have	met	many
people	in	this	fortress	now	but	not	a	single	baker.

MS:	We	 don’t	 have	 enough	 observant	 Jews	 on	 staff	 to	 require	 that	 we	 keep
challah	on	hand.

RBA:	 Forget	 challah,	 then,	 I	wish	 to	 learn	 how	 to	make	 those	 delicious	 sweet
round	 things	 that	 Tristan	 has	 brought	 into	 the	 fortress,	 with	 the	 brightly
colored	bits	on	them.	If	I	could	spend	some	time	baking	those,	then	I	would
not	mind	if	my	magic	work	consists	only	of	Sending.

MS:	I’ll	talk	to	Dr.	Blevins.

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
on	“Announcements”	ODIN	channel
DAY	915	(LATE	JANUARY,	YEAR	3)

Effective	 immediately,	Dr.	Frank	Oda	has	been	promoted	 to	Scientist



Emeritus.	 In	this	new	role,	Dr.	Oda	will	be	unburdened	from	the	day-
to-day	 responsibilities	 of	 running	 DODO’s	 R&D	 department,	 and	 will
enjoy	 the	 freedom	 to	 pursue	 advanced	 research	 projects	 that	 have
been	back-burnered	until	now	during	his	months	of	hard	work	on	the
Chronotron.	 Please	 congratulate	 him	 if	 you	 should	 encounter	 him
around	the	facility.
Macy	 Stoll	 has	 already	 tasked	 HR	 with	 recruiting	 or	 promoting	 a

replacement	 for	 Dr.	 Oda	 as	 head	 of	 the	 R&D	 department.	 In	 the
interim,	 Dr.	 Oda	 will	 remain	 in	 place	 as	 acting	 head	 and	 assign
department	staff	to	various	tasks	as	appropriate.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

JANUARY	30

Temperature	29F,	damp,	slight	NE	breeze.	Barometer	steady.
More	firewood	delivered	and	stacked	(using	area	of	garden	that	was	dug

up	for	Bay	Psalm	Book—eighteen	months	later	soil	has	still	not	recovered).
Expecting	snowdrops	soon.

Yesterday	afternoon	Tristan,	Melisande,	and	Erszebet	drove	to	the	house
with	 the	new	witch,	Rachel,	who	will	be	 lodging	with	us	until	 appropriate
quarters	can	be	determined	for	her.	A	tiny,	wide-eyed	thing,	looking	like	a
rag	 doll	 in	 a	 dress	 that	 Erszebet	 picked	 out	 for	 her	 during	 a	 raid	 on
Newbury	 Street.	 Predictably,	 there	 was	 disagreement	 about	 logistics.
Tristan	wanted	Erszebet	to	return	to	the	office	to	continue	to	Send	people—
they	 have	 quite	 the	 schedule	 there	 now,	 and	 are	 working	 her	 almost	 to
exhaustion.	He	argued	that	Melisande	is	the	only	one	who	speaks	medieval
Hebrew	and	therefore	Mel	should	stay	with	Rachel.

“We	 will	 both	 stay	 with	 her,”	 said	 Erszebet.	 “I	 was	 ‘on	 hold’	 (with air
quotes)	for	more	than	a	century,	you	can	be	‘on	hold’	for	overnight.”

“Erszebet,	you	can’t	even	talk	to	her,	what’s	the	good	of	your	staying?”
“I	will	talk	to	her	through	Melisande,”	Erszebet	said	in	her	so-there	tone.

“Do	you	know	how	long	it	has	been	since	I	have	had	another	witch	to	talk



to?”	 Erszebet	 made	 a	 mock-surprise	 face.	 “Why,	 of	 course	 you	 do.	 You
know	exactly	how	long	it	has	been.	So	you	will	give	me	this.	If	you	refuse,	I
will	understandably	go	on	strike,	which	I	would	have	done	months	ago	if	I
were	 not	 so	 exceptionally	 generous	 and	 patient.	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 an
opportunity	not	to	force	me	to	go	on	strike.”	(Have	been	coaching	her	on
her	communication	skills.	Clearly	mixed	results.)

Tristan	nodded.	“Fine,”	he	said.	“You’ll	return	at	1300	hours	tomorrow.”
She	rolled	her	eyes.	“This	 is	not	an	army	barracks.	 I	will	 return	at	one

o’clock	in	the	afternoon.”
“Major	Sloane	has	vectored	a	couple	of	DOSECOPS	to	the	house,	to	keep

an	eye	on	things,”	said	Tristan,	to	me	now.	“They’re	on	their	way	here.”
“Absolutely	not,”	I	said.	“She’s	not	a	criminal	or	a	fugitive.”
“It’s	about	security,”	said	Tristan.
“Felix,”	 Mel	 suggested	 quickly.	 “Rachel	 knows	 Felix	 from	 her	 native

DTAP.	 He’s	 between	 DEDEs.	 He’s	 not	 technically	 a	 guard,	 but	 he’s
qualified—in	fact	he’s	overqualified.	Surely	you	can	arm	him	and	have	him
bunk	in	the	dining	room.”	A	glance	at	me.	“Would	that	be	all	right?”

“Only	 because	 Rachel	 knows	 him,”	 I	 said.	 “Being	 a	 den-mother	 to
wayward	witches	is	not	in	my	job	description,	and	I	will	not	play	along	if	it
requires	armed	men	in	my	living	room.”

Tristan’s	 jaw	 worked	 silently	 for	 a	 few	moments.	 I	 knew	 what	 he	 was
thinking:	It’s not your living room anymore—it belongs to the East House Trust.
But	 he	 had	 the	 good	 grace	 not	 to	 say	 this	 out	 loud.	He	 called	 off	 the	 two
guards,	placed	a	call	to	Felix,	and	left.

I	 confess	 I	 was	 surprised	 and	 touched	 by	 Erszebet’s	 cosseting	 young
Rachel.	Speaking	to	her	through	Melisande,	she	insisted	Rachel	spend	the
time	 giving	 vent	 to	 how	 very	 different	 and	 disorienting	 it	 is	 here.
Melisande	translating,	most	of	the	English-to-Hebrew	being	some	form	of
“I	know,	isn’t	it	awful?	I	don’t	know	what’s	worse,	to	have	it	happen	all	at
once	 as	 with	 you,	 or	 to	 have	 it	 happen	 with	 gradual	 inevitability	 as	 with
me.”



Diachronicle	
DAY	1800	 (SUMMER,	YEAR	5)

In	which	the	zenith	becomes	our	new	normal

I	 HAVE	 BUT	 EIGHTEEN	 DAYS	 left	 before	 the	 solar	 eclipse	 and	 there	 is	 far	 too
much	to	cover	in	what	time	is	left	to	me.	I	am	more	desperate	than	ever	not
to	be	 stuck	here	 for	 fucking	ever.	Therefore	 I	 shall	 resort	 to	 a	compendious
depiction	of	the	next	phase	of	DODO’s	existence.

Two	 and	 a	 half	 years	 passed.	 Every	 day	 I	 rose	 and	went	 to	work.	Many
times	I	was	Sent	back	to	various	DTAPs	to	perform	missions.	A	lot	happened,
in	 other	words.	And	 yet	 those	 two	 and	 a	 half	 years	 flew	by	 so	 quickly	 that
when	it	was	over	it	felt	as	if	some	witch	had	Sent	me	into	the	future.

The	 value	 of	 the	 Chronotron	 exceeded	 all	 expectations.	 With	 it	 at	 our
disposal,	we	were	close	to	gods	in	our	omniscience.	Over	the	course	of	those
dazzling	 years,	DODO	 expanded	 beyond	 anything	 even	Tristan	 could	 have
imagined	 that	 afternoon	when	he	 took	me	 to	 coffee.	We	 expanded	both	 in
our	own	DTAP	and	also	throughout	history.	In	the	twenty-first	century,	we
built	 training	 and	 research	 centers	 all	 over	 the	 globe,	with	ODEC-equipped
facilities	 in	 Europe,	 the	 Middle	 East,	 and	 Japan.	 To	 guarantee	 the	 most
authentic	 training,	 we	 lured	 experts	 in	 certain	 fields	 of	 importance	 to	 us
forward	 through	 time.	 Our	 Fighters	 scrimmaged	 in	 top-secret	 dojos	 with
Roman	 legionaries,	 Viking	 berserkers,	 and	 samurai.	 Their	 training	 gear	 was
wrought	by	armorers	of	ages	past,	brought	 forward	to	toil	 in	air-conditioned
smithies.	 Per	 Tristan’s	 early	 joke	 to	 me	 years	 earlier,	 I	 did	 indeed	 have	 a
chance,	 once,	 to	 practice	 my	 conversational	 Sumerian—with	 an	 actual
Sumerian.

We	 could	 not	 bring	 people	 forward	 from	 the	 past	 willy-nilly,	 of	 course.
Strict	 principles	 around	 Anachrons	 were	 codified,	 with	 each	 one	 being
personally	approved	by	Blevins.	Generally	it	was	safer	for	a	DOer	to	train	in	a
DTAP	and	bring	 that	knowledge	back	 to	us,	 than	 it	was	 to	bring	 somebody
forward,	which	would	then	oblige	us	to	spend	time,	energy,	and	medical	and
psychological	 resources	 on	 keeping	 them	 from	 losing	 their	 shit	 having	 a



difficult	 time	 adjusting	 to	 modernity,	 however	 carefully	 we	 tried	 to	 shield
them.	 Our	 epidemiology	 unit	 ran	 around	 the	 clock	 checking	 samples	 and
improving	our	vaccination	protocols.

Most	of	the	early	Anachrons	were	witches.	Erszebet,	to	our	surprise,	did	not
fly	the	coop	once	she	had	been	made	redundant.	She	rather	adopted	the	air	of
Cleopatra,	and	made	it	clear—to	them	and	to	us—that	she	was	now	the	Alpha
Witch.	None	of	 the	other	witches	could	ever	possibly	know	as	much	as	 she
did,	about	the	twenty-first	century	or	about	DODO’s	real	missions;	likewise,
none	of	us	 could	possibly	know	how	 to	behave	 appropriately	with	 the	new
witches.	 She	 maintained	 all	 of	 her	 charismatic	 narcissistic	 bitchiness
prepossessing	fierceness,	but	she	became,	in	effect,	the	Den	Mother	of	Weird
Sisters.	 Frank	 and	 Rebecca’s	 home	 couldn’t	 hold	 them	 all,	 so	 DODO
purchased	a	big	old	house	elsewhere	in	Cambridge,	rigged	it	up	with	all	kinds
of	security	hardware,	and	turned	it	into	a	kind	of	sorority	for	Erszebet	and	her
brood.	Vans	with	blacked-out	windows	shuttled	back	and	forth	between	it	and
DODO	 headquarters,	 ferrying	 witches.	 They	 had	 come	 from	 all	 times	 and
places,	 but	 they	 mostly	 followed	 Erszebet’s	 lead	 when	 it	 came	 to	 fashion
choices.

There	was	also	a	very	small	cohort	of	contemporary	witches.	Erszebet	could
smell	them,	and	found	it	perfectly	ordinary	to	approach	strangers	on	Mass	Ave
and	inform	them	of	their	latent	abilities,	to	the	despair	of	everyone	who	cared
about	 security	 clearance.	 Those	 rare	 few	 who	 responded	 positively	 were
immediately	told	it	was	a	joke	by	me	(or	Rebecca,	or	whoever	was	Erszebet-
minding	 that	 day);	meanwhile	 the	 attendant	DOSECOP	 (our	 version	of	 the
Secret	 Service)	 would	 capture	 an	 image	 of	 the	 woman’s	 face,	 and	 send	 it
electronically	for	identification	and	background	check.	If	the	DOSECOP	got	a
green	light,	they	would	signal	the	Erszebet-minder,	who	would	backpedal	on
the	 “just	 a	 joke”	 line	 and	 surreptitiously	 invite	 the	 newfound	 witch	 to	 an
interview	 near	 (not	 at,	 not	 at	 first)	 HQ.	 There	 were	 only	 three	 contemp
witches	at	first	(there	are	now	about	eight).	One	of	these	was	Julie	Lee,	aka	the
Smart-ass	 Oboist	 with	 the	 tattooed	 eyebrows	 from	 the	 Apostolic	 Café.
Apparently	 Erszebet	 had	 known	 her	 for	 a	 witch	 from	 day	 one	 but	 did	 not
bother	 to	 mention	 it	 until	 the	 mood	 possessed	 her.	 Another	 was	 Tanya
Wakessa	Washington,	a	legal	clerk	in	City	Hall	who	was	a	regular	at	the	café.

The	third	was	Rebecca	East-Oda.
She	was	a	grudging	convert.	I	think	she	agreed	to	be	recruited	more	for	the

sake	of	supporting	an	endeavor	Frank	loved	than	out	of	any	eagerness	of	her



own.	That	said,	she	was	quite	chuffed	with	herself	the	first	time	she	turned	an
apple	 into	 an	orange.	And,	with	her	Congregationalist	 studiousness,	 she	was
apt.	Erszebet	worked	with	them	every	day	in	one	of	the	ODECs,	displaying	a
patience	 and	 good	 humor	 she	 revealed	 nowhere	 else,	 teaching	 them	 basic
magical	 spells,	 but	 it	 was	 slow	 going.	 Raised	 in	 a	 civilization	 from	 which
magic	had	been	eradicated	for	a	century	and	a	half,	they	all	suffered	a	kind	of
atrophy	of	the	faculties	needed	to	perform	it.	Erszebet	had	told	me	in	private
that	even	Julie—the	best	of	 them—was	probably	years	away	from	being	able
to	Send	a	DOer	with	any	degree	of	spatiotemporal	accuracy.

Our	 budget	 seemed	 limitless	 at	 that	 time,	 in	 no	 small	 part	 because	 there
were	multiple	variations	of	the	Bay	Psalm	Book	gambit—famous	works	of	art,
rare	artifacts	and	antiques,	treasure	troves	of	all	sorts	.	.	.	we	made	them	ours
and	 sold	 them	 all	 for	 cash.	 Tristan	 and	 I	 had	 ethical	 qualms	 about	 this,	 but
Blevins	 was	 in	 charge.	 The	 Fugger	 Bank	 became	 our	 frenemy	 was	 neither
friend	nor	foe	to	us;	at	some	times	they	checked	our	strategems,	at	other	times
abetted	 us,	 according	 to	 some	 larger	 plan	 of	 their	 own	 that	 eluded	 our
understanding.	 It	 became	 increasingly	 obvious	 that	 Dr.	 Cornelius	 Rudge,
who’d	been	in	on	the	project	from	the	beginning,	had	deep	connections	to	the
Fuggers,	and	was	basically	serving	as	their	man	on	the	inside.

But	acquiring	treasure	was	no	longer	DODO’s	primary	goal.	Oh	no,	reader,
do	not	think	it.

Frink	and	Blevins	had	an	uber-mission	(I	wonder,	shall	it	seem	antiquated	or
inconceivable,	 if	 these	words	 are	ever	brought	 to	 light?).	 I	 can	only	guess	 at
what	 this	 might	 have	 been,	 and	 at	 when	 they	 conceived	 it:	 at	 the	 very
beginning	of	the	project,	or	at	some	point	during	the	years	when	DODO	was
growing	to	the	zenith	of	its	power?	Only	in	the	last	few	weeks	have	I	gained
an	inkling	of	their	true	motives.	I	shall	say	what	I	know	of	these	as	quickly	as	I
can,	because	my	hand	is	cramping	up	like	a	motherfucker	most	pitiably;	but	en
route	I	must	explain	what	happened	in	the	Constantinople	Theater.

Yes,	 DODO	 had	 several	 distinct	 theatres	 of	 operations,	 of	 which
Constantinople,	 circa	1200,	was	 the	 first,	 the	biggest,	 and	 the	one	 that	most
concerned	Tristan	and	myself.

The	official	rationale	for	what	we	were	doing	there	was	as	follows:
At	 the	 time	 of	 our	 great	 thriving,	 there	were	 amongst	 the	 powers	 of	 the

globe	multiple	 entities	 that	 caused	our	government	 concern.	These	 included
China,	Russia,	and	certain	nefarious	elements	in	the	Middle	East.

DODO	 was	 tasked	 with	 discouraging	 China	 and	 Russia	 from	 becoming



geopolitical	 BFFs	 close	 allies.	 We	 were	 to	 do	 this	 by	 subtly,	 retroactively
shifting	the	historical	soul	of	Russia	away	from	the	Eastern	Orthodox	Church
and	toward	the	Roman	Catholic	one,	starting	just	after	the	Fourth	Crusade.

The	Fourth	Crusade	was
an	epic	clusterfuck
a	comic-opera	misadventure
a	tragic	saga	with	farcical	elements.	It	never	even	reached	its	intended	target

in	the	Holy	Land.	Instead	the	Crusaders—Catholics	 from	Western	Europe—
invaded	 the	 Byzantine	 Empire,	 which	 was	 a	 Christian	 land,	 and	 sacked
Constantinople.

Its	 domino	 effect	 throughout	 history	 is	 a	 remarkable	 lesson	 in	 cause	 and
effect	 that	I	will	 return	to	at	another	 time,	 if	writer’s	cramp	and	 leisure	 time
allow	it.	What	matters	here	is	to	note	the	consequences.	With	the	help	of	the
Chronotron	and	of	various	Spies	and	Sages	we	Sent	back	 to	 serve	as	 its	eyes
and	ears,	we	planned	out	a	long	interrelated	series	of	DEDEs.	Any	one	of	these
would	seem	innocuous	unto	itself—stealing	a	pitchfork	in	some	small	town	in
the	Urals,	digging	a	trench	in	the	city	of	Zara,	moving	a	sleeping	dog	from	a
hut	 in	 a	 back	 alley	 in	Budapest	 to	 another	 hut	 fifty	 feet	 away.	Collectively,
these	 slight	 alterations	pushed	our	agenda,	 shifted	 the	quantum	tendencies	of
reality	to	allow	us	to	form	what	we	ultimately	desired:	that	Catholicism	would
spread	 its	wings	over	more	of	Christendom,	and	the	Orthodox	Church	over
less	of	it.

Catholicism	 unchecked	 would	 mean	 disaster	 for	 both	 the	 colonizing	 of
North	 America	 and	 the	 development	 of	 science,	 and	 so	 every	 bit	 of
strengthening	that	happened	on	the	church’s	eastern	flank	had	to	be	offset	on
its	northwestern	one,	to	maintain	within	Europe	the	tensions	and	conflicts	that
would	 lead	 to	 a	 successful	 Protestant	 Reformation.	 That	 too	 is	 a	 story	 for
another	day,	but	it	is	important	to	note	here	that	it	involved	the	collusion	of
influential	bankers,	in	particular	the	Fuggers.	Gráinne	had	indirect	connections
to	that	family	owing	to	her	post-Shear	circumstances,	and	in	sundry	ways,	she
greatly	assisted	us	in	bringing	her	generation	of	Fuggers	into	the	fold,	in	such
manner	 that	 subsequent	generations	were	 raised	 to	be	our	natural	allies.	As	 I
have	 recently	 and	 painfully	 learned,	 she	 had	 her	 own	 reasons	 for	 becoming
cozy	with	the	Fuggers,	but	now	I	am	getting	ahead	of	myself.

Back	to	the	uber-mission—or,	to	be	precise,	what	Frink	and	Blevins	claimed
was	the	uber-mission.

Because	the	1204	fall	of	Constantinople	is	what	brought	Catholicism	so	far



east,	most	of	our	DEDEs	set	off	little	chain	reactions,	quiet	little	tributaries	that
met	up	in	the	central	artery	of	the	Fourth	Crusade.

This	meant	several	things:	first,	that	young	Rachel	was	invaluable	to	us,	not
only	 as	 a	 witch,	 but	 as	 a	 source	 of	 information	 far	 exceeding	 all	 our
documented	knowledge.	Furthermore,	we	could	rely	on	her	to	Send	a	DOer
to	that	DTAP	with	uncanny	specificity.	It	also	meant	that	most	of	our	Fighters
had	to	be	trained	to	have	at	least	a	basic	grasp	of	Greek	(spoken	by	the	native
Orthodox	 Christians	 of	 Constantinople),	 Latin	 (spoken	 by	 the	 crusading
Catholics	 who	were	 besieging	 them),	 and	 Anglo-Saxon	 (the	most	 common
tongue	of	the	Varangian	Guards).	They	also	learned	to	fight	in	both	the	eastern
style	 employed	 by	 the	 conscripted	 army	 and	 the	 northern	 style	 of	 the
Varangians,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 various	 continental	 styles	 employed	 by	 the	 wide
variety	of	soldiers	from	Flanders	down	to	Sicily.	There	were	few	actual	battles
over	the	two-year	course	of	the	Fourth	Crusade,	but	every	one	of	them	had
been	quite	the	mishmash	of	styles.	I	speak	from	listening	to	Tristan,	who	was
one	of	our	frontline	Fourth	Crusade	DOers.

While	we	were	growing	and	thriving	in	the	twenty-first	century,	the	witch
network	 was	 being	 built	 out	 with	 astonishing	 rapidity	 in	 many	 DTAPs.
Gráinne,	who	had	taken	up	with	an	acquaintance	of	Francis	Bacon	(and	of	the
Fuggers,	 per	 above),	 was	 worth	 her	 weight	 in	 diamonds,	 as	 (rather	 like
Constantinople)	late	Elizabethan	London	is,	within	the	time-space	continuum
of	recorded	human	history,	akin	to	Grand	Central	Station,	especially	given	that
we	 needed	 to	 have	 KCWs	 of	 both	 Catholic	 and	 Protestant	 backgrounds.
Within	eighteen	months,	every	DTAP	we’d	targeted	had	a	Known	Compliant
Witch	who	knew	Gráinne,	or	a	witch	who	knew	a	witch	who	knew	a	witch
who	knew	Gráinne.	We	could	safely	move	DOers	from	DTAP	to	DTAP	in
ways	unthinkable	before	the	Chronotron	came	online.	Gráinne—whom	I	had
never	met—seemed	to	enjoy	her	position	of	prominence.	Unlike	most	of	the
other	witches	working	with	DODO	(whom,	it	must	be	said,	we	spent	a	not
inconsiderable	 amount	 of	 time	 placating),	 she	 asked	 nothing	 of	 us.	 She	was
generous	and	earnest.	Our	one	great	blindness,	our	tragic	flaw,	is	that	we	never
questioned	that.

But	again,	I	am	getting	far	ahead	of	myself.

INCIDENT	REPORT



AUTHOR:	LTC	Tristan	Lyons
SUBJECT:	Chira	Lajani
THEATER:	Constantinople
DTAP:	Blachernae	Palace,	1203
FILED:	Day	1787	(June,	Year	5)

Sexual	assault	and	repercussions	(weregild)
Chira	Lajani	was	on	assignment	in	1203	Constantinople.	Her	DEDE	put	her	in
the	royal	wing	of	Blachernae	Palace	after	sunset.	This	wing	is	guarded	mostly	by
the	mercenary	Varangian	Guards	of	which	I	(LTC	Tristan	Lyons)	was	one,	being
there	 for	 a	 separate	DEDE.	Under	normal	 circumstances	our	paths	would	not
cross.

Chira	 reports	 that	 having	 accomplished	 her	 DEDE	 she	 was	 returning	 to
Basina’s	quarters	 so	 that	Basina	would	Home	her,	when	 she	was	accosted	by	a
Varangian	 Guard	 speaking	 Greek	 to	 her	 with	 an	 accent	 she	 has	 come	 to
recognize	 as	 Norman/French.	 He	 propositioned	 her	 as	 she	 was	 descending	 a
flight	of	steps	leading	down	from	a	raised	terrace	toward	the	bathhouse	entrance
in	a	courtyard	below.	She	turned	him	down.	She	is	used	to	being	propositioned,
especially	 by	 the	 Guard,	 who	 consider	 themselves	 outside	 the	 normal	 social
constraints	 of	 the	 local	 culture.	 However,	 she	 is	 also	 used	 to	 being	 respected
when	she	says	no.	This	VG	did	not	accept	her	no.	He	grabbed	her	as	she	reached
a	landing	in	the	stairway	and	pinned	her	against	a	stone	balustrade.	She	resisted.
He	 ripped	her	 robe	 off	 of	 her	 shoulder	 so	 that	 it	 fell	 to	 the	 sash	 at	 her	waist.
Although	 he	 was	 stronger	 than	 she	 was	 and	 did	 not	 require	 a	 weapon	 to
overpower	her,	he	reached	down	with	his	right	hand	and	drew	a	seax	(long	knife)
from	a	sheath	on	his	belt,	presumably	considering	this	the	easiest	way	to	terrorize
her	into	silence.

Her	assailant	was	suddenly	holding	her	with	his	left	hand	only.	In	the	period
combat	 training	 that	 is	 a	 requirement	 for	 all	 DOers,	 we	 are	 taught	 to	 be
extremely	conscious	of	when	the	opponent	makes	a	move	for	his	knife,	since	that
is	 the	 single	most	 dangerous	moment	 in	 hand-to-hand	 combat.	 Chira	 reacted
with	 a	 wrist-lock	 technique	 that	 forced	 her	 assailant	 to	 drop	 the	 knife.	 He
reached	 down	 for	 it,	 giving	 her	 the	 opportunity	 to	 spin	 away	 from	 the	 stone
balustrade.	Now	furious	and	no	longer	content	with	merely	terrorizing	her,	the
assailant	aimed	a	wild	slash	at	her	that	produced	a	shallow	but	bloody	wound	on
the	outside	of	her	right	thigh.	In	so	doing	he	became	imbalanced.	Chira	stepped
in	 and	 took	 advantage	 of	 this	 to	 throw	 him,	 planting	 her	 left	 hip	 under	 his



buttock	and	shoving	hard	on	his	chin.	Spinning	away	from	her,	he	sprawled	over
the	 balustrade,	 balanced	 for	 a	moment,	 then	 fell,	 plunging	 approximately	 five
meters	onto	a	wrought	iron	fence	which	impaled	him.	As	this	was	happening	he
screamed	in	a	way	that	drew	attention	all	over	the	courtyard.

Various	other	Varangian	Guards	came	to	investigate,	then,	seeing	the	wound
on	her	leg,	summoned	female	servants	to	come	and	attend	to	her.	The	incident
was	singular	enough	that	word	of	it	spread	through	the	royal	wing	of	the	palace
within	 a	 quarter	 hour,	 and	 through	 the	 entire	 palace	 compound	 in	 an	hour.	 I
heard	of	it	from	fellow	guards,	who	were	reconstructing	what	move	Chira	must
have	 used	 to	 get	 him	 to	 drop	 the	 knife.	 On	 the	 excuse	 of	 needing	 to	 relieve
myself,	I	made	my	way	to	where	she	was	being	comforted.

This	 was	 a	 small	 antechamber	 outside	 the	 bathhouse.	 One	 of	 Basina’s
attendants	was	there,	holding	Chira’s	torn	and	blood-soaked	dress.	Chira	was	by
this	time	in	a	fresh	robe.	She	had	been	washed	clean	of	the	blood	and	her	thigh
had	been	bandaged.	She	appeared	shaken.	(Although	when	I	spoke	to	her	later,
she	 said	 she	 just	 wanted	 to	 get	 on	 with	 her	 DEDE	 in	 hopes	 of	 preventing	 a
repeat	of	the	assault	in	another	Strand.)

A	contingent	of	 four	Varangian	Guards	appeared	in	the	doorway.	Naturally,
given	what	had	 just	happened,	 I	 assumed	 their	 intent	was	hostile.	 I	 interposed
myself	between	them	and	the	women	and	placed	my	right	hand	on	the	handle	of
my	seax.

Their	leader	was	Magnus,	who	was	known	to	me	by	reputation,	being	one	of
the	most	senior	and	respected	of	all	the	Varangian	Guards	in	the	city	despite	his
relative	youth	(early	thirties?)	and	outlier	status	as	a	Norman	(most	of	the	VG	are
Anglo-Saxons,	and	 in	 this	 era	 the	Normans	and	Anglo-Saxons	are	 frenemies	at
best).	He	may	have	recognized	my	face,	but	we	had	never	conversed.	Magnus	is	a
tall,	lean,	broad-shouldered	bearded	man	with	long	brown	hair	and	blue	eyes.	He
entered	first,	displaying	both	hands,	palms	out,	in	a	gesture	of	peace.	Behind	him
were	three	other	men,	I	would	guess	of	the	same	kinship	group.	They	muttered
together	 in	what	 I	 recognized	 as	Norman	French.	One	 carried	 a	pile	 of	men’s
clothes;	one	carried	an	ornate	wooden	box;	the	third	carried	a	small	leather	bag.
All	four	were	unarmed;	they	must	have	checked	their	weapons	outside.

“It’s	 all	 right,	brother,	 I	 am	here	 to	make	 this	 right,	 as	best	 I	 can,”	Magnus
said,	speaking	in	Anglo-Saxon.	I	nodded	and	stepped	out	of	his	way.

Magnus	 stopped	 just	 in	 front	 of	 Chira.	 The	 other	 three	 approached,	 went
down	 on	 their	 knees,	 bowed	 their	 heads,	 and	 held	 up	 the	 objects	 they	 were
carrying.



“I	am	Magnus	of	Normandy,”	began	Magnus	in	stilted,	accented	Greek.	“The
man	who	assaulted	you	is	my	distant	kinsman.	He	has	no	other	family	and	so	it
falls	to	me	to	offer	you	the	weregild	for	his	offense.	He	did	not	have	much	but
now	 it	 is	 all	 yours.	 There	 are	 clothes,	 ornamentation,	 and	 money.	 You	 will
receive	it,	please.”	He	gestured	and	the	men	held	the	items	closer	to	her.

Chira	could	not	hide	her	surprise.	She	glanced	at	me	briefly,	and	I	nodded,	so
she	 accepted	 the	 offering	with	 thanks.	 Basina’s	 attendant	 and	 a	 young	 servant
woman	 relieved	 the	men	of	 their	 load—and	 then	gave	 them	a	 look	 suggesting
they	should	 leave	now.	Magnus	saluted	Chira	with	a	 fist	 to	his	chest.	His	men
rose,	turned	on	their	heels,	and	marched	out.

Since	 I	 had	 seen	 for	 myself	 that	 Chira	 was	 safe,	 and	 it	 would	 have	 been
awkward	for	me	to	remain	as	the	sole	male,	I	left	with	Magnus’s	group.

As	 soon	as	we	were	outside	 the	bathhouse,	Magnus	 turned	 to	me	to	ask	my
cause	for	being	here.

Seeing	an	opportunity	 to	 forge	a	 connection,	 I	 said,	 “This	woman	has	done
me	a	kindness	in	the	past	and	I	am	concerned	for	her	well-being”—and	I	said	it
in	Magnus’s	own	dialect	of	Norman.

He	was	pleasantly	surprised	to	hear	his	mother	tongue	spoken.	“What	is	your
name?”	he	asked.	“You	have	a	familiar	accent.”

“My	 name	 is	 Tristan	 of	 Dintagel,”	 I	 said.	 “I	 spent	 a	 year	 of	 my	 youth	 in
Normandy	 seeking	 my	 fortune,	 before	 coming	 east	 to	 join	 the	 Varangian
Guard.”

He	 gave	 me	 a	 peculiar	 look.	 “Tristan	 of	 Dintagel?”	 He	 glanced	 over	 his
shoulder	at	one	of	his	men,	who	was	simultaneously	exchanging	looks	with	the
other	two	men.	“Are	you	a	man	of	great	exploits?”

“You	must	ask	the	Emperor	his	opinion	on	the	subject,”	I	said,	“as	his	is	the
only	opinion	that	matters	to	my	salary.”

Magnus	stared	at	me	a	moment	longer	and	then	laughed	along	with	his	men.
“It	is	a	pleasure	to	meet	someone	who	speaks	as	we	do,”	he	said,	and	held	out	a
hand	to	exchange	peace	with	me.	I	returned	to	my	post	having	agreed	with	him
that	we	would	break	bread	together	the	next	time	our	duties	allowed	it.

Later	that	day	I	found	access	to	Chira	again,	to	find	her	resolute	to	finish	her
DEDE	 on	 this	 Strand,	 and	 as	 I	 had	 finished	my	 own	DEDE	 I	 returned	 here
while	 she	was	 still	 in	Constantinople.	 She	 should	 be	 home	within	 a	 day.	The
wound	on	her	thigh	will	probably	require	modern	medical	treatment	and	leave	a
permanent	scar,	but	seems	unlikely	to	cause	permanent	disability.

Respectfully	submitted,



Lieutenant	Colonel	Tristan	Lyons

Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff
on	“Constantinople	Theater”	ODIN	channel
DAYS	1790–1797	(LATE	JUNE,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	LTC	Tristan	Lyons:
Gang,	 I	wanted	 to	 raise	a	 topic	of	 interest	 in	 case	anyone	else	being
Sent	to	C’ople	can	confirm	what	I	just	saw,	or	gather	more	info.
Long	 story	 short	 is	 that	 I	 was	 hanging	 out	 there	 with	 Magnus	 of

Normandy,	whom	many	of	you	will	have	heard	of	as	one	of	 the	more
senior	Varangians.	Not	so	much	in	terms	of	formal	rank	as	the	respect
in	which	he’s	held	by	 the	other	VGs,	which	 is	saying	something	given
he’s	a	Norman.	I	had	crossed	paths	with	him	a	couple	of	days	earlier
and	he	had	taken	an	interest	in	me	and	suggested	we	dine	together.
As	 everyone	 knows,	 it’s	 against	 SOP	 to	 make	 casual	 social

connections	 with	 historicals,	 since	 only	 bad	 things	 can	 come	 of	 it
(unless	you’re	a	Lover	or	a	Closer,	 in	which	case	 it’s	part	of	your	 job
description).	So	 I	was	hesitant	 to	accept	Magnus’s	 invitation.	But	as	 I
said,	he’s	a	respected	leader	in	the	VG	ranks,	and	I’m	pretty	junior.	So
the	 invitation	 was	 an	 honor,	 and	 it	 would	 only	 have	 raised	 more
questions	and	suspicions	if	I	had	just	blown	him	off.
Further	 complicating	 the	 scenario	 is	 that	Magnus	 (who,	 for	 all	 his

status	in	the	Guard,	has	a	vaguely	manic	“ah,	WTF”	aspect)	decided	we
should	dine	not	in	the	VG	mess	hall,	nor	even	in	the	taverns	the	Guard
tended	 toward,	 but	 that	 we	 should	 head	 down	 to	 the	 Venetian
neighborhood	 because	 he	 “liked	 the	 smell	 of	 maritime	 industry”	 or
something.
I	went	with	him,	 just	 the	two	of	us,	and	we	got	a	 lot	of	 freaked-out

looks	 from	the	Venetian	 traders	and	 their	 families	because	we	were,
you	know,	the	Emperor’s	Guards,	coming	into	a	Venetian	neighborhood



while	the	Venetian	navy	was	parked	across	the	Bosporus	threatening
to	attack	the	Emperor	.	.	.	but	obviously	nobody	was	going	to	mess	with
us.	We	sat	down	at	an	outdoor	table	overlooking	the	harbor,	and	had	a
conversation	that	on	the	surface	seemed	like	 just	polite	“get	to	know
you”	stuff.	My	cover	story	was	designed	to	stand	up	under	exactly	this
kind	 of	 testing.	 It	 is	 that	 I	 came	 from	 a	 pretty	 obscure	 location	 in
England,	 that	 I	 had	 family	 connections	 in	 Normandy,	 and	 had	 spent
some	 time	 there	when	 younger,	which	was	how	 I	 came	 to	 speak	 the
dialect.	He	probed	me	a	 little	on	 that.	This	made	me	a	 little	nervous
since	I’d	been	in	that	part	of	the	world	(Collinet,	specifically)	150	years
earlier	and	so	I	couldn’t	cite	specific	names	or	incidents	to	back	up	my
story.	But	“my”	village	and	his	are	some	fifty	kilometers	apart,	which
is	enough	separation	 to	blur	 things	quite	a	bit,	 and	he	had	 left	when
fairly	young,	so	 there	weren’t	any	smoking	guns.	Basically,	 the	cover
story	seemed	to	pass	muster	and	we	moved	on	to	other	chitchat	about
the	 day-to-day	 workings	 of	 the	 VG	 and	 rumors	 about	 the	 Crusaders
and	what	they	were	up	to.
After	 we’d	 had	 a	 few	 drinks	 and	 a	 good	 dinner	 we	 stood	 up	 and

began	 to	 head	 back	 to	 the	 barracks.	 But	 we’d	 only	 gone	 about	 a
hundred	strides	when	he	turned	to	me	and	said,	“Would	you	like	to	go
see	your	namesake?”
Having	no	 idea	what	he	was	 talking	about,	 I	agreed.	We	were	near

the	border	of	 the	Venetian	quarter,	but	now	he	 led	me	back	 into	 the
heart	 of	 it.	 We	 walked	 for	 about	 a	 hundred	 yards	 through	 winding
streets.	 The	 sun	 was	 setting	 (time	 of	 year	 was	 midsummer,	 sunset
was	late).	We	came	to	a	Roman	Catholic	church	where	vespers	were
under	way.	This	is	the	Church	of	St.	Bartholomew	for	those	of	you	who
would	care	to	visit	 it.	Later	 it	was	destroyed	on	all	of	the	Strands	I’m
aware	of,	so	it	doesn’t	exist	in	our	present.	Point	being,	for	purposes	of
this	story,	its	west	entrance	was	lit	up	by	the	sunset	when	we	arrived.
He	 led	 me	 into	 the	 church,	 both	 of	 us	 crossing	 ourselves	 in	 the

traditional	 manner	 as	 we	 entered	 (I	 doubt	 Magnus	 is	 a	 practicing
Christian	 of	 any	 stripe,	 and	 when	 the	 VG	 guards	 the	 Empress	 at
religious	services,	 it’s	an	Orthodox	church,	so	he	must	have	vestigial
muscle	memory	from	childhood	re:	how	to	behave	in	a	church).
We	went	inside	just	far	enough	that	we	could	turn	around	and	look

at	 the	 stained	 glass	 windows	 in	 the	 west	 front	 without	 drawing	 the



attention	of	the	congregants	or	the	priest.	There’s	a	big	round	window
in	 the	 middle	 and	 some	 smaller	 ones	 to	 the	 sides.	 As	 is	 typical	 of
churches	 like	 this,	 the	big	one	depicts	scenes	 from	the	 life	of	Jesus,
with	 emphasis	 on	St.	Bartholomew	 (one	of	 the	 twelve	Apostles),	 and
the	peripheral	ones	depict	various	other	saints.
One	of	the	stained	glass	windows	depicted	a	knight	with	yellow	hair

holding	what	appeared	to	be	a	boat	oar.	Scattered	around	him	on	the
ground	were	the	supine	forms	of	what	I	took	to	be	defeated	enemies.
Behind	him	was	a	crude	rendering	of	a	church.	A	scroll	above	his	head
identified	him	as	St.	Tristan	of	Dintagel.
As	 you	 can	 all	 imagine,	 I	 was	 astonished	 and	 speechless	 for	 a

minute.	 I	became	conscious	of	the	fact	that	Magnus	was	studying	my
face	intently.	When	I	 finally	came	to	my	senses,	 I	said,	“I	had	no	idea
that	my	saintly	namesake	had	been	commemorated	in	a	church	so	far
from	home!”	and	thanked	him	for	making	me	aware	of	 it.	 I	 fell	to	my
knees	 in	 a	 show	 of	 piety,	 offered	 up	 a	 prayer	 to	 St.	 Tristan,	 and
purchased	 a	 candle,	 which	 I	 lit	 and	 placed	 beneath	 the	 window	 in
question.
Magnus	and	 I	 then	walked	back	up	to	 the	barracks	without	 further

discussion	 of	 this	 incident.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 can	 tell,	 he	 accepts	my	 story,
which	is	that	I	was	named	after	a	saint	who	dwelled	in	my	part	of	the
world	150	years	ago.
But	until	this	incident	I	had	no	idea	that	there	was	such	a	thing	as	a

St.	Tristan	of	Dintagel	recognized	by	the	Catholic	Church.	Since	I	came
back	I’ve	found	traces	of	him	on	the	Internet,	but	it’s	all	pretty	sketchy
and	 obscured	 by	 GLAAMR.	 I’m	 guessing	 that	 St.	 Tristan	 became	 a
thing	on	certain	Strands	but	not	others.	Any	ideas,	people?

Reply	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes:
On	it.	Will	get	back	to	you	with	any	findings.
It	kinda	sounds	like	Magnus	set	you	up.	Any	worries	on	that	front?

From	LTC	Lyons:
He	didn’t	call	me	out.	But	I	won’t	BS	you,	Stokes,	it’s	worrisome	and	I
think	he	senses	something’s	weird	about	me.	On	 the	other	hand,	 it’s
only	two	weeks	until	the	Crusaders	storm	Galata	Tower	and	then	we’ll
be	 going	 our	 separate	 ways,	 so	 I	 intend	 to	 go	 back	 to	 the	 DTAP	 on



schedule	 tomorrow.	 For	 me	 to	 just	 disappear	 would	 confirm	 any
suspicions	he	might	be	harboring.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Can	you	delay	 your	 return	 to	C’ople?	A	bunch	of	us	are	working	 this
and	coming	up	with	spotty/fluctuating	results.	There	is	heavy	GLAAMR
around	 St.	 Tristan	 of	 Dintagel	 and	 so	 we’re	 seeing	 entire	 Wikipedia
articles	 warping	 in	 and	 out	 of	 existence.	 Some	 risk	 that	 merely
Googling	the	name	is	tending	to	make	it	more	real.

From	LTC	Lyons:
So	what	is	the	point	of	my	delaying	return	to	C’ople?	Shizzle’s	about	to
go	down,	you	know	this.	We’ve	been	working	toward	it	for	three	years.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
We	 can	 get	 better	 answers	 by	 sending	 some	 Sages	 back	 to	 other
Strands	 where	 we	 think	 that	 the	 St.	 Tristan	 legend	 is	 more	 firmly
entrenched.	 We	 need	 to	 know	 more	 before	 Sending	 you	 into	 a
potentially	messed-up	situation.
And	by	 “messed-up	situation”	 I	mean	 “alternate	universe	 in	which

you	are	a	two-hundred-year-old	warrior	saint.”

From	LTC	Lyons:
No	research	needed.	St.	Tristan	is	damn	well	entrenched	in	the	Strand
I’m	 working—I	 already	 told	 you	 he	 has	 at	 least	 one	 stained	 glass
window.	So	we	have	to	stick	with	the	story	I	told	Magnus,	which	is	that
I’m	 simply	 named	 after	 him.	 Stokes,	 this	 is	 ubiquitous—almost
everyone	back	then	is	named	after	a	saint.

LETTER	ON	PARCHMENT,	HANDWRITTEN

IN	LATIN	BY	PROFESSIONAL	SCRIBE,

CONSTANTINOPLE

JUNE	1203

Brother	Ando:



May	the	Lord	find	you	and	our	mother	well.	Upon	receiving	this	letter	please
respond	as	swiftly	as	you	may.	I	have	met	a	valiant	warrior	here	in	Byzantium,
a	Varangian	Guard	like	myself,	but	of	a	name	too	familiar,	that	is	Tristan	of
Dintagel,	 which	 lies	 in	 England.	 The	 rantings	 of	 the	 Frankish	 priests	 are
gibberish	to	me,	so	I	care	not	for	their	saints.	Nor	was	I	ever	one	to	listen	to	the
songs	around	the	hearth,	but	I	know	you	were.	Do	you	not	recall	a	song	about
a	great	hero	who	hailed	from	a	remote	part	of	England	and	who	had	appeared
suddenly	in	our	region	and	fended	off	a	tribe	with	whom	we	feuded?	He	was
credited	with	 saving	 the	village	and	made	a	 saint	by	 the	Christians.	 It	 strikes
me	as	a	remarkable	coincidence	to	meet	another	man	with	such	a	name.	There
is	 some	 quality	 to	 this	man	 that	 I	 cannot	 quite	 describe,	 but	 he	 seems	 like	 a
man	apart,	as	belonging	to	some	other	race.

I	wonder	if	 there	be	miracles	and	if	so,	how	may	I	make	use	of	this	one
that	a	hero	of	legend	has	seen	fit	to	manifest	himself	within	my	ken,	just	at	the
moment	when	we	are	under	siege	by	the	Franks!	Please	respond	to	tell	me	if	my
memory	 is	correct,	and	say	as	much	as	you	can	of	 the	old	 legends	concerning
this	hero.	Also	send	news	of	our	mother	and	the	village	if	there	is	any.

YOUR	BROTHER,

Magnus

Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff
on	“Constantinople	Theater”	ODIN	channel
DAYS	1798–1805	(EARLY	JULY,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	Historical	Operations	Subject	Matter	Authority	(HOSMA)
Dr.	Eloise	LeBrun:
I’m	 just	 back	 from	 1232	 Paris	 with	 some	 results	 concerning	 “St.
Tristan	of	Dintagel,”	which	 I	will	 post	 on	 this	 channel	 as	 I’ve	 time	 to
write	 them	 up,	 but	 the	 executive	 summary	 is	 that	 I	 don’t	 think	 LTC
Lyons	should	go	back	 to	C’ople.	Has	he	been	Sent	 yet?	 I	 can’t	make



heads	or	tails	of	the	DEDE	scheduling	app.

Reply	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes:
He	was	Sent	eight	hours	ago,	and	isn’t	expected	back	for	two	weeks—
this	is	where	we	complete	the	DEDE,	during	the	Crusaders’	attack	on
Galata	Tower	@	Constantinople.	What	did	you	find?

From	Dr.	LeBrun:
Ugh,	I	just	missed	him:(
Well,	it’s	all	academic	now,	I	guess.
What	 I	 found	 is	 that	 on	 some	 of	 these	 Strands	 an	 oral	 tradition

developed	 in	 the	 vicinity	 of	 Collinet	 in	which	 the	 story	 of	 Tristan	 got
inflated	 into	 a	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 yarn	 and	 eventually	 turned	 into	 a
chanson	 de	 geste	 sung	 by	 various	 troubadours.	 Apparently	 it	 was
popular	enough	that	the	church	decided	to	capitalize	on	it	by	trumping
him	up	enough	to	canonize	him	(even	though	there	are	no	miracles	or
martyrdom	attributed	 to	him)—which	 is	 how	he	 found	his	way	 into	 a
stained	glass	window.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
On	multiple	Strands?	But	he	only	hit	the	burglar	with	the	boat	oar	on
one	Strand!

From	Dr.	LeBrun:
Crosstalk	between	Strands	apparently.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Is	that	a	thing!?	Would	one	of	our	magic	experts	please	enlighten	me?

From	Rebecca	East-Oda:
We’ve	seen	it	before	in	creative	arts	settings,	especially	storytelling.	If
you	think	about	what	is	going	on	in	a	storyteller’s	mind	when	he	or	she
spins	a	fictional	yarn,	what	they	are	trying	to	do	 is	to	come	up	with	a
story	 that	did	not	actually	happen,	but	 that	seems	as	 if	 it	might	have
happened.	 In	other	words,	 it	 has	 to	make	sense	and	 to	be	plausible.
Typically	 such	 a	 story	 makes	 use	 of	 real	 places,	 historical	 events,
characters,	etc.	but	the	events	of	the	story	itself	seem	to	take	place	in
an	alternate	version	of	reality.



The	conventionally	accepted	explanation	for	this	is	that	storytellers
have	 a	 power	 of	 imagination	 that	 makes	 them	 good	 at	 inventing
counterfactual	 narratives.	 In	 the	 light	 of	 everything	 we’ve	 learned
about	 Strands	 at	 DODO,	 however,	 we	 can	 now	 see	 an	 alternate
explanation,	 which	 is	 that	 storytellers	 are	 doing	 a	 kind	 of	 low-level
magic.	Their	“superpower”	isn’t	imagining	counterfactuals,	but	rather
seeing	across	parallel	Strands	and	perceiving	things	that	actually	did
(or	might)	happen	in	alternate	versions	of	reality.
I	think	you	can	see	where	this	is	going,	Mel.	Even	if	Tristan	smacked

the	 burglar	 with	 the	 oar	 on	 only	 a	 single	 Strand,	 it’s	 possible	 that
storytellers	in	other,	nearby	Strands	were	able	to	sense	it	or	perceive
it	and	 tell	 the	story	 in	a	compelling,	convincing	way.	From	there,	 the
story	 could	 propagate	 to	 other	 Strands—including	 ours,	 where	 just
this	 morning	 I	 found	 an	 entry	 on	 St.	 Tristan	 of	 Dintagel	 in	 Alban
Butler’s	 original	 (1759)	 edition	 of	 Lives	 of	 the	 Saints,	 which	 is	 in	 our
library.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Holy	crap	he’s	on	Wikipedia	now	too.
NVM	he’s	gone	now.

From	Dr.	LeBrun:
I	 don’t	 have	 time	 to	 translate	 all	 of	 the	 documents	 from	 Latin	 and
medieval	French	into	English,	but	I’ll	post	a	few	snippets.

From	Dr.	Roger	Blevins:
Just	became	aware	of	this	thread	and	am	skimming	it.
Am	 I	 to	 understand	 that	 changes	 have	 occurred,	 recently,	 on	 the

pages	of	a	250-year-old	book	in	our	library!?

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Yes.	 There	 are	 faint	 traces	 of	 GLAAMR	 around	 it,	 according	 to
Erszebet.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
I	see.	That	 is	 troubling.	Not	 the	 first	 time	diachronic	magic	has	been
troubling.



From	Dr.	Stokes:
How	so,	Dr.	Blevins?	The	entire	point	of	DODO	is	to	change	the	present
by	 doing	 things	 in	 the	 past.	 History	 books	 and	Wikipedia	 entries	 are
naturally	going	to	change	accordingly.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
Dr.	Stokes,	I	am	taking	this	offline,	as	the	expression	goes.	Please	see
me	in	my	office.

From	Dr.	LeBrun:
Here	 for	 example	 is	 a	 translation	 of	 a	 letter	 in	 clerical	 Latin	 from	 a
village	priest	in	Normandy	to	his	bishop,	dated	1063:

The	 struggle	 against	 pagan	 beliefs	 and	 practices	 in	 this	 parish	 is
never-ending,	and	tests	my	faith	every	hour	of	every	day.	Of	late	some
of	the	village	wives	have	been	filling	their	children’s	ears	with	a	story
that	has	spread	like	a	grass	fire	from	one	household	to	the	next.	It	is
nothing	more	than	an	old	saga	of	the	Vikings,	so	far	as	I	can	discern.
Its	hero	 is	one	Tristan,	a	roaming	Anglo-Saxon	warrior	of	enormous
strength	and	stature	who	comes	to	sojourn	in	a	Norman	village	for	a
time.	Peaceable	by	nature,	he	is	roused	to	action	when	the	village	is
raided	by	brigands,	and	makes	an	heroic	stand	on	 the	shore,	 laying
about	him	with	a	boat	oar	until	all	of	 the	attackers	have	been	slain.
Then	after	accepting	the	gratitude	of	the	villagers	he	wanders	away	to
pursue	other	adventures.	As	you	can	see	it	is	just	the	sort	of	lay	that
appeals	 to	 the	 simple	minds	 of	 the	 common	 people	 and	 as	 such	 is
nearly	impossible	to	eradicate.

There	 is	 a	 response	 from	 the	bishop	 in	which	he	 says	 that	he	has
heard	the	same	story	from	other	villages	in	the	area,	but	that	in	some
versions	Tristan	is	a	Christian	man	who	is	defending	the	parish	church
from	pagans	who	have	come	to	defile	it	and	steal	its	reliquary.	He	goes
on	to	suggest	that	rather	than	trying	to	stamp	out	this	popular	story,
the	priest	should	instead	co-opt	it	by	re-telling	it	to	his	flock	as	a	tale
about	Christian	virtues.
Jumping	forward	a	hundred	years	I	found	a	fragment	of	an	obscure

chanson	de	geste.	 I’m	dating	 it	 by	 its	 form,	which	 fluctuates	between
the	early	style	(ten-syllable	assonant	rhyme,	in	this	case	on	short	“i”)



and	 the	 later	 one	 (twelve-syllable	monorhyme,	 in	 this	 case	 long	 “i”).
Here’s	a	few	stanzas	just	to	convey	the	flavor	of	it,	although	of	course
I’m	translating	for	meaning	not	nuance.	Stanzas	are	of	variable	length
and	most	of	them	too	water-damaged	to	make	out.	Can	go	back	and	do
a	 more	 careful	 translation	 if	 required,	 including	 seeking	 possible
encoded	messages/references,	not	unheard	of	in	this	tradition:

By	the	banks	of	the	peaceful	Dives	Tristan	reclines,
Broad-shouldered	with	noble	carriage	and	proud	spirit,
Flaxen-haired	knight	of	Tintagel,	new-pledged	to	Charlemagne.
He’s	come	to	serve	our	king,	the	servant	of	Jesus	Christ	.	.	.
(about	six	stanzas	illegible)
Look!	From	the	loins	of	his	enchanting	mistress	at	dawn	he	leaps
To	the	alarms	of	the	invading	baleful-eyed	heathens
Who	come	to	steal	the	village’s	beloved	relics	of	St.	Septimus
To	dishonor	its	Christian	spirit,	a	woe	much	worse	than	sin	.	.	.
(two	dozen	unreadable	stanzas)
.	.	.	And	now	does	noble	Tristan,	Charlemagne’s	new	paladin,
Clap	hand	on	oar	and	calling	upon	Our	Lady’s	virtues
Use	the	humble	oar	as	staff,	to	smite	the	unsanctified	chins
Of	seven	pagan	warriors	in	buckram	suits,
While	their	gleaming	wicked	swords	no	target	hit
On	Tristan’s	manly,	bold,	courageous	side	.	.	.

There’s	about	another	nine	hundred	verses,	but	most	are	 too	water-
damaged,	and	at	a	glance,	the	rest	seem	to	be	about	Tristan’s	service
at	 Charlemagne’s	 court	 and	 later	 his	 adventures	 against	 the	Moors,
which	presumably	would	justify	his	canonization.	Will	now	peruse	that
section	 and	 let	 you	 know	 if	 anything	 leaps	 out	 that	 might	 click	 for
Magnus.

From	Dr.	Stephen	Moore:
Sorry	 to	 be	 a	 johnny-come-lately	 to	 this	 thread,	 but	 the	 Bodleian
Library	was	closed	yesterday	and	so	I’ve	only	just	been	able	to	visit	the
rare	books	 room.	 I	was	able	 to	 find	 traces	of	 the	Tristan	 legend	 in	a
letter	 written	 in	 1071	 to	 William	 the	 Conqueror.	 The	 original	 is,	 of
course,	 in	 Latin	 but	 I	 have	 supplied	 a	 hasty	 translation,	 copy/pasted
below,	with	apologies	for	infelicities	in	language.



Greetings	to	my	beloved	monarch	and	cherished	brother	William,	by
the	grace	of	God	King	of	the	English	and	Duke	of	the	Normans.
As	I	circuit	the	many	manors	you	have	seen	fit	to	bestow	upon	me

for	my	assistance	at	Hastings,	I	remain	profoundly	grateful	for	your
beneficence	and	generosity.	All	are	bountiful	with	crops	and	livestock,
the	serfs	healthy	and	none	excessively	aggrieved.	In	all,	I	receive	it	as
a	tremendous	boon.
However	I	am	sorrowful	to	inform	you	that	my	search	for	the	hero-

colony	of	Dintagel	has	come	to	naught.	Dintagel,	from	which	sprang
that	most	renowned	and	admired	knight	Tristan,	who	is	featured	so
valiantly	in	the	Song	of	Collinet	in	its	defense	of	the	holy	reliquary	of
the	martyr	St.	Septimus	of	Pontchardon	against	the	incursions	of	the
heretics	of	Lisieux	that	enthralled	us	in	our	youth,	has	proven	to	be
nothing	but	a	spit	of	land	with	a	ruined	Roman	fortress.	In	the	nearby
village	of	Bossiney	(Boskyny),	my	men	have	asked	after	the	fellowship
of	knights	from	which	Tristan	sprang,	and	are	met	universally	with
stupid	looks	from	the	villagers.
There	is	however	an	abundance	of	sheep,	which	may	be	exploited	to

the	profit	of	your	majesty	and	the	greater	glory	of	God.

Yours	in	great	love	and	all	homage,
Robert,	Count	of	Mortain	and	Earl	of	Cornwall

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	LTG	Octavian	K.
Frink	on	private	ODIN	channel
DAY	1805	(JULY,	YEAR	5)

Okie,	this	is	just	to	give	you	a	heads-up	on	a	possible	situation	that	is
developing.	You’ll	 recall	a	bit	of	unpleasantness	 two	and	a	half	years
ago	 when	 Lieutenant	 Colonel	 Lyons	 went	 off	 half-cocked	 during	 a
DEDE	in	1045	Normandy	and	got	into	a	brawl	with	the	locals.	I	said	at
the	time,	and	I	still	maintain,	that	this	was	a	serious	error	in	judgment



that	 called	 his	 qualifications	 for	 the	 job	 into	 question.	 Well,	 now	 it
looks	like	the	chickens	are	coming	home	to	roost.	LTC	Lyons	has	gone
back	to	1203	Constantinople	to	finish	out	the	big	DEDE	we	have	been
working	 for	 the	 last	 three	 years.	 That’s	 fine	 as	 far	 as	 it	 goes.
Unfortunately	 his	 actions	 in	 Normandy,	 160	 years	 earlier,	 have	 had
incalculable	reverberations,	with	the	result	that	he	is	now	revered	as
some	 combination	 of	 a	 romantic	 folk	 hero	 and	 Christian	 saint	 by
people	all	over	the	Nordic	and	Christian	worlds.	One	of	the	Varangian
Guards	 at	 the	 Constantinople	 DTAP	 seems	 dangerously	 close	 to
putting	two	and	two	together.
No	action	needed	or	requested	at	this	time,	but	I	wanted	to	put	this

up	on	your	radar	just	in	case	it	blows	up	in	our	faces	in	a	few	days	or
weeks.
I	 just	 finished	a	 rather	unpleasant	meeting	with	Dr.	 Stokes	who	 is

reflexively	defensive	of	LTC	Lyons	and	doesn’t	seem	to	appreciate	the
magnitude	of	the	problem.

Reply	from	LTG	Frink:
Blev,	 I’ve	 read	 this	 a	 couple	 of	 times	 and	 don’t	 see	 why	 you	 are	 so
excited.	I’ve	spent	my	career	running	operations	in	places	like	Fallujah
and	Jalalabad	and	I’ve	never	seen	anything	go	off	without	glitches.	But
you	have	a	better	grasp	of	these	diachronic	operations	than	I	do	and	so
I’ll	take	it	under	advisement.
Are	you	doing	anything	to	mitigate	the	problem?

From	Dr.	Blevins:
We	have	a	young	MUON	here	who	I	am	sure	you	will	remember	since
she	is	the	one	who	crashed	the	ribbon-cutting	party	by	materializing	in
the	 ODEC.	 Rachel	 is	 her	 name.	 She	 is	 now	 one	 of	 our	 most
experienced	 witches,	 and	 is	 obviously	 an	 expert	 on	 1203
Constantinople	 since	 it’s	 where	 she	 was	 born	 and	 raised.	 I	 have	 a
meeting	 scheduled	with	 her	 in	which	 I	will	 explore	 some	options	 for
cleaning	up	the	mess	that	LTC	Lyons	has	left	in	his	wake.

From	LTG	Frink:
How’s	 it	going	with	the	portable	ODEC	and	so	on?	Knowing	how	your
mind	works,	Blev,	I	can	see	where	all	of	this	is	leading:	a	de-emphasis
on	diachronic	operations	per	se,	in	favor	of	C/COD	psy-ops	centered	on



witches	in	mobile	units.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
You	know	me	well,	Okie.	Yes.	The	ATTO,	as	we	call	the	portable	ODEC,
is	 shaping	 up	 quite	 well.	 To	 develop	 the	 psy-ops	 wing	 of	 the
organization,	we	 are	 getting	 ready	 to	 bring	 forward	 Gráinne,	who	 is,
after	all	 is	said	and	done,	still	 the	most	powerful	witch	we	have	ever
encountered.

From	LTG	Frink:
The	Irish	super-witch?

From	Dr.	Blevins:
That	 terminology	 is	deprecated.	We	have	been	calling	 them	Wenders
for	 their	 superior	 ability	 to	 navigate	 between	 Strands	 while
maintaining	an	unbroken	thread	of	consciousness.	In	the	entire	history
of	DODO	we	have	only	encountered	three	of	them.	Gráinne	has	been	by
far	the	most	loyal	and	it’s	time	we	rewarded	her	with	a	promotion.

LETTER	FROM

GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
A	Tuesday	of	High	Summer,	1602

Auspiciousness	and	prosperity	to	you,	milady!
It’s	 a	 brief	 but	 timely	warning	 I’m	writing	 you	with,	Your	Grace,	 and	no

action	does	 it	require	on	your	part,	but	only	alertness.	Sir	Francis	Bacon,	the
gentleman	whose	demeanor	does	command	this	fleet	of	thinkers	and	doers	of
the	age,	including	Monsieur	Cardigan	my	benefactor	.	.	.	he	urges	the	nobles	of
the	court	to	redouble	their	efforts	 in	Ireland.	He	would	have	the	crown	take
over	our	entire	 island	as	 a	means	 to	 “honor.”	Therefore	 if	 any	courtier	 from
England	 do	 come	 courting	 you,	 it’s	 wise	 to	 be	 testing	 the	 waters	 of	 their
acquaintanceship	with	Sir	Francis.	If	they	are	even	indirectly	under	his	sway	or
in	his	circles,	then	surely	it’s	disingenuous	they’re	being.



And	 meanwhile	 merely	 to	 keep	 you	 apprised	 of	 my	 circumstances,	 they
continue	 apace	 with	 some	 fascinating	 developments	 (more	 fascinating	 to
myself	than	to	you,	I	warrant).	It’s	Norwich	we’re	spending	the	summer	in,	and
here	I’ve	come	to	know	three	witches,	something	older	than	myself,	and	sisters
to	each	other	.	.	.	all	of	them	half-nieces	of	Sir	Francis	Bacon	himself!	For	isn’t
their	 father	Nathaniel	 his	 half-brother.	 But	 this	 isn’t	 the	 only	 peculiar	 thing
about	them,	there	being	three	other	facts	of	note:

First,	 being	 that	 they	 know	 of	 Tristan’s	 guild	 and	 likewise	 work	 to	 abet
them	on	occasion	(not	so	oft	as	I	do).	Of	course	I	knew	that	there	are	many
other	witches	working	for	them	(their	term	for	us,	collective,	 is	KCW),	but	I
had	not	realized	I	had	contemporaries.

A	second	and	stranger	fact	of	note	being	that	they	were	never	recruited,	but
rather	raised	 in	a	tradition	of	service	to	Tristan’s	crew,	 for	sure	their	mother
Anne	 and	 before	 that	 her	 mother	 Winnifred	 worked	 with	 Tristan’s	 people,
although	there	is	nothing	in	the	family	history	of	working	with	Tristan	himself.
’Twas	Winnifred	was	won	over	 to	 the	work	by	 an	 agent	 named	Esme,	 forty
years	 ago.	Here	again,	 a	minor	detail	Tristan’s	not	 telling	me	about	how	his
guild	be	doing	their	business.

But	here’s	the	final	and	most	interesting	note,	and	might	even	be	of	direct
interest	 to	 Your	 Grace:	 besides	 their	 connection	 to	 Sir	 Francis,	 these	 weird
sisters	are	the	granddaughters	of	none	other	than	Sir	Thomas	Gresham,	who	as
you	know	was	an	associate	of	the	Fugger	banking	family	.	.	.	who,	despite	their
unholy	religion,	have	long	financed	your	resistance	on	occasion,	for	the	sheer
joy	 of	 causing	 headaches	 to	 Queen	 Bess.	 I’m	 thinking	 it	 must	 be	 no
coincidence	that	all	of	these	particular	lineages	and	associations	twine	together
through	time	in	some	way	that	Tristan	sees	more	clearly	than	I	do,	and	surely
it’s	use	he’s	getting	out	of	it	in	ways	that	I’m	not	seeing	yet.	But	I	will.	Oh	yes,
Your	Grace,	it’s	soon	enough	I’ll	see	as	clear	as	he	does.

Whether	 I	 be	near	 or	 far,	may	 I	 hear	 only	 good	 things	 of	 you,	My	Lady
Gráinne!	Your	Gráinne	now	of	Norwich

TRANSCRIPT	(EXCERPT)
INTERVIEW	CONDUCTED	BY	DR.	ROGER	BLEVINS	(RB)



WITH	MUON	RACHEL	BAT	AVRAHAM	(RA)
11:00,	DAY	1807	(10	JULY,	YEAR	5)

NOTES:	Video	recording	was	made	automatically	by	a	motion-activated	security
camera	system	in	Conference	Room	#2	at	DODO	HQ,	Cambridge,	MA.	In	the
wake	of	subsequent	events,	the	file	was	salvaged	from	a	secure	server	by	DODO
personnel	and	transferred	to	the	ad	hoc	GRIMNIR	backup	system,	where	it	was
later	transcribed.	Excerpt	below	begins	at	approximately	11:15	local	time.

RB:	In	preparing	for	this	meeting,	I	took	the	routine	step	of	reviewing	your	file.
I	 see	you	have	once	again	started	asking	the	DOers	you	Send	back	to	your
native	DTAP	to	get	word	to	your	family	that	you’re	safe.

RA:	Yes,	I	am	sure	they	are	worried	about	me.	It	has	been	nearly	three	years.	I
want	to	reassure	them.

RB:	 You	 signed	 a	 nondisclosure	 agreement.	 That	 means	 nothing	 can	 be
disclosed.	To	anyone.

RA:	Except	God,	you	mean.	You	cannot	tell	me	to	keep	anything	from	God.
RB:	Ask	God	to	tell	your	family	how	you’re	doing.
RA:	I	do,	of	course.	But	I	am	a	good	daughter,	and	so	I	must	make	the	effort	as

well.
RB:	No,	you	mustn’t.	In	fact,	you	signed	a	paper	swearing	you	would	not.
RA:	 The	 commandments	 come	before	 any	pledge	 I	make	 to	 a	worldly	 regime,

and	the	commandments	say	honor	your	father	and—
RB:	You	ran	off.	You	abandoned	them.
RA:	No,	my	mother	is	the	one	who	Sent	me!	[weeping]	I	had	her	blessing!	She

said	she	would	make	it	all	right	with	my	father.	I	am	the	fastest	Sender	of	all
the	witches,	and	the	most	precise.	I	am	a	benefit	to	you	because	my	mother
sent	me	here.	It	is	okay	that	I	send	reassurances	to	her.

RB:	You	can’t.	If	you	insist	on	attempting	it,	we	will	assign	you	to	other	DEDEs
and	you	will	never	Send	anyone	back	to	Constantinople.

RA:	 Will	 you	 lame	 yourselves	 out	 of	 spite?	 I	 am	 the	 best	 witch	 for
Constantinople.

RB:	 Security	 is	 our	 first	 priority.	 If	 you	 will	 not	 cooperate	 with	 us,	 then	 we
cannot	cooperate	with	you.	 I	will	have	to	reassign	you	to	 the	Antwerp	and
London	DTAPs.	We	will	need	additional	help	there	when	we	bring	Gráinne
forward.

RA:	But	I	am	Tristan’s	preferred	Sender	for	Constantinople.



RB:	Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons	is	subordinate	to	me	and	all	of	his	decisions	are
subject	to	my	review.

RA:	I	understand.
RB:	 In	 any	 case,	 his	 habit	 of	 disappearing	 into	 remote	DTAPs	 for	weeks	 at	 a

time	leaves	an	operational	void,	obliging	colleagues	to	fill	in	for	him.
RA:	Constantinople	is	not	remote,	it	is	the	most	cosmopolitan	city	in	the	world!
RB:	Not	for	long.
RA:	What	does	that	mean?
RB:	 After	 what	 happens	 next,	 everything	 looks	 so	 different	 that	 it	 doesn’t

matter	how	well	you	know	the	city,	it’ll	be	completely	rebuilt.
RA:	What	do	you	mean	by	these	words,	“what	happens	next”?
RB:	I	have	reason	to	believe	that	by	going	back	to	1203	Constantinople,	Tristan

has	blundered	into	a	trap	of	his	own	devising.	Unwittingly,	of	course.	But	he
is	still	culpable,	because	of	his	arrogance,	his	lack	of	accountability.

RA:	What	sort	of	trap?
RB:	 The	 details	 are	 complicated.	 There’s	 not	 time	 to	 explain	 them	 here.	 The

point	is	that	he	needs	to	be	evacuated.	If	he	were	a	commando	on	some	kind
of	 raid,	 we’d	 be	 sending	 in	 the	 helicopters	 right	 now,	 the	 SEAL	 team,	 to
extract	him	from	the	mess	he	has	made.	But	since	he’s	a	DOer	and	he’s	been
deployed	 to	 a	 DTAP,	 instead	 we	 need	 to	 Send	 someone	 who	 knows	 the
territory	and	who	can	get	to	him	and	Home	him	with	extreme	prejudice,	as
the	saying	goes.

RA:	You	want	me	to	Send	another	DOer	to	rescue	him?
RB:	 You’re	 not	 listening,	 Rachel.	 The	 person	 we	 Send	 back	 on	 this	 rescue

mission	can’t	 just	be	any	ordinary	DOer.	It	must	be	a	MUON,	a	witch	who
has	 the	 capability	 of	 Homing	 him	 as	 soon	 as	 he	 is	 found.	 One	 who	 is
intimately	 familiar	 with	 every	 byway	 of	 the	 city,	 every	 nuance	 of	 its
languages.

RA:	You’re	asking	.	.	.	me	to	be	Sent	back?
RB:	 ODEC	 #4	 has	 been	made	 ready	 for	 action.	 One	 of	 our	 other	MUONs	 is

there	 waiting	 for	 you.	 I	 have	 provided	 her	 with	 cover—with	 plausible
deniability.	You	can	be	back	home	in	ten	minutes,	if	that	is	what	you	really
want.	But	you	can	never	come	back.	You	must	decide	now.

URGENT	BULLETIN



MISSING:	RACHEL	BAT	AVRAHAM
MISSING	SINCE:	TODAY,	11:25,	July	10
MISSING	FROM:	Conference	Room	#2,	top	floor
DETAILS:	During	interview	with	Dr.	Blevins,	became	combative,	removed
pepper	spray	device	from	purse,	discharged	it	toward	Dr.	Blevins,	fled	the
room;	when	he	had	finished	washing	the	residue	from	his	eyes,	she	was
gone.	Security	reports	she	has	not	exited	the	building,	however,	her
whereabouts	are	unknown.
APPEARANCE:	Long	dark	hair,	pale	skin,	dark	eyes.	Dressed	in	gray	sweater-
dress	and	jodhpur	boots,	lots	of	eye	makeup	and	bangles.	Late	teens.	Speaks
heavily	accented	English.

Security	is	currently	searching	the	building,	which	is	in	lockdown.	Rachel
lives	in	the	MUON	residence.	We	have	contacted	or	left	word	with	the	off-
shift	MUONs	there.	Also	sending	word	to	local	precincts	and	hospitals.
Likeliest	that	she	is	hiding	in	the	building	somewhere	waiting	for	somebody
else	to	leave	so	that	she	can	sneak	out.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

JULY	10

Temperature	79F,	dry,	still.	Barometer	steady.
Faring	 well:	 cucumber,	 squash,	 chard.	 Starting	 to	 harvest	 basil	 leaves.

Re-seeding	salad	greens.
Frank	 called	 from	 the	 DODO	 offices	 to	 say	 he	 will	 not	 be	 home	 for

dinner:	 the	 building	 is	 in	 lockdown	 because	 the	 witch	 Rachel	 assaulted
Blevins	 (how	 very	 satisfying	 that	 must	 have	 been)	 and	 disappeared.
Surprised	it	took	this	long	for	somebody	to	snap.



Exchange	of	posts	between
Dr.	Melisande	Stokes	and	Mortimer	Shore

on	private	ODIN	channel
DAY	1807

Mel:	Where’s	Rachel?
Mortimer:	idk.	Checking	her	calendar	.	.	.
Mel:	NVM.	Calling	her.	1	sec.
Mortimer:	looks	like	she	had	an	11:00	with	Blev.
Mel:	Went	to	vm.
Mortimer:	Conf	rm	2
Mel:	I	know	but	something	crazy	happened,	Blev	called	security—
medics	are	there.	No	Rachel.

Mortimer:	Where	r	u?
Mel:	OMW	down	to	ODECs.	WHT	Rachel?
Mortimer:	CU	down	there.
Mel:	Bio	breach!
Mortimer:	?
Mel:	Rachel	ran	through	decon	area,	didn’t	follow	protocol.
Mortimer:	ICU	through	glass	wall	now.
Mel:	FUCK.	Whole	place	will	have	to	be	scrubbed.	Going	in	to	check
ODECs.

Mortimer:	Someone’s	in	#4.	Check	that	first.
Mel:	OK
Mortimer:	Not	on	calendar.
Mel:	It’s	Nadja.
Mortimer:	?
Mel:	New	MUON.
Mortimer:	Rachel?
Mel:	Gone.
Mortimer:	Never	there?	Or	.	.	.
Mel:	Nadja’s	confused,	says	she	just	Homed	Rachel.

URGENT	BULLETIN:	UPDATE



OK,	 everyone,	 Mortimer	 here,	 there’s	 a	 lot	 of	 confusion	 and	 so	 I’ve
been	asked	to	post	a	temporary	status	update:

–		Rachel	bat	Avraham	was	Homed	back	to	1203	Constantinople
from	ODEC	#4	at	about	11:25.

–		This	was	an	unauthorized	operation.	The	MUON	who	performed
the	Homing	was	using	the	ODEC	for	routine	training	when	Rachel
showed	up	and	demanded	to	be	let	in	to	the	ODEC.	Once	inside,
Rachel	employed	psy-ops	[magical]	techniques	to	induce	the
other	MUON	to	effect	the	Homing	spell.

–		Unless	you	hear	otherwise,	RIP	Rachel	bat	Avraham.
–		There’s	going	to	be	a	lot	of	wiki	confusion	over	the	next	hour	or
so.	Please	just	stay	away	from	all	Constantinople-related	entries
until	end	of	day	tomorrow	or	you’ll	get	even	more	confused.
Tomorrow	you	may	find	references	to	a	conflagration	or	explosion
or	firestorm	around	Galata	Tower	in	Constantinople	July	1203.	If
you	are	one	of	the	Byzantine	DOers	or	historians,	it	might	not
match	your	memories	of	the	battle	for	Galata	Tower.	Those
memories	are	now	out	of	date.

–		Lieutenant	Colonel	Tristan	Lyons	remains	on	active	DEDE	in	that
DTAP.

Meanwhile	 I’ve	 also	 been	 asked	 to	 share	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 information
about	Diachronic	Shear	since	most	of	us	weren’t	on	the	scene	yet	the
last	 time	 it	 happened.	What	 I’ve	 got	 below	 is	 a	 helpful	mnemonic	 to
bide	you	over,	until	one	of	the	real	pros	has	time	to	write	up	something
more	detailed.	Feel	 free	 to	print	 this	out	and	post	 it	 in	break	rooms,
etc.	More	TK	soon.

Peace	out,	Mortimer

DIACHRONIC	SHEAR
YOU	CRINGE,	YOU	SINGE!

RAFSTIQUORDOT!



Run
A	common	mistake	at	the	onset	of	a	Diachronic	Shear	event	is	to	reflexively
shield	 oneself	 from	 eruptions	 of	 bodily	 fluids	 and	 flaming	 gobbets,	 thus
losing	 precious	 moments	 that	 could	 be	 spent	 putting	 distance	 between
yourself	and	the	epicenter.	A	rift	between	universes	is	no	place	to	be	fussy—
you	can	always	clean	up	later.

Amputate
Body	parts	 that	unfortunately	 found	 themselves	on	 the	wrong	 side	of	 the
rift	 may	 seem	 to	 remain	 attached.	 Intense	 GLAAMR	 and	 general
disorientation	 may	 hide	 their	 misshapen	 form.	 Many	 victims	 will	 be
unwilling	 to	 believe	 in	 the	 reality	 of	 what	 has	 happened	 to	 them.	 The
temptation	may	 be	 strong	 to	 leave	 these	 attached	 and	 hope	 for	 the	 best.
Don’t	do	it!	Think	of	it	as	being	like	gangrene,	except	faster.

Fires	(extinguish)
Most	Diachronic	Shear	events	are	recorded	in	the	history	books	as	epic	fires
of	unknown	origin.	That’s	because,	after	 the	Shear	 itself	 is	over	and	done
with,	fires	remain,	and	find	plentiful	fuel	in	destroyed	structures.	Nipping
these	in	the	bud	may	prevent	enormous	loss	of	life	in	the	coming	hours.

Shore	up	crumbling	structures
Buildings	 may	 have	 lost	 primary	 structural	 members	 during	 the	 Shear.
Ones	that	haven’t	collapsed	already	may	be	prevented	from	doing	so	with
stopgap	measures.	When	in	doubt,	get	out!

Tourniquets	(apply	as	needed)
This	 is	 an	 elementary	 first-aid	 procedure	 that	may	 save	 the	 lives	 of	 some
who	were	caught	along	the	boundary	of	the	Shear.

Intimidate	witnesses
Rumors	spawned	by	a	Shear	event	may	trigger	a	cascade	of	aftershocks,	as
well	as	compromising	your	cover	story.	Do	whatever	it	takes	to	discourage
witnesses	from	saying	anything	to	their	friends	and	loved	ones	about	what
they	have	seen.	Given	the	nature	of	what	goes	on	during	a	Shear,	this	will
commonly	involve	some	sort	of	appeal	to	whatever	gods,	demons,	or	other
supernatural	forces	figure	in	to	the	locals’	belief	system.



Quell	civil	disturbances
Panicked	bystanders	may	react	in	a	way	that	will	only	inflict	further	human
suffering—as	well	as	making	it	difficult	for	you	to	get	Homed.

Use	your	pre-established	alibi
As	part	of	Standard	Operating	Procedures,	DOers	should	always	have	alibis
and	 explanations	 handy	 for	 any	 discrepancies	 that	may	 be	 called	 to	 their
attention	by	curious	and	meddlesome	locals.	Anything	you	can	do	to	place
yourself	far	from	the	scene	of	the	Shear	will	help	you	get	home.

Observe
This	 one’s	 far	 down	 the	 list	 because	 it’s	 a	 lower	 priority.	 But	 it’s	 still	 a
priority!	 DODO	 is	 always	 eager	 to	 gather	 more	 data	 on	 what	 happens
during	a	Diachronic	Shear,	and	so	any	observations	that	can	be	committed
to	memory	will	be	welcome	once	you	get	home.

Return	to	the	twenty-first	century
This	 is	 self-explanatory!	 Find	 your	 KCW	 and	 get	 Homed	 as	 soon	 as
possible—if	 a	 Shear	 has	 occurred	 in	 your	 DTAP,	 it	 means	 that	 your
operation	has	been	“blown”	and	there	is	no	point	in	your	staying	around.

Document
Get	to	a	debriefing	room	as	quickly	as	possible	and	record	everything	you
remember	while	it’s	fresh	in	your	mind.

Opiates
Medical	 research	 conducted	 during	 the	 Iraq	 War	 has	 confirmed	 that
immediate	 administration	 of	 morphine	 following	 a	 traumatic	 event	 can
prevent	 post-traumatic	 stress	 disorder	 (PTSD).	 Our	 medicine	 cabinet	 is
well	stocked	and	we	have	personnel	standing	by	trained	in	the	prompt	and
proper	administration	of	this	therapy.

Therapy
As	all	DOers	will	be	aware	from	their	HR	portfolios,	the	benefits	package
includes	 state-of-the-art	 health	 care,	 with	 no	 arbitrary	 distinctions	 made
between	physical	 and	mental	health.	These	benefits	 are	your	 right—don’t
hesitate	to	use	them!



Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	on
“Department	Heads”	ODIN	channel

DAY	1808

cc:	LTG	Octavian	K.	Frink
General	Frink	has	asked	 to	present	 an	account	of	 the	 confusing	and
regrettable	events	preceding	and	 following	 the	disappearance	of	one
of	 our	 MUONs:	 Rachel	 bat	 Avraham.	 Please	 note	 that	 this	 is	 a
confidential	 and	 privileged	 communication	 for	 senior	 management
only.	 You	may	 disseminate	 relevant	 facts	 to	 your	 subordinates	 on	 a
need-to-know	basis.
I	must	begin	by	emphasizing	that	none	of	these	events	were	within

my	 power	 to	 alter,	 in	 large	 part	 due	 to	 the	 somewhat	 decentralized
nature	 of	 our	 current	 org	 chart	 and	 the	 inherent	 limitations	 of
managing	Anachrons,	MUONs,	and	other	personalities	who	are	not	a
good	match	for	modern	organizational	discipline.
Having	 said	 that,	 below	 is	 a	 summary	 of	 events	 courtesy	 of	 Macy

Stoll	 after	 interviewing	 all	 relevant	 witnesses.	 I	 believe	 at	 this	 point
you	are	aware,	at	least	anecdotally,	of	most	of	what	happened,	but	you
may	consider	the	following	account	definitive:
Per	established	HR	procedures,	Dr.	Blevins	was	interviewing	Rachel

bat	Avraham	in	Conference	Room	#2.	This	was	a	quarterly	review,	of
the	 sort	 normally	 conducted	 by	 Lieutenant	 Colonel	 Lyons,	 but	 since
LTC	Lyons	was	away	on	a	DEDE,	Dr.	Blevins	had	decided	 to	 conduct
the	review	himself.
Under	 normal	 circumstances	 this	 interview	 would	 have	 been

unremarkable.	Rachel’s	 personnel	 record	 indicated	 a	 few	 areas	 that
were	 in	 need	 of	 improvement,	 which	 Dr.	 Blevins	 brought	 up	 in	 the
conversation	 as	 a	 matter	 of	 course.	 Dr.	 Blevins	 reported	 after	 the
incident	 that	 Rachel	 showed	 signs	 of	 being	 under	 considerable
emotional	distress,	presumably	related	to	the	upcoming	climax	of	our
1203	 Constantinople	 operations	 and	 possible	 repercussions	 for	 the
family	and	friends	she	left	behind	in	that	DTAP.



Rachel	 became	 highly	 emotional	 and	 announced	 her	 intention	 to
return	home	at	once.	Dr.	Blevins	reminded	her	that	this	was	forbidden.
A	confrontation	developed	and	Dr.	Blevins	informed	her	that	he	would
summon	DOSECOPS	 if	needed	 to	prevent	her	 from	gaining	access	 to
an	ODEC.	She	reached	into	her	purse	and	drew	out	a	small	canister	of
pepper	spray	which	she	discharged	in	Dr.	Blevins’s	general	direction.
He	did	not	sustain	a	direct	hit,	but	 the	cloud	of	spray	drifted	 into	his
face	 and	 created	 intense	 irritation	 of	 the	 eyes	 and	 nasal	 passages,
forcing	him	to	leave	the	conference	room	and	grope	his	way	down	the
hall	 to	 the	men’s	washroom	where	 he	washed	 his	 face	 in	 a	 sink	 for
several	 minutes	 before	 recovering	 to	 the	 point	 where	 he	 could
summon	 DOSECOPS.	 By	 that	 time,	 Rachel	 had	 long	 since	 fled	 the
room.
Subsequent	 review	 of	 security	 camera	 footage	 shows	 that	 Rachel

proceeded	via	the	back	stairwell	to	the	cellar	level	where	she	entered
the	 bio-containment	 area	 and	 passed	 directly	 through	 it	 without
performing	 any	 of	 the	 required	 decontamination	 procedures.	 ODEC
numbers	1	through	3	were	vacant,	but	ODEC	#4	was	occupied	by	Nadja
Cole,	 a	MUON	 in	 training,	 recruited	 only	 three	months	 ago.	She	was
using	 the	 ODEC	 to	 do	 “homework”	 related	 to	 her	 training	 program;
she	was	not	there	to	Send	anyone,	nor	does	she	yet	have	the	seniority
or	training	required	to	do	so.
Because	of	Rachel’s	seniority,	Nadja	did	not	question	her	when	she

requested	 entry	 to	 the	 ODEC.	 Once	 the	 two	 of	 them	were	 closed	 up
together	inside	of	ODEC	#4,	we	lose	the	thread	of	the	story,	since	our
only	witness	 is	 Nadja,	 and	 it	 appears	 that	 Rachel	 employed	magical
techniques	 of	 some	 sort	 to	 cloud	 her	 judgment	 and	 induce	 her	 to
Home	 Rachel	 back	 to	 1203	 Constantinople.	 Nadja’s	 account	 of	 what
happened	 is	 fuzzy	 and	 clearly	 unreliable.	 Since	 Homing	 is	 a	 much
easier	spell	than	Sending,	apparently	Nadja,	with	Rachel’s	assistance,
was	able	to	accomplish	it.
We	will	likely	never	have	the	complete	story	of	what	Rachel	did	upon

returning	to	her	home	DTAP.	The	historical	record	is,	at	the	moment,
clouded	 by	GLAAMR	and	 impossible	 to	make	 sense	 of.	 LTC	Lyons	 is
expected	to	be	Homed	three	days	from	now	and	may	be	able	to	supply
some	further	details.
Dr.	 Blevins	 was	 examined	 by	 Dr.	 Srinavasan	 in-house	 and



discharged	with	 oral	 and	 topical	medications	 to	 control	 swelling	and
discomfort	 from	 the	 pepper	 spray.	 No	 permanent	 injuries	 are
anticipated.
Nadja	has	been	placed	on	administrative	leave	pending	the	outcome

of	a	more	formal	investigation.
The	 bio-containment	 zone	 is	 still	 being	 scrubbed	 down	 as	 per

protocol	and	 is	expected	 to	be	back	 in	working	order	 in	 time	for	LTC
Lyons’s	scheduled	return.

AFTER	ACTION	REPORT

DEBRIEFER:	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes
DOER:	LTC	Tristan	Lyons
THEATER:	Constantinople
OPERATION:	Galata
DEDE:	Relic	relocation
DTAP:	Pera,	Constantinople,	July	1203
STRAND:	Fourth	and	last	repetition	of	this	DEDE

(Note	to	readers:	Refer	to	the	reports	on	the	first	three	repetitions	of	this	DEDE
for	 general	 background.	 The	 specific	 DEDE	 was	 to	 enter	 the	 abandoned
battlefield	tent	of	the	Byzantine	Emperor,	secure	a	religious	relic	of	importance
to	Orthodox	Christians,	and	move	it	to	a	different	tent	so	that	it	would	be	found
by	the	Bishop	of	Halberstadt.	—MS)

As	I	[Lyons]	knew	going	into	this,	the	battle	for	Galata	Tower	took	place	over
the	course	of	two	days,	and	my	DEDE	had	to	be	accomplished	the	first	day.	But
I	had	to	remain	until	the	end	of	the	second	day	before	I	could	connect	with	our
KCW	to	Home	me.

This	was	my	fourth	Strand	prosecuting	this	DEDE,	so	at	this	point	I	knew,	or
thought	I	knew,	what	to	expect.

I’m	 passing	 as	 a	 member	 of	 the	 Varangian	 Guard.	 I’ve	 attained	 enough
seniority	 and	 respect	 by	 this	 point	 that	 I’m	working	 as	 part	 of	 the	 Emperor’s
personal	 guard.	 In	 peacetime	 that	 means	 standing	 near	 him	 when	 he	 goes	 to
church	or	whatever,	but	in	wartime	it	means	being	near	him	on	the	battlefield.

The	battle	strategy	for	both	sides	of	this	conflict	is	all	over	the	wiki,	so	I	don’t



need	to	explain	that.	The	Emperor’s	so-called	navy	is	in	appalling	shape,	it’s	just
a	handful	of	 ships	 literally	rotting	 in	the	harbor,	and	the	Emperor’s	army	is	an
embarrassing	joke	except	for	the	Varangian	Guard.

We	 were	 camped	 out	 on	 the	 steep	 hillside	 that’s	 north	 across	 the	 Golden
Horn	from	the	old	walled	city.

[The	Golden	Horn	is	the	inlet	that	serves	as	the	city’s	harbor.	—Mel]
Across	the	Bosporus	from	us,	so	on	the	Asian	side,	is	where	the	Crusaders	had

been	 camped	 since	 they	 arrived	 a	 few	 weeks	 earlier.	 The	 Emperor	 had	 sent
emissaries	 over	 there	 to	 them,	 with	 bribes	 and	 threats,	 telling	 them,	 “I’m	 the
Emperor,	why	are	you	trying	to	replace	me	with	this	punk	kid	nobody	wants?”
and	the	Crusaders’	response	had	been,	“Actually,	no,	we’ve	got	the	real	king	right
here	in	our	pocket,	and	we’re	putting	him	on	your	throne.”	They	didn’t	want	to
attack	the	city,	they	just	wanted	to	get	rid	of	the	“tyrant.”

There’s	 two	notable	 things	about	 the	hillside	where	we	are	camped	with	 the
Emperor.	First,	there’s	Galata	Tower,	which	is	a	huge	stand-alone	structure	right
at	 the	 top	of	 the	hill.	 It’s	one	of	 the	best-sited	strategic	defenses	 I’ve	ever	 seen.
Archers	 can	 shoot	 at	 anyone	 approaching	 from	 the	 Bosporus,	 or	 the	 Golden
Horn,	or	even	the	Sea	of	Marmara,	or	from	inland.	The	single	most	important
thing	they’re	guarding	 is	 the	chain	that	goes	across	 the	entrance	 to	 the	Golden
Horn.	That	inlet	is	so	deep	and	narrow	that	it	feels	like	a	river	mouth,	more	than
a	harbor.	The	chain	is	enormous,	it’s	held	up	by	a	series	of	barges,	and	the	only
way	 to	 undo	 the	 chain	 is	 through	 a	mechanism	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 hill	 where
Galata	is.	So	the	archers	in	Galata	Tower,	more	than	anything	else,	are	there	to
keep	 invaders	 away	 from	 the	 mechanism	 that	 releases	 the	 chain.	 That’s	 the
defensive	 mantra	 of	 Constantinople:	 nobody	 can	 scale	 the	 walls,	 nobody	 can
break	 the	 chain,	 so	what	matters	 is,	don’t	 let	 anyone	near	 the	mechanism	 that
releases	the	chain.	If	you’re	invading,	if	you	want	to	get	near	the	mechanism,	you
first	have	to	take	Galata	Tower.	Which	is	pretty	much	untakeable.

The	other	 thing	of	note	on	 the	hill	 is	Pera,	 the	 Jewish	neighborhood.	On	a
map,	you	could	draw	a	line	east	from	Galata	Tower	across	the	Bosporus	to	the
Asian	shore,	where	the	Crusader	army	was	attacking	from.	You	could	also	draw	a
line	 south	 from	 Galata	 Tower	 that	 would	 cross	 Pera,	 then	 cross	 the	 Golden
Horn	to	the	old	city.	We	were	camped	outside	the	tower,	close	to	Pera.

That	explains	why	the	Emperor	and	his	army	were	in	tents—knowing	that	the
Crusader	 attack	 was	 going	 to	 be	 directed	 against	 the	 Galata	 Tower,	 they	 had
been	deployed	on	the	north	side	of	the	Golden	Horn	to	protect	it.

On	 the	morning	of	 July	 fifth,	 it’s	 no	 secret	 that	 the	Crusaders	 are	 about	 to



attack.	We—the	Emperor’s	army—are	fully	geared	up,	the	tower	full	of	archers.
On	the	hillside	going	down	to	the	Bosporus	are	thousands	of	Byzantine	soldiers
fully	 armed	 and	 ready	 for	 the	 Crusaders	 to	 attack.	 None	 of	 them	 were	 really
worried,	because	when	you’re	looking	at	that	intense	Bosporus	current,	it	seems
obvious	that	the	Crusaders	could	not	cut	directly	across	in	those	particular	ships
—those	ships	weren’t	built	for	the	Bosporus,	they	were	built	for	Alexandria,	they
were	never	supposed	to	be	anywhere	near	Constantinople.	Even	if	they	could	get
across,	 they	 would	 have	 to	 anchor	 in	 that	 current,	 which	would	 be	 extremely
challenging,	 and	 then	disembark	without	 first	being	picked	off	by	our	 archers.
That	was	not	going	to	happen.	They	were	sailing	into	their	own	destruction.	Of
course,	I	knew	better,	but	I	kept	my	mouth	shut	and	just	let	it	all	happen.

So	 the	 Crusader	 ships	 approach	 us.	 The	 Emperor	 gives	 the	 order	 for	 my
contingent	of	VGs	to	reinforce	the	archers	up	in	the	Galata	Tower.	By	the	time	I
and	my	guys	are	up	to	where	we	have	a	decent	vantage	point,	the	archers	in	the
tower	 are	 barraging	 the	 ships	with	 fire-arrows,	 regular	 arrows,	 stones,	we’re	 so
sure	 we’re	 going	 to	 annihilate	 them	 and	 litter	 the	 Bosporus	 with	 their	 shit-
stained	armor.

But	 then	 something	happened:	 the	 sides	of	 the	Crusaders’	 ships	broke	open
and	 thousands	of	knights	on	horseback	came	 leaping	out	of	 the	holds,	 straight
into	the	water.	In	that	moment	of	the	Byzantines’	amazement,	the	archers	on	the
boats	began	to	shoot	at	us.	After	loosing	one	flight	of	arrows,	they	jumped	into
the	water,	 ahead	of	 the	horses,	with	 their	bows	 and	quivers	held	up	over	 their
heads,	and	as	soon	as	they	were	in	water	shallow	enough	to	keep	their	bowstrings
dry,	they	began	to	shoot	up	the	hillside.	In	full	chain	mail	and	some	plate	armor.
As	I	said,	this	was	my	fourth	Strand	so	I’d	already	seen	it	three	times,	but	it	was
an	 astounding	 thing	 to	watch.	Makes	 footage	 of	 the	Normandy	 landings	 look
like	nothing	special.

Then	 the	 same	 thing	 happened	 that	 had	 happened	 on	 every	 Strand:	 the
Emperor	 turned	and	 fled,	and	most	of	his	army	 fled	with	him.	There	wasn’t	a
battle,	 it	was	 just	 them	getting	chased	by	 the	Crusaders	 along	 the	 shore	of	 the
Golden	Horn,	 about	 a	mile	 inland,	where	 there	was	 a	 bridge	 across	 the	water
that	the	Emperor’s	army	crossed	over	and	then	burned	behind	them.

The	only	part	of	the	Emperor’s	army	that	didn’t	flee	was	the	tower	garrison,
which	was	largely	Varangian	Guards	but	also	partially	local	conscripts.	I	was	still
there.	The	whole	hillside,	 including	 the	 imperial	 camp,	was	 emptied.	 I	knew	I
had	about	 an	hour	 and	a	half	before	 the	Crusaders	 returned.	So	 I	 fulfilled	my
DEDE—went	into	the	Emperor’s	abandoned	tent,	got	the	relic,	put	it	into	the



other	tent	so	that	it	would	be	found	by	somebody	we	need	it	to	be	found	by.	So
the	DEDE	was	accomplished	without	incident	just	as	on	the	other	Strands.

Now	 I	 just	had	 to	wait	 to	 rendezvous	with	 a	KCW,	 and	 since	 I	 know	how
things	pan	out,	 I	 know	 there	will	 be	 a	KCW	 in	 the	Crusaders’	 army	who	 can
Send	me	back	tomorrow.	That’s	what	I	had	done	the	 first	 three	Strands.	I	 just
have	 to	 survive	 through	 the	 rest	 of	 what’s	 to	 come,	 without	 accidentally
telegraphing	anything	to	any	of	my	cohort.

So	I	re-enter	the	tower.	Approximately	one	hour	later,	as	I	knew,	the	Crusader
army	comes	back	and	tries	to	get	at	the	mechanism	releasing	the	chain,	but	we
have	shitloads	of	arrows	and,	more	important,	fire-arrows.	More	specifically,	fire-
arrows	made	with	Greek	fire,	which	burns	more	when	it	touches	water,	so	we’re
making	 them	weep	 down	 by	 the	 casing	 to	 the	 chain-release.	 Their	 squires	 are
holding	 shields	over	 their	heads	 to	protect	 them,	with	water-soaked	hides	over
them,	and	we’re	lighting	the	fucking	shields	on	fire.

Their	 leader,	 the	Marquis,	 finally	calls	 them	off.	They	pillage	 the	Emperor’s
camp	 (and	 the	 right	 guy	 finds	 the	 relic	 I	moved,	 so	my	DEDE	 is	 officially	 a
success	 despite	 what	 happened	 next)	 and	 spend	 the	 afternoon	 and	 evening
hollering	up	to	us	in	every	language	they	can	think	of,	trying	to	bribe	us	to	just
give	up	the	tower.	Obviously	we	don’t.	So	eventually	they	get	drunk	and	squat	in
the	Emperor’s	camp	for	the	night,	celebrating.	They	know	there’s	only	a	couple
dozen	of	us	in	the	tower,	and	once	they	take	us	down,	then	they’ll	have	Galata,
which	means	 they’ll	 get	 into	 the	harbor,	which	means	 they’ll	 get	 into	 the	city.
They	know	tomorrow	is	theirs.

But	what	they	don’t	know	is	that	all	through	the	night,	what	looks	like	regular
ferry	 traffic	 across	 the	harbor	 is	 actually	 thousands	of	 armed	 soldiers,	disguised
like	 ragmen	 and	 coal	 sellers	 and	 Jews	 and	 fishermen,	 sneaking	 across	 from	 the
walled	city,	up	the	hillside	by	Pera	and	into	the	tower.	By	dawn	we	are	all	packed
in	like	anchovies.	It’s	a	miracle	nobody	accidentally	castrates	anyone	else,	and	the
stench	of	all	those	bodies	is	so	intense,	it’s	almost	psychotropic.

The	 Crusaders	 think	 there’s	 approximately	 thirty	 soldiers	 inside,	 when	 it’s
now	nearly	a	hundred	times	that.	In	the	morning,	we	wait	for	the	moment	when
the	 Crusader	 knights	 are	 getting	 geared	 up	 with	 their	 squires’	 help,	 and	 the
grooms	 are	 saddling	 the	 horses—they	 all	 do	 it	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 which	 is	 ill-
considered,	because	right	at	this	moment,	when	they	are	all	vulnerable,	we	hurl
open	 the	 gates	 of	 the	 tower	 and	 a	 thousand	 soldiers	 burst	 out	 and	 rush	 the
Crusaders,	 swords	 and	 axes	 swinging,	 spears	 flying—and	 at	 the	 same	 time,
thousands	 more	 are	 shooting	 fire-arrows	 down	 the	 slope	 at	 everyone	 on	 the



ships,	who	thought	they	weren’t	even	in	the	game	today.	We	had	a	catapult	on
the	roof	of	the	tower	that	hurled	boulders	down	into	the	Bosporus—they	didn’t
hit	any	of	the	ships	but	they	made	waves	big	enough	to	capsize	the	smaller	ones.
The	whole	Crusader	army	was	almost	literally	caught	with	its	pants	down.

Half	 of	 the	Crusaders	 just	 fled	because	 they	were	unarmed,	 or	because	 they
were	 servants	 whose	 pay	 grade	 didn’t	 include	 armed	 combat.	 They	 scattered
immediately	into	the	woods	beyond	the	camp.	Meanwhile	there	are	hundreds	of
thousands	of	citizens	of	Constantinople	sitting	on	the	walls	of	the	city,	watching
this	 from	 across	 the	 Golden	 Horn	 like	 it’s	 reality	 TV.	 Most	 of	 them	 don’t
actually	 care	who	wins	because	 they	understand	 it’s	 just	 about	who	 sits	on	 the
throne,	they	know	the	Crusaders	aren’t	here	to	try	to	actually	harm	the	city	itself.
All	 the	potential	 emperors	 are	 assholes,	 and	 they’re	 all	 related	 to	 each	other,	 it
hardly	 matters	 which	 one	 wins.	 So	 the	 citizens	 are	 literally	 picnicking	 and
placing	bets	on	who	wins	the	day.

Finally	 the	Crusader	knights	were	mounted,	and	their	 foot	 soldiers	got	 their
heads	together	enough	to	finish	armoring	and	grab	their	weapons,	and	we	finally
had	full	engagement.	We	still	had	the	advantage	of	topography,	because	we	were
coming	 from	 the	 top	 of	 the	 hill	 and	 they	 were	 down	 the	 slope.	 Two	 Greek
soldiers	ran	right	up	to	the	Crusader	army,	grabbed	a	lord,	slashed	him	across	the
face,	and	began	to	drag	him	back	toward	the	tower,	but	one	of	his	knights	went
after	 him	 and	 hacked	 the	 heads	 off	 both	 of	 the	Greeks,	 and	 brought	 the	 lord
back	 to	 the	 safety	of	 the	 crusading	 army.	The	whole	 thing	happened	 in	 about
thirty	seconds.

That	 shifted	 everything—suddenly	 the	 Crusaders	 rose	 to	 the	 occasion,
cheering	and	catcalling,	and	Christ,	talk	about	a	counterattack.	None	of	our	men
had	horses,	and	most	of	 them	were	conscripted—they	didn’t	want	 to	be	 there,
they	had	essentially	no	military	training.	So	as	soon	as	things	got	really	heated,
they	deserted	their	stations.	Some	of	them	ran	down	to	the	harbor	chain	to	try	to
pull	 themselves	across	 the	Golden	Horn	on	 it—it	could	 take	 the	weight,	 those
links	were	nearly	as	big	as	I	am—but	the	Crusader	archers	picked	them	off	easily.
Remember,	there’s	a	quarter	of	a	million	people	watching	this	for	their	morning
entertainment.	It	was	surreal.

Abruptly,	there’s	only	a	couple	hundred	of	us	left,	and	we	start	to	realize	(of
course,	 I	knew	this	all	along)	 that	we	better	close	 the	gates	of	 the	 tower	before
the	Crusaders	come	charging	in.

To	be	more	precise,	they	have	to	close	the	gates;	I	have	to	get	my	butt	out	the
gates	and	away	from	there.	As	much	as	it	insults	my	military	instinct,	I	can	only



meet	my	KCW	if	I	get	away	from	the	tower,	because	all	the	Varangians	in	that
tower	are	going	down.	So—just	like	the	three	times	before—I	push	my	way	out
during	that	moment	of	confusion,	when	the	Varangians	and	Greeks	are	trying	to
close	 the	 gates	while	 the	Crusaders	 are	 trying	 to	 force	 them	 to	 stay	 open.	 I’m
wearing	Varangian	lamellar	armor,	relatively	lightweight,	so	I	have	more	mobility
than	 the	Crusaders	whose	 ranks	 I	 have	 to	 break	 through.	 I	 jab	 at	 a	 couple	 of
armpits	and	groins	to	encourage	bodies	to	get	out	of	my	way,	but	my	goal	isn’t
to	terminate	anyone,	it’s	just	to	get	out	of	there.	I	know	how	it	ends.	My	job	is
not	to	stick	around	for	it.	It’s	hard	because	I	know	some	of	those	men	pretty	well
now	and	leaving	them	to	their	doom	while	I	slip	away	to	find	a	witch	to	Send
me	home	 .	 .	 .	we	 should	consider	getting	counselors	 to	help	 soldiers	deal	with
that,	it	could	fester	into	PTSD.

The	only	other	Varangian	 I	 see	 fleeing	 the	 tower	 is	Magnus.	He	 follows	me
out	of	the	place.	He’s	got	his	eye	on	me.	I	think	he’s	expecting	me	to	grab	a	boat
oar	and	single-handedly	mow	down	a	few	hundred	armed	knights	or	something.
But	in	all	of	the	confusion	it’s	easy	enough	for	me	to	elude	him.

So	I	get	out,	away	from	the	tower,	and	I	watch.	I	watch	the	Crusaders	barely
manage	to	pry	the	gates	back	open,	and	I	watch	them	stream	into	the	tower,	and
I	hear	the	carnage	inside,	and	I	know	what	it	means.

That’s	when	it	happened.
I	knew	what	was	supposed	to	happen	next.	The	Crusaders	were	supposed	to	go

down	and	open	up	 the	casing	 for	 the	chain	mechanism,	 release	 the	chain,	 and
sail	into	the	harbor,	to	the	astonished	horror	of	their	quarter	million	spectators.
Then	 they	 send	 across	 the	Bosporus	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 their	 camp—especially	 the
women	and	the	cooks.	There’s	a	KCW	in	the	Crusader	army,	and	she’s	supposed
to	Send	me	back	here.	Meanwhile	the	Jews	of	Pera	are	frantically	packing	their
bags	 and	 hightailing	 it	 out	 of	 town	 to	 start	 the	 well-documented	 Byzantine
Diaspora.	All	of	that	is	what	happened	three	Strands	in	a	row.

But	 this	 time	 something	happens	 that	has	never	happened	before:	 there	 is	 a
massive	flash	of	light	and	an	explosion	on	the	harbor	side	of	the	hill,	right	exactly
where	 Pera	 is.	 The	 entire	 hillside—all	 of	 Pera,	 which	 was	 built	 of	 stone—is
flaming.	 This	 has	 never	 happened	 before,	 I	 have	 no	 idea	 why	 it’s	 happening,
obviously	 at	 the	 time	 I	 didn’t	 know	 that	Rachel	 had	 come	 back	 to	 1203	 and
meddled	by	 telling	people	what	was	coming.	 I	 realized	 from	the	1601	London
DTAP	that	 this	has	got	 to	be	Diachronic	Shear	and	I	knew	I	had	to	get	as	 far
away	as	possible.	So	I	run	toward	the	woods	and	wait	to	see	what	happens	when
all	the	fire	and	explosions	die	down.	That	happens	very	fast,	actually—just	 like



in	London.
I	come	back	toward	the	tower	for	reconnaissance,	and	I	see	at	once	that	two

things	are	different	from	how	they’ve	always	been.	First,	because	of	the	explosion
and	 fire	 and	 all	 that	 hell	 that	 broke	 loose,	 there’s	 no	way	 to	 release	 the	 chain
mechanism.	It’s	fused.	That	thing	is	never	going	to	open.	Ever.	And	just	as	I’m
thinking	about	what	a	massive	fuck-up	that	is—because	without	the	chain	being
lowered,	 the	 ships	 cannot	 get	 into	 the	 safety	 of	 the	 harbor,	 and	 then	 literally,
history	 cannot	move	 forward—and	 then	 the	 second	 thing	 I	 notice	 is	 that	 .	 .	 .
Pera	 is	 gone.	Gone.	Not	 even	 any	 foundation	 stones.	 It’s	 obliterated—a	black
charred	 spot,	 acres	 of	 it—on	 the	hillside,	 as	 if	 there	was	never	 anything	 there.
And	 that	 awful	 smell	 I	 remember	 from	 the	 Albigensian	DTAP,	 that	 noisome
smell	 of	 charred	 bones	 after	 an	 execution.	 The	 whole	 area,	 which	 had	 been
walled	 and	 locked,	 went	 up	 so	 fast	 that	 nobody	 there	 had	 time	 to	 escape.
Horrible.

A	 quarter	 hour	 later,	 while	 half	 the	 army	 is	 still	 walking	 around	 in	 a	 daze,
something	incredible	happened:	the	Eagle,	 the	 largest	and	heaviest	 iron-prowed
Venetian	 ship,	 rammed	 into	 the	 harbor	 chain	 and	 broke	 it.	 They	 broke	 the
harbor	 chain	 of	 Constantinople!	 That’s	 not	 how	 it	 was	 supposed	 to	 happen.
Invaders	 tried	 for	 five	 hundred	 years	 to	 break	 the	 chains	 guarding	 the	Golden
Horn.	 Every	 generation	 of	 that	 chain	 was	 unbreakable.	 Something	 about	 the
Diachronic	Shear	must	have	had	a	molecular	effect	on	the	metal	and	weakened
the	chain.	 I	 think	 the	multiverse	 required	 the	Crusaders	 to	get	 into	 the	harbor
and	so	made	sure	 it	happened,	even	 if	 they	couldn’t	do	 it	 the	way	they	did	on
every	other	Strand.

Anyhow—neither	side	lost	many	men	to	the	Shear,	but	it	freaked	the	hell	out
of	everyone.	Even	being	aware	of	the	Shear,	I’m	already	feeling	confused	about
what	 happened,	 so	 I’m	 sure	 all	 kinds	 of	 crazy	 things	 will	 end	 up	 getting	 said
about	it.	I’m	willing	to	bet	everyone	will	say	that	Pera	must	have	been	made	of
wood	to	go	up	in	flames	like	that,	and	the	flames	must	have	come	from	the	fire-
arrows—something	 like	 that,	even	though	I	know	Pera	was	made	of	 stone	and
tile,	 and	 I	 also	 know	 the	 angle	 the	 fire-arrows	 came	 from	 would	 never	 have
landed	in	Pera	anyhow.	So	lots	of	weird	crap	is	going	to	get	said.

In	 conclusion,	 it	 appears	 Rachel	 was	 reunited	 with	 her	 family	 and	 warned
them.	This	changed	everything.

Clearly	 Rachel’s	 information	 moved	 quickly	 out	 of	 the	 Jewish	 settlement.
There	is	no	way	we	will	ever	know	what	Rachel	said,	or	to	whom,	or	what	that
person	attempted	to	do	with	the	information.	We	know	only	that	the	multiverse



could	not	bear	such	a	change	of	course,	and	eliminated	its	possibility.

Post	by	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes
on	“All-DODO”	ODIN	channel

DAY	1812

All,
Mortimer	has	requested	that	everyone	please	stop	checking	the	wiki

for	updates	on	Constantinople,	it’s	slowing	the	servers	down	and	it	is	a
waste	of	time	until	 the	GLAAMR	dissipates.	Lieutenant	Colonel	Lyons
and	 I	believe	that	over	 the	next	 few	days,	history	will	 literally	rewrite
itself,	as	the	oral	accounts	of	 that	day’s	Diachronic	Shear	make	their
way	 into	written	 testimonials	 and	 then	 eventually	 history	 books,	 and
finally	the	Internet.
Rachel	 bat	 Avraham	 almost	 certainly	 died	 in	 the	 Shear.	 Although

she	died	in	defiance	of	our	regulations,	it	is	important	to	be	sensitive	to
the	grief	of	the	many	DODO	workers—especially	her	fellow	MUONs—
who	 had	 the	 fortune	 and	 pleasure	 to	 have	 worked	 with	 her	 for	 the
better	part	of	three	years.

Respectfully	submitted,
Melisande	Stokes

Exchange	of	posts	by	LTG	Octavian	K.	Frink,
Dr.	Constantine	Rudge,	and	Dr.	Roger

Blevins



on	private	ODIN	channel
DAYS	1810–1813	(MID-JULY,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	LTG	Octavian	K.	Frink:
Blev,	(cc	Rudge):
I’ve	 been	 following	 the	 traffic	 on	 this	 system	 as	 my	 schedule

permits.	 Relieved	 to	 hear	 LTC	 Lyons	 made	 it	 back	 in	 one	 piece.
Somewhat	 confused	 otherwise.	 He	 accomplished	 the	 mission	 on	 all
four	Strands?	So,	how	do	we	know	whether	it	worked?

Reply	from	Dr.	Roger	Blevins:
Okie,	 that	 is	 the	 fundamental	 question	 of	 all	 diachronic	 operations—
how	can	we	know	 the	 success	 or	 failure	 of	 a	 campaign	 such	 as	 this
one,	where	the	objective	is	to	shift	national	borders	a	few	kilometers,
or	even	a	few	meters,	to	one	direction	or	the	other?
In	the	present	case,	as	you	know,	what	we	are	trying	to	achieve	is	to

pry	Crimea	 loose	 from	 the	Russians	and	get	 it	back	 into	 the	 full	and
undisputed	possession	of	Ukraine,	all	without	firing	a	shot	or	engaging
in	military	operations	as	that	term	is	normally	understood.
If	 the	 project	 succeeds,	 then	 our	 present-day	 reality	 changes;	 we

wake	up	tomorrow	and	Ukraine	owns	the	Crimea	free	and	clear.	Not
only	that,	but	history	will	have	changed	as	well.	We’ll	have	no	memory
and	no	records	of	Russia	ever	having	marched	into	Crimea	in	2014.	So
how	do	we	know	that	anything	even	happened?
The	answer	is	that	the	alteration	of	history	doesn’t	happen	in	a	flash;

it	 takes	 a	 little	 while	 to	 propagate	 through	 all	 of	 the	 Strands	 and
whatnot,	 and	 during	 that	 time	 there	 is	 this	 thing	 that	Dr.	 Oda	 terms
GLAAMR	 (Galvanic	 Liminal	 Aura	 Antecedent	 to	 Manifold	 Rift),	 which
even	non-magical	people	can	sense	if	it’s	strong	enough.

From	Dr.	Constantine	Rudge:
Just	 jumping	 in	 here	 with	 a	 note	 that	 DODO’s	 R&D	 division	 has
invented	 ways	 of	 measuring	 GLAAMR.	 That’s	 why	 we	 had	 three	 spy
planes	 in	 last	 year’s	 budget;	 we	 mounted	 the	 GLAAMR	 detection
systems	 in	 their	 bellies,	 and	 even	 now	 they	 are	 flying	 routes	 over
Ukraine	gathering	data.

From	LTG	Frink:



Yes,	 I	 remember	 the	 spy	 planes	now,	 and	 the	 ruckus	 they	 caused	 in
the	budget	hearing.	Glad	to	know	they	are	getting	some	use.
Why	can’t	we	just	draw	a	map	or	something,	and	store	it,	and	then

compare	it	to	a	current	map	a	few	days	later?	I	know	you’re	going	to
tell	me	it	would	change	and	there	would	be	GLAAMR,	but	 is	there	no
way	to	just	store	a	document	in	such	a	way	that	it	wouldn’t	change?

From	Dr.	Blevins:
That	 is	being	worked	on	too.	Apparently	 if	 the	map	were	stored	in	an
ODEC,	your	idea	might	work.	But	because	space	in	ODECs	is	so	scarce
and	expensive	we	have	done	very	little	of	this.

From	LTG	Frink:
Seems	to	me	we	could	get	a	hell	of	a	lot	of	thumb	drives	into	an	ATTO.
Give	me	a	sitrep	on	those.
Oh,	and	I	noticed	that	when	Rachel	bat	Avraham	flew	the	coop,	she

used	mind	control	on	the	witch	who	Homed	her.	Obviously	psy-ops	is	a
common	ability	among	the	historical	witches.

From	Dr.	Rudge:
Just	 a	 gentle	 reminder,	 General	 Frink,	 that	 we	 try	 to	 avoid	 using
loaded	terms	such	as	“mind	control.”

From	LTG	Frink:
Connie,	 you	 can	 call	 it	 whatever	 you	 want,	 psy-ops	 has	 got	 to	 be
simpler	than	what	we	just	went	through	to	get	Crimea	back.

From	Dr.	Rudge:
Yes,	General	Frink,	Crimea	is	part	of	the	Ukraine	today.	You	may	share
with	me	 a	 vague	memory,	 rapidly	 fading,	 of	 a	 Russian	 invasion	 that
never	happened.	As	if	we	dreamed	it,	and	the	memory	of	the	dream	is
being	dispelled	by	the	more	concrete	realities	of	the	new	day.
Without	disputing	your	opinion	 that	 the	operation	was	anything	but

simple,	 I’ll	 point	 out	 that	 to	 achieve	 the	 same	 result	 through
conventional	 military	 operations	 would	 have	 been	 infinitely	 more
complex	and	risky.

From	LTG	Frink:



I’ll	 give	 you	 complex.	 Risky	 I’m	 less	 sure	 of.	 Hard	 to	 know	what	 the
real	risks	are.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
To	 answer	 a	 question	 earlier	 in	 this	 “thread,”	 the	 first	 ATTO	 is
proceeding	through	its	testing	routines	more	or	less	on	schedule,	but
it	 is	 a	 device	 of	many	 subsystems	 and	 there	 are	 endless	 delays	 and
complications	around	procuring	special	parts,	debugging	“code,”	and
so	on.	We	are	looking	at	bringing	Gráinne	forward	in	mid-September,
once	 we’re	 certain	 the	 device	 works.	 In	 the	 meantime	 we	 could
certainly	 try	 some	 experiments	with	 thumb	 drives	 or	 other	 forms	 of
document	storage,	as	you	suggest.
In	 the	 meantime,	 Okie,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 draw	 your	 attention	 to	 a

question	we	were	kicking	around	earlier,	namely	what	 to	do	with	 the
surplus	 personnel	 in	 LTC	 Lyons’s	 department—including	 LTC	 Lyons
himself—now	that	the	big	push	in	the	Constantinople	Theater	is	over.
Do	we	wish	to	throw	them	into	another	colossal	operation,	or	sit	back
and	assess?

From	LTG	Frink:
Will	give	you	a	call	in	five,	Blev.

FROM	LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK
TO	ALL	DODO	DEPARTMENT	HEADS

DAY	1825	(LATE	JULY,	YEAR	5)

First	of	all,	I	would	like	to	congratulate	all	DODO	personnel	for	the
successful	 conclusion	 of	 operations	 in	 the	 Constantinople	 Theater.
That	 is	 not	 to	 gloss	 over	 the	 tragic	 story	 of	 the	 late	 Rachel	 bat
Avraham,	however,	 to	the	best	of	our	ability	to	assess	 these	things,	 it
would	appear	that	DODO	was	able	to	“undo”	a	Russian	takeover	of
the	Crimea	that,	on	our	Strand,	never	successfully	happened.	To	have
achieved	a	similar	result	using	conventional	Trapezoid-style	operations



would	 have	 been	 immensely	 costly	 in	 both	 dollars	 and	 blood	 and
would	have	raised	the	possibility	of	opening	a	wider	war.

One	of	 the	measures	of	a	successful	 team	is	 the	ability	 to	adapt	to
unexpected	complications	that	inevitably	crop	up	during	the	course	of
a	complex	operation—the	“fog	of	war,”	as	it	were.	Our	glitch	for	this
mission	 was	 the	 unexpected	 advent	 of	 “St.	 Tristan	 of	 Dintagel”	 as
blowback	 from	 earlier	 operations	 in	Normandy.	While	 this	made	 it
seem	 touch	 and	 go	 for	 a	 short	 time,	 the	 situation	 seems	 to	 have
resolved	without	further	repercussions.

Before	 many	 of	 you	 depart	 for	 well-deserved	 vacations	 during
August,	 I	wanted	 to	 supply	 an	 idea	of	 top-level	direction	during	 the
rest	of	this	year,	and	the	year	following.	The	Constantinople	Theater
has	 proved	 that	 with	 the	 help	 of	 the	 Chronotron	 we	 can	 conduct
large-scale	 operations	 that	 will	 reshape	 history	 to	 our	 advantage
without	the	expense	and	bloodshed	of	conventional	warfare.	As	you	all
know,	DODO	is	also	conducting	 significant	operations	 in	 five	other
theaters	at	this	time.	All	of	these	are	scheduled	to	wind	down	over	the
course	of	 the	 autumn	and	early	winter.	Our	general	plan	 is	 to	 stand
down,	stand	back,	and	appraise	the	results	and	lessons	learned	before
plunging	into	additional	theater-scale	operations.

With	that,	I	wish	you	all	a	restful	August.
Sincerely,
Lieutenant	General	Octavian	K.	Frink

Post	by	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes	to	LTC	Tristan
Lyons

on	private	ODIN	channel
DAY	1825

I	didn’t	think	Frink	could	be	that	smooth.

Reply	from	LTC	Lyons:
Don’t	go	there,	Stokes.



From	Dr.	Stokes:
No,	seriously,	that	was	the	nicest	“fuck	you”	letter	ever.

From	LTC	Lyons:
He’s	a	general.	He	fights	wars.	When	the	war’s	over,	he	stops	fighting
and	puts	his	army	to	work	training	to	fight	the	next	war.	That’s	all	this
is.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Hmm,	 I	 think	 being	 turned	 into	 a	 saint	 may	 have	 affected	 your
judgment.

From	LTC	Lyons:
So	you’re	going	to	be	the	little	devil	on	my	shoulder?

From	Dr.	Stokes:
:)

From	LTC	Lyons:
I’m	outta	here.	Time	for	some	R&R.	See	you	in	three	weeks.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Where	you	going	again?

From	LTC	Lyons:
Probably	shouldn’t	divulge	this,	but	I’m	going	to	Normandy.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Collinet?

From	LTC	Lyons:
You	 got	 it.	 It’s	 a	 nice	 place	 now.	 There’s	 a	 B&B	 practically	 right	 on
Thyra’s	homesite.	Going	to	go	get	drunk	on	cider	and	light	a	candle	at
the	chapel	of	St.	Tristan.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Light	one	for	me.

From	LTC	Lyons:



Roger	wilco.

LETTER	FROM

GRÁINNE	to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
A	Wednesday	of	Late-Harvest,	1602

Auspiciousness	and	prosperity	to	you,	milady!
So	at	last,	the	time	’tis	for	me	to	reveal	my	plan	to	you	in	full.	As	good	as	all

these	fellas	have	been	to	me	both	in	London	and	in	Antwerp,	there’s	naught	of
use	 that	 comes	 of	 my	 remaining	 a	 spy	 for	 Your	 Grace	 when	 I’ve	 lost	 the
chance	to	dawdle	around	Whitehall,	and	it’s	all	these	natural	philosophers	and
bloody	intellectuals	I’ve	got	around	me.	And	the	Fuggers,	of	course,	but	they
at	least	are	clear-eyed,	so	they	are,	about	how	to	get	things	done	in	this	world.	I
know	Your	Grace	grows	weary	of	 the	world,	 and	 sorrowful	 I	 am	 to	 think	of
your	moving	past	us	to	the	realms	beyond.	I’ve	no	premonition	at	all	of	what
shall	 come	 of	 Ireland	 once	 you’ve	 left	 us,	 and	 I	 fear	 the	 English	 will	 renew
their	 bloody	 conquering	 schemes,	 especially	 with	 the	 urging	 of	 Sir	 Francis
feckin’	Bacon.

So	I	hope	it’s	understanding	that	Your	Grace	will	be,	when	I	tell	you	that
I’ve	vowed	to	myself	to	look	out	for	my	own	cause	now:	that	being	magic,	and
the	fate	of	my	sister	witches.	Sure	Tristan	Lyons	trusts	me	as	a	sibling,	and	yet
isn’t	he	always	refusing	to	tell	me	what	stymies	all	magical	abilities	in	future.
So	 I’m	 thinking	 the	 best	 way	 for	 me	 to	 be	 learning	 such	 a	 thing	 is	 to	 go
forward	 into	 the	 future	 myself,	 and	 be	 looking	 at	 things	 from	 his	 vantage
point.	Glad	I	am	to	hear	from	within	the	net-work	that	Tristan’s	bosses	think
to	 bring	 me	 forward	 anyhow,	 to	 help	 them	 with	 a	 thing	 they	 call	 an	 Atto,
which	 is	 apparently	 exactly	 like	 the	 horrid	 little	 chambers	 their	 witches	 be
spending	all	their	days	in,	only	not	quite	so	little,	and	on	wheels.	As	if	wheels
would	make	it	any	better.

I	intend	to	use	the	resources	of	Tristan’s	own	guild,	what	calls	itself	DODO,
not	to	restore	magic,	but	to	prevent	its	destruction	in	the	first	place,	as	soon	as	I
ken	what	is	the	cause	of	such	destruction.	A	brilliant	plan	this	is,	to	my	mind,



and	 so	obvious	 and	 straightforward,	 I	wonder	what	bollocks	 excuse	Tristan’s
superiors	have	for	not	be	doing	likewise.	I	know	not	how	long	a	stretch	of	time
there	is,	between	the	death	of	magic	and	its	rebirth,	but	that	stretch	is	surely	a
boil	on	the	face	of	history,	and	if	it	can	be	avoided,	then	it	is	my	duty	to	see
that	happen.	For	surely	the	destruction	of	magic	 is	not	only	bad	for	witches,
but	bad	for	Ireland	and	such	like	nations	that	are	relying	heavily	on	magic	for
self-defense	from	oppressors.

So	here	then	is	my	plan:	oft	enough	have	I	listened	to	Tristan	and	the	other
DOers	 lament	 of	 a	 certain	 officer	 whose	 name	 is	 Roger	 Blevins.	 This
gentleman,	although	little	enough	he	seems	to	do,	yet	has	more	power	than	all
the	 others	 put	 together—even	 including	Tristan	Lyons	himself!	Rose	 is	 of	 a
mind	with	me,	and	it’s	Sending	me	forward	in	time	she’s	agreed	to,	so	that	I
may	ingratiate	myself	with	this	Blevins—and	yourself	knows	well	enough	how
easily	I	may	ingratiate	myself	when	it’s	ingratiating	that	is	called	for!	And	then
won’t	I	be	in	a	position	to	be	learning	things	Tristan	wouldn’t	have	me	learn.
And	won’t	he	be	helpless	to	prevent	my	learning.

And	so,	my	dear	beloved	Pirate	Queen,	I	pledge	my	loyalty	to	you	forever,
and	to	the	Irish	cause,	but	it’s	off	to	the	future	I’m	now	bound.

Whether	 I	 be	near	 or	 far,	may	 I	 hear	 only	 good	 things	 of	 you,	My	Lady
Grace!

Yours	ever,	Gráinne	No	Longer	in	England

INCIDENT	REPORT

AUTHOR:	Esme	Overkleeft
SUBJECT:	Magnus
THEATER:	Northern	Europe,	Early	Medieval	(NEEM)
OPERATION:	Botanical	Infrastructure	Ops	for	Magical	Enhancement
(BIOME)
DTAP:	Collinet,	Normandy,	1205
FILED:	Day	1857	(late	August,	Year	5)



Having	 completed	 my	 DEDE	 in	 Normandy	 1205	 DTAP	 (Iris	 germanica
rhizome	grafting	along	La	Vie	River),	I	went	to	KCW	Imblen	of	Collinet	to	be
Sent	back	to	DODO	HQ.	I	have	worked	with	Imblen	on	several	occasions	and
my	Norman	French	allows	us	to	have	reasonably	fluent	conversations.	As	others
who	 have	 visited	 this	 DTAP	 can	 attest,	 she	 is	 a	 calm,	 unflappable,	 good-
humored	woman.

However,	on	this	occasion	she	was	on	edge.	Magnus	of	Normandy,	known	to
several	 of	 our	 DOers	 from	 DTAPs	 1202–3	 Constantinople,	 returned	 to	 his
home	village	 (some	50	km	 from	Collinet)	 after	many	years	 gone,	which	was	 a
cause	 of	 celebration.	 However,	 Magnus	 was	 excessively	 preoccupied	 with
querying	everyone	about	their	memory	of	a	local	song	or	folktale,	about	a	great
hero	 who	 had,	 several	 generations	 earlier,	 saved	 the	 village	 from	 attack	 by	 a
feuding	 tribe	 and	 later	 been	 canonized	 by	 the	 Church.	 The	 hero	 was	 named
Tristan	of	Dintagel,	 an	unremarkable	 enough	name—except	 that	Magnus	met
somebody	 named	 Tristan	 of	 Dintagel	 in	 Constantinople,	 160	 years	 after	 the
events	of	the	story.

Magnus	 called	 the	 village	 elders	 into	 council	 and	 described	 this	 remarkable
coincidence	to	them.	They	did	not	share	his	obsessive	curiosity.	He	then	traveled
to	Collinet	to	query	Imblen,	formally	seeking	her	advice	and	assistance	as	a	witch
to	make	sense	of	this.	He	was	excited	and	aggressive	and	supplied	many	details
about	Tristan’s	recent	activities	in	Constantinople,	making	it	obvious	that	he	had
observed	Tristan	closely	and	recruited	other	members	of	the	Varangian	Guard	to
keep	an	eye	on	him.

Imblen	 feels	 she	 said,	 “I	 can’t	 help	 you,”	 a	 little	 too	 quickly	 and	 firmly,
because	 he	 became	 even	 more	 intrigued,	 and	 declared	 that	 he	 would	 go	 to
Dintagel	directly	to	seek	the	(parish?	Church?	Hundreds?)	records	and	establish
if	 “his”	Tristan	was	a	descendant	of	 the	hero	 .	 .	 .	or	 if	 something	 stranger	was
happening.

For	 the	 record,	 this	 is	 the	 fourth	 Strand	 on	 which	 something	 like	 this	 has
happened.	 Each	 time,	 Imblen	 seems	 more	 shaken	 and	 Magnus	 appears	 more
clear-headed	and	determined.	This	time—given	what	he	understands	of	witches’
powers—he	hypothesized	directly	to	Imblen	that	given	Tristan’s	archaic	speech
patterns,	perhaps	another	witch	had	Sent	Tristan	forward	in	time,	and	if	so,	“he
would	hie	himself	back	to	Constantinople	to	learn	more	of	Tristan’s	doings,	in
case	there	could	be	profit	for	himself	made	from	it.”

Respectfully	submitted,
Esme	Overkleeft



Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff	on
“Anachron

Management”	ODIN	channel
DAYS	1862–1870	(EARLY	SEPTEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes:
Welcome	 back	 from	 vacation,	 everyone.	 I	 am	 assuming	 you	 have	 all
seen	Esme	Overkleeft’s	 incident	report.	 It	sounds	like	Magnus	knows
too	much.	Should	we	consider	bringing	him	forward?

Reply	from	Macy	Stoll:
Please	 keep	 in	 mind	 that	 the	 Anachron	 Management	 Team,	 which
bears	 the	brunt	 of	 looking	after	 all	 of	 these	people	who	are	brought
forward,	is	currently	operating	at	capacity.	Some	Anachrons	are	easier
to	handle	than	others.	If	this	Magnus	is	so	burning	with	curiosity	that
he	would	 traverse	 half	 the	 known	world	 to	 pursue	 this	matter,	 then
he’ll	cause	just	as	much	trouble	for	us	here	if	we	bring	him	forward.

From	LTC	Tristan	Lyons:
Respectfully,	Macy,	if	we	bring	him	forward	we	will	at	least	have	some
oversight	 re:	his	 troublemaking.	 If	 that	 requires	additional	 resources
for	 the	 Anachron	 Management	 Team,	 then	 there	 are	 channels	 for
requesting	same.

From	Dr.	Roger	Blevins:
Magnus’s	psych	profile	suggests	he	will	probably	be	considered	a	“nut
job”	(possessed	by	demons,	etc.)	by	anyone	in	his	era.	While	he	might
cause	 problems,	 they	 don’t	 warrant	 us	 spending	 the	 resources	 on
housing	him	here	for	the	rest	of	his	life.	He	isn’t	sophisticated	enough
to	figure	the	whole	thing	out—or	to	be	useful	to	us	if	he’s	here.	It’s	not
worth	the	resources	to	bring	him.

From	LTC	Lyons:
Respectfully,	 I	can	vouch	 for	Magnus’s	abilities,	having	 fought	beside



him	 on	 several	 occasions	 in	 Constantinople	 DTAPs.	 Contrary	 to	 Dr.
Blevins’s	 assessment,	 I	 cannot	 think	of	 a	better	 soldier	 to	help	 train
DOers	who	will	be	operating	in	the	Viking/Norman	world.	I	should	have
proposed	 recruiting	 him	 already.	 My	 department	 has	 a	 number	 of
physically	 active	 DOers	who	 are	 currently	 in	 turnaround.	 If	 we	 bring
him	 forward	 I’ll	 be	 his	minder	 until	 we’ve	 taken	 proper	measure	 of
him.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Just	 bumped	 into	 Esme	 in	 the	 cafeteria—she	 had	 to	 do	 one	 more
Strand	on	DTAP	1205	Collinet,	 and	 says	 Imblen	 reports	 that	Magnus
has	now	advanced	his	theory.
Given	 that	 Tristan	 of	 Dintagel	 of	 legend	 came	 to	 Normandy	 as	 a

fortune-seeker,	 and	 then	 (as	Magnus	 sees	 it)	 almost	 certainly	 came
forward	in	time,	he	is	evidence	that	time	travel	is	an	excellent	way	to
seek	one’s	fortune.	Apparently	Magnus	would	like	to	employ	the	same
method.	He	is	asking	Imblen	what	fee	she	would	accept	to	Send	him	in
one	direction	or	another.	She	has	reverted	to	typical	witch	maneuvers
of	 requesting	 impossible-to-get	 things	 (in	 this	 case	myrrh	 from	 the
cradle	 of	 Baby	 Jesus).	 He	 threatened	 her—highly	 unusual	 behavior
toward	 a	witch—and	 she	had	 to	 render	him	mute	 for	 an	hour	 to	 put
him	in	his	place.
Esme	 hasn’t	 had	 time	 yet	 to	 file	 a	 full	 report,	 but	 I’ll	 link	 in	 this

thread	when	she	does.	Please	reconsider	bringing	Magnus	forward.

From	Dr.	Blevins:
Anyone	 stupid	 enough	 to	 threaten	 an	 active	 witch	 will	 never	 get	 his
head	around	what	is	really	going	on	here.
But	since	he	is	now	a	threat	to	one	of	our	human	assets,	and	Tristan

seems	 to	 think	 he	 can	 contain	 him,	 I’ll	 (dispassionately)	 second
Melisande’s	suggestion	to	bring	him	forward.

From	LTG	Octavian	K.	Frink:
Have	been	monitoring	this	thread.
Bring	Magnus	forward.	Even	if	he	doesn’t	figure	anything	out,	we’re

dealing	with	 the	specter	of	Diachronic	Shear	 if	he	says	something	 to
somebody	more	 clever	 than	he	 is.	 If	we	 keep	him	busy	 as	 a	 combat
instructor	he’ll	probably	think	he’s	died	and	gone	to	Valhalla.



Private	message	from	LTC	Lyons	to	Dr.	Stokes:
Don’t	correct	him	about	Valhalla,	Stokes.	I	know	you	want	to.	Don’t.

GRÁINNE’S
FINAL	LETTER

to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
PART	1

Summer	Solstice,	1603

Faith	and	Auspiciousness	to	Your	Grace!
It’s	a	very	long	letter	I’ll	be	writing	you	this	day,	and	the	last	one	ever,	for

certain	 this	 time.	 I’ve	 been	 to	 the	 future	 and	back	 again,	 so	 I	 have,	 and	 am
about	to	go	again—and	this	time,	I	am	quite	certain	there’ll	be	no	returning.
So	you’ll	never	know	the	end	of	my	story,	Your	Grace,	but	now	in	your	closing
weeks,	 before	 you	 cease	 to	 draw	 breath,	 it’s	 a	 remarkable	 adventure	 I’m
leaving	you	to	dwell	upon,	that	you	might	not	forget	your	little	Gráinne	as	the
veils	lower	between	the	worlds	to	receive	you.

So	to	get	on	with	the	telling:
Rose	Sent	me	forward,	to	the	same	place	we	have	both	so	oft	sent	Tristan

and	the	others.	I	arrived	in	a	place	so	shocking	that	I	doubt	our	fair	language
has	words	harsh	and	perverse	enough	to	do	it	 justice.	As	Tristan	had	already
revealed	to	me,	in	this	future	day	there’s	only	a	small,	airless	chamber	where
magic’s	working,	with	 just	 enough	 room	 for	 two	people,	barely	 larger	 than	a
garderobe	 it	 is.	 The	 walls	 are	 slick	 and	 peculiar,	 like	 tiles	 made	 of	 painted
wood.	And	no	smells	in	it	at	all,	not	a	one.	How	can	that	be?

But	’tis	nothing	compared	to	what	happens	when	the	door	of	the	chamber
opes.	’Twould	take	me	half	a	lifetime	to	describe	to	you	the	wonders	and	the
horrors	 of	 the	 future	 world.	 The	 garderobe,	 what	 they	 call	 the	 ODEC,	 is
housed	within	a	large	chamber—a	strange	room	with	mechanical	monstrosities
and	a	dreadful	buzz	in	the	air	as	if	lightning	were	always	just	about	to	strike,	a



sound	they	are	all	indifferent	to,	much	as	I	became	indifferent	to	the	odors	of
Southwark.	And	this	chamber	 in	 turn	 is	 inside	a	vast	building,	which	 is	on	a
street	full	of	vast	buildings,	in	a	city	of	streets	with	vast	buildings.	Larger	than
cathedrals	some	of	them,	but	without	ornament	or	even	shape.	Like	building
blocks	for	giants,	so	they	are.	No	imagination	or	love	of	beauty	at	all.

Everything	 functions	 without	 human	 or	 magical	 assistance,	 but	 I	 confess
most	 breathlessly	 that	 whatever	 power	 keeps	 humanity	 and	 its	 many
mechanical	servants	humming	.	.	.	it	is	far	more	dazzling	than	any	magic	I	have
ever	seen	performed.

And	I	tell	you	straight	out:	suspicious	this	makes	me,	for	what	is	the	cause
to	 bring	 magic	 back	 when	 it	 has	 been	 replaced	 by	 something	 clearly	 more
serviceable?	 So	 the	 first	 riddle	 I	 put	my	mind	 to	was	 this:	 in	 a	world	where
carriages	travel	without	beasts	to	pull	them,	and	food	is	effortlessly	abundant,
and	there	 is	ample	 light	to	sunder	any	darkness,	 from	all	manner	of	peculiar
torches,	none	of	them	given	to	burning	down	a	place	even	if	it	is	all	wood,	and
where	all	and	sundry	wear	grander	clothes	than	most	anyone	in	London	and	an
astonishing	variety	what’s	more	.	.	.	something	there	must	be,	some	commodity
or	advantage,	that	magic	can	attain	but	mankind	cannot	yet.	Nothing	material
can	 it	 be,	 for	 no	magic	 I	 ever	 knew	 summoned	 such	 luxuries	 for	 royalty	 as
everyday	folk	here	take	as	commonplace.

The	 environs	 are	 not	 the	 point	 of	 my	 tale	 so	 I	 shall	 omit	 most	 of	 the
gobsmacking	details,	but	please	know	I	will	happily	discourse	upon	it	if	you’re
requesting	it	of	me,	Your	Grace.	To	the	Kingdom	of	Heaven	I	know	you	are
bound	 soon,	 but	 it	 might	 not	 contain	 half	 the	 wonders	 of	 yon	 twenty-first
century.

So	to	get	to	the	telling	at	last:
Greeted	I	was	by	the	lady-in-waiting	of	the	ODEC—the	first	woman	ever	I

met	 of	 that	 time,	 in	 that	 time,	 and	wasn’t	 she	 strangely	 dressed!	With	 teeth
every	 bit	 as	 fine	 as	 Tristan’s.	 When	 I	 gave	 her	 courtesy,	 why,	 she	 was
astonished,	for	isn’t	my	name	one	of	glorious	renown	in	the	future?	It	is,	sure.
She	proffered	me	a	thick	white	cotton	shift	with	a	belt	sewn	into	it,	from	a	pile
of	 them	 beside	 the	 door,	 and	 then	 a	 set	 of	 absurdly	 short	 stockings	 from
another	pile	(socks,	she	called	them),	instructed	me	to	don	it	all,	and	asked	me
to	wait—as	if	I’d	anywhere	to	go	now	that	I’d	arrived.	Then	she	spoke	directly
to	 her	 desk,	 so	 she	 did,	 asking	 it	 to	 send	 her	 Lieutenant	 Colonel	 Lyons	 on
account	of	Gráinne	had	arrived	from	London.

Within	moments	there	he	was,	my	handsome	fella,	looking	at	me	through	a



wall	 made	 of	 the	 most	 perfect	 glass	 that	 can	 be	 imagined—so	 smooth	 and
flawless	as	to	be	invisible.	He	looked	ever	so	bizarre	in	the	weeds	he	must	wear
in	 that	 future	 time,	 monotone	 and	 snug	 but	 shapeless,	 not	 glorifying	 his
marvelous	shape	and	yet	neither	hiding	 it	 for	modesty	as	priests	are	wont	 to
do.	 ’Twas	incredibly	dull	he	looked.	After	giving	me	a	look	up	and	down,	he
nodded	as	if	to	say	“Sure	that	be	Gráinne”	and	then	went	to	a	door	in	the	glass
wall,	out	of	my	view.

Meanwhile	I	was	hustled	away	by	another	young	man	with	gorgeous	teeth,
who	smelled	like	something	I	might	 like	to	 lick	(but	refrained),	escorting	me
out	of	the	room	of	the	ODEC,	he	did,	under	horrible	illumination	that	buzzed
fiendishly	 and	 made	 everyone	 look	 dead,	 along	 a	 corridor	 covered	 in	 some
kind	of	 short,	 stubby	pelt,	 very	 firmly	 set	 upon	 the	boards,	 and	 then	 into	 a
room	tiled	with	a	marvelous	substance	such	as	my	stockinged	feet	had	never
felt	before—it	both	gave	way	and	yet	slightly	gripped	the	stocking.	This	room
was	blindingly	bright	and	cold,	everything	made	of	metal	like	an	armory,	but
even	brighter	somehow,	as	if	everything	were	the	color	of	a	new	sword—whole
walls	like	silver.	Most	peculiar	it	was.	At	this	point,	Your	Grace,	I	wouldn’t	be
lying	to	say	that	I	was	that	fatigued	and	weak,	as	if	all	my	humors	were	being
slowly	drained	from	me.	It	occurred	to	me	that	a	good	slumber	would	be	most
agreeable.	 As	 if	 he	 were	 reading	 my	 thoughts,	 the	 young	 man	 led	 me	 to	 a
peculiar	piece	of	furniture,	something	between	a	couch	and	a	throne,	a	sort	of
upright	divan	I	suppose	it	was.	 ’Twas	soft	and	padded	and	strewn	about	with
blankets	and	in	other	ways	most	inviting	for	one	about	to	swoon.

But	 then	 Tristan	 came	 into	 the	 room,	 and	 that	 brought	 me	 back	 to	 my
senses.

“God	ye	good	morrow,”	myself	said	gaily.	“There’s	no	need	to	be	looking	so
surprised,	Tristan,	sure	Rose	is	attending	to	my	duties	in	Southwark,	and	I’d	a
mind	 to	 see	 for	 myself	 the	 Great	 Work	 I	 am	 helping	 build	 with	 my
journeyman’s	efforts.	 I	know	you	were	wanting	me	to	come,	 so	 I	 thought	 I’d
better	leg	it	to	you	quick	as	I	could.”

“You’re	two	weeks	early,”	he	said.
“’Twas	a	change	of	scene	I	was	wanting,	all	them	natural	philosophers	were

growing	dull	enough	to	dry	snot.	Isn’t	it	right	glad	you	are	to	see	me,	so?	Sorry
my	togemans	are	so	homely,	they’re	all	your	maid	had	to	offer	me.	’Tisn’t	even
my	knees	these	stockings	reach	to,	I	never	knew	how	tawdry	your	costume	was
in	this	era.”

“Listen	 to	 me,”	 Tristan	 said	 in	 the	 stoic	 soldierly	 way	 of	 his,	 which	 was



grand	with	me	as	the	whole	point	of	coming	here	was	to	hear	what	he	had	to
say.	 Besides	 which,	 I	 was	 growing	 weaker	 almost	 every	 minute.	 “There	 are
things	 in	 the	air	here	 that	can	kill	you	 just	 from	what	you	breathe	or	 touch.
There	 is	 an	 entire	 protocol	 you	must	 go	 through,”	 and	 then	 he	 went	 about
using	 lots	 of	 words	 what	 sounded	Latin	 and	 of	many	 syllables,	 and	 I	 wasn’t
especially	interested	in	them	as	I	was	suddenly	fain	to	sit	in	the	divan.	Happily
’twas	exactly	there	he	placed	me,	and	talking	without	pause	he	was,	saying	he
would	have	to	talk	to	his	superiors	while	I	was	going	through	the	ordeal	he	was
about	to	put	me	through.

A	woman	dressed	all	in	white	appeared	in	this	room,	like	a	religious	acolyte
of	 some	pagan	creed,	 and	didn’t	 she	and	 the	young	man	begin	 to	work	with
some	alarming	mechanical	objects,	 the	which	 seemed	 to	be	alive	all	on	 their
own,	with	mysterious	eyes	and	lights	and	noises	and	movements,	full	of	hoses
and	tubes	they	were,	transparent	like	fine	glass	but	bendable	like	straw,	most
confounding.	And	they	were	bringing	these	monsters	close	to	me,	and	I	saw	all
manner	of	needles	at	the	ends	of	the	tubes.	The	woman	was	introduced	to	me
as	a	physician	(truly!	A	woman	physician!)	and	the	young	man	as	her	“nurse,”
and	they	explained	in	a	most	unmusical	and	peculiar	kind	of	English	that	they
had	 to	pump	me	 full	 of	medicine	 to	prevent	 the	 invisible	 airborne	humours
from	 imbalancing	my	 own.	 They	 had	 nothing	 practical	 there,	 no	 leeches	 or
poultices	or	charms	or	herbs,	nothing	but	these	strange	mechanical	curiosities.
The	fellow	explained	they	had	to	stick	needles	into	my	arm	to	fill	me	with	the
medicine—in	 the	 form	 of	 potion	 it	was—and	 sure	 it	was	 the	 closest	 I	 have
ever	 come	 to	 panicking.	 Only	 Tristan’s	 familiar	 presence	 kept	 me	 from
something	near	hysteria,	and	Your	Grace	knows	I	am	not	easily	unnerved.

Things	were	so	clean,	you	could	smell	the	cleanliness,	cleaner	than	soap	it
was,	and	very	cold	to	the	spirit.	The	needles	did	not	hurt,	and	were	bound	to
my	arms	and	the	backs	of	my	hands	with	some	kind	of	sticking	tape,	and	I	felt
a	cold	drowsy	feeling	in	my	veins,	as	if	someone	were	binding	me	with	a	spell
of	 lethargy.	These	 first	moments	of	my	arrival,	 to	 speak	 true,	were	not	even
the	slightest	bit	resembling	what	I	imagined.

“You’ll	be	getting	treatment	over	the	course	of	the	next	few	days,”	says	the
physician,	“and	you’ll	be	quarantined	in	this	room	for	two	weeks.”

“And	I’ll	have	to	bring	Blevins	in	to	see	you,”	says	Tristan,	as	if	aggrieved	he
were,	 although	 of	 course	 secretly	 Blevins	 was	 exactly	 the	 man	 I	 wanted.
“Gráinne,	I’m	shocked	you	did	this	without	consulting	me	first.”

“Sure	 you	 haven’t	 been	 back	 to	 see	 me	 in	 weeks,”	 says	 I.	 “How	 could	 I



consult	you	if	you	weren’t	there	to	consult?”
“There	have	been	plenty	of	agents	back	in	your	time,”	says	he.	“You	could

have	given	one	of	them	a	message.”
“But	 then	 I’d	miss	 seeing	 that	 look	 on	 your	 face.”	 I	 grin.	 “’Tis	 all	 grand,

Tristan,	we’ll	have	a	grand	time	of	it.”
Unconvinced	 he	 looked,	 and	 none	 too	 happy,	 but	 away	 he	went	 anyhow.

Now	I	was	alone.	Or	so	I	thought.
The	 light,	 which	 shone	 impossibly	 steady	 right	 out	 of	 the	 ceiling,	 was

dimmed	so	that	it	was	perhaps	as	bright	as	a	cloudy	morn—before	that	it	had
been	 as	 bright	 as	midsummers	 at	 noon—and	 then	 it	 dimmed	 even	more	 so
that	 it	 resembled	nearly	 sunset,	 but	without	 the	proper	kinds	 of	 shadows	 or
color.	 All	 wrong	 and	 strange	 it	 was.	 It’s	 quite	 overwhelmed	 I	 was	 finding
myself,	Your	Grace,	and	I	was	not	at	all	sure	after	all	that	I	was	really	prepared
for	my	adventure.	Wasn’t	I	certain	I	would	need	to	be	finding	someone	who
had	my	back.

And	suddenly	I	realized	I	was	not	alone.	As	far	as	one	might	spit	(well,	as
far	as	I	might	spit	anyhow,	which	is	farther	than	some)	was	a	curtain	dividing
the	 room,	 suspended	cleverly	 from	a	 sort	of	 track	attached	 to	 the	 ceiling.	A
hand	 reached	 out	 from	 its	 other	 side	 and	 swept	 it	 out	 of	 the	way,	 revealing
another	 divan-throne,	 and	 upon	 that	 didn’t	 there	 sit	 a	 man	 now	 with	 long
brown	hair,	dressed	in	the	same	ungainly	togemans	I	was	wearing—white	robe
and	insensibly	short	stockings.	And	needles	sticking	out	of	his	arms,	so	he	had,
attached	 to	 tubes.	 A	 sinewy	 strength	 he	 had,	 rare	 amongst	 the	 city	 folk	 of
London,	 even	 the	 soldiers,	 and	 honestly	 even	 Tristan,	 who	 is	 quite	 the
specimen,	looked	merely	bulky	in	compare.	Every	visible	inch	of	skin	on	this
fellow’s	 body	 was	 taut.	Handsome	 he	 was,	 but	 not	 so	 handsome	 as	 Tristan.
There	was	no	way	to	know	his	rank	as	he	had	nothing	about	him	but	what	I
did,	that	being	what	we	were	given	to	hide	our	nakedness.	He	held	himself	like
a	 soldier	 and	 a	 leader.	Common	 sense	declared	he,	 like	myself,	 had	 recently
arrived	 from	 elsewhere.	 Looking	 him	 over,	 as	much	 as	 I	 could	 be	 seeing	 of
him,	 it	 seemed	 clear	 to	me	 that	 he	 would	 offer	 excellent	 protection,	 not	 to
mention	an	excellent	fuck,	and	so	I	took	it	upon	myself	to	make	friends	with
him.

“Good	day	to	you,”	I	said.	“Do	you	speak	English?”
It	 was	 a	 queer	 look	 he	 gave	 me,	 and	 then	 didn’t	 he	 answer	 not	 in	 the

Queen’s	 English	 but	 in	 a	 peculiar	 patois	 of	 Anglo-Norman	 French.	 I’m
knowing	enough	French	to	get	along	in	a	whorehouse,	but	that	is	the	French	of



our	day.	His	was	of	an	earlier	age.	But	plenty	of	time	we	had,	and	little	else	to
occupy	it,	and	so	as	the	hours	went	by	we	explained	ourselves	to	each	other.

He	is	Magnus,	from	a	village	in	Normandy.	He	had	spent	much	of	his	life
a-roaming,	 fighting	 for	 the	Emperor’s	 guard	 in	Constantinople.	 ’Twas	 all	 the
way	forward	from	the	year	1205	or	so	Magnus	had	come	(he	wasn’t	much	for
calendars,	 he	 was	more	 of	 a	map	 fella),	 and	 he	 had	 been	 Sent	 hither	 to	 his
great	 surprise	 and	 without	 his	 leave,	 as	 he	 had	 begun	 to	 sort	 out	 that
something	 peculiar	 was	 happening	 with	 the	 world.	 Lest	 his	 understanding
trigger	lomadh	(he	had	a	different	word	for	it,	but	understood	it	perfectly,	as
he’d	 seen	 it	 with	 his	 own	 eyes),	 Tristan	 and	 his	 company	 had	 brought	 him
forward,	so	they	had,	for	everybody’s	safety.	He	had	arrived	three	days	before
me.

Now	this	fella,	I	thought,	was	one	to	have	on	your	side	if	you	were	feeling
weak	as	a	kitten,	which	I	was,	being	deprived	of	all	magic.	So	chat	him	up	I
did,	and	between	us	didn’t	we	share	nuggets	of	 information.	He	had	 little	 to
add	to	my	knowledge,	of	course,	as	he	was	no	part	of	Tristan’s	company.	He
hadn’t	a	strategy	as	I	did,	given	he	didn’t	know	he	would	be	coming	here	until
moments	 before	 it	 happened.	 I	 kept	 my	 counsel	 but	 was	 friendly	 enough.
Surely	he’s	not	so	evolved	as	we,	in	that	it’s	obsessed	he	is	with	gold	and	such,
like	all	 those	accursed	Norman-type	peoples	who	have	run	riot	over	our	 fair
island	.	.	.	but	he’s	canny,	that	lad.	Straight	off	I	sensed	that.

The	 next	 day	 the	 weakness	 came	 over	 me	 something	 terrible	 and	 I	 had
fevers	and	aches.	As	Magnus	and	I	lay	there	getting	potions	pumped	into	our
bodies	 to	 balance	 our	 humors,	 another	 physician-type	woman	 came	 into	 the
room	and	went	straight	to	Magnus	and	let	him	know,	by	pantomime	gestures,
that	he	should	be	baring	his	 left	 shoulder.	This	he	did,	and	 immediately	 she
took	exception	 to	 something	on	 it.	 It	 seemed	a	 simple	birthmark	 to	me.	He
looked	askance	at	her	interest,	and	no	wonder,	for	perhaps	here	as	ever	people
are	 eager	 to	 see	 marks	 of	 the	 devil	 upon	 a	 body,	 and	 especially	 upon	 a
stranger.	He	tensed,	but	the	woman	did	not	seem	to	notice.

“I	see	why	they	called	me	in	.	.	.	that	does	look	a	little	suspicious,”	she	said,
off-hand	as	all	that.

He	tensed	more.
From	 her	 breast	 pocket	 the	 woman	 removed	 an	 object	 no	 larger	 than	 a

playing	card.	Colored	light	shone	from	one	face	of	it,	as	if	’twere	a	stained	glass
window.	She	let	her	fingers	play	over	it	for	a	few	moments,	then	spoke:	“I’ll	be
removing	that	mole	for	a	biopsy.”



After	 the	 briefest	 of	 pauses,	 the	 object—which	 I	 later	 learned	 is	 called	 a
phone—spoke	to	Magnus	in	his	own	dialect.	Or	tried	to,	anyway,	as	“biopsy”
ain’t	a	word	to	those	people,	any	more	than	it	is	to	you	and	me—but	as	best	I
could	 discern,	 it	 strung	 a	 few	 words	 together	 that	 approximated	 the	 idea,
which	was	that	she	was	going	to	lop	the	thing	off	for	a	closer	look.

I	 could	 see	well	 enough	 that	 this	wasn’t	Magnus’s	 first	phone-chat,	 for	he
was	 in	 no	way	 as	 astonished	 as	 I.	He	 rattled	 something	 off,	 and	 after	 a	 few
moments	the	phone	translated:	“Going	to	cut	it	off	me?”	Magnus	was	wary	but
not	worried.

To	her	gentleman	attendant	she	said	something	about	“lie	doe	cain”	which
the	phone	dutifully	attempted	to	translate,	but	botched	it	somehow—forgive
me,	Your	Grace,	but	I	was	half	delirious,	and	this	bit	was	a	sort	of	comedy	of
errors	 involving	 the	 phone	 and	 the	 various	 dialects.	 Magnus	 had	 a	 lot	 of
questions—not	of	a	suspicious	nature,	you’ll	understand,	but	simple	hunger	to
know.	It	was	laboriously	explained	that	“lie	doe	cain”	is	a	potion,	not	magical
in	 nature	 (since	 magic	 has	 no	 purchase	 in	 this	 time	 and	 place)	 but	 once
injected	 into	 his	 shoulder	with	 a	wee	 needle,	 deadened	 the	 pain	 so	 that	 the
woman	sliced	that	birthmark	off	Magnus’s	shoulder	without	him	even	needing
a	 swig	 of	 whiskey!	 He	 watched	 this	 in	 fascination	 and	 wonder,	 like	 a	 child
seeing	a	magician	at	his	 tricks.	The	assistant	bandaged	 it	neatly	enough,	and
said	to	him,	through	the	phone,	“That	might	hurt	after	the	lie	doe	cain	wears
off.”

Utterly	 baffled	was	Magnus,	 and	 he	 reached	 across	 to	 prod	 the	 bandage.
“No	pain?”	he	said.

“Don’t	touch	it,”	she	said	with	brisk	compassion.	“No	touch.”
“No	pain,”	he	repeated.	“No	nothing!”
The	doctor	had	been	dousing	her	hands	with	a	 sort	of	ointment	 they	use,

scented	like	bad	gin.	It	is	a	ritual	with	them.
“Anesthetic,”	 she	 said	 slowly,	 and	 repeated	 it	 several	 times,	 syllable	 for

syllable.	“Makes	it	numb.”
“But	how?	Is	it	magic?”
I	shook	my	head.	“There	is	no	magic	in	this	time.”	He	looked	astounded	at

this	news,	so	now	I	knew	I	had	some	insight	to	offer	him	that	sure	would	bind
him	to	me.

The	physician	now	turned	her	attention	to	me,	and	said	she’d	like	to	have	a
look	at	my	skin,	all	over,	as	a	precaution—for	my	freckly	complexion	was	of	a
sort	prone	to	just	the	sorts	of	moles	she’d	lately	sliced	off	of	Magnus,	and	it’s



superstitious	they	are	about	such	things.	The	assistant	shot	the	curtain	across
to	afford	me	a	bit	of	privacy,	and	I	pulled	up	my	shift	and	let	the	doctor	look
me	over.

“So	the	lie	doe	cain	is	a	numbing	agent,	is	it?”	I	asked	the	female	physician.
“Where	does	it	come	from?	Seems	a	remarkable	ointment.”

She	 shrugged.	 “It’s	 very	 commonplace	 in	 this	 era.	You	 can	 buy	 it	 at	 any
pharmacy.	 Do	 you	 know	 what	 a	 pharmacy	 is?	 You	 might	 know	 it	 as	 an
apothecary,	or	chemist.”

“Aye	I	know	it	surely,	but	I	doubt	he	does,”	I	say.	“I’ll	explain.”
No	eldritch	freckles	were	to	be	found	on	my	person	and	so	the	lady	and	her

assistant	packed	up	their	potions	and	bandages	and	absented	themselves.	This
was	only	one	such	encounter,	for	don’t	these	people	have	a	thousand	varieties
of	 doctor,	 each	 keen	 to	 inspect	 a	 different	 bit	 of	 you	 with	 a	 different
contraption,	and	it’s	shocked	you’d	be,	my	lady,	if	I	told	you	everywhere	they
looked.

When	 they	 were	 leaving	 us	 alone,	 I	 brought	Magnus	 up	 to	 date	 on	 all	 I
knew	(besides	my	own	schemes,	of	course).	His	pale	blue	eyes	were	round	as
platters	a	fair	bit	of	the	time.

“But	you	must	know,”	I	told	him	when	I’d	said	all	 I	knew,	“I’ve	never	 left
my	 own	 age	 before.	 Well,	 not	 by	 more	 than	 a	 year	 or	 two,	 for	 sport.	 I’ve
nothing	left	to	explain,	for	all	the	rest	will	be	as	new	to	me	as	to	you.”

After	a	 few	days	of	 this,	my	fevers	broke,	and	my	vigor	returned	as	I	was
growing	accustomed	to	an	existence	without	magic.	When	it	seemed	I	was	fit
for	conversation,	Tristan	returned.	He	had	company:	one	older	gentleman	and
two	 women,	 a	 bit	 younger	 than	 myself.	 The	 younger	 of	 the	 two	 was	 very
beautiful	and	wore	a	dress;	the	other,	plainer,	and	dressed	similarly	to	the	men,
and	the	bearing	of	a	scholar	did	she	have	about	her,	like	an	abbess.

“This	is	Gráinne,”	said	Tristan,	looking	tense	about	the	mouth.
I	 smiled	my	charming	 smile	 and	held	out	my	hand	 to	 the	gentleman.	He

stared	at	me.	He	was	a	dignified-enough	looking	chap,	clearly	of	higher	birth
from	Tristan	 by	 the	way	 he	 carried	 himself.	He	had	 a	 short,	 thick	mane	 of
grey,	swept	back	as	if	posing	for	a	statue	he	was.	He	reminded	me	a	bit	of	that
right	arse	Les	Holgate	who	triggered	the	lomadh	and	ruined	my	life.	“This	is
Dr.	Roger	Blevins,”	Tristan	says	to	me,	in	a	heavy-handed	sort	of	way.

“Well	met	and	God	save	you,	milord,”	I	say,	leaning	forward	from	the	divan
to	clasp	his	hand	gingerly	(as	the	back	of	my	hand	had	all	the	needles	still).

“It	is	good	to	meet	you—but	you	have	defied	protocol	in	coming	here,”	he



says	sternly,	with	great	anger	 in	his	eyes.	So	as	usually	 is	 the	case,	 I	begin	to
cast	 a	 spell	 to	 soften	 him	 to	me	 .	 .	 .	 and	 at	 once	 I	 realize,	 with	 a	 dreadful
feeling	in	my	guts,	that	it	will	not	work!	Tristan	spoke	true,	there	was	no	magic
here	at	all.	No	wonder	I	felt	at	once	so	heavy	and	dull.

“I	cry	pardon,”	I	say,	trying	not	to	show	my	dismay.	“Things	do	work	best
free	and	easy-like	in	London,	I	did	not	realize	how	regular	in	your	habits	you
are	here.	Isn’t	it	good	I	came	and	learned	that?”

The	two	men	exchanged	glances	and	each	sighed,	in	different	keys.	Blevins
made	a	gesture	with	his	head,	and	Tristan	nodded	as	if	understanding	a	secret
code	he	was.

“Mel,”	he	said,	a	bit	wearily,	to	the	plainer	of	the	women.	“Meet	Gráinne.
Gráinne,	here	is	Doctor	Melisande	Stokes.	And	here	is	Erszebet.”	That	being
the	fine-looking	one	in	the	skirt,	with	the	painted	face.

Melisande,	 without	 a	 smile	 of	 greeting	 but	 a	 look	 of	 some	 checked
amusement	in	her	eye,	held	out	her	hand	and	shook	mine.	“It’s	an	honour	to
meet	you,	Gráinne.	We	are	very	much	in	your	debt.	Welcome	to	America.”

Much	quieter	is	Melisande	than	I	was	anticipating	her	to	be.	She	must	be
clever	 in	hidden,	 subtle	ways,	not	 the	way	of	educated	women	 in	Elizabeth’s
court	who	are	falling	all	over	each	other	to	outshine	one	another.	Her	light	is	a
secret	 that	 she	 uses	 as	 a	 tool,	 and	 sure	 there	 is	 something	 tough	 there
underneath	it,	which	I	do	respect	well	enough.	’Tis	clear	enough	from	watching
her	 and	 Tristan	 that	 there	 should	 be	 fire	 between	 them,	 certainly	 some
congress,	but	just	as	clear	that	admitting	to	it	is	something	you’ll	find	neither
of	 them	 doing.	 Still	 the	 attraction	 hangs	 in	 the	 air	 almost	 visibly.	 I	 believe
when	I	go	back	there—now	that	I	have	a	plan,	which	shortly	I	shall	tell	you	of
—I	must	find	a	way	to	use	that.

And	as	for	Erszebet,	their	original	witch,	she	is	fair	indeed,	but	she	is	not	a
happy	 lass.	Her	discontentment	 fairly	 radiates	 from	her	 fiery	dark	eyes,	 and
her	face	is	fashioned,	as	if	from	birth,	to	have	a	bit	of	a	pout	or	sneer.	And	yet
strangely	charming	(excuse	the	term)	I	found	her	to	be	at	once.

Rather	than	taking	my	proffered	hand	to	shake,	she	took	it	and	kissed	my
knuckles.	 “I	 greet	 you	 as	 a	 sister,”	 says	 she.	 “As	 I	 greet	 all	 the	 witches	 who
dwell	in	my	house,	and	come	under	my	aegis.”

“Now	wait	a	moment,”	says	Tristan.	“We	don’t	know	we’ll	be	keeping	her
on	as	an	employee.”

“And	I	don’t	know	I’ll	be	staying,”	says	I,	“if	this	is	how	I’m	to	be	spoken	of
—like	as	if	I	weren’t	even	in	the	room.”



“Gráinne,	 don’t	 you	 understand,	 you	 can’t	 leave,”	 said	Tristan	 with	 some
irritation.	 “Once	 an	historical	 agent	has	 come	 forward,	 they	 cannot	 go	back,
they	have	too	much	knowledge	of	what	is	here	to	safely	take	back.”

“Then	staying’s	what	I’ll	do,”	I	said	agreeably.
Now	the	Blevins	is	watching	all	of	this	back-and-forth	with	what	I’m	sure	he

imagines	 to	 be	 a	 canny	 and	 knowing	 mien.	 Ever	 so	 stern	 he	 was	 in	 the
beginning,	with	his	talk	of	protocols,	but	now	doesn’t	he	change	his	tune	and
become	the	friend	and	protector	of	poor	Gráinne.

“Did	you	have	in	mind	making	the	poor	woman	a	detainee?”	says	the	Blevins,
taking	a	wee	step	closer	to	me,	as	if	he’s	going	to	ward	off	the	others’	wicked
assaults.	“No,	we	need	her	abilities	in	the	ATTO.	This	has	been	in	the	works
for	months,	 Tristan.	 Perhaps	 you	missed	 it,	 when	 you	 were	 off	 becoming	 a
hero	 and	 a	 saint,	 and	watching	Diachronic	Shear	 in	Pera,	 and	vacationing	 in
France;	but	Gráinne,	though	she	showed	up	early,	came	here	to	work	for	me.
And	 once	 we	 have	 matters	 sorted	 out,	 she’ll	 enjoy	 the	 same	 freedoms	 and
privileges	as	any	other	anachronic	employee.”

During	the	ensuing	silence,	while	Tristan	and	Mel	are	rolling	their	eyes	at
this	peroration,	Erszebet	steps	in.

“She’s	not	an	employee,”	says	Erszebet.	“She	has	not	signed	your	nonsense
papers.	She	has	only	helped	you	from	the	generosity	of	her	heart.	You	have	no
hold	on	her.	As	I	know	the	story,	you	are	deeply	in	her	debt	and	have	made
absolutely	no	attempt	to	recompense	her.”	To	me,	she	says,	“This	is	a	terrible
world	 and	 I	 would	 not	 stay	 if	 I	 could	 leave,	 but	 I	 have	 obligations	 I	 must
honor.	You	do	not.	If	I	were	you,	I	would	leave	at	once.	If	you	want	to	stay,	I
will	do	all	 in	my	power	to	make	things	 less	wretched	for	you	than	they	have
been	for	me.”

More	sympathy’s	what	I’d	be	feeling,	if	these	words	came	from	an	unkempt
beggar,	 but	 here	 she	 is	 wearing	 a	 gown	 as	 fine	 as	 any	 at	 Bess’s	 court	might
wear,	although	scandalously	short	of	length	the	skirt	was.	So	I	do	wonder	a	wee
bit	about	how	easily	she	finds	things	miserable.	But	she	is	offering	me	a	place
at	her	table,	and	I	accept	with	graciousness.

“I	 will	 show	 you	 everything	 you	 need	 to	 know	 to	 survive	 in	 this	 strange
world,”	she	says	firmly,	as	if	in	defiance	of	the	men,	whom	she	does	not	waste
even	a	flicker	of	her	attention	on	now.	“These	people	think	they	have	set	up
an	 initiation	 into	 these	 times,	 for	Anachrons	who	 come	 forward.	What	 they
offer	is	feeble.	I	will	give	you	my	own	attention,	as	I	do	every	witch.	You	will
be	comfortable	and	safe,	and	most	important,	you	will	understand	things.	These



men	do	not	think	witches	need	to	understand	much,	as	if	we	were	just	cogs	in
a	bit	of	machinery,	they	have	no	regard	for	our	human	rights.”

“Our	what?”	asks	I,	as	I	see	it’s	Blevins’s	turn	to	be	rolling	his	eyes	a	bit.
“I	will	show	you	how	to	order	take-out	and	flush	a	toilet	and	use	Instagram.

Although	you	are	older.	Perhaps	you	would	prefer	Facebook.”	A	sly	smile	of
pleasure.	“I	will	take	you	shopping.	For	clothing.	The	other	Anachrons	are	not
allowed	 this,	 but	 the	witches	 I	 take	whenever	 I	wish.	 I	 think	 you	will	 enjoy
that.”

None	of	the	others	disagreed	with	her,	which	I	took	to	mean	that	this	was
Erszebet’s	role	in	greeting	all	new	witches.	She’d	made	a	gesture	on	the	word
“clothing,”	gracefully	smoothing	her	hands	down	either	side	of	her	bodice,	so
that	her	meaning	would	be	obvious	even	to	those	with	no	modern	English.

Such	as	Magnus,	who	had	been	watching	all	of	this	from	his	divan	silently,
as	a	cat	gazing	into	a	garden	from	an	open	window.

“Clothing,”	 he	 echoed,	 and	 they	 all	 turned	 toward	 him.	 Clearly	 he	 had
already	been	introduced	before	I	arrived,	as	none	of	them	rushed	to	shake	his
hand.	“Clothing,”	he	repeated,	imitating	Erszebet’s	gesture	upon	his	own	body.

Tristan	nodded,	and	fluently	enough	he	spoke	to	him,	 in	Magnus’s	native
tongue.	I	could	make	out	a	smattering	of	familiar	words—chemise,	pantaloons,
cap.	Magnus	 frowned	 and	 unconvinced	 he	 looked.	He	 responded	 to	Tristan
with	a	growling	answer	and	sure	didn’t	that	answer	include	a	word	we	had	just
learned	from	the	physician:	lidocaine.

Tristan	looked	taken	aback.	They	spoke	briefly	and	then	Tristan	turned	to
the	 others.	 “He’s	 curious	 about	 the	 lidocaine	 Doctor	 Andrews	 gave	 him.
Wonders	if	we	are	going	foraging	or	raiding	for	clothes,	if	we	can	obtain	some.”

The	Blevins	made	an	appalled	sound	in	his	throat,	which	developed	into	a
chuckle.	“Foraging	or	raiding?”	Then	he	laughed	out	loud.

“He’s	a	medieval	Norman	warrior,	 sir,”	Tristan	said.	 “There’s	no	word	 for
‘shopping’	in	his	language.”

“Nonsense,”	Blevins	 said.	 “He’s	 from	circa	 1200	 and	he	 lived	 in	 the	most
sophisticated	city	in	the	world.	Even	if	he	was	illiterate.”

“Almost	everyone	was	illiterate,”	rejoined	Melisande.	“That’s	why	being	an
historical	linguist	is	such	a	challenge,	Dr.	Blevins,	or	don’t	you	remember?	Oral
tradition	was—”

“Oral	 tradition	 is	 why	 he	 got	 into	 trouble	 in	 the	 first	 place,”	 says	 the
Blevins,	and	to	Tristan	he	says	it,	not	to	Mel.	“By	recognizing	you	from	such
an	old	story.”



“He	put	 two	 and	 two	 together,	 and	became	 suspicious	 that	we	were	 time
traveling,”	Mel	agreed,	“and	that	fired	his	imagination.”

“I’ll	give	him	that	much—he	has	a	vivid	imagination,”	said	the	Blevins,	“and
that	he	imagines	himself	a	Viking.”	And	over	the	lovely	face	of	Tristan	don’t	I
see	a	look	of	annoyance	flare	for	a	moment,	then	fade	away.

Magnus	knows	perfectly	well	that	they’re	talking	about	him.	He	can’t	make
out	 one	 word	 in	 ten,	 but	 “viking”	 he	 knows.	 He’s	 favoring	 Blevins	 with	 an
innocent	look	that	I	did	not	for	one	moment	believe	was	really	innocent.	I	saw
at	once	what	Magnus	was	about:	for	his	own	reasons,	whatever	they	be,	he	was
gulling	 them	 all	 into	 considering	 him	 dull-witted.	 Seeing	 he	 now	 has	 the
Blevins’s	attention,	he	taps	his	shoulder,	and	says	with	deliberately	(it	seemed
to	me)	child-like	delight,	“Viking!	Viking!”	and	makes	a	fist	as	if	he’s	holding
an	axe,	and	goes	into	a	little	pantomime	of	laying	about	himself	as	if	in	a	battle
of	legendary	times.	And	then	doesn’t	he	laugh	like	a	toddler.

At	this,	the	Blevins	smirks,	and	says	to	Tristan,	“He’s	like	that	Korean	guy
we	brought	from	the	Silla	dynasty.”

“Who,	Yeon	Hyeokgeose?”	says	Melisande	curtly.	“He	was	developmentally
challenged.	He	was	simple.”

“This	guy’s	pretty	simple,”	says	the	Blevins	with	a	quick	laugh,	and	gestures
to	Magnus	 as	 if	 he	 was	 a	 piece	 of	 furniture.	And	 then	 quick	 as	 you	 like,	 I
realize	that	Magnus	has	looked	round	at	the	rest	of	us	to	see	our	displeasure	at
whatever	Blevins	 said	 (and	he	might,	 in	 hindsight,	 have	 even	 recognized	 the
word	simple)—and	then	realizing	he’d	just	been	insulted,	doesn’t	he	smile	and
chuckle	at	the	Blevins	as	if	they	were	old	friends.

“He	 is	 not	 simple,”	 Tristan	 said.	 “I’ve	 fought	 in	 battle	 beside	 him,	 he	 is
quick-witted	and	I	know	his	worth.”

“Battle’s	 not	 about	 brains,	 is	 it,”	 says	 the	 Blevins.	 It’s	 not	 Magnus	 he’s
looking	at	when	he	says	 it,	but	Tristan,	and	I	can	see	well	enough	from	that
what	 sort	 of	 history	 lies	 between	 these	 two	men.	 “Tristan,	 we’re	 done	 here.
Gráinne	needs	to	be	shown	every	kindness—whether	by	Erszebet	or	the	rest
of	the	Sea	Cod	Staff,	it’s	no	concern	of	mine—or	of	yours.	We’ll	get	her	into
the	ATTO	as	soon	as	we	can.	As	for	Hagar	the	Horrible	here,	I	suspect	he’ll
end	up	a	useless	drain	on	our	resources	and	our	hospitality.	But	he	seems	an
amiable	sort.	Once	we’re	satisfied	he	has	a	decent	 level	of	 impulse	control—
enough	 that	we	 can	 take	 him	 off	 premises	without	 causing	 an	 incident—I’ll
wager	he’d	be	susceptible	to	a	shock	and	awe	sort	of	treatment.”

“It’s	going	to	take	a	lot	to	shock	him	or	awe	this	dude,”	Tristan	demurred.



“Viking!”	echoes	Magnus,	and	wasn’t	his	face	beaming.
“Wait	 until	 he	 gets	 a	 load	 of	 modern	 video	 games,”	 the	 Blevins	 insisted.

“We’ll	get	him	some	toys	to	play	with,	settle	him	down	a	little,	and	then	see
what	he	can	do	for	us	as	a	trainer.”

INCIDENT	REPORT

AUTHOR:	MAJ	Isobel	Sloane
SUBJECT:	Magnus	and	Gráinne
THEATER:	C/COD	(present	day)
DTAP:	Bio-containment	ward
FILED:	Day	1880	(late	September,	Year	5)

Pursuant	 to	 the	 Sexual	Harassment	Policy,	 information	 is	 hereunder	presented
about	a	series	of	incidents	in	the	bio-containment	ward	involving	recently	arrived
Anachrons	Magnus	and	Gráinne	(no	last	names	provided).	Technically	these	do
not	 constitute	 sexual	 harassment	 per	 se	 since	 all	 activity	 took	 place	 between
consenting	 adults	 in	 what	 they	 believe	 to	 be	 a	 private	 setting.	 However,
DOSECOPS	personnel,	part	of	whose	job	is	to	continuously	monitor	the	video
and	 audio	 “feeds”	 from	 the	 room	 in	 question,	 have	 raised	 a	 number	 of
complaints	that	need	to	be	addressed.

Without	getting	into	overly	lurid	details,	the	basic	situation	is	that	after	a	few
days	 during	 which	 she	 complained	 of	 fever,	 chills,	 aches,	 and	 low	 energy	 (all
typical	 for	 newly	 arrived	 Anachrons	 going	 through	 the	 inoculation	 protocol),
Gráinne	 has	 bounced	 back	 and	 returned	 to	 a	 level	 of	 vitality	 and	 vigor	 that,
though	it	might	be	normal	for	her,	is	exceptional	by	our	standards.	Magnus,	of
course,	 had	 a	 three-day	 head	 start	 on	 her	 in	 this	 department,	 and	 the
inoculations	never	seemed	to	make	much	of	a	dent	on	him	anyway.	They	are	in
adjacent	beds,	separated	only	by	a	curtain,	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	No	one	else
is	 in	 the	 ward,	 and	 they	 are	 blissfully	 unaware	 of	 the	 existence	 of	 modern
surveillance	technology.	Beginning	three	days	ago	and	building	from	there,	 the
two	of	them	have	been	engaging	in	a	wide	range	of	sexual	activities,	as	often	as



four	 times	a	day.	These	activities	are	quite	obviously	consensual,	 so	 there	 is	no
issue	where	that	is	concerned.	Gráinne,	as	it	turns	out,	exhibits	a	pattern	of	loud,
prolonged,	and	repetitive	vocalizations	while	engaging	in	such	activities—in	the
vernacular,	 she	 is	what	 is	known	as	 a	 “screamer.”	All	of	 this	 comes	 through	 in
full	Dolby	7.1	on	the	security	consoles	that	DOSECOPS	personnel	are	expected
to	monitor	 as	 a	 condition	 of	 their	 employment.	While	 it	may	 have	 had	 some
novelty	value	at	first,	it	is	now	to	the	point	of	posing	a	serious	distraction	at	best.
At	 worst	 it	 is	 creating	 an	 actively	 hostile	 work	 environment,	 particularly	 for
female	employees	and	for	 those	whose	religious	convictions	make	such	viewing
problematic.

Accordingly,	 I	 have	muted	 the	 audio	 feeds	 from	 the	 bio-containment	 ward
and	 encouraged	 security	 personnel	 to	 leave	 the	 cameras	 off	most	 of	 the	 time,
making	occasional	 spot	 checks	only.	Since	Gráinne	and	Magnus	are	 locked	 in,
escape	 is	 physically	 impossible,	 and	 since	 our	 long-suffering	medical	 personnel
are	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 a	 door,	 only	 a	 few	 yards	 away,	with	 access	 to	 the	 no
doubt	 spectacular	 bio-monitor	 readout	 infographics,	 there	 is	 zero	 chance	 of
either	of	these	two	Anachrons	suffering	any	kind	of	medical	emergency	without
our	knowing	of	it	immediately.

These	 measures,	 which	 I	 unilaterally	 placed	 into	 effect	 this	 morning	 after
stumbling	into	the	ops	center	during	a	particularly	egregious	transaction	between
Magnus	and	Gráinne,	have	already	lifted	morale	among	security	staff	and	eased	a
tense	situation.	Lieutenant	[name	redacted],	who	first	drew	my	attention	to	the
problem,	has	been	placed	on	medical	leave	and	assigned	to	a	counselor.

Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff
on	“Department	Heads”	ODIN	channel

DAY	1881

Post	from	LTC	Tristan	Lyons:
Not	to	nitpick,	but	Gráinne’s	not	a	“screamer”	in	my	experience.

Reply	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes:



Could	you	clarify	that	please?

From	LTC	Lyons:
Hahaha,	yes,	happy	to	clarify	(thanks,	Stokes!).	During	various	DEDEs
in	settings	where	Gráinne	was	engaged	in	sexual	activity	WITH	OTHER
PEOPLE,	 I	 did	 not	 observe	 the	 vocalizations	 mentioned	 in	 Sloane’s
incident	report.

From	Dr.	Stokes:
Maybe	 she	 simply	 wasn’t	 enjoying	 herself—there’s	 no	 reason	 a	 sex
worker	would.

From	LTC	Lyons:
Can	someone	tell	me	how	to	retreat	from	this	minefield?	All	I’m	saying
is:	archive	the	recordings	even	if	they’re	not	being	live-monitored.

TRANSCRIPT	(EXCERPT)
CONVERSATION	BETWEEN	GRÁINNE	(G)

AND	MAGNUS	(M)
DAY	1884	(LATE	SEPTEMBER,	YEAR	5)

NOTES:	Video	recording	was	made	automatically	by	a	motion-activated	security
camera	system	in	bio-containment	ward	at	DODO	HQ,	Cambridge,	MA.	In	the
wake	of	subsequent	events,	the	file	was	salvaged	from	a	secure	server	by	DODO
personnel	and	transferred	to	the	ad	hoc	GRIMNIR	backup	system,	where	it	was
later	transcribed.	Excerpt	below	begins	at	approximately	14:12	local	time.
Subjects	are	engaged	in	“missionary	position”	style	coitus	with	faces	in	close
contact	and	so	audio	is	of	low	quality.	Dialog	is	in	a	mishmash	of	languages;	this	is
an	approximate	translation	into	modern	English.

G:	I	asked	Erszebet	about	“shock	and	awe.”
M:	The	words	the	Pigeon	used?



G:	(slapping	Magnus	on	the	buttock)	Blevins,	lad.	His	name	is	Blevins.
M:	What	is	their	meaning?
G:	’Tis	a	phrase	used	by	soldiers.	From	one	of	their	sagas.	A	tactic	to	break	the

will	of	the	enemy,	so	it	is.
M:	I	understand	this	tactic	well	and	moreover	have	used	it.	In	fact	I	am	using	it

now!

[REDACTED]

G:	Oh,	there’s	more.	 In	one	of	their	wars,	didn’t	 they	face	an	enemy	that	was
poor,	 ill-equipped,	with	bad	weapons	and	 low	morale.	To	make	 the	war	be
over	 fast,	 they	 used	many	 of	 their	 best	weapons	 in	 a	 great	 show	of	 force.
This	was	shock	and	awe.

M:	So	Erszebet	thinks	that	the	Pigeon	means	to	use	this	tactic	on	me.	To	fuck
my	mind	like	I	am	fucking	your	pussy.

G:	You’re	fucking	my	pussy?	I	hadn’t	noticed.
M:	Notice	this!

[REDACTED]

G:	Be	getting	your	mind	off	of	Erszebet,	now.
M:	That	is	difficult.
G:	Then	close	your	pretty	eyes	and	pretend	it’s	her	you’re	fucking.
M:	Okay.	Mmm,	that’s	very	nice!
G:	(pinches	Magnus’s	nipple)
M:	Bitch!
G:	 Be	 paying	 attention,	 I’m	 trying	 to	 tell	 you	 something	 important	 about

Blevins.
M:	I	understand.	But	if	you	pinch	my	nipple	again	I’ll	flip	you	over	and	give	it	to

you	up	the	ass	and	then	I’ll	be	pinching	your	nipples	and	pulling	your	hair
and	you	won’t	be	able	to	do	a	thing	about	it	except	moan	like	an	alley	cat.

G:	That,	and	reach	up	underneath	to	be	grabbing	you	by	the	ball	sack	which	is
what	happened	when	you	tried	that	yesterday.

M:	Yes,	I	remember	.	.	.	or	was	it	the	day	before?
G:	In	any	case	the	K-Y	Jelly	is	right	over	there	if	you	mean	it.
M:	Kind	of	them	to	leave	that	there	for	us.	I	was	going	to	kill	that	doctor	when

he	shoved	his	 finger	up	my	ass	but	 then	 I	 realized	 the	possibilities	of	 that
substance.



G:	Yes,	 you	 could	 fuck	me	 in	 the	ass	 and	not	be	 seeing	my	 face	 so	you	 could
imagine	I	was	Erszebet.

M:	She	makes	me	hot.
G:	She	makes	me	hot	and	I’m	not	even	a	woman-fucking	kind	of	woman.
M:	I’d	like	to	see	the	two	of	you	doing	it!
G:	Maybe	soon.	Growing	close	aren’t	we,	she	and	I.	She	has	much	to	say	to	me.
M:	About	shock	and	awe?
G:	 And	 other	 things.	 She	 saw	 the	 death	 of	 magic	 with	 her	 own	 eyes.	 Lived

through	it,	so	she	did,	poor	lass.	So	we	don’t	just	talk	about	your	concerns,
Magnus,	but	matters	of	interest	to	us	witches.

M:	I	know	that,	I’m	not	stupid.
G:	You	just	act	that	way.
M:	Yes.
G:	Keep	it	up.
M:	I	will.
G:	Oh,	and	be	keeping	that	up	too!

[REDACTED]

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	on
“Announcements”	ODIN	channel
DAY	1890	(1	OCTOBER,	YEAR	5)

For	 fear	 of	 “putting	 a	 jinx”	 on	 it,	 we’re	 not	 having	 a	 formal	 ribbon-
cutting	ceremony	this	time,	but	I	wanted	to	announce	that	ATTO	#1—
the	 first	of	our	new,	 fully	mobile	ODECs—went	 “hot”	 this	morning	at
0900	 sharp.	 I’m	 assured	 that	 all	 systems	 are	working	 normally,	 and
Gráinne—who	 is	 now	 out	 of	 quarantine—reports	 that	 she	 is	 able	 to
perform	magical	activities	 inside	of	 it	as	effectively	as	she	ever	could
in	Elizabethan	London.
Please	 join	 me	 in	 congratulating	 Dr.	 Oda	 on	 another	 major

achievement.	It	is	going	on	three	years	since	he	shifted	to	“Emeritus”



status	 in	the	wake	of	the	successful	Chronotron	launch,	and	some	of
you	may	have	mistaken	that	for	a	dignified	form	of	retirement.	In	truth
his	 work	 on	 this	 project	 has	 been	 tireless	 and	 relentless,	 and	 a
testimony	 to	what	may	 be	 achieved	 by	 a	 gifted	mind	when	 given	 the
freedom	 to	 pursue	 its	 own	 interests	 unfettered	 by	 bureaucratic
restrictions.

Post	by	Dr.	Frank	Oda	on
“Announcements”	ODIN	channel
DAY	1890	(1	OCTOBER,	YEAR	5)

Thanks	 to	 Dr.	 Blevins	 and	 to	 all	 those	 of	 you	 who	 have	 sent	 me
congratulatory	messages	and	greeted	me	in	person	today.	In	truth	it	is
a	bittersweet	day,	for	I	actually	am	now	transitioning	to	full	retirement
after	three	years	of	work	on	the	Ambient	Temperature	Tactical	ODEC
(ATTO).	My	full	departure	is	still	a	few	months	away.	In	the	meantime,
here	 is	 a	 little	 more	 information	 for	 those	 of	 you	 who	 haven’t	 been
following	this	closely.
“Ambient	Temperature”	simply	means	that	this	ODEC	is	capable	of

functioning	 without	 being	 connected	 to	 large,	 expensive,	 finicky
cryogenic	systems.	To	make	a	long	story	short,	we	have	achieved	this
by	 replacing	 the	 traditional	 superconductors	 with	 higher-temp
superconductors	that	can	be	kept	at	the	required	temperature	through
a	combination	of	clever	insulation	and	solid-state	Peltier	coolers.
“Tactical”	 is	 a	 reference	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 these	 ODECs,	 unlike	 the

ones	 we	 are	 used	 to,	 are	 capable	 of	 being	 moved	 about.	 For
simplicity’s	 sake,	 we	 have	 constructed	 the	 first	 production	 run	 of
ATTOs	 in	 conventional,	 unmarked	shipping	 containers.	So	 this	 finally
answers	the	question	that	has	been	on	so	many	people’s	minds	during
the	last	couple	of	years:	Why	is	there	a	shipping	container	in	Loading
Bay	3	with	technicians	in	bunny	suits	going	in	and	out	of	it?



Finally,	 “ODEC”	 simply	 means	 that,	 despite	 the	 innovations
mentioned	above,	this	is,	at	the	end	of	the	day,	just	another	ODEC,	i.e.,
an	environment	in	which	it	is	possible	for	MUONs	to	conduct	MAGOPs.
On	 the	 inside	 it	 is	 somewhat	 larger	 than	 our	 stationary	 “strategic”
ODECs	 in	 the	 basement,	 but	 as	 far	 as	 the	MUON	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is
functionally	the	same.
As	to	what	uses	the	ATTOs	might	be	put	to,	I’ll	allow	readers	of	this

message	to	use	their	imaginations.	Let’s	just	say	that	when	we	fired	up
the	first	ODEC	some	four	years	ago	and	let	Erszebet	go	to	work	in	 it,
we	learned	very	quickly	that	most	of	the	things	witches	are	capable	of
were	not	actually	 that	useful,	 from	a	practical	standpoint,	as	 long	as
they	were	 confined	 to	 a	 fixed	 volume	 the	 size	 of	 a	 phone	 booth.	We
settled	on	Sending	and	Homing	as	the	two	most	useful	functionalities,
and	 as	 you	 know	 we	 have	 constructed	 a	 large	 organization	 around
that.	The	new	ATTOs	 (of	which	we	have	one	up	and	running,	 three	 in
final	production,	and	six	more	in	the	works)	can	do	everything	the	old
ODECs	 can	 do,	 but	 our	 ability	 to	 move	 them	 around	 the	 world	 and
disguise	 them	 should	 enable	 our	 ever-growing	 staff	 of	 MUONs	 to
practice	 their	 craft	 in	 a	 greater	 diversity	 of	 operational	 modalities,
broadening	 the	 palette	 of	 force	 projection	 options	 available	 to	 our
strategic	 leadership	 team	 as	 they	 consider	 how	 most	 effectively	 to
project	American	soft	power	across	time	and	space.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

OCTOBER	2

Temperature	65F—warm,	fair,	and	dry,	with	slight	breeze	from	the	west.
Barometer	 steady.	 Foliage	 turning;	 about	 nine	 days	 from	 peak	 (will	 be	 a
little	early	this	year).

Didn’t	 make	 a	 journal	 entry	 yesterday	 because	 feared	 I	 couldn’t	 keep
emotions	in	check.

The	day	comes	for	every	man	when	he	has	to	retire.	There	is	little	point



in	pretending	otherwise.	For	Frank	that	day	was	yesterday;	he	has	already
dropped	to	fifty	percent	and	will	 taper	to	full	retirement	at	the	end	of	the
year.	 I	 am	 a	 little	 apprehensive	 as	 to	 where	 he	 will	 find	 outlets	 for	 his
energies	when	he	 is	 spending	 all	 of	 his	 time	 at	 home	 again,	 but	 the	East
House	 Trust	 can	 certainly	 put	 him	 to	 work	 on	 innumerable	 repair	 and
improvement	projects,	at	least	for	a	little	while.

For	the	most	part,	he	is	going	out	on	a	high	note	with	the	ATTO.	During
the	 years	 of	 his	 first	 retirement,	 when	 he	 was	 living	 in	 exile	 from	 the
scientific	community,	we	were	both	 in	denial	about	how	bad	 things	were.
Going	back	to	productive	work	at	DODO	was	the	best	thing	in	the	world	for
him.	All	 the	 politics	 and	 the	mishaps	 tempered	his	 enjoyment	 to	 quite	 a
degree,	 but	 the	 honors	 he	 has	 received	within	 the	 secret	world	 of	 black-
budget	defense	technology	have	meant	the	world	to	him.

He	 announced	 his	 retirement	 yesterday,	 but	 his	 message	 to	 his
colleagues	 was	 butchered	 by	 someone	 in	 Macy	 Stoll’s	 department	 who
heaped	on	a	lot	of	gibberish	at	the	end.	I	can	only	trust	that	his	treasured
colleagues	saw	through	it	and	found	it	amusing.

LETTER	(HANDWRITTEN)	ON	PERSONAL

STATIONERY	OF

DR.	ROGER	BLEVINS	TO

LIEUTENANT	GENERAL	OCTAVIAN	K.

FRINK

DAY	1905	(MID-OCTOBER,	YEAR	5)
Okie,

Hope	you’re	enjoying	the	cooler	weather	down	in	DC,	up	here
fall	is	on	the	way	and	the	colors	are	starting	to	peak.	Great	football
weather.

Just	wanted	to	drop	you	a	note	letting	you	know	progress	with
our	two	newest	Anachrons.



Gráinne	 bounced	 back	 from	 the	 inoculation	 protocol	 in	 fine
form	and	seems	to	have	picked	up	an	additional	infusion	of	energy
and	 high	 spirits	 from	 spending	 hours	 each	 day	 in	 the	 ATTO,
where	 she	 has	 access	 to	 magic	 again.	 As	 you	 know	 we	 had	 a
challenging	battery	of	experiments	lined	up	for	her,	all	more	or	less
in	the	realm	of	psy-ops,	and	after	a	rough	patch	at	 the	beginning
when	 she	 didn’t	 quite	 see	 the	 point	 of	 it	 (systematic
experimentation	not	being	a	natural	 fit	 for	a	witch!),	she	buckled
down	 to	 work	 and	 has	 been	 generating	 all	 sorts	 of	 interesting
results.	 Yesterday	 I	 went	 into	 the	 ATTO	 while	 it	 was	 up	 and
running	 and	 sat	 in	 on	 some	 of	 these	 procedures	 as	 an	 observer.
There	 is	 the	 usual	 “ODEC	mind	 fog”	 which	 nearly	 all	 modern
people	 complain	 about	 to	 a	 greater	 or	 lesser	 extent,	 but	 I	 came
away	 immensely	 impressed	 with	 Gráinne’s	 talents	 and	 her
dedication	to	DODO’s	mission.	In	retrospect,	it’s	a	shame	we	kept
her	tucked	away	in	Elizabethan	England	for	so	many	years.	She	is
clearly	 our	 most	 capable	 MUON,	 and	 if	 I	 may	 say	 as	 much
without	 stepping	 over	 the	 boundaries	 of	 the	 sexual	 harassment
policy,	 a	 real	 ornament	 to	 DODO.	 She	 doesn’t	 have	 Erszebet’s
drop-dead	looks	but	rather	a	kind	of	presence	that	grows	on	you.

Anyway,	 that’s	 probably	 enough	 on	 that	 topic—the	 R&D
boffins	 are	 working	 up	 some	 numbers	 on	 the	 results	 of	 our
experiments	 that	 you	 should	 be	 able	 to	 share	 with	 all	 of	 those
senators	 who	 are	 badgering	 you	 for	 the	 latest	 news	 on	 the
Trapezoid’s	so-called	“mind	control”	experiments.

Sometimes	 it’s	a	 shame	you’re	not	up	here	 in	Cambridge	with
us,	as	you	miss	the	human	side	of	things.	Today	I	introduced	one
of	our	other	new	Anachrons	to	some	of	the	wonders	of	the	modern
world.	This	is	Magnus,	whom	you’ll	remember	as	the	troublesome
Varangian	Guard	who	had	to	be	Sent	forward.	To	judge	from	the
alarmist	 reports	 that	 were	 flying	 around	 prior	 to	 that	 decision,
you’d	 imagine	 him	 as	 some	 kind	 of	 dangerous	 predatory
mastermind.	 Of	 course,	 now	 that	 he’s	 here,	 he	 turns	 out	 to	 be



nothing	of	the	sort.	He’s	a	simple,	amiable	chap	with	a	wide-eyed
appreciation	 for	 everything	 we	 share	 with	 him.	 Don’t	 get	 me
wrong,	 I	 wouldn’t	 want	 to	 get	 on	 his	 bad	 side,	 but	 we	 think	 he
could	be	a	fine	trainer	in	the	Violence(s)	Ethnology	Department.

To	whet	his	appetite	a	bit,	and	air	him	out,	I	 took	him	up	to
Andover	for	the	homecoming	game,	which	as	you’ll	know	from	the
alumni	newsletter	we	won	in	a	fine	come-from-behind	effort.	This
was	an	excellent	fit	for	his	overall	mentality.	He	isn’t	the	sharpest
knife	 in	 the	drawer,	but	he	 is	 enthusiastic,	 and	after	 some	 initial
confusion	he	understood	the	basics	of	the	rules—which	he	likened
to	 shield-wall	 combat	 among	 the	Vikings.	He	 cheered	 lustily	 for
our	 side	 all	 the	 way	 through	 the	 game	 and	 seemed	 genuinely
moved	by	the	last-minute	heroics.	I’m	able	to	converse	with	him	in
a	mixture	of	Byzantine	Greek,	Old	French,	and	modern	English
(knowing	lots	of	half-dead	obscure	languages	continues	to	have	its
plusses,	even	if	it	doesn’t	put	me	in	your	pay	grade).

This	is	all	somewhat	calculated,	I’ll	admit:	since	arriving	in	our
age,	 Magnus	 hasn’t	 seen	 modern	 people	 engaged	 in	 any	 sort	 of
rough-and-tumble,	and	I	wanted	to	impress	upon	him	that	we	as	a
people	 have	 not	 gone	 entirely	 soft.	 Message	 delivered;	 after	 the
game	 we	 went	 down	 to	 the	 field	 and	 chatted	 with	 some	 of	 the
players	 (I	 am	 introducing	 him	 as	 a	 recently	 arrived	 exchange
student	 from	 Dagestan),	 and	 afterwards	 in	 the	 car	 he	 made
appreciative	comments	about	their	size	and	strength	and	grit.

Having	got	that	message	across,	I	then	proceeded	to	take	him	to
Walmart	en	route	home.

Imagine	 a	man	 from	 the	 thirteenth	 century	 suddenly	 plucked
into	the	twenty-first	.	.	.	and	introduced	to	Walmart	of	all	places!

Beyond	 the	 total	 astonishment	 of	 modern	 life	 in	 general,	 the
cornucopia	of	goods	clearly	 left	him	gobsmacked,	as	the	Brits	say.
He	 has	 had	 a	 childish	 fixation	 on	 lidocaine	 ever	 since	 the
dermatologist	used	it	on	him,	and	was	delighted	to	find	that	there
was	 an	 entire	 section	 of	 the	 store	 stocked	 not	 only	with	 that	 but



many	other	magical	potions	as	well.	I	showed	him	a	cordless	drill
—and	 then	 the	 expressions	 on	 his	 face!	He	 almost	 tired	me	 out
with	his	naive	enthusiasm—we	covered	 the	entire	 store.	Not	 just
the	obvious	things	like	furniture	and	clothes,	but	sports	equipment,
dinnerware	.	.	.	He	was	delighted	with	things	we	take	for	granted
—insect	repellent!	He	loved	the	insect	repellent!	As	well	as	canned
goods;	chili	mix;	hairspray.	A	refreshing	reminder	of	how	amazing
the	world	we	live	in	really	is.

If	you	ever	want	to	be	reminded	how	extraordinary	modern	life
is,	if	you	ever	need	to	slap	yourself	out	of	the	complacency	of	taking
electricity	or	Teflon	for	granted	.	.	.	come	take	an	Anachron	out	on
an	orientation	tour.

Love	to	Bess	and	the	family.	Get	your	butt	up	here	some	time
soon	 for	 a	 round	 of	 golf.	Don’t	 worry	 about	 the	 bugs—we	 have
insect	repellent!

Cheers,
Blev

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	on
“Announcements”	ODIN	channel
DAY	1920	(31	OCTOBER,	YEAR	5)

To	all	employees	and	contractors:
This	is	just	a	final	reminder	that	we	are	closing	early	this	afternoon

at	 3	 p.m.	 to	make	 preparations	 for	 the	 annual	 Halloween	 party.	 For
those	of	 you	who’ve	 joined	DODO	 in	 the	past	 year—and	 I	 know	 there
are	many	 of	 you—this	 is	 traditionally	 our	 biggest	 social	 event	 of	 the
year,	 comparable	 to	 what	 the	 Christmas	 party	 would	 be	 in	 a	 less
culturally	 and	 spatiotemporally	 diverse	 organization.	 In	 accordance
with	 our	 usual	 protocols,	 we	 need	 to	 make	 special	 preparations	 to
welcome	your	family	members	and	SOs	without	 inadvertently	 leaking
classified	information.	Thanks	to	all	who	have	volunteered	to	help	out



with	that	work—by	now	you	should	know	your	assignments.
On	a	practical	level,	this	means	that	all	access	to	the	basement	bio-

containment/ODEC	complex	will	be	sealed	off	at	3	p.m.	sharp,	and	a
rotating	 security	 detail	 assigned	 there	 (we	 want	 to	 make	 sure
DOSECOPS	 gets	 to	 enjoy	 the	 festivities	 too!).	 The	 main	 site	 for	 the
party	 will	 be	 the	 cafeteria.	 Please	 be	 sure	 you	 have	 removed	 all
documents	of	a	potentially	sensitive	nature	from	that	area.	We’ll	also
be	allowing	visitors	to	tour	the	Chronotron	on	a	half-hourly	basis,	and
so	 IT	 personnel	 need	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 all	 documents	 are	 stowed
away	 in	 locked	drawers—this	 includes	Post-it	notes	on	monitors	and
desktops,	etc.
Halloween	decorations	will	go	up	in	the	cafeteria	starting	at	4	p.m.

and	we’ll	have	the	usual	trick-or-treat	facilities	for	the	little	ones.
Also	at	4	p.m.	we’ll	have	a	briefing	 in	 the	big	conference	room	 for

Anachrons	who	 are	 unfamiliar	with	 our	 traditions	 around	Halloween
and	 may	 need	 some	 guidance	 as	 to	 what	 is	 and	 is	 not	 appropriate
behavior—I	know	this	has	been	a	concern	in	the	past,	based	on	some
of	the	anecdotes	and	incident	reports	that	have	been	shared	with	me.
Remember,	our	medical	staff	would	like	to	enjoy	the	evening	too—let’s
not	make	them	work!
Doors	open	at	5	p.m.	for	families	and	SOs.
As	you	choose	your	costumes,	please	try	to	keep	in	mind	everything

our	Diversity	Policy	has	to	say	about	stereotypes	surrounding	witches.
Most	of	you	who	work	here	don’t	need	to	be	told	this,	but	every	year	it
seems	 we	 have	 some	 children	 who	 show	 up	 in	 costumes	 that	 are
offensive	 to	 certain	members	 of	 our	 staff.	 Remember,	 the	 following
costume	elements	are	expressly	forbidden:

Pointy	hats
Green	skin
Warts	on	nose
Brooms

Anyone	 who	 shows	 up	 in	 a	 potentially	 offensive	 costume	 will	 be
gently	redirected	to	Conference	Room	12	where	we	will	have	a	range
of	alternative	costume	choices	to	choose	from.
With	 your	 assistance	 I’m	 sure	 we	 can	 all	 look	 forward	 to	 another



enjoyable	and	memorable	Halloween	party.	Have	fun,	everyone!

TRANSCRIPT
SELECTED	RADIO	TRAFFIC

ON	DODO	SECURITY	FREQUENCIES
DAY	1920	(HALLOWEEN,	YEAR	5)

NOTES:
All	 content	 transcribed	 from	 recordings	 made	 during	 the	 evening	 of
Halloween	 and	 auto-saved	 to	 DODO	 archives.	 In	 the	 wake	 of
subsequent	events,	 files	were	salvaged	 from	a	secure	server	by	DODO
personnel	and	transferred	to	the	ad	hoc	GRIMNIR	backup	system,	from
which	 they	 were	 later	 decrypted	 and	 transcribed.	 Repetitive	 content
such	as	routine	comm	checks	has	been	redacted	for	clarity.

OTHER	NOTES:
—“BACKHOE”	 is	 Secret	 Service	 code	 name	 for	 Lieutenant	 General
Octavian	K.	Frink.
—“STYLUS”	is	Dr.	Roger	Blevins.
—“DOSECOPS	 C4”	 is	 the	 communications	 officer	 on	 duty	 in	 the
Diachronic	Operations	Security	Ops	 (DOSECOPS)	Command,	Control,
and	Communications	Center,	 the	hub	 for	 security	operations	beneath
DODO’s	Cambridge,	MA,	headquarters.
—“DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL”	is	the	ranking	officer	on	duty	there	(at	the
time	of	these	recordings,	Major	Isobel	Sloane).
—“DOSECOP	1,”	“DOSECOP	2,”	etc.	denote	specific	security	officers	on
site.
—“USSS	1,”	USSS	2,”	 etc.	denote	United	States	Secret	Service	officers
visiting	the	site	as	part	of	BACKHOE’s	personal	security	detail.

15:00:00	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 All	 units,	 this	 is	 a	 reminder	 that	 the	 facility	 is	 now



officially	closed	for	the	day	and	transitioning	to	off-hours	security	protocols.
We’re	 expecting	 a	 number	 of	 delivery	 vehicles	 in	 the	 next	 two	 hours	 at
Docks	 1	 and	 2,	 these	 will	 be	 bringing	 party	 supplies.	 Normal	 screening
procedures	 apply	 for	 all	 incoming	 cargo,	 drivers,	 and	 entertainment
personnel.	Doors	open	for	civilian	guests	in	two	hours.

15:37:12	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	This	is	C4	Actual.	I	have	just	received	confirmation
that	Backhoe	is	coming	to	the	party.	He’ll	be	coming	in	from	Hanscom,	exact
arrival	 time	 TBD.	 We	 will	 be	 integrating	 with	 his	 Secret	 Service	 detail	 as
needed.	Officers	on	duty	at	Dock	1	should	stand	by	to	close	it	to	all	civilian
traffic	 and	 make	 it	 ready	 to	 receive	 Backhoe	 and	 his	 entourage;	 please
acknowledge.

15:37:38	DOSECOP	1:	Acknowledged,	standing	by.

16:05:56	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 Two	 vans	 are	 now	 inbound	 from	 MUON	 Residential
Facility	 carrying	 a	 total	 of	 nineteen	MUONs	 and	 three	 support	 staff,	 ETA
16:30.	We’ll	direct	them	to	Docks	1	and	2.	Any	officers	on	patrol	in	that	part
of	 the	 building	 should	 stand	 by	 to	 help	 check	 credentials,	 just	 to	 avoid	 a
backup	and	a	lot	of	annoyed	MUONs.

16:23:32	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	This	is	C4	Actual.	I’ve	received	confirmation	from
Backhoe’s	Secret	Service	detail	that	he	is	on	the	ground	and	in	a	vehicle.	ETA
is	 about	 17:30	 depending	 on	 traffic,	 will	 update	 as	 I	 have	 further
information.

16:30:00	DOSECOPS	C4:	All	units,	this	is	a	reminder	that	doors	will	open	for	civilian
ingress	 in	 thirty	minutes.	Officers	on	 internal	patrols,	now	 is	 the	 time	 for
you	to	inspect	all	surfaces	for	potentially	classified	documents.	All	monitors
are	 to	 be	 switched	 off	 or	 placed	 in	 secure	 locked	 mode	 with	 Infosec-
compliant	screen	savers.

16:31:45	DOSECOP	1:	Dock	1	here.	MUON	vans	have	arrived	and	are	backing	into
the	grade-level	ramps	at	Docks	1	and	2.

16:31:55	DOSECOPS	C4:	Acknowledged.	Have	officers	standing	by	the	side	doors	of
those	vans	to	offer	a	hand	to	disembarking	MUONs,	we	have	been	warned
to	expect	an	abundance	of	high	heels,	and	some	of	the	ladies	are	new	to	that
kind	of	footwear.	Don’t	want	to	kick	off	the	party	with	an	injury.

16:32:02	DOSECOP	1:	Acknowledged.	Standing	by	with	stepstools	and	strong	arms.
16:36:38	DOSECOPS	C4:	Loading	dock	detail,	sitrep	please?	Looks	on	the	cameras

like	there’s	quite	a	bottleneck	and	some	hurt	feelings.



16:36:54	DOSECOP	1:	Roger	that,	C4.	If	you’re	watching	this	on	the	feed	you	may
have	noticed	that	some	of	the	MUONs’	costumes	are,	uh	.	.	.

16:37:00	DOSECOPS	C4:	Stop	right	 there	before	you	get	 into	 trouble,	officer.	Yes,
the	costumes	have	been	receiving	close	attention	from	C4	staff	and	we	are
aware	of	their	nature.	What	is	the	issue?

16:37:10	DOSECOP	1:	Some	of	them	didn’t	bring	their	lanyards	and	badges	because
of	 compatibility	 issues	 of	 an	 aesthetic	 or	 stylistic	 nature	 with	 costumes.
Procedures	dictate	.	.	.

16:37:20	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	Understood.	This	is	Actual.	I	am	authorizing	you	to
waive	 procedures	 and	 treat	 the	MUONs	 as	 civilians	 for	 now.	 No	 need	 to
write	up	 incident	reports	or	any	of	that.	Visual	 ID	 is	sufficient.	The	one	 in
the	red	shimmery	um	.	.	.	whatever	you	call	it	is	gonna	have	to	take	her	mask
off	whether	she	likes	it	or	not.

16:37:31	 DOSECOP	 1:	 Roger	 that,	 Actual.	 Speaking	 of	 visual	 ID,	we	 have	 two	 in
violation	of	the	diversity	policy	regs.

16:37:40	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	Come	again?
16:37:46	DOSECOP	1:	Pointy	hats	and	brooms,	sir.
16:37:50	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	So,	two	of	the	MUONs	are	attired	in	a	manner	that

is	culturally	offensive	to	MUONs?
16:37:57	DOSECOP	1:	According	to	the	regs	issued	yesterday,	yes,	sir.
16:38:02	 DOSECOPS	 C4	 ACTUAl:	 That’s	Ms.	 Stoll’s	 problem.	 Let	 them	 in	 without

further	delay.

16:50:00	DOSECOPS	C4:	All	units,	doors	open	in	ten.
16:50:15	 DOSECOPS	 C4	 ACTUAL:	 This	 is	 C4	 Actual.	 Just	 an	 update	 before	 all	 hell

breaks	 loose.	Backhoe	 is	still	 inbound,	ETA	has	been	pushed	back	to	17:45
because	he	has	decided	to	swing	by	Stylus’s	residence	and	pick	up	Stylus	and
his	 wife	 en	 route.	 They	 will	 all	 be	 arriving	 together.	 At	 that	 time	 we’ll	 be
clearing	Dock	1	for	the	vehicle	carrying	Backhoe	and	Stylus,	as	well	as	Dock	2
for	the	war	wagon	with	Secret	Service	detail.

16:51:20	DOSECOP	2:	Reporting	in	from	Door	1	where	we	have	now	two	separate
minivan	 loads	 of	 costumed	 rug	 rats	with	moms	 in	 a	 high	 state	 of	 combat
readiness.	 They	 are	 taking	 exception	 to	 our	 holding	 the	 line	 on	 the	 1700
hours	opening	time.	Request	permission	to	let	them	in	early.

16:51:30	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 Hold	 the	 line.	We	 see	 the	moms	 and	 concur	 with	 your
threat	assessment.	As	diversionary	tactic	we	are	sending	out	a	 juggler	on	a
unicycle.	You	might	want	to	open	the	door	for	him.



16:51:59	DOSECOP	2:	Acknowledged,	I	have	unicyclist	on	visual.

17:00:00	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	Okay	to	open	doors	to	civilian	guests.	Officers	on
patrol,	 divert	 to	 entrance	 zones	 and	 help	 with	 any	 bottlenecks—all
credentials	need	to	be	checked,	no	exceptions.

17:01:11	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 Door	 2	 personnel,	 our	 audio	 systems	 picked	 up	 a	 loud
bang	followed	by	a	scream,	please	report.

17:01:25	DOSECOP	3:	Roger,	that	was	the	guy	making	the	balloon	animals.	Wiener
dog	underwent	explosive	decompression,	scared	a	baby.

17:01:34	DOSECOPS	C4:	Acknowledged.

17:15:00	DOSECOPS	C4:	All	door	units,	report	with	numbers.
17:15:15	DOSECOP	3:	Door	2	has	admitted	41	with	approximately	three	dozen	still

waiting	for	credentials	check.
17:15:31	DOSECOP	2:	Door	1,	79	in,	a	dozen	waiting.
17:15:40	DOSECOP	4:	Door	3,	56	in,	maybe	two	dozen	outside.
17:16:02	DOSECOP	1:	Uh,	C4,	no	one	yet	except	the	MUONs	but	we	are	expecting

two	 full	 buses	 from	 the	 SARF	 [Supervised	 Anachron	 Residential	 Facility]
with	an	estimated	total	of	70.	Should	be	here	in	ten.

17:16:12	DOSECOPS	C4:	Weren’t	they	supposed	to	be	in	the	building	by	1600?	For
the	Anachron	briefing?

17:16:17	DOSECOP	1:	Anachrons	and	their	sense	of	time.
17:16:26	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	This	is	C4	Actual,	I	want	those	buses	processed	fast

so	 we	 can	 clear	 the	 docks	 for	 Backhoe’s	 vehicles.	 Any	 officers	 on	 internal
patrol,	if	it	looks	like	the	surge	is	abating	at	the	doors,	redirect	to	the	loading
docks.

...

17:27:43	DOSECOP	1:	Here	come	the	SARF	buses.	Brace	for	weirdness.

17:50:15	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 Patching	 Secret	 Service	 voice	 frequencies	 into	 local
DOSECOPS	 VOIP	 network.	 We	 should	 all	 be	 on	 the	 same	 channel	 now,
literally.

17:50:21	USSS	1:	Backhoe	vehicle	1,	comm	check.
17:50:25	DOSECOPS	C4:	Acknowledged.
17:50:30	USSS	2:	Backhoe	vehicle	2,	comm	check.
17:50:35	DOSECOPS	C4:	Acknowledged.
17:50:42	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	This	is	DOSECOPS	C4	Actual	welcoming	our	Secret



Service	brothers	and	sisters	to	Boston.	We	are	tracking	you	with	an	ETA	of
sixty	 seconds.	Officers	 in	 civilian	clothes	are	waiting	on	 the	 street	 to	wave
your	vehicles	in.	Loading	docks	are	clear.

17:50:59	 USSS	 1:	 Thank	 you,	 C4	 Actual,	 Boston	 drivers	 have	 made	 quite	 an
impression	on	us,	and	we	are	looking	forward	to	working	with	you	and	your
staff	on	a	safe,	sane	Halloween	party.

17:52:15	USSS	1:	C4,	I’m	out	of	the	vehicle	and	having	a	look-see	around	the	dock
area.	 Everything	 looks	 nominal	 but	 there	 is	 one	 gentleman	 wearing	 a
Mongol	costume	having	an	argument	with	your	door	staff	.	.	.

17:52:25	DOSECOPS	C4:	It’s	not	a	costume.
17:52:29	USSS	1:	Come	again?
17:52:33	DOSECOPS	C4:	He	actually	is	a	Mongol.
17:52:40	USSS	1:	Oh.
17:52:43	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	We’ve	 patched	him	 into	 an	 interpreter	 over	 a	 voice	 link

but	the	conversation	is	proceeding	slowly.
17:52:53	USSS	1:	Is	that	a	real	archery	set	he’s	carrying?	That	is	my	only	concern.

That,	and	the	fact	that	he	seems	agitated.	Is	it	safe	for	Backhoe	to	get	out	of
the	car?	Oh,	never	mind,	Backhoe	just	got	out	of	the	car.

17:53:01	DOSECOPS	C4:	Who	is	the	Indian	chief?	Hard	to	make	out	on	the	security
feed.

17:53:09	USSS	1:	That	is	Stylus.	Repeat,	Stylus	is	dressed	as	an	Indian	chief.
17:53:20	USSS	2:	On	another	note,	C4,	has	the	shipping	container	in	the	adjoining

bay	been	cleared	and	secured?
17:53:27	DOSECOPS	C4:	The	rusty	green	one	over	in	Dock	3?
17:53:31	USSS	2:	 Roger.	 Just	 part	 of	 our	 SOP	 to	 check	 and	 secure	 any	of	 those

within	our	perimeter.
17:53:40	DOSECOPS	C4:	Understood.	It’s	not	a	shipping	container.
17:53:44	USSS	2:	Come	again,	C4?
17:53:52	DOSECOPS	C4:	The	thing	 in	Dock	3	that	 looks	exactly	 like	a	rusty	green

shipping	 container	 is	 something	 else.	 Will	 explain	 later.	 It	 is	 extremely
secure.

17:54:02	USSS	1:	As	you	can	see,	Backhoe’s	entire	delegation	is	out	of	the	vehicle
and	 waiting	 behind	 the	 Mongol,	 can	 we	 have	 the	 interpreter	 tell	 him	 to
stand	aside	please	so	that	we	can	wave	our	people	through?

17:54:07	DOSECOPS	C4:	Will	pass	your	request	on	but	it	might	be	more	prudent	to
.	.	.



17:54:11	 USSS	 1:	 Never	 mind,	 C4,	 Stylus	 is	 gesturing	 toward	 the	 shipping
container,	telling	the	others	about	it.

17:54:17	DOSECOPS	C4:	ATTO.	It’s	called	an	ATTO.	The	shipping	container.
17:54:31	 DOSECOP	 1:	 Genghis	 Khan	 has	 cleared	 door	 security,	 we	 are	 open	 for

business	to	welcome	Backhoe.	Apologies	for	delay.
17:54:36	USSS	1:	Copy	that.	Stand	by.
17:54:42	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 As	 you	 can	 see,	 Backhoe’s	 delegation	 is	 wandering	 over

toward	the	ATTO.
17:54:55	DOSECOP	1:	Is	that	Backhoe’s	costume?
17:54:59	USSS	1:	Affirmative.
17:55:06	DOSECOP	1:	He’s	dressed	as	.	.	.	a	lieutenant	general	in	the	United	States

Army?
17:55:16	USSS	1:	Affirmative.	He	says	it’s	the	only	night	of	the	year	when	he	can

wear	it	in	Boston	and	not	be	recognized.

Diachronicle	
DAY	1920	 (HALLOWEEN,	YEAR	5)

In	which	witches	will	be	witches

I	SHALL	NEVER	KNOW	IF	the	Halloween	party	was,	from	the	start,	a	monstrous
distraction	created	by	Gráinne.	It’s	true	that	the	higher-ups	had	offered	such	a
masque	the	previous	two	years	.	.	.	but	now	I	wonder	if	perhaps	Gráinne,	in
Year	5,	 did	not	use	 an	ODEC	 to	go	back	 in	 time	 to	 the	 same	ODEC	 two
years	earlier,	slip	out	and	work	her	wiles	on	Blevins	(i.e.,	induce	him	to	make
the	Halloween	party	an	annual	event),	and	then	return	to	the	present	day—I
mean	to	say,	what	was	the	present	day	before	I	was	marooned	in	1851.

In	any	case,	there	was	a	Halloween	party	and	she	used	elements	of	it	to	her



advantage.	More	specifically,	she	relied	upon	it	as	a	diversion	so	that	she	could
begin	to	use	the	ATTO	to	her	advantage.

Have	I	mentioned	the	ATTO	in	these	scribblings?	In	simplest	terms	it	was	a
portable	 ODEC.	 Oda-sensei,	 with	 his	 unending	 genius,	 sorted	 out	 how	 to
make	 it	both	portable	and	 larger	 than	 the	 stationary	ODECs	 in	 the	office:	 it
was	the	size	and	shape	of	a	shipping	container.	Blevins	was	obsessed	with	it,	a
cat	 with	 catnip,	 and	 grew	 preoccupied	 with	 all	 the	 great	 psychological
ops/warfare	that	could	be	accomplished	with	a	movable	magic	machine.	Both
Tristan	 and	 I	 were	 obviously	 hesitant	 (if	 the	 reasons	 for	 hesitance	 weren’t
obvious	then,	they	sure	as	shit	are	by	now!).

Erszebet’s	attitude	toward	the	ATTO,	and	the	work	that	could	be	done	in
it,	 vacillated	 wildly.	 After	 five	 years	 she	 was	 really	 fucking	 sick	 bored	 with
doing	 no	magic	 but	 Sending,	 and	 so	 the	 possibilities	 offered	 by	 the	ATTO
intrigued	her;	on	the	other	hand,	she	resented	going	through	another	series	of
parlor	tricks	to	demonstrate	its	capabilities,	as	she	had	done	with	us	when	we
first	 sprang	 her	 from	 the	 elder-hostel.	 I	 wish	 I	 could	 remember	 now	 what
Gráinne	thought	of	it—I	realize	with	rueful	retrospection	that	she	was	playing
her	cards	very	close	to	her	vest.

But	to	the	events	of	that	evening:	Gráinne	and	Erszebet	had	both	chosen	to
get	all	ironically	meta	about	things	mock	the	contemporary	image	of	witches
by	wearing	green	body	paint	and	pointy	hats	(they	claimed	they	were	groupies
of	 Wicked,	 but	 I	 know	 for	 a	 fact	 that	 neither	 of	 them	 has	 ever	 seen	 it).
Anyhow,	put	off	by	the	extreme	security	measures,	they	failed	to	show	up	at
the	loading	dock	as	the	rest	of	us	did,	to	pay	political	homage,	as	Blevins	and
Frink	arrived.

Roger	Blevins	was	dressed	like	a	Native	American	tribal	chieftain,	 lest	any
of	us	 forget	 that	his	cultural	 insensitivity	was	boundless.	Frink	wore	his	own
dress	uniform.	Macy	Stoll,	Blevins’s	Girl	Friday,	dressed	as	a	sexy	librarian,	or
tried	to,	anyhow.	Erszebet	had	costumed	Tristan	and	myself	to	resemble	Boris
and	Natasha	 from	War	and	Peace.	 (Tristan,	 never	 having	 read	War	 and	Peace,
assumed	he	was	 going	 to	 be	 dressed	 like	 the	Cold	War	 spy	 from	Rocky	 and
Bullwinkle,	and	was	speechless	when	presented	with	the	garb	of	a	nineteenth-
century	 Russian	 aristocrat.	 He	 did	 look	 quite	 splendid,	 I	 confess.)	 Frank
dressed	 like	the	George	Takei	character	 from	Star	Trek,	and	Rebecca	dressed
like	Rebecca,	with	a	 lavender	wreath	or	 something.	Mortimer	and	 Julie	Lee
were	non-human	bipeds.

Of	 course,	Blevins	 immediately	wanted	 to	 show	off	 the	ATTO	 to	 Frink.



Isobel	Sloane,	the	smart	and	tough	head	of	DOSECOPS,	prudently	suggested
that	they	come	back	in	an	hour,	allowing	them	to	make	sure	everything	was
“shipshape.”

Blevins	agreed	gaily,	requesting	they	then	be	joined	for	a	demonstration	by
some	 witches	 (whom	 we	 were	 supposed	 to	 call	 MUONs,	 a	 term	 Erszebet
found	onomatopoetically	 bovine	 and	 thus	offensive.	Of	 course.).	As	most	of
the	witches	were	 in	 party	 dress,	Major	 Sloane	 could	 not	 identify	 them,	 and
asked	to	solicit	Erszebet	and/or	Gráinne,	who	were	the	easiest	to	find.

Once	 the	 two	were	 located	 they	 grudgingly	 agreed	 to	 this.	 Erszebet	 had
thrown	a	hissy	fit	when	the	DOSECOPS	approached	her,	but	Rebecca	and	I
found	her	in	the	women’s	restroom	and	convinced	her	this	was	not	a	return	to
the	humiliating	parlor	 tricks	of	 the	 late	1840s.	Gráinne	was	 totally	 shit-faced
quite	 merry	 and	 trying	 to	 molest	 Mortimer	 in	 the	 coat	 closet,	 which	 we
discovered	because	 Julie	had	been	 tracking	her	 all	 evening	 in	 anticipation	of
just	 such	 an	 event.	 Gráinne	 had	 a	 thing	 for	 Mortimer	 (or	 more	 likely	 for
whatever	could	only	be	accessed	 from	his	 computer.	Ah,	 the	 sad	wisdom	of
hindsight.).

Anyhow,	an	hour	later,	Oda-sensei	ceremoniously	opened	the	door	to	the
ATTO,	ushered	 the	 quintet	 (two	witches,	Blevins,	 Frink,	 and	Mrs.	Blevins)
inside,	and	closed	the	door	on	them.

The	 Secret	 Service	 detail	 that	 had	 arrived	 with	 Frink	 immediately	 grew
agitated	 that	 they	 could	 not	 maintain	 a	 radio	 connection	 to	 him	while	 the
ATTO	was	in	operation.	I	rather	thrilled	at	Major	Sloane’s	attempt	to	explain
the	decoherence/multiverse	premise	to	them—it	was	very	satisfying	to	know
that	everyone	on	 the	DODO	team	 takes	 an	 interest	 in	what	we	are	 actually
doing.	The	Secret	Service	official	did	not	grasp	it,	concerned	only	with	losing
contact	with	the	general.

“Don’t	worry,”	said	Isobel	Sloane.	“Gráinne	is	so	drunk	that	Erszebet’s	the
only	one	doing	any	magic,	and	knowing	Erszebet	she’ll	come	flouncing	out	of
there	in	about	twenty	minutes,	bored	with	all	of	them.”

And	 a	wry	 sense	 of	 humor	 to	 boot?	How	 I	wish	 I’d	 had	 the	 bandwidth
taken	 the	 time	 to	 get	 to	 know	Major	 Isobel	 Sloane	 a	 little	 better.	When	 I
think	of	where	I	am	now,	I	cannot	but	wonder	if	she	either	contributed	to	my
situation	or	could	possibly	have	prevented	it.

To	 continue:	 Erszebet	 did	 not,	 in	 fact,	 come	 flouncing	 out	 after	 twenty
minutes,	or	even	after	thirty,	or	even	forty-five.	The	Secret	Service	folks	were
beside	 themselves	with	 anxiety.	Major	 Sloane,	 and	Tristan,	 and	 Frank	Oda,



and	myself	all	attempted	to	quell	their	misgivings.
Reader,	we	should	not	have	quelled	them.	For	there	were	things	happening

within	 that	ATTO	 that	 can	never	be	undone.	 If	 only	we	had	known	 to	be
suspicious.

20:08:00	USSS	1:	C4,	get	me	Actual.
20:08:10	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	C4	Actual	here.
20:08:13	 USSS	 1:	 It’s	 been	 an	 hour	 and	 not	 a	 peep.	 I	 am	 beginning	 to	 get

concerned	 messages	 from	 people	 in	 the	 Pentagon	 wanting	 to	 know	 why
Backhoe	is	incommunicado.

20:08:22	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	The	Pentagon?
20:08:27	USSS	1:	The	Trapezoid.	Was	my	transmission	garbled?
20:08:33	 DOSECOPS	 C4	 ACTUAL:	 Sorry,	 I	 was	 distracted.	 I	 thought	 you	 said

Pentagon.
20:08:40	USSS	1:	 I’m	a	 little	 foggy	myself	with	 all	 of	 the	weirdness	 around	here

and	I	may	have	said	the	wrong	thing.	I	am	referring	to	the	[GARBLED].	The
very	 large	 building	 across	 the	 Potomac	 River	 from	 DC	 that	 is	 the
headquarters	of	the	United	States	military.	Does	that	help	clarify	matters?

20:08:51	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	Sure.	The	Pentagon.
20:08:56	USSS	1:	That’s	what	I’m	saying!	The	[GARBLED]!	People	at	the	Pentagon

are	worried	about	Backhoe	being	out	of	touch	for	a	whole	hour.
20:09:12	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	The	door	locks	from	the	inside.	We	could	force	it.	It

would	be	expensive	to	replace	and	might	ruin	the	evening	for	our	guests.
20:09:30	USSS	1:	It	is	uncharacteristic	of	Backhoe	not	to	touch	base.
20:09:37	 DOSECOPS	 C4	 ACTUAL:	 The	 environment	 inside	 of	 an	 ODEC	 is	 a	 little

weird	and	can	mess	with	people’s	perception	of	time.
20:09:44	USSS	1:	Oh,	that’s	reassuring!
20:09:51	USSS	3:	Lights	on	the	ATTO	door	are	changing	color.
20:09:53	DOSECOPS	C4	ACTUAL:	We	see	the	door	in	unlock	mode.
20:10:01	USSS	3:	Visual	on	Backhoe.	Visual	on	Stylus.	They	seem	nominal.
20:10:10	USSS	1:	Tracking	device	back	online.	Informing	the	Pentagon,	they’ll	be

happy	to	hear	it.



20:10:16	USSS	3:	Stylus’s	wife	now	coming	out.	One	witch	on	her	six.
20:10:22	DOSECOPS	C4:	Any	DOSECOPS	personnel	near	the	ATTO,	that	looks	like

Erszebet.	Do	we	have	visual	on	Gráinne?
20:10:40	DOSECOP	5:	Talked	to	Ms.	Karpathy	at	the	base	of	the	ATTO	steps.	She

says	Gráinne	is	inside,	feels	unwell.
20:10:45	DOSECOPS	C4:	Copy.	A	reliable	source	earlier	described	her	as	drunk	off

her	ass	and	sexually	aggressive.	Sending	a	medic.
20:10:58	 DOSECOP	 5:	 Ms.	 Karpathy	 concurs	 with	 that	 assessment.	 Says	 medic

unnecessary.
20:11:11	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 It	 is	 SOP.	 Even	 if	 all	 she’s	 doing	 is	 lying	 on	 the	 floor

unconscious,	we	need	to	get	her	in	the	recovery	position	and	keep	an	eye	on
her.

20:11:15	DOSECOP	5:	Copy.	Ms.	Karpathy	 is	blocking	the	entrance.	Says	Gráinne
wouldn’t	want	to	be	seen	in	her	current	condition.

20:11:21	DOSECOPS	C4:	Copy.	Stand	down	and	wait	for	the	medic.

20:14:32	DOSECOP	5:	I	have	visual	on	the	medic.
20:14:40	 DOSECOPS	 C4:	 We	 see	 her	 too.	 We	 see	 her	 talking	 to	 Ms.	 Karpathy.

Sitrep?	Audio	garbled.
20:14:50	DOSECOP	5:	Ms.	Karpathy	is	reluctantly	allowing	the	medic	to	enter	the

ATTO.
20:15:00	DOSECOPS	C4:	We	see	that.	Why	is	Ms.	Karpathy	closing	the	door?
20:15:05	DOSECOP	5:	Too	late	to	ask,	but	she	seems	very	protective	of	Gráinne’s

privacy.	Must	be	quite	a	scene	in	there!
20:15:12	DOSECOPS	C4:	We’ll	send	Facilities	to	clean	it	up	in	the	morning.

20:18:51	DOSECOPS	C4:	We	show	the	ATTO	door	cycling.
20:19:02	 DOSECOP	 5:	 Door	 confirmed	 open	 and	 medic	 coming	 out	 with	 Ms.

Karpathy,	as	you	can	see,	C4.	Will	get	status.

20:21:14	DOSECOP	5:	Medic	reports	Gráinne	passed	out	and	in	recovery	position,
vital	signs	normal.	Ms.	Karpathy	has	volunteered	to	sit	in	the	ATTO	with	her
until	she	comes	around.

INCIDENT	REPORT



AUTHOR:	Macy	Stoll
SUBJECT:	ATTO	procedure	violation
THEATER:	C/COD
OPERATION:	Year	5	Halloween	Party
DTAP:	Cambridge,	MA,	present	day
FILED:	Day	1921	(November	1,	Year	5)

The	 ATTO	 was	 left	 powered	 up	 overnight.	 No	 harm	 and	 no	 casualties	 are
known	 to	 have	 resulted	 from	 this	 incident.	 This	 appears	 to	 have	 been	 an
oversight	 resulting	 from	an	 impromptu	demo	 that	was	 staged	during	 the	party
for	 LTG	Frink.	 Some	 of	 our	 personnel	 remained	 in	 the	ATTO	 following	 the
conclusion	of	 the	 tour	 and	 there	 seems	 to	have	been	 confusion	 as	 to	who	was
responsible	 for	 powering	 the	 system	down	 at	 the	 conclusion	 of	 the	 demo	 and
placing	it	in	a	safed	condition.

Dr.	Oda	assures	me	that	the	system	is	designed	to	run	for	an	indefinite	period
of	 time	without	 harm	 and	 so	 I’m	 sure	 you’ll	 all	 be	 relieved	 to	 know	 that	 the
ATTO	has	passed	a	thorough	systems	checkup	in	the	wake	of	this	incident.

So,	no	harm,	no	foul—but	I	am	writing	 it	up	anyway	as	a	“lessons	 learned”
document.	 Remember,	 we	 don’t	 yet	 know	 everything	 about	what	 can	 happen
inside	an	operating	ODEC	and	 so	 it	 is	never	 approved	procedure	 to	 leave	one
turned	on	and	unattended.

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	to	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
on	private	ODIN	channel,	10:30

DAY	1923	(3	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Dr.	Blevins,	Gráinne	failed	to	report	to	the	ATTO	for	scheduled	psy-ops
research	activities	this	morning	at	0900.	Keycard	records	show	she	did
not	report	for	work	this	morning,	and	she	did	not	call	in	sick	or
otherwise	advise	us	as	to	the	reason	for	her	absence.	Normally	this
would	be	handled	as	a	routine	HR	matter	but	because	of	her	special
status	I	felt	it	best	to	bring	it	to	your	attention	directly.	Shall	I	check	in



with	the	staff	at	the	MUON	residence?

Reply	from	Dr.	Blevins,	15:49,	same	day:
Macy,	apologies	for	the	belated	response,	but	I	wanted	to	let	you	know
that	 I	 just	 saw	Gráinne	 in	person,	 looking	a	 little	 the	worse	 for	wear
after	her	activities	at	the	Halloween	party,	which	have	already	become
the	stuff	of	internal	DODO	legend—all	classified,	of	course.	As	you	can
appreciate,	 the	 concept	 of	 calling	 in	 sick	 is	 unfamiliar	 to	 Anachrons
and	so	I	think	we	can	overlook	her	failure	to	do	so	this	morning.

GRÁINNE’S
FINAL	LETTER

to	GRACE	O’MALLEY
PART	2

And	so,	to	make	a	short	tale	of	it,	when	they	were	through	pumping	me	with
the	potions,	Erszebet	brought	a	gown	 like	her	own	for	me	to	wear,	 the	most
brilliant	colors,	I	felt	like	a	lady	of	the	court,	so	I	did!	And	she	brought	me	out
into	the	world	of	Cambridge	(not	England’s	Cambridge,	of	course)	and	showed
me	the	many	many	things	I	referred	to	earlier,	which	as	I	said	would	take	half
a	lifetime	to	describe	proper-like.	So	in	the	interest	of	finishing	this	before	you
die,	I’ll	be	staying	with	the	part	of	this	story	that’s	to	do	with	my	plans.

The	place	 is	 full	of	 rules	and	regulations,	and	doesn’t	Erszebet	 just	 ignore
every	single	one	of	them,	and	what	can	they	do	about	it?	There	is	a	reverence
that	is	paid	her,	and	no	rules	apply	to	her.	She	has	explained	many	wondrous
things	to	me,	but	the	most	important,	of	course,	is	why	magic	finally	stopped
working.	Without	going	into	the	minutiae	of	it,	as	I’m	sure	Your	Grace	has	no
patience	for	it,	it	comes	down	to	this:	those	natural	philosophers	and	the	rest	I
have	 been	 keeping	 company	 with	 in	 the	 shadow	 of	 Sir	 Francis?	 It	 is	 their
doing.	 Those	 curs	 and	 their	 ilk	 as	 the	 centuries	 progress.	 These	 “scientists”
make	 the	 world	 extremely	 technical	 in	 innumerable	 ways,	 and	 it’s	 not	 only
that	science	is	a	new	kind	of	magic	that	makes	ours	seem	feeble	by	compare,



it’s	that	their	powers’	waxing	causes	ours	to	wane.	And	there	is	particular	a	kind
of	art	called	photography,	which	as	I	guess	from	the	name	means	“light-writing,”
or	the	setting	down	of	light	on	paper.	The	effect	is	an	image	like	a	painting	or
a	 drawing,	 but	 as	 real	 as	 the	 real	 image	 being	 copied.	 It	 is	 wondrous—and
everywhere.	And	the	cause	of	magic’s	end,	so	it	is.

This	means	that	for	magic	not	to	end,	there	must	be	no	photography.	Sure	I
am	there’s	other	things	as	well,	but	that	is	where	it	ended,	and	so	that	is	where
the	undoing	must	begin.

The	greatest	risk	of	my	tenure	in	the	future	was	to	expose	my	intentions	to
Erszebet,	on	the	strong	suspicion	she	would	care	to	join	me	in	my	endeavors.
And	so	she	was,	Your	Grace—gleefully,	almost	greedily,	did	she	agree	to	join
my	ranks.

“How	appalling	that	I	was	so	beaten	down	by	these	horrible	Yankees,”	she
said	(not	certain	am	I,	what	a	Yankee	is),	“that	I	never	thought	of	doing	this
thing	 myself.	 You	 are	 a	 witch	 after	 my	 own	 heart,	 Gráinne,	 a	 woman	 of
integrity!”	 And	 then	 we	 pledged	 ourselves	 each	 to	 the	 other	 in	 the	 way	 of
witches,	which	I	must	not	share	even	with	Your	Grace.

And	now	doesn’t	Erszebet	Send	me	back,	a	few	hours	or	a	day	at	a	time,	so
that	I	can	be	seeing	to	various	matters	of	our	mutual	interest?

I	am	in	London	just	now,	to	set	some	things	in	motion.	But	having	done	so,
and	 having	 writ	 this	 very	 long	 letter	 to	 Your	 Grace,	 I	 will	 be	 returning	 to
Tristan’s	lair,	with	a	plan	to	undo	the	undoing	of	magic.	It	must	be	done	slowly
and	cautiously,	to	avoid	lomadh,	or	as	they	call	it	in	that	era,	Diachronic	Shear.
But	it	shall	be	done.

And	here	be	my	plan,	which	is	of	three	parts.
First,	 I	must	be	getting	the	money	on	my	side,	because	after	magic	wanes

money	is	the	most	powerful	thing	on	earth	(followed	by	weapons	that	destroy
whole	cities	in	a	go,	and	religion—that	never	goes	away,	damn	it!—and	lastly,
female	actors	who	do	not	wear	much	clothing).	Having	little	enough	need	for
money	 in	 London,	 I	 have	 been	 but	 passing	 familiar	 with	 some	 men	 of	 the
banking	world,	but	by	now	I	have	corrected	 that,	 sure.	The	Gresham	family
seems	to	me	already	to	be	a	waning	force,	but	the	Fuggers	are	savvy	enough.	I
have	arrived	at	an	understanding	with	Athanasius	Fugger,	the	man	in	our	time
with	the	sharp	yellow	beard.	And	in	the	future	I	have	made	the	friendliest	of
connections	with	one	Constantine	Rudge,	who	is	an	important	member	of	the
Fuggers’	 high	 councils,	 and	 who	 has	 been	 in	 on	 DODO	 from	 its	 very
beginnings.	 And	 in	 other	 times	 and	 places	 as	 well,	 as	 Erszebet	 finds



opportunities	to	Send	me,	I	have	sought	out	other	Fuggers.	In	short,	haven’t	I
predisposed	the	whole	clan	to	be	of	assistance	to	me—or	to	“any	comely	Irish
witch	named	Gráinne,”	as	it	is	likely	to	be	their	descendants	that	I	deal	with.
They	have	been	told	now	that	an	immortal	witch	has	pledged	herself	to	aid	the
family.	 And	 whilst	 I	 was	 in	 the	 future,	 with	 Erszebet’s	 assistance	 haven’t	 I
made	 a	 study	 of	 whole	 eras	 of	 what	 happens	 between	 then	 and	 now,	 and
coming	 back	 here,	 haven’t	 I	 whispered	 into	 the	 Fuggers’	 ears	 where	 they
should	 be	 adjusting	 their	 interests	 to	 keep	 the	money	 flowing	 their	 way?	 Is
right	I	have.

So	I	have	secured	myself	access	to	money	ahead.
The	 second	necessity	 of	 the	 plan	 is	 to	 be	 getting	 rid	 of	 human	 obstacles.

Chief	among	these	are	Melisande	and	Tristan.	The	Blevins	is	now	my	poppet,
and	sure	I	am	he’ll	be	easy	to	dispatch	in	time.	Tristan	and	Melisande	I	must
somehow	maroon.	Tristan	I’ve	affection	for	and	cannot	bear	to	hurt	directly.
But	seeing	Erszebet’s	animus	for	him,	I	asked	her	would	she	kindly	get	him	out
of	the	way,	and	she	did	heartily	agree.	She	herself	is	warmer	toward	Melisande,
and	 so	 we	 arrived	 at	 the	 conclusion	 that	 it’s	 myself	 shall	 be	 dispatching
Melisande.

So	that’s	the	second	piece.	The	third	is	the	Great	Undertaking	itself.	Using
the	wisdom	of	the	Chronotron	and	the	power	of	the	ODEC,	I	must	send	their
agents	(what	they	call	DOers)	back	in	time	to	gently	unweave	that	which	has
led	 to	 this	 madness	 called	 photography.	 In	 order	 to	 avoid	 lomadh,	 I	 must
dismantle	 things	gently.	But	persistently.	 I	will	 start	 at	 the	end	and	unweave
backwards	through	time.

Your	Grace,	 please	 know	 that	 I	 do	 all	 of	 this	 not	 only	 for	magic	 but	 for
Ireland	and	love	of	yourself.	I	suspect	it’s	never	again	that	I’ll	be	on	my	native
soil,	 and	sure	my	heart	 is	aching	 for	 it,	but	 it	 is	a	 far	better	 thing	 I	do	now,
than	any	magic	or	even	spying	I	have	ever	done.

My	heart	is	with	you	as	I	leave	for	this	great	battle.
Yours,	Gráinne

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	to	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
on	private	ODIN	channel,	23:49



DAY	1923	(3	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)
Dr.	Blevins,
Sorry	for	the	late-night	post,	which	I	understand	you	are	unlikely	to

see	until	 the	morning.	 I’ve	been	burning	 the	midnight	oil	here	at	 the
office,	collating	some	records	from	our	internal	security	systems	over
the	 last	 few	weeks,	and	have	uncovered	something	you	need	 to	hear
about	as	soon	as	possible.	Headed	for	home	now	to	get	some	shuteye,
but	 I’m	 hoping	 that	 by	 the	 time	 I	 show	 up	 for	 work	 tomorrow	 you’ll
have	made	time	in	your	schedule	for	a	private	face-to-face.

LETTER	ON	PERSONAL	STATIONERY	OF	DR.

ROGER

BLEVINS	TO	LTG	OCTAVIAN	K.	FRINK

DAY	1925	(5	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)
Okie—

Can’t	say	how	pleased	Bess	and	I	were	to	have	you	up	here	for
the	Halloween	party.	As	the	years	go	by	it’s	the	old	friendships	that
seem	to	matter	most.

What	good	luck	it	was,	to	boot,	that	we	were	able	to	spend	a	bit
of	time	in	the	ATTO	watching	the	two	MUONs	ply	their	trade.
For	 years	 I’ve	 been	bending	 your	 ear	about	all	 of	 the	 things	 that
these	 women	 can	 do	 beyond	 just	 Sending	 our	 agents	 to	 faraway
DTAPs,	but	there’s	nothing	like	a	practical	demonstration.

In	that	vein,	I’m	writing	to	recommend	we	shift	the	hierarchy	of
contemporary	witches.	Now	that	Gráinne	has	been	here	a	couple
of	months,	and	I’ve	had	a	chance	to	see	her	in	action,	I	realize	that
my	 earlier	 misgivings	 about	 her	 reliability	 are	 completely
unfounded.	 She	 is	 sincerely	 devoted	 to	 our	 work	 here.	 I
recommend	 she	 be	 given	 seniority	 right	 below	 Erszebet—and
frankly,	if	she	could	keep	off	the	sauce,	she	might	one	day	replace
Erszebet.	She’s	very	gifted	at	what	she	does,	since	she	is	from	an	era
when	magic	was	strong	and	she	practiced	it	regularly,	which	is	not



true	of	Erszebet.
More	important,	however,	she	is	remarkably	agreeable	to	work

with,	and	has	none	of	Erszebet’s	attitude—which	after	nearly	five
years	continues	 to	make	her	a	pain	 in	 the	neck.	It	was	one	 thing
when	Erszebet	was	 the	only	means	 to	our	performing	magic,	but
she’s	just	a	cog	in	a	machine	now	and	yet	continues	to	carry	herself
as	if	she	were	the	queen	bee.	Gráinne	has	none	of	that	attitude—
she’s	a	terrific	team	player.	She	is	all	about	the	bigger	picture.

I	think	perhaps	because	(as	she	has	confessed	to	me)	she	worked
as	 a	 spy	 for	 Grace	 O’Malley	 in	 her	 era,	 Gráinne	 understands
strategic	 thinking	 and	 even	 personal	 sacrifice	 in	 a	 way	 that
Erszebet	(and	most	of	the	other	witches)	just	don’t.

Of	 course,	demoting	Erszebet	would	have	a	 lot	 of	unfortunate
repercussions,	so	we’d	have	to	finesse	this	a	little	by	creating	a	new
position	 for	 Gráinne—a	 parallel	 branch,	 let’s	 say,	 devoted	 to
MAGOPs	 other	 than	 Sending.	 In	 ranking	 based	 on	 merit,
Gráinne	 is	 by	 far	 our	 best	witch,	 and	we	 need	 to	 recognize	 and
reward	excellence	wherever	it	flourishes.

Just	wanted	that	on	the	record	before	the	Christmas	bonuses	get
calculated;-)

—Roger

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	to	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
on	private	ODIN	channel,	11:12

DAY	1925	(5	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Dr.	Blevins,
Sorry	for	the	repeated	pings	over	the	last	few	days,	but	I’m	frankly	a

little	surprised	you	haven’t	responded	yet.	I	AM	NOT	KIDDING—it	is	a
matter	of	 the	highest	urgency	 that	we	have	a	private	 face-to-face	as
soon	 as	 possible.	 In	 the	meantime,	 I	 suggest	 in	 the	 strongest	 terms



you	cancel	further	sessions	in	the	ATTO	with	Gráinne.

.	.	.

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	LTG	Octavian	K.
Frink

on	private	ODIN	channel,	11:50
DAY	1925	(5	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Okie,
I	 just	 sent	 you	 a	 “snail	 mail”	 letter	 on	 a	 personnel	 matter.	 This

message	will	probably	overtake	it—sorry	for	the	confusion.
It	 has	 to	 do	with	 one	 of	 our	 employees	whose	 behavior	 is	 causing

some	concern.	Nothing	that	we	can’t	handle	here,	but	I	wanted	to	give
you	a	heads-up	in	case	you	hear	anything	from	the	woman	in	question.
As	you	know	I’ve	been	working	with	Macy	for	two	decades	now,	and

she’s	always	been	my	right-hand	woman.	Loyal	and	reliable	to	a	fault.
Well,	 it	 grieves	 me	 to	 tell	 you	 that	 she	 has	 been	 under	 some
considerable	 stress	 of	 late,	 and	 has	 not	 been	 herself.	 I	 think	 she’s
having	a	hard	time	with	the	way	our	MUONs	outshine	her	on	so	many
levels,	and	her	self-doubt	has	been	gnawing	away	at	her	and	made	her
vengeful	and	frankly	a	little	paranoid.
In	short,	if	you	receive	any	communications	from	Macy,	please	take

them	with	a	grain	of	salt.	I’m	looking	for	a	way	to	land	this	plane,	as	it
were,	but	there	may	be	some	turbulence	during	the	descent.

.	.	.

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	to	Dr.	Roger	Blevins
on	private	ODIN	channel,	22:51

DAY	1927	(7	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Dr.	Blevins,
I	am	here	late	again,	beside	myself.	I	can’t	get	over	the	fact	that	you



won’t	talk	to	me.
The	 least	 you	 could	 do	 is	 pay	 some	 attention	 to	 my	 warnings.

Looking	 at	 tomorrow’s	 ATTO	 calendar	 I	 see	 you	 have	 a	 block
scheduled	 with	 Gráinne	 at	 1000	 which	 segues	 right	 into	 a
Gráinne/Erszebet	block	at	1100.
WHAT	IS	GOING	ON?!?!
I	 have	 canceled	 those	ATTO	blocks.	 I	 consider	 it	 a	 security	matter

and	I	have	plenty	of	evidence	to	back	up	my	decision.

.	.	.

Post	by	Macy	Stoll	to	Dr.	Frank	Oda	on
private	ODIN	channel,	08:32

DAY	1928	(8	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Dr.	Oda,
Sorry	for	the	irregular	communication	but	I	know	you	are	frequently

in	the	building	early,	and	obviously	you	are	one	of	the	people	with	the
know-how	required	to	power	up	the	ATTO.
I’m	making	a	unilateral	decision	to	restrict	access	to	the	ATTO	until

we	get	certain	important	matters	sorted	out.
If	 anyone—ANYONE—shows	 up	 while	 I’m	 not	 around,	 requesting

even	brief	 “experimental”	 access	 to	 the	ATTO,	 the	 answer	 is	 “no.”	 If
they	have	a	problem	with	that,	send	them	to	me.
Don’t	 worry,	 I’m	 sending	 the	 same	 message	 to	 all	 the	 other

keyholders.

Reply	from	Dr.	Oda,	08:56:
Macy,
I	received	your	message	about	ATTO	access	and	will	comply.	As	you

know,	we’re	getting	ready	to	move	ATTO	#1	out	of	the	dock	and	get	it
out	in	the	field	for	mobile	tests,	beginning	just	after	Thanksgiving.	Its
place	will	then	be	taken	by	ATTO	#2.

From	Macy	Stoll,	09:01:
Thank	you,	Dr.	Oda,	but	I’m	not	sure	if	I	follow	your	point—remember	I



am	an	operations	person,	not	a	physicist.

From	Dr.	Oda,	09:03:
Today	was	the	last	day	scheduled	for	normal	ATTO	research	anyway—
tomorrow	we	hoist	it	onto	the	tractor-trailer	rig	and	begin	prepping	it
for	mobile	operations.	 I	 can	move	 that	 schedule	up	 if	 you	are	 telling
me	it’s	not	going	to	be	used	today	for	scheduled	research.

From	Macy	Stoll,	09:07:
That’s	exactly	what	I’m	telling	you	and	it’s	fine	with	me	if	no	one	uses	it
today.	Shut	it	down.
Have	any	of	the	MUONs	been	by	today?

From	Dr.	Oda,	09:10:
No,	 just	 Magnus,	 he	 has	 a	 boyish	 fascination	 with	 trucks	 and
equipment	and	likes	to	hang	around	on	the	loading	docks	watching	in
his	off	time.

.	.	.

Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	to	Macy	Stoll
on	private	ODIN	channel,	10:15

DAY	1928

Macy,	I	arrived	in	the	office	half	an	hour	ago	to	find	my	ATTO	schedule
canceled	without	my	say-so,	everything	in	disarray,	Gráinne	and
Erszebet	up	in	arms,	and	according	to	the	security	cameras	you	are
camped	out	in	front	of	the	ATTO	doors	wearing	a	hard	hat	and
watching	them	put	the	thing	on	some	kind	of	hoist.	Your	arms	are
crossed	in	what	seems	a	very	irritable	frame	of	mind.	I’m	writing	you
this	message	because	this	is	a	serious	matter	and	I	feel	we	need	to
establish	a	paper	trail	in	the	event	of	any	subsequent	disciplinary
action	that	might	be	called	for.

Follow-up	from	Dr.	Blevins,	fifteen	minutes	later:
I	 have	 been	 talking	 to	 Dr.	 Oda	 who	 informed	 me	 about	 your



communications	with	him	earlier	this	morning.
Security	is	en	route	to	escort	you	from	the	premises.

Reply	from	Macy	Stoll,	thirty	seconds	later:
Dr.	Blevins,
Hitting	 “send”	on	a	message	 I	 have	been	keeping	 in	 “Drafts”	 for	a

few	days.	Getting	this	on	the	record	before	you	lock	me	out	of	the	ODIN
system,	which	I	suspect	will	be	your	next	move.
I’m	sorry	it’s	come	to	this.

DRAFT	MESSAGE
TOP	SECRET
PRIVILEGED	AND	CONFIDENTIAL

This	message	documents	what	I	believe	to	be	a	CLEAR	AND	PRESENT
national	security	threat.
I	 have	 incontrovertible	 evidence	 that	 two	 MUONs,	 Gráinne	 and

Erszebet,	 have	 been	 colluding	 to	 circumvent	 essential	 security
procedures.
My	suspicions	were	first	aroused	on	Halloween,	when	(as	shown	on

security	camera	footage)	Gráinne	and	Erszebet	entered	the	ATTO	with
Dr.	and	Mrs.	Blevins	and	LTG	Frink.	An	hour	later,	all	of	them	emerged
except	for	Gráinne.	It	was	explained	that	Gráinne	had	been	taken	sick,
but	 this	was	not	verified	until	a	DODO	medic	arrived	and	entered	 the
ATTO	with	 Erszebet	WHEREUPON	ERSZEBET	CLOSED	AND	LOCKED
THE	DOOR!	After	a	few	minutes	in	the	FULLY	POWERED	UP	ATTO	the
medic	 emerged	 and	 confirmed	 that	 Gráinne	 was	 there,	 unconscious
but	 stable.	 Erszebet	 then	 went	 back	 into	 the	 ATTO	 “to	 look	 after
Gráinne”	 and	 remained	 in	 the	ATTO	until	 after	 the	 conclusion	 of	 the
party.
Our	 security	 system	automatically	 logs	 all	 arrivals	 and	 departures

by	means	of	RFID	badges.	The	system	recorded	Erszebet	and	Gráinne
departing	 the	building	 together	at	03:37	on	1	November.	Gráinne	did
not	 show	 up	 for	 work	 the	 next	 day,	 nor	 the	 morning	 after	 that	 (3
November),	 though	Dr.	 Blevins	 gave	 a	 verbal	 report	 of	 her	 being	 on
premises	the	afternoon	of	3	November.
Following	subsequent	suspicious	activity	I	checked	security	camera

footage	 timestamped	 03:37	 of	 1	 November	 and	 observed	 Erszebet



leaving	 the	 ATTO	 alone	 and	 proceeding	 to	 the	 exit	where	 she	waved
TWO	 RFID	 badges	 over	 the	 sensor—hers	 and	 Gráinne’s.	 Repeat:
GRÁINNE	DID	NOT	LEAVE	THE	ATTO.	Her	next	appearance	anywhere
on	the	premises	was	during	the	afternoon	of	3	November—almost	72
hours	after	she	entered	the	ATTO	during	the	Halloween	party!
All	of	this	evidence	supports	the	theory	that	Erszebet	Sent	Gráinne

to	some	other	DTAP	on	Halloween	and	that	Gráinne	spent	three	days
on	 a	 COMPLETELY	 UNAUTHORIZED	 AND	 IRRESPONSIBLE	 DEDE	 OF
HER	OWN	CHOOSING.
Following	 this	 lead,	 I	 have	 made	 an	 exhaustive	 study	 of	 all	 of

Erszebet’s	and	Gráinne’s	comings	and	goings	since	Gráinne	emerged
from	 quarantine.	 I	 have	 checked	 their	 entrances	 and	 exits	 from	 the
building,	 tracked	 their	 movements	 on	 the	 security	 cameras,	 and
cross-correlated	this	with	the	calendars	and	logs	for	the	ATTO	and	the
other	 ODECs.	 To	 make	 a	 long	 story	 short,	 what	 happened	 on
Halloween	 is	 not	 a	 one-time	 anomaly,	 but	 part	 of	 a	 pattern.	 The
evidence	clearly	supports	the	following	allegations:

–		Gráinne	has	made	brief,	unauthorized	visits	to	unknown	DTAPs	on
half	a	dozen	occasions	in	addition	to	the	lengthy	absence	spanning
31	October–3	November.

–		Erszebet	has	Sent	her	on	all	of	these	occasions,	and	has	covered
for	Gráinne’s	absence	by	committing	ID	card	fraud.

–		Most	disturbing	of	all,	I	believe	that	Gráinne	and	Erszebet	have
used	the	ATTO	to	manipulate	the	memories	and	the	mental	states
of	non-MUON	personnel	who	were	in	there	with	them,	using	the
very	“psy-ops”	techniques	that	Gráinne	is	allegedly	“researching.”

–		Those	who	have	been	so	victimized	include	Dr.	Roger	Blevins.

This	explains	the	extraordinary	and	unilateral	actions	I	have	taken	in
changing	 the	 ATTO	 schedule	 and	 shutting	 it	 down	 until	 the
conspirators	 can	 be	 apprehended.	 I	 realize	 that	 these	 actions	 will
appear	shocking	to	some,	but	I	am	confident	that	I	will	be	vindicated.



Post	by	Dr.	Roger	Blevins	on
“Announcements”	ODIN	channel

DAY	1931	(11	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

To	all	employees	and	contractors:
I	know	that	some	of	you	have	noticed	and	remarked	on	Macy	Stoll’s

recent	unplanned	absence	from	work,	and	so	wanted	to	make	a	brief
announcement	before	rumors	and	speculation	get	out	of	hand.
As	you	know	I	have	worked	hand-in-glove	with	Macy	for	many	years.

We	could	not	have	built	DODO	 into	 its	current	 form	without	her	 loyal
and	tireless	work	on	the	operational	side	of	things.
It	is	with	a	heavy	heart,	therefore,	that	I	announce	Macy	has	decided

to	 resign	 her	 position,	 effective	 immediately.	 I	 realize	 that	 this	 will
come	as	a	surprise	to	many	of	you,	but	that’s	the	way	Macy	wanted	it.
She	wanted	to	work	at	full	power	and	effectiveness	until	the	very	end
and	 then	make	a	 clean	break,	 rather	 than	slowly	 fading	away	over	a
period	of	months.	She	plans	to	take	a	few	well-earned	months	off	and
then	seek	less	stressful	opportunities	in	the	non-profit	sector.
Needless	 to	 say,	 given	 all	 that	 Macy	 does	 for	 us,	 this	 is	 going	 to

leave	a	void	that	will	take	some	time	to	fill.	I’m	stepping	in	for	the	time
being	as	acting	head	of	C/COD	while	we	recruit	a	replacement.
In	accordance	with	the	usual	security	procedures,	her	DODO	email

and	ODIN	 channels	 have	 been	 “turned	 off.”	 Those	 of	 you	who	would
like	 to	write	personal	notes	 to	Macy	should	 leave	 them	 in	 the	box	at
the	 front	 desk—we’ll	 deliver	 them	 in	 a	 few	 weeks,	 once	 Macy	 gets
back	from	a	long	and	restful	vacation.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

NOVEMBER	13



Temperature	 40F,	 no	 wind.	 Barometer	 rising.	 Garden:	 mulch,	 mulch,
and	more	mulch.

Mei	has	sent	us	a	cellar-conversion	specialist	to	see	about	converting	the
cellar	 into	 a	 “hangout	 room”	 for	 the	 grandkids	 so	 they	 can	 be	 antisocial
when	 they	 visit	 during	 their	 adolescence.	 Pointed	 out	 that	 her	 bedroom
worked	just	 fine	for	her	antisocial	purposes,	but	she	says	 they	want	 to	set
up	some	kind	of	gaming	center.

Frank	 has	 been	 sulking	 around	 the	 house,	 as	 he	 has	 been	 placed	 on	 a
“time-out”	by	Blevins,	who	suddenly	informed	him	that	somebody	higher
up	insists	he	takes	his	vacation	time	immediately,	because	his	not	taking	it
is	confusing	the	HR	system.	Apparently	Macy	had	been	covering	for	him,
but	now	that	she	has	abruptly	resigned,	the	bean-counters	are	having	their
way.	Never	thought	I	would	miss	that	woman.

While	Frank	is	“on	vacation”	he	is	not	legally	supposed	to	be	on	site.	He
takes	 phone	 calls	 from	 trucking	 companies—something	 to	 do	 with
acquiring	a	semi-trailer	rig	on	which	to	mount	the	ATTO.	Otherwise,	he	is
very	much	 underfoot	 here	 again.	 I	 like	 it,	 now	 that	 I’m	 here	more	 often
myself.	He	is	pensive,	spending	a	lot	of	time	by	himself.	He	spent	ten	hours
yesterday	in	front	of	the	computer	in	his	office,	and	when	I	came	by	later	to
dust	I	found	evidence	of	business	as	usual—incomprehensible	sketches	and
equations	on	graph	paper,	and	industrial	supply	catalogs	piled	on	the	floor,
sticky	notes	hanging	out	of	them	willy-nilly.

It’s	probably	too	late	already	for	Mei’s	“hangout	room”	in	the	cellar.	If	I
read	the	signs	correctly,	by	the	time	she	can	draw	up	the	plans	and	mobilize
the	 contractors,	 Frank	 will	 have	 claimed	 the	 space	 and	 begun	 a	 new
experiment	there—something	to	keep	him	busy	in	his	retirement.

Threw	a	dinner	party	 last	night.	Frank	brought	 the	 leaf	down	 from	 the
attic	and	put	it	into	the	dinner	table	and	we	got	the	second-best	chairs	out
of	 the	 basement.	 Tried	 as	 best	 as	 possible	 under	 these	 very	 peculiar
circumstances	to	be	all	Emily	Post	about	it,	inviting	people	as	couples,	and
setting	out	place	cards.

Frank	and	I:	seated	at	opposite	ends	of	the	table	as	host	and	hostess.
Melisande	 and	 Tristan:	 still	 not	 a	 couple,	 remarkably	 enough,	 but

resigned	to	being	treated	as	if	they	were.	Tristan	on	my	right,	Melisande	on
Frank’s	left.

Mortimer	 and	 Julie	 (my	 fellow	 modern	 witch,	 and	 occasional	 DOer):



very	much	a	 couple.	Something	about	her	heavily	pierced	and	 inked	 look
appealed	to	Mortimer	somehow	(although	her	tattoos	evaporated	when	she
was	Sent	the	first	 time;	she	has	since	grown	her	real	eyebrows	out).	Once
I’d	gotten	past	her	 looks	and	her	 language	 I	 found	her	 a	 reasonably	good
match	for	Mortimer;	she	seems	to	make	him	happy.

Gráinne	 and	 Erszebet:	 thick	 as	 thieves.	 Erszebet	 has	 been	 the	 den-
mother	to	all	the	witches	from	the	start,	even	her	elders,	but	Gráinne	is	the
first	one	 she	has	 treated	as	 a	peer.	She	 seems	almost—almost—content	 in
Gráinne’s	 company.	 Had	 never	 considered	 Erszebet	 capable	 of
contentment.	Gráinne	extremely	personable	with	everyone,	so	perhaps	not
a	surprise	that	she	can	wrest	a	smile	from	Erszebet.

Magnus	and	Constance:	I	think	Magnus	had	some	sort	of	dalliance	with
Gráinne	when	he	first	arrived,	but	this	seems	to	have	cooled	down,	and	he
has	 lately	 taken	 up	 with	 Constance	 Billy,	 a	 peaches-and-cream	 sort	 of
Norman	witch	 from	 the	 fourteenth	 century	who	was	brought	 forward	 last
year	to	get	her	out	of	some	predicament	related	to	the	Hundred	Years’	War
and	the	Black	Death.	Anyway,	she	is	lovely,	she	speaks	Magnus’s	language,
and	 she	 also	 speaks	 modern	 English	 now	 well	 enough	 to	 get	 along	 at
dinner.	 I	 seated	 him	 across	 from	 Tristan	 and	 (breaking	 Emily	 Post
protocol)	next	 to	Constance	 so	 that	he	would	be	 in	 earshot	 of	 two	people
who	could	talk	to	him.

As	with	all	such	events	it	was	more	work	than	I	had	expected	and	I	ended
up	wondering	why	I	had	got	myself	into	it.	I	was	reminded	of	Frank’s	early
MIT	days	when	an	expectation	of	a	faculty	wife	was	to	throw	such	affairs	and
extend	a	welcoming	hand	to	foreign	graduate	students	and	their	wives	and
children,	 who	 were	 naturally	 feeling	 isolated	 and	 lonely.	 The	 only
difference	 in	 this	 case	 being	 that	 the	 visitors	 are	 foreign	 not	 only	 to	 our
place	but	to	our	time.	Constance	showed	up	two	hours	early	to	help	with	the
cooking,	 which	 she	 understands	 well.	 She	 is	 younger	 than	 I	 had
appreciated,	 and	 all	 aflutter	 about	 Magnus,	 who	 shows	 her	 a	 lot	 of
attention.

Frank	was	a	bit	dubious	that	I	had	invited	Magnus,	whom	he	saw	as	a	sort
of	man-child	who	would	require	a	lot	of	management	at	the	dinner	table.	I
was	 therefore	 braced	 for	 all	 sorts	 of	 Asterix	 and	 Obelix	 hijinks	 when	 he
showed	up,	but	this	could	not	have	been	further	from	the	case.	During	his
stint	as	a	Varangian	Guard	at	the	court	of	the	Byzantine	Emperor,	Magnus
obviously	learned	how	to	behave	in	formal	social	situations.	He	was	on	his



best	 behavior,	 taking	 everything	 in	 with	 his	 quick	 blue	 eyes,	 asking
intelligent	 questions	 of	 Tristan	 and	 Constance,	 showing	 me	 a	 degree	 of
courtesy	 that	 was	 almost	 comically	 formal.	 I	 put	 the	 Thanksgiving
decorations	up	last	week—the	usual	kitschy	stuff	that	has	been	in	the	family
forever—but	he	 took	 it	 very	 seriously	 and	asked	many	questions	 (through
Constance)	 until	 Tristan	 mercifully	 took	 over	 and	 gave	 him	 the	 whole
download	about	turkeys,	pilgrims,	cranberries,	the	Wampanoag	tribe,	etc.	I
don’t	 speak	 Norman	 French,	 of	 course,	 but	 this	 apparently	 segued	 into
questions	about	DODO’s	vacation	policy	(Magnus	understands	that	no	one
is	 expected	 to	 work	 on	 that	 Thursday)	 and	 Black	 Friday	 and	 Yuletide
shopping	and	all	the	rest.

During	dinner	Magnus	and	Gráinne	kept	sizing	each	other	up	across	the
table,	as	though	they’d	taken	each	other’s	measure	and	were	circling	warily,
but	they	seem	to	have	arrived	at	a	decision	to	stay	out	of	each	other’s	way.
Constance	 observed	 apprehensively,	 Julie	 was	 fascinated,	 Mortimer
cheerfully	oblivious	as	usual.	Erszebet	was	down	at	Frank’s	end,	seated	to
his	 right	 in	 the	 position	 of	 honor,	 a	 detail	 she,	 and	 only	 she,	 would
appreciate.	She	still	views	him	as	a	sort	of	highfalutin	 techno-butler,	and
patronized	 him	 with	 questions	 about	 the	 plans	 to	mount	 the	 ATTO	 on	 a
truck	and	drive	it	around	while	conducting	various	experiments.	These	are
now	 scheduled	 to	 begin	 immediately	 after	 Thanksgiving—Blevins	 has
announced	that	“Black	Friday”	will	not	be	a	holiday	for	DODO	personnel,
and	 everyone	 is	 expected	 to	 show	 up	 for	 work	 as	 usual	 instead	 of
participating	 in	 TV	 set	 riots	 at	 their	 local	 Walmart.	 Frank	 answered
patiently	and	thus	caught	the	attention	of	Magnus,	who	doesn’t	have	much
modern	English	vocabulary	but	does	respond	to	“truck”	and	“Walmart”	and
a	 few	 other	 terms	 like	 “touchdown,”	 “iPhone,”	 and	 “Google.”	 Like	most
other	 male	 Anachrons	 he	 views	 the	 latter	 as	 a	 near-miraculous	 way	 of
viewing	 pictures	 of	 naked	 ladies.	 Between	 that	 and	 his	 fascination	 with
trucks	 I	 suppose	 I	 can	 see	 why	 Blevins	 and	 others	 see	 him	 as	 a	 bit	 of	 a
simpleton.	 But	 it	 is	 quite	 obviously	 a	matter	 of	male	 jealousy.	Magnus	 is
ludicrously	hyper-masculine	in	ways	that	have	been	bred	and	trained	out	of
modern-day	men	and	so	they	have	to	deprecate	his	intelligence.

In	 any	 event	 we	 got	 through	 the	 evening	 without	 any	 sword-	 or	 cat-
fights.	There	was	the	usual	fuss	trying	to	get	people	to	leave	so	that	I	could
tidy	up	alone,	which	I	prefer.	I	had	Frank	summon	the	MUON	van	to	get	rid
of	Erszebet,	Gráinne,	and	Constance,	and	leaned	on	Mortimer	and	Julie	to



give	Magnus	 a	 lift	 back	 to	 the	 SARF.	 I	 shooed	Tristan	 and	Frank	 out	 and
they	went	to	the	basement	to	drink	scotch	and	speak	of	Deep	Dark	Things.
Melisande	stayed	to	help	clear	dishes.	She	has	seemed	a	little	distant	lately,
and	uncharacteristically	wistful,	so	I	asked	her	directly	what	was	going	on.
Knowing	 as	 she	 does	 that	 I’ve	 decided	 to	 step	 away	 from	 DODO	 in	 all
capacities	except	witch-work,	she	confessed	she	was	thinking	of	leaving	too
—entirely—sometime	 in	 the	new	 year.	 She	 attributed	 this	 to	 (a)	Blevins’s
unending	denigrations	of	her	competence	and	(b)	more	significantly,	 the
growing	 shift	 away	 from	 diachronic	 work	 (where	 her	 expertise	 is	 clearly
valued)	 and	 toward	 psychological	 operations	 (which	 she	 not	 only	 is	 not
expert	on,	but	which	she	finds	more	ethically	problematic,	as	do	I).	I	think
however	 there	 is	 also	 (c):	 she	 and	 Tristan	 have	 teetered	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 a
relationship	for	so	long,	and	never	yet	fallen	into	it,	and	she	is	tired	of	that
balancing	act.	Men	are	always	better	at	compartmentalizing	these	things.	I
don’t	especially	say	that	in	a	laudatory	way.

Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff
on	“Anachrons”	ODIN	channel

DAY	1937	(17	NOVEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	LTC	Tristan	Lyons,	08:30:
FFS	where	 is	Magnus?	He	was	supposed	 to	be	here	on	 the	0800	bus
from	the	SARF	for	a	seminar	in	Violence(s)	Ethnology.	This	is	the	third
time	he’s	been	late.
Usually	he’s	a	morning	person.

Reply	from	officer	on	duty	at	SARF	(Supervised	Anachron	Residential
Facility),	08:41:
He	was	out	 the	door	at	0800	sharp	but	apparently	did	not	get	on	 the
bus,	which	was	waiting	outside.	Will	check	cameras.

Follow-up	from	officer	on	duty	at	SARF,	08:52:
Front-door	security	camera	footage	is	ambiguous.	We	see	him	exiting



the	door	and	going	down	the	front	walk	toward	the	bus,	but	just	as	he
is	exiting	the	frame	he	appears	to	juke	sideways.
Magnus	has	always	been	fascinated	by	the	security	cameras	and	so

he	probably	knows	where	the	coverage	areas	are.	Evidence	suggests
he	 proceeded	 down	 the	walk	 until	 he	 believed	 he	was	 out	 of	 frame,
then	made	his	move.

From	LTC	Lyons,	08:56:
Alerting	 DOSECOPS	 and	 Dr.	 Blevins	 (acting	 head	 of	 C/COD).	 Anyone
who	sees	him	or	 learns	anything,	pipe	up	here	so	we	can	cancel	 the
alert.

From	MAJ	Isobel	Sloane	(ranking	DOSECOPS	officer	on	duty),	09:12:
We’ve	activated	 the	protocols	 for	AWOL	Anachrons.	These	have	been
worked	out	in	advance	with	local	police	departments	and	transit	police
—obviously	we	want	to	find	the	missing	Anachron,	but	we	have	to	treat
it	as	a	sensitive	matter.	We	don’t	want	someone	like	Magnus	ending	up
in	the	slammer	with	a	random	assortment	of	criminals.
Currently	checking	all	bus	and	T	routes	in	the	vicinity	of	the	SARF.

From	LTC	Lyons,	09:20:
Respectfully,	MAJ	Sloane,	Magnus	isn’t	going	to	hop	on	a	bus.	He	can
walk	faster	than	most	people	can	run,	and	he	can	run	faster	than	cars
and	 buses	 are	 capable	 of	 moving	 in	 Boston	 traffic.	 He	 has	 been
missing	now	for	eighty	minutes,	and	with	his	 level	of	physical	 fitness
could	be	anywhere	in	a	ten-	or	twelve-mile	radius	of	the	SARF	by	this
point.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	09:32:
Acknowledged	 and	 understood.	 Also	 putting	 out	 feelers	 to	 local	 PDs
and	 social	 service	 agencies	 for	 reports	 of	 weird	 or	 threatening
behavior.

From	Dr.	Roger	Blevins,	10:05:
Just	became	aware	of	Magnus’s	disappearance.	May	I	suggest	sending
officers	to	check	local	gridirons,	sports	bars,	any	place	connected	with
football.	 I	 took	 him	 to	 a	 game	 last	 month	 and	 he	 seemed	 quite
interested.



From	MAJ	Sloane,	10:16:
That’s	a	useful	lead,	Dr.	Blevins.	Anything	else	in	that	vein?

From	Dr.	Blevins,	10:23:
I	also	 took	him	 to	Walmart,	which	he	quite	enjoyed,	but	 (a)	he	would
have	no	way	of	 locating	a	Walmart,	and	(b)	even	if	he	did,	the	closest
one	is	many	miles	away.

From	officer	on	duty	at	SARF,	10:56:
[Redacted],	who	 frequently	 takes	 the	 night	 shift	 at	 the	 security	 desk
here,	 told	me	 the	 other	 day	 that	Magnus	had	 “borrowed”	his	 iPhone
and	apparently	used	the	map	application.	Magnus	was	also	seen	using
a	pen	to	draw	on	the	palm	of	his	hand.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	11:01:
Need	to	wake	up	[redacted]	and	have	him	check	the	search	history	on
his	phone.	Sounds	like	Magnus	drew	a	map.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	11:05:
Suit	 yourself,	 Major	 Sloane,	 but	 I	 believe	 you	 are	 grossly
overestimating	 Magnus’s	 mental	 capacity.	 He	 cannot	 even	 speak
English,	much	less	type	search	terms	into	a	navigational	app.

From	LTC	Lyons,	12:00:
He’s	been	gone	for	four	hours.	Sitrep?

From	MAJ	Sloane,	12:01:
Just	writing	 one	 up.	Nothing	 yet.	 [Redacted]’s	 phone	 didn’t	 preserve
any	search	history.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	13:27:
Bingo.	We	have	a	 report	 from	 the	Walmart	Supercenter	 in	Lexington
that	a	man	matching	Magnus’s	description	has	been	using	a	computer
in	the	electronics	department	for	a	couple	of	hours.	It’s	only	ten	miles
—he	 could	 have	 Paul	 Revered	 it	 on	 foot.	 Sending	 all	 available
DOSECOPS	units.

From	LTC	Lyons,	13:30:
Please	advise	Walmart	rent-a-cops	not	to	engage	Magnus.	I	can’t	even



.	.	.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	13:31:
Neither	can	I.	Have	already	emphasized	this	to	them.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	14:10:
Plainclothes	 DOSECOPS	 personnel	 made	 peaceful	 contact	 with
Magnus	 and	 escorted	 him	 from	 the	 Walmart	 without	 incident.
Interviewing	witnesses.	Magnus	is	in	the	SUV,	should	be	back	in	DODO
HQ	soon.	He’s	calm	and	relaxed.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	14:15:
Any	 indications	Magnus	might	have	divulged	classified	 information	to
civilians?

From	MAJ	Sloane,	14:23:
All	eyewitness	reports	so	far	agree	that	he	said	nothing—which	stands
to	reason	since	he	doesn’t	speak	English!	Sounds	like	he’d	brought	a
Sharpie	 from	 the	 SARF	 and	 was	 using	 it	 to	 draw	 on	 his	 hand	 and
forearm—that’s	what	 freaked	out	 the	store	management	and	caused
them	to	call	it	in.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	14:39:
Magnus	 is	 in	 the	 building,	 being	 escorted	 to	 conference	 room	 for
debriefing.

From	LTC	Lyons,	14:42:
Don’t	you	guys	have	a	lockable	room	down	in	DOSECOPS	land?

From	Dr.	Blevins,	14:45:
No	need	to	escalate	by	placing	Magnus	in	something	that	looks	to	him
like	a	prison.

From	LTC	Lyons,	14:47:
It	won’t	look	to	him	like	a	prison—he’s	never	seen	a	prison!—it’ll	look
to	him	like	the	nicest,	cleanest	room	he’d	ever	seen	in	his	life	until	a
few	weeks	ago.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	15:05:



Still	waiting	on	the	Norman	interpreter	so	we	can	interview	him.

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:08:
FFS	I	can	do	that.	No	need	to	wait.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	15:11:
We	are	observing	him	 in	 the	meantime.	As	part	of	a	psych	eval.	He’s
scratching	himself	with	a	paper	clip.

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:12:
???

From	MAJ	Sloane,	15:14:
Just	 superficial	 scratches.	Not	 enough	 to	 draw	blood.	Maybe	 the	 ink
irritated	his	skin.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	15:23:
Why	are	the	alarms	going	off?

From	SGT	Jones,	15:25:
Major	Sloane	asked	me	 to	notify	 everyone	 that	we	got	 a	 report	 from
the	Walmart	that	Magnus	has	a	knife.	Apparently	 they	reviewed	their
security	camera	footage	and	saw	him	taking	it	from	the	kitchen	section
and	hiding	it	in	his	trousers.	He’s	had	it	the	whole	time.

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:25:
OMW

From	CPT	Gomez,	15:26:
Need	medic	conf	rm

From	SGT	Jones,	15:26:
Facility	 is	 in	 lockdown.	 All	 personnel	 following	 active	 shooter
protocols.

From	CPT	Gomez,	15:28:
Need	medic	Stairwell	2

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:28:



He’s	on	ODEC	level.
He’s	in	ODEC	2	with	a	MUON.
It’s	Constance	Billy.
He’s	gone.	Constance	shaken	but	unharmed.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	15:30:
Gone	where?	To	what	DTAP?

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:32:
Constance	 says	 he	 threatened	 her	with	 a	 knife	 and	 demanded	 to	 be
Sent	to	912	AD	Svelvik.	It’s	a	DTAP	she	knows	pretty	well.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	15:34:
Isn’t	that	three	centuries	before	his	time?

From	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes,	15:40:
912	Svelvik	is	like	Grand	Central	Station	for	old-school	Vikings.

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:45:
Magnus	has	always	been	fascinated	by	that	era,	it	doesn’t	surprise	me
that	he	would	choose	to	go	there.	He	knows	he	can’t	come	back,	ever,
after	what	he’s	done.	So	he	picked	the	one	place	where	he	could	live
out	the	rest	of	his	days	as	his	fantasy	of	a	classic	Viking.

From	Dr.	Stokes,	15:48:
Maybe	he’ll	go	discover	America:)

From	LTC	Lyons,	15:50:
Not	actually	that	funny,	Stokes.

Magnus’s	search	history
(recovered	from	computer	on	display	in

Walmart	electronics	department)



TRUCK
BOOBS
FREE	BOOBS	PIX
LIE	DOE	CAIN
LIE	DO	CAIN	NUMM
NUMB
LIDOCAINE
TOPICAL	ANAESTHETICS
SCAR
HOW	MAKE	SCAR
SCARIFICATION
BLACK	FRIDAY
BLACK	FRIDAY	WALMART
TRUCK	BOX
METAL	TRUCK	BOX
BIG	METAL	TRUCK	BOX	PIX
BIG	TRUCK	PICTURES
TRUCK	WITH	BIG	STEEL	BOX
SHIPPING	CONTAINER
SHIPPING	CONTAINER	IMAGE
SHIPPING	CONTAINER	WIKIPEDIA
SHIPPING	CONTAINER	DOOR
SHIPPING	CONTAINER	TRAILER
TRACTOR	TRAILER
SEMI	TRAILER
18	WHEELER
NAKED	WOMAN
NAKED	WHITE	WOMAN
[redacted]
FUGGER
FUGGERS	WHERE	LIVE
FUGGER	BOSS
GUN
BEST	GUN
GUN	SHOOT	HOW
GUN	HOW	SHOOT	YOUTUBE
REVOLVER	HOW	SHOOT



SEMIAUTOMATIC	HOW	SHOOT
SHOTGUN
SHOTGUN	HOW	LOAD
BULLET	ARMOR
GOLD
GOLD	WHERE
AMERICA	WHY	RICH
AMERICA	WHY	RICH	HISTORY
CONQUISTADOR
CONQUISTADOR	GOLD	MAP
EL	DORADO
CIBOLA
TENOCHTITLAN
TENOCHTITLAN	MAP
TENOCHTITLAN	HARBOR
TENOCHTITLAN	CLOSEST	PORT
VERA	CRUZ
VERA	CRUZ	HARBOR
VERA	CRUZ	MAP
VERA	CRUZ	NAVIGATE	EUROPE
GOOGLE	MAPS

THE	LAY	OF	WALMART

TRANSLATOR’S	 NOTE:	 “The	 Lay	 of	 Walmart”	 comprises	 two	 parts.
Handwriting	analysis	confirms	that	both	were	written	by	the	same	author,
self-identified	as	Tóki	Olafsson,	a	skald	originally	dwelling	in	the	village	of
Sverðvík	(modern-day	Svelvik)	on	the	Oslofjord	in	the	early	tenth	century.
Part	 1,	 written	 on	 sheets	 of	 birch	 bark	 using	 oak-gall	 ink,	 was	 recovered
from	 a	 peat	 bog	 outside	 of	 Sverðvík	 by	 a	 covert	 DODO	 archaeological
extraction	team	in	the	wake	of	Part	2’s	discovery.

The	 overall	 style	 is	 typical	 of	 Norse	 epic	 verse	 of	 Tóki’s	 era,	 though
somewhat	rough-hewn	as	many	parts	seem	to	have	been	written	in	haste.	Not



all	skalds	were	literate.	Tóki	was,	and	seems	to	have	used	written	documents	as
an	aid	to	composition	and	memorization.	Of	note	here	 is	his	use	of	modern
English	 loan	 words	 such	 as	 “Walmart”	 and	 “ditapp,”	 which	 is	 his
transliteration	of	DTAP	(Destination	Time	and	Place),	a	common	acronym	in
the	Department	of	Diachronic	Operations.

PART	1

A	hearing	I	ask.	A	skald	am	I.
A	witch	woke	me,	hurried	to	my	hut,
Summoned	me	from	sleep,
Beseeched	me	to	bear	witness,

Record	in	runes	a	traveler’s	tale.
Tailing	her	out	of	town,	I	heard	tell
Of	what	had	happened:	a	man	Sent
From	distant	time	and	place,

Magnus,	mighty	one,	subject	of	sagas,
Treasure-taker,	ship-shaker,	ring-bearer.
Yet	when	he	came,	not	as	well	clad
As	the	cats	the	witch	kept.

To	her	home	we	hastened.
Magnus,	blanket-bundled,	on	a	bench,
Sat	by	the	sparking	fire,	staring
Amused	at	the	flames’	antics.

“Say	nothing,”	he	said,	stretching	out	a	hand.
“Hear	only,	heed	me,	memorize	my	words,
O	skald,	story-stretcher,	keeper	of	epics.
Write	them	in	runes	on	the	morrow.”

“Sent	hither	was	I,	just	now,	naked.
A	witch-friend,	fair	Frankish	girl,
Got	me	away	in	good	order
From	a	far	place,	a	fat	land.

“Walmart	is	where	the	thralls



Of	that	land	store	up	their	wealth.
A	fat	fool	took	me	there,
Thinking	he	would	make	me	quail,

“Cock-shriveled,	cuckolded,
Shamed	by	the	sight	of	such	treasure.
While	the	memory	of	that	mart	remains	mine,
I’ll	make	it	yours	too,	tale-teller.

“We’ll	wend	our	way	to	other	times,
Tell	the	tale,	hiring	a	host	of	heroes,
Return	as	raiders	to	plunder	that	place
And	carry	on	viking	thenceforward.

“Of	the	fat	land	I’ll	say	little	now.
Too	many	tales	to	tell	of	its	weird	wonders.
Walmart	is	what	I	have	just	seen,
Not	so	long	ago	as	when	you	lay	sleeping.

“Greater	than	any	Goth	village
Is	the	width	of	its	walls,	sheer	and	strong.
Thrice-gated,	though,	with	glass:
Frail	fencing	for	a	treasure-trove!

“For	in	Fatland,	visits	from	vikings
Are	few	and	far	between;
Fear	rules	fellows,	makes	men	meek,
Glass	gates	are	good	enough.

“That	barrier	breached,	all	the	land’s	luxury
Lies	ready	for	reaping.
Here’s	what	my	memory	holds
Of	how	it	is	sorted.

“Long	lanes,	laden	with	loot
Wide	ways,	well	made	for	waging	war
Like	the	roads	of	the	red-crested	Romans
Ordered	just	so,	as	warp	and	weft.



“Too	many	for	merchants	to	memorize,
Marked,	therefore,	with	runes	they	can	read.
Romans	wrote	them	first.	The	fat	ones	stole	them,
As	well	as	Arabs’	numerals,	arranged	below.

“For	each	district	of	the	treasure-town,
A	Roman	rune	written,	raised	high
For	each	lane	lying	below	it,
An	Arabic	number	to	know	it.

“South	face	the	glass	gates;	the	fat	fool
Northward	led	me,	shouldering	them	aside
Greeting	a	guard,	vested	in	blue,
Scarcely	strength	to	stand	had	that	old	ogre.

“To	our	right,	ranks	of	clashing	carts
Waiting	to	be	wheeled	and	weighed	down
By	Fatlanders	too	frail	for	fardels.
Sight-seers	only,	we	spurned	these.

“Till-keepers’	tables	cluttered	our	view.
Beyond	them,	still	north-questing,
Kiosks	and	cairns	covered	the	place,
Towers	of	trifles.

“From	there,	to	the	west,	lies	all	the	food	in	the	world.
North,	a	cornucopia	of	clothing,	all	colors.
Doubling	back	south,	white	witches
Doling	out	drugs,	physicians’	philtres.

“Eastward,	though,	lies	victory	for	vikings.
Counting	the	cairns,	the	merchandise-mounds
Standing	in	the	center	of	the	wide	east-west	way,
Stop	at	the	sixth.	Atop	it’s	an	image:

“A	fair	lass,	tresses	flowing,
Like	the	lush	Linndalsfallet,
Where	it	rushes	over	rocks,



Teeth	shining	like	Snæfellsjökull.

“Cradled	in	the	lass’s	hands,	a	bottle,
Bewitching	brew,	beautifying	the	hair.
Below	it,	many	more	such,	stacked	like	soldiers.
That	is	the	landmark	that	leads	you	to	the	left.

“A	long	lane,	laden	with	loot.
Its	rune	is	like	Berkano:	the	Beginning.
Its	number,	one	score	and	five.
Let	it	lead	you	north.	Little	more	to	say,

“For	in	fewer	than	five	paces
Is	what	your	hand	has	hungered	for
Since	you	found	yourself	in	Fatland,
Alone	and	naked:	Numberless	knives,	new	and	needy.”

Thus	the	blanket-wearer,	who	now	bated,
Hefting	a	horn,	whetting	his	whistle.
“More	mead,	if	you	are	willing,	witch.
There’s	riches	in	this	tale.”

Ingibjörg	was	the	witch’s	name.
South	of	Sverðvík,	alone	she	abided
Here	in	this	hut,	cozy,	kept	clean,
Cats	her	companions,	dogs	her	defenders.

“Let	none	say	I	don’t	serve	a	guest	sweetly.
Here	is	your	horn,	more	mead	for	Magnus.
Gladly	I’ll	listen	to	more	of	your	story
But	the	riches	you	rave	of	mean	ruin	for	me.

“Here	in	my	hut	I	am	happy.
Grief-bringing	gold,	land	needing	labor,
Swords,	slaves,	silks,	swag:	to	what	end
Should,	I,	Ingibjörg,	buy	into	this	business?”

“For	that	there’s	an	answer,”	said	Magnus.
“Gráinne’s	grief	made	her	great	with	rage,



Drove	her	to	desolate	ditapps,
Reddened	her	hands	with	friends’	blood.

“To	you,	welcoming	witch,	I’ll	have	more	to	say
When	the	sun	sheds	its	light	on	the	shore
And	cocks	crow.	Now	is	night-work,
Telling	the	tale	to	Tóki,	the	skald.”

Drinking	deep	of	the	mead,	whetting	his	whistle,
Magnus	made	the	most	of	it	then,
Telling	to	me,	Tóki,	tales	of	Walmart,
Where	the	weapons	were,	how	to	find	food.

When	the	sun	shed	its	light	on	the	shore,
When	the	cocks	crowed,	home	I	hied,
Wrote	it	in	runes,	left	nothing	out,
Then	slept	soundly.

“Tóki,	time	to	depart!”	were	the	next	words	I	heard.
Magnus	and	Ingibjörg	stood	staring.
“Distant	ditapps	await	us.	Hardy	heroes
Restless	to	ramble,	we’ll	sway	them	to	our	side!”

Blanket-bound	was	he	still,	blowing	on	blue	hands.
“Furs	I	will	fetch	you,	friend,”	said	I.	“No	need
To	ride	so	rude-clad,	cold	and	uncovered.”
“We	won’t	ride,”	said	he,	“naked	will	both	of	us	be

“When	the	witch	has	her	way,	and	we’re	at	the	ditapp.”
“Sending	it’s	to	be	then,”	said	I,	“travel	through	time,
Dark	and	dangerous.	Ingibjörg’s	will
Isn’t	what	it	was	when	last	I	heard	tell.”

The	witch	was	fur-clad,	fierce-faced,
Fingering	her	skein,	but	half	in	this	world.
“I	have	heard	tell	from	the	man	Magnus
Of	a	future	that	is	to	be	feared.

“Alchemists	and	astronomers,	addling



The	wits	of	witches,	stripping	us	of	our	strength,
Helpless	hags	they’d	make	of	us.	I’ll	not	have	it.
Put	away	your	pen.	In	a	peat	bog,	bury	the	bark.

“Let	it	lie	there,	a	legend
For	our	friends	in	the	future	to	find.
The	story	will	stay	in	your	mind,	son	of	Olaf.
Tell	it	true,	when	you	get	to	the	ditapp.”

	

Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff	on
“Diachronic	Ops-misc”	ODIN	channel

DAY	1943	(MONDAY	BEFORE	THANKSGIVING,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes:
Checking	 on	 a	DEDE	 assignment	 I	 just	 got	 that	 confuses	me.	 In	 two
days	I’m	supposed	to	go	to	San	Francisco	1850	to	recruit	an	immigrant
Chinese	witch	there.	 It’s	 listed	as	a	one-day	DEDE,	so	I’ll	be	home	in
time	for	Thanksgiving	dinner,	supposedly.
Chinese	is	my	weakest	language.	We	have	five	DOers	who	are	fluent,

three	of	them	ethnically	Chinese,	at	least	one	of	those	(Julie	Lee)	not
only	 currently	 available	 but	 also	 (FWIW)	 a	MUON.	 I’m	 curious	 why	 I
was	assigned	this	DEDE?
Also,	regardless	of	who	goes,	I’d	like	to	see	the	Chronotron	data	on

why	we	need	 to	recruit	 this	witch	so	close	 to	July	1851.	Whether	 the
goal	is	to	bring	her	forward	to	work	as	a	contemporary	witch,	or	to	do
some	final	magical	adjustments	in	those	last	few	months	.	.	.	why	not
go	back	several	years	earlier	and	recruit	her	directly	from	China?	I’m
sure	 that	 data	 has	 already	 been	 crunched	 by	 the	 Chronotron	 (cc’ing
Dr.	Oda	and	Mortimer	for	confirmation),	but	I	find	this	puzzling.



Reply	from	Mortimer	Shore:
Dr.	Oda	is	still	“on	vacation”	(read:	getting	ready	for	the	ATTO	move	on
Friday).	I	will	look	into	all	this	ASAP	but	I	am	a	little	overwhelmed	with
work	 right	 now.	 My	 understanding	 is	 that	 Gordon	 Healey	 and	 Mary
Case	are	our	data-whisperers	 there	at	 the	moment	and	 they’re	both
cool.	They’re	not	great	at	communicating	in	regular	English	though.	I
can	ask	them	to	summarize	stuff	for	me	and	I’ll	get	back	to	you	about
it.

From	Dr.	Roger	Blevins:
Dr.	Stokes,
I	 understand	 you	 have	 reservations	 about	 your	 Wednesday

assignment,	and	out	of	respect	for	your	senior	position	within	DODO,	I
am	 willing	 to	 respond	 to	 them,	 although	 it	 is	 against	 protocol	 for	 a
DOer	to	question	their	mission.	While	I	understand	that	you	would	like
an	explanation,	you	do	not	require	one	to	do	your	job.
I’ve	 told	Mortimer	Shore	 that—as	he	already	knows,	of	course—he

needs	to	focus	his	time	and	energies	on	projects	that	actually	require
his	attention,	so	please	do	not	expect	him	to	follow	up	on	his	last	offer
to	you	regarding	Chronotron	data.
Mel,	I	do	realize	it	must	be	unnerving	to	go	to	a	DTAP	that	is	so	close

to	 the	 very	 end	 of	 magic.	 As	 Erszebet	 has	 recalled	 on	 innumerable
occasions,	she	was	hardly	able	to	perform	magic	at	all	for	the	last	year
or	so	before	the	eclipse.	So	I	have	a	proposal	that	I	hope	will	reassure
you:	when	you	go	to	the	San	Fran	DTAP,	Gráinne	has	offered	to	go	with
you,	and	as	soon	as	you’ve	accomplished	your	DEDE	(which	if	 I	recall
correctly	 is	 to	 recruit	 a	 witch	 from	 that	 era),	 Gráinne	 will	 Send	 you
back	here	 immediately.	 She	will	 then	get	 back	here	with	 the	help	 of
the	KCW—she’s	not	nearly	as	unnerved	about	 the	 timing	as	 you	are,
and	 is	happy	 to	make	 the	 journey	 if	 it	will	help	you	 feel	more	secure
about	returning.
So,	in	short:	Don’t	worry	about	it.	Just	do	it.	After	all,	it’s	your	job.



Exchange	of	posts	by	DODO	staff
on	private	ODIN	channel

DAYS	1943–1944
(MONDAY	AND	TUESDAY	BEFORE	THANKSGIVING,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	Dr.	Melisande	Stokes	to	LTC	Tristan	Lyons	and	Mortimer
Shore:
Any	thoughts	on	this	DEDE?	Gráinne	seems	awfully	cozy	with	Blevins
lately.	Also,	Mortimer,	are	you	being	blocked	from	Chronotron	data?

Mel

Reply	from	LTC	Tristan	Lyons:
It’s	 fine,	Mel.	Gráinne’s	 resourceful,	 she’ll	 get	both	of	 you	back	here
safely.	She’s	hardwired	subversive	when	it	comes	to	authority	(I	heard
the	 coders	 classified	 her	 Chaotic	 Neutral)—she’s	 playing	 Blevins,
survival	 instinct,	 force	 of	 habit.	 Erszebet	 genuinely	 likes	 her	 and
Erszebet	 would	 not	 like	 her	 if	 she	 took	 the	 Gráinne/Blevins	 thing
seriously.	Gráinne’s	got	your	back.
If	you’re	still	gone	on	Friday,	I’ll	have	Erszebet	Send	me	back	to	help

you	out.
Tristan

From	Mortimer	Shore:
Hey,	Mel,	not	being	blocked,	really	am	swamped	with	a	sudden	wave	of
mundane	 coding	 assignments	 that	 came	 unexpectedly	 from	Blevins.
Nobody	else	(except	Oda)	has	the	security	clearance	to	do	it	and	he’s
busy	on	ATTO	moving.
I	agree	with	Tristan.	But	heads-up	Tristan,	you	can’t	go	back	to	help

Mel	out	because	you	are	about	to	get	a	whopper	new	DEDE—earliest
era	witch-recruitment	we’ve	had	yet:	20,000	BC	Germany.	I	only	know
because	 Erszebet	 has	 been	 surfing	 the	 wiki	 doing	 research—she
needs	some	kind	of	reference	point	to	Send	you	to.	I	turned	her	on	to
the	Hohle	Fels	caves	in	the	Ach	Valley.	Have	fun!	LOL

From	LTC	Lyons:
I	 haven’t	 heard	 anything	 about	 that,	 but	 I’ll	 start	 brushing	 up	 on	my
cave	art.	Wonder	how	the	hell	 they	expect	me	to	recruit	a	witch	who
can	Send	me	back	here.



From	Mortimer	Shore:
That’s	why	they	pay	you	the	big	bucks.	See	you	both	when	you’re	back
from	your	Extreme	DTAPs	lol

Peace	out
Mortimer



PART
FIVE



Diachronicle	
DAY	1945	 (DAY	BEFORE	THANKSGIVING,	YEAR	5)

In	which	the	road	to	perdition	is	paved	with	gold

GRÁINNE	AND	I	HAD	ARRIVED	in	San	Francisco	without	benefit	of	the	level	of
research	 to	which	 I	 was	 accustomed.	 Blevins,	 clearly	 smitten	with	Gráinne,
had	 allowed—one	 might	 even	 say	 encouraged—her	 to	 learn	 all	 manner	 of
Internet	 searching,	and	 she	assured	me	 that	 she	had	done	all	 the	background
work	for	this	DTAP.	There	were	no	particular	skills	required,	it	was	argued,	as
San	Francisco	 in	 1850	was	 such	 a	madcap	 swill	 of	 different	 cultures	 (and	 so
extremely	under-populated	by	women)	that	even	if	I	wore	pants	and	chewed
gum	I	would	not	stand	out	as	irregular,	while	no	matter	how	prepared	I	was,	I
would	still	stand	out	for	being	female.	Because	we	were	so	close	to	the	end	of
magic,	the	intention	was	to	get	in	and	out	quickly.

As	arrival	was	always	in	the	nude,	and	this	was	San	Francisco	at	the	start	of
the	Gold	Rush,	it	was	sensible	to	arrive	in	a	brothel.	Gráinne	had	chosen	the
Golden	Mounds,	right	on	Portsmouth	Square,	which	was	so	new	(having	been
rebuilt	twice	in	the	past	year	due	to	monstrous	fires)	that	it	still	smelled	of	pine
sap	and	paint,	which	 stale	beer	 and	 stale	 sweat	had	not	yet	masked.	 Imagine
whatever	 tawdry	 image	 of	 Gold	 Rush	 whorehouses	 you	 like;	 this	 one	 was
surprisingly	 well-appointed,	 despite	 the	 slapdash	 construction.	 Somebody,
somewhere,	had	come	into	massive	amounts	of	gold	leaf,	and	the	whole	place
glittered.	You’ve	surely	seen	the	photographs	of	prostitutes	of	this	era,	I	need
not	 spend	 the	 ink	 describing	 them—but	 I	 was	 not	 prepared	 for	 the	 loud,
rowdy,	almost	assembly-line	attitude	of	 the	place.	Curtains,	at	best,	 separated
nooks	for	nookie	sexual	congress.	There	was	nothing	close	to	privacy.	It	was	a
madhouse	of	copulation.	This	made	our	arrival—in	the	corner	of	a	large	room
with	 some	 eight	 beds	 all	 sectioned	 off	 by	 hanging	 “tapestries”—entirely
unnoticed.



We	both	stumbled	 to	our	knees.	 I	 recovered	quickly,	 for	 I	had	been	Sent
many	times.	Gráinne	was	a	little	slower	to	shake	it	off—but	then	she	was	more
in	her	element	than	I,	and	in	a	trice	she	had	pinched	a	couple	of	day-dresses.
Corsets	and	blouses	generally	remained	on	the	girls,	at	least	at	this	tier	of	low-
latency	prostitutional	services.

“We’ll	do	better	to	find	their	non-work	clothes,”	I	said,	as	Gráinne	tossed
me	the	more	modest	of	the	two	dresses.	“Since	we	shall	have	to	go	out	on	the
street.”

“No	 need	 to	 dress	 primly	 here	 at	 all,”	 she	 replied	 cheerily.	 “Not	 for	 the
time	 that’s	 in	 it.	 Here’s	 some	 knickers	 that	 look	 clean	 enough”—and	 she
tossed	 me	 some	 linen	 bloomers.	 (Not	 unlike	 the	 ones	 I	 am	 wearing	 now,
although	these	are	a	much	finer	weave	and	mercifully	much	cleaner.	I	must	be
grateful	for	these	small	blessings	now.)

We	made	our	way	downstairs	and	headed	for	the	main	door,	when	a	wasp-
wasted	figure	stepped	between	us	and	our	egress.	“Who	are	you?”	demanded
this	 older	woman	 (dressed	more	 as	 one	 imagines	 ladies	 dressing	 in	 the	 early
Victorian	 era—so	 clearly	 the	 madam	 of	 the	 place).	 She	 aimed	 the	 query
straight	at	me,	and	I,	unprepared,	without	the	usual	backstory	we	were	always
careful	to	produce,	hesitated.

“It’s	grand,	ma’am,	surely,”	said	Gráinne,	with	a	winsome	smile.	“Mary	 it
was	sent	us	over	from	the	other	place,	there’s	a	ship	arrived	with	lots	of	new
women,	 and	 they	 haven’t	 the	 beds	 set	 up.	 If	 you	 don’t	 want	 us	 we’ll	 be
striking	out	 on	our	 own,	 but	we’ve	 heard	 such	 agreeable	 things	 about	 your
terms.	 Will	 you	 take	 us,	 so?	 Shall	 we	 just	 be	 fetching	 our	 bags	 from	 the
harborside?	Pay	my	cousin	no	mind,	she’s	deaf	and	dumb.”

The	woman	frowned.	“Mary	should	know	we	don’t	take	Irish,”	she	said.
“It’s	a	surfeit	of	English	ladies	you’ve	got,	is	it?”	Gráinne	asked	in	a	playfully

disbelieving	voice.	And	 then,	 in	an	odd	accent	 somewhere	between	London
and	 Appalachian,	 she	 asked,	 “What	 if	 we	 were	 English,	 then?	 Would	 that
work	 for	your	 johns?	We	can	easily	be	English.	My	cousin	here,	 she	can	be
anything!”

Now	 the	 woman	 looked	 confused,	 but	 in	 a	 way	 that	 suggested	 Gráinne
would	get	her	way.	With	 a	 brusque	gesture	 she	motioned	 toward	 the	door.
“Very	well,	then,	get	your	things	and	come	back,	we	can	use	the	help.”

“Help,”	Gráinne	quoted	with	a	snigger,	and	out	we	went	to	meet	the	city.
“Who’s	Mary?”	I	whispered	as	we	exited.
Gráinne	 shrugged.	 “Mary’s	 such	 a	 common	name	 there	will	 always	 be	 at



least	one	nearby.	’Tis	the	best	name	to	be	using	when	you’re	counterfeiting.”
To	say	that	San	Francisco	in	1850	was	a	city	being	built	on	Gold	Rush	fever

does	not	begin	to	capture	the	chaos,	havoc,	greed,	and	rough-hewn	glamour
that	made	up	the	peninsula.	It	had	taken	almost	no	time	at	all	for	the	sharpest
of	 the	’49ers—or	Argonauts,	as	 the	tens	of	 thousands	who	came	by	sea	were
called—to	realize	that	the	real	money	was	to	be	made	not	from	mining	gold
but	from	selling	all	manner	of	goods	to	the	fellows	who	were	trying	to	mine	it.
Shops	 of	 every	 conceivable	 sort	 had	 sprung	 up	 in	 buildings	 around	 the
waterfront	and	on	the	route	out	of	town—freshly	built	wooden	buildings	that
(I	did	know	this	much	from	some	hasty	research)	had	already	burned	in	three
enormous	conflagrations	over	the	past	year	or	so.

I	also	knew	from	my	abbreviated	Googling	that	a	fourth	Great	Fire	would
destroy	a	swath	of	the	town	just	a	few	weeks	after	our	arrival.	This,	in	concert
with	 my	 awareness	 that	 magic	 was	 soon	 to	 wane	 entirely,	 added	 a	 certain
urgency	to	our	DEDE—I	was	eager	to	accomplish	it	and	get	out	quickly.

Between	credit	and	gold,	the	town	was	obviously,	and	almost	dangerously,
wealthy.	 Grand,	 elegant	 palace-like	 hotels	 and	 buildings	 were	 being
constructed	 in	 a	 slapdash	manner	 even	 faster	 than	 they	were	 burning	 down.
The	 building	 we	 had	 just	 exited	 was	 three	 stories	 tall	 and	 brightly	 painted,
facing	onto	a	large	city	square.	I	looked	to	either	side—the	entire	block	was	a
series	 of	 theatres,	 saloons,	 and	 inns,	 bustling	 in	 the	 bright	midday	 sun	with
prostitutes,	gamblers,	con	men,	and	the	occasional	gentleman.	Given	there	was
no	 easy	 natural	 source	 of	 water	 or	 wood,	 I	 cannot	 imagine	 where	 all	 the
resources	to	do	this	were	being	obtained.

“Amazing,”	said	Gráinne	heartily,	gazing	down	the	hill	toward	the	harbor—
in	which	was	moored	many	hundreds	of	tall	ships.	“Two	years	ago	this	was	a
village;	now	this.	See	all	them	ships?	Marooned	there	by	their	crews,	so	they
are,	the	crews	having	jumped	ship	to	go	prospecting.	So	it’s	taking	possession
the	city	folk	have	done,	and	turned	them	into	homes,	inns,	taverns,	brothels,
theatres,	 and	 I	 do	 believe	 a	 jail.	 And	 look,	 that’s	 where	 the	 Chinamen	 are
living.”

She	pointed	 to	 a	peculiar	neighborhood	of	unaccountably	neat	 and	 sturdy
wooden	homes,	laid	out	in	a	grid,	on	a	slope	near	the	harbor.	“Those	houses
were	 shipped	 over	 here	 from	Canton,	 in	 pieces	 but	 ready	 to	 be	 assembled.
They’re	very	popular	and	their	owner	is	about	to	make	a	fortune.	Can’t	say	as
much	for	the	rest	of	the	Chinese.”

“Where’s	Xiu	Li?”	 I	 asked,	 this	being	 the	name	of	 the	witch	we	were	 to



recruit.	“Since	you	did	all	the	research	I	assume	you	have	some	idea?	I	guess
the	Chinese	have	brothels	as	well?”

Gráinne	cut	me	a	look.	“Why	are	you	even	suggesting	that?	Do	you	think
all	witches	are	prostitutes?”

“Well,	in	all	fairness,	you—”
“Sure	wasn’t	I	a	spy	for	the	O’Malley!”	she	said	with	ferocity.	“Prostitution

was	a	front	and	didn’t	I	only	engage	in	it	to	suit	my	own	purposes!	Anyhow,”
she	 said,	 collecting	 herself	 and	making	 a	 let’s-put-this-behind-us	 gesture,	 “it
certainly	 isn’t	 the	case	here.	There	be	no	witches	amongst	 the	Chinese	 tarts,
no	 witch	 would	 be	 finding	 herself	 in	 the	 straits	 those	 poor	 women	 are
subjected	to.	No,	our	lady	is	right	across	the	square	there,	in	the	fancy	hotel—
the	St.	Francis.	Not	much	saintly	about	it	from	what	I	hear.”	She	chuckled	her
distinctively	Gráinne	chuckle,	took	me	by	the	hand,	and	led	me	across	the	dry
dirt	square.

We	entered	 the	 lobby	of	 the	St.	Francis—like	 the	Golden	Mounds,	 there
was	tacky,	tawdry	opulence	everywhere,	much	as	I	imagine	Vegas	must	look,
but	 without	 the	 neon—and	 a	 woman	 unlike	 any	 Chinese	 witch	 I	 had
expected	was	standing	by	a	card	table	in	the	center	of	the	room.

Xiu	Li	was	 tall	and	elegant,	almost	gentlemanly,	 feet	unbound	(although	I
noticed	when	she	walked	that	she	walked	stiffly).	Her	dress	was	an	ingenuous
blend	 of	 Oriental	 and	 Western	 that	 revealed	 just	 enough	 flesh	 to	 make	 a
gentleman	 inclined	 to	 stare,	 and	 yet	 concealed	 enough	 that	 she	 could,
technically,	pass	as	modest,	at	least	here.

She	was	watching	the	card	game,	and	at	a	certain	point,	she	settled	upon	the
arm	 of	 one	 player’s	 chair.	 She	 moved	 with	 the	 demure	 grace	 of	 a	 geisha
pouring	tea,	and	yet	at	the	same	moment	somehow	with	brazen	confidence	as
well.	She	was	beautiful	and	spellbinding.

Literally,	spellbinding.
She	was	helping	her	companion	cheat	at	cards.
For	a	 few	moments,	we	watched	 the	card	game.	Xiu	Li’s	 companion	was

also	Chinese—a	 gentleman	with	 short	 hair,	 cut	 in	 the	Western	 style.	There
were	 three	other	players,	 all	white	men,	one	young,	 two	chubby	 and	older.
Standing	 back	 from	 the	 table	 were	 an	 assortment	 of	 servant-ish	 types,
including	a	Chinese	man	with	long	hair	in	a	queue.

“’Tis	a	weak	magic	here,”	said	Gráinne	under	her	breath	at	last.	“She’s	using
soft	 magic	 to	 influence	 their	 choices,	 rather	 than	what	 I’d	 do	 in	 her	 place,
change	 the	order	of	 the	cards	 in	 the	deck.”	 I	 recalled	Erszebet	 lamenting	on



the	cheap	parlor	tricks	she’d	been	forced	to	perform	to	earn	her	keep,	back	in
.	 .	 .	 well,	 just	 about	 now,	 actually.	What	 an	 odd	 thought,	 that	 at	 this	 very
moment	Erszebet	was	a	young	witch	somewhere	in	Eastern	Europe,	innocent
to	all	that	lay	ahead.

We	watched	 the	 game	 to	 its	 completion—that	 is	 to	 say,	 to	 her	 partner’s
satisfaction—and	then	without	hesitation,	Xiu	Li	turned	with	radiant	grace	and
walked	 elegantly	 directly	 toward	 us.	 She	 greeted	 Gráinne	 as	 if	 a	 friend	 she
knew	attended	her.	Not	surprising,	as	I	have	come	to	understand	that	witches
recognize	each	other	in	subtle	ways.

“You	are	no	witch,”	the	tall	elegant	woman	said	to	me.
“Along	 for	 the	 ride	 with	me,	 she	 is.	 Gráinne	 I	 am	 by	 name,	 and	 this	 is

Melisande,	and	you	are	Xiu	Li.”
Xiu	Li	smiled,	her	teeth	small	opalescent	pearls.	“Yes.”
“We’ve	a	proposition	 for	you,”	 said	Gráinne.	“Be	 there	a	place	 to	 talk	 in

private?”
“There	is	a	room	upstairs,”	said	Xiu	Li.	“I	do	most	of	my	business	there.”
I	confess	deep	curiosity	to	know	what	her	business	was,	but	as	Gráinne	was

clearly	the	lead	DOer	here,	I	satisfied	myself	with	following	along	quietly.	We
headed	for	a	wooden	staircase.

It	 seemed	 to	me	 that	 somebody	was	 following	 us	 up	 the	 stairs,	 and	 sure
enough,	at	the	top,	we	were	stopped	by	a	Caucasian	gentleman	who	had	been
just	behind	us.	“Hey,	Shirley,”	he	 said,	mispronouncing	her	name	 in	a	nasal
voice.	“Introduce	me	to	your	friends	here.”	He	had	a	flat	accent,	akin	to	what
I	would	in	my	own	time	describe	as	midwestern.

“We	talk	first,	and	then	we	talk	to	you,”	said	Xiu	Li,	with	cold	friendliness.
“Hi,	 I’m	 Francis	 Overstreet,”	 he	 said,	 offering	 his	 hand	 to	 Gráinne,	 and

then	to	me.
“St.	Francis,	is	it?”	Gráinne	smiled.
“Hardly,”	he	said,	in	much	the	same	tone.	“Although	I	am	the	proprietor	of

this	 fine	 establishment.	 And	 as	 Miss	 Shirley	 here	 knows,	 when	 courtesan
services	 are	 being	 established,	 I	 not	 only	 get	 a	 cut,	 but	 I	 get	 to	 sample	 the
wares.”	He	 turned	 a	 leering	eye	 to	 the	 two	of	us,	 and,	determining	 at	once
which	was	more	leer-worthy,	he	winked	at	Gráinne.	I	confess	a	certain	relief.
If	he	were	not	handsome,	his	demeanor	would	be	utterly	repugnant.	But	he
was	a	man	in	the	prime	of	life,	fine	looking,	his	face	intelligent.	A	portrait	of
him	 would	 suggest	 a	 man	 of	 integrity	 and	 dignity.	 So	 the	 leer	 was	 more
disorienting	than	disgusting.



Gráinne	 was	 already	 giving	 him	 an	 inviting	 smile.	 “After	 supper?”	 she
suggested.	“I’ve	some	errand	to	run	before	that.”

“My	dance	card	is	otherwise	empty.”	He	smiled	back.
“Oh	 good,”	 I	 said,	 nudging	Gráinne	 slightly,	 as	 I	 realized	 that	 expression

would	mean	nothing	to	her.
“Oh	good,”	 she	echoed.	“Invite	a	 friend,”	 she	added,	pushing	me	slightly

toward	him.
He	looked	nonplussed:	further	confirmation	I	was	the	less	delectable	morsel.
Francis	Overstreet	trotted	back	down	the	stairs	to	oversee	his	glamorous	den

of	 iniquity,	as	Xiu	Li	 led	us	a	 short	way	down	the	corridor	 to	a	 small	 room
made	all	round	of	sanded	wooden	planks,	with	admirably	clean	windows,	that
looked	out	over	the	square.

“Your	business?”	she	asked	coolly.
“Magic’s	dying	off,”	said	Gráinne	matter-of-factly.	“I’m	sure	you’ve	felt	it.”
After	a	sober,	studied	pause,	Xiu	Li	nodded	once.	“I	have.	I	wondered	if	it

was	to	do	with	being	in	this	new	world	that	has	no	history	or	civilization.”
“It	 has	 plenty	 of	 history,”	 I	 corrected	 her.	 “The	 native	 people	 have	 had

witches	and	magic	all	along.	But	they	are	feeling	the	loss	as	well.	Everyone	is.”
“In	fact,”	continued	Gráinne,	“we	are	about	to	lose	magic	entirely.”
Xiu	Li’s	eyes	opened	wide.	She	did	not	speak.
“But	that	is	temporary,”	I	amended.	“Many	years	from	now,	in	the	future,

magic	is	restored	and	used	in	a	very	different	way	in	society.	We	are	here	to
encourage	you	to	come	forward	with	us	to	a	time	when	magic	will	be	strong
again.	There	are	some	caveats,	but	it	will	be	far	better	than	being	stuck	here	in
this	time	and	place,	especially	as	a	Chinese	woman.”

She	was	ignoring	me,	her	intense	black	eyes	studying	Gráinne’s	face.	“Why
does	it	end?	What	stops	it?”

“Photography,”	said	Gráinne	confidingly.
Xiu	Li	received	this	and	mused	upon	it	 for	a	moment.	“I	see,”	she	said	at

last—as	 if	 she	 really	 did	 see,	 although	 she	obviously	 lacked	 the	 education	 to
grasp	it	in	the	manner	that	we	at	DODO	did.	“How	long	do	we	have	before
it	is	gone?”

“July	 next	 year,”	 said	 Gráinne	 sympathetically.	 “There’s	 a	 solar	 eclipse,
witnessed	by	everyone	in	Europe,	and	someone	takes	a	photograph	of	it,	and
that’s	 that.”	 She	 snapped	 her	 fingers.	 “It’s	 over.	 So	 you’d	 best	 consider	 our
offer	and	come	forward	with	us.”

I	stared	at	Gráinne.	She	was	strikingly	well-informed	for	an	Anachron.	Who



would	have	told	her	something	that	specific?	It	must	have	been	Erszebet.
Xiu	Li’s	pale	skin	had	paled	even	further	hearing	this.	She	sank	onto	a	stool,

her	 heavy	 silk	 dress	 shifting	 gracefully	 around	 her	 legs	 so	 that	 she	 appeared
almost	a	mermaid.	“This	is	dreadful	news.”

“Yes,”	said	Gráinne,	with	no	sense	of	dread	at	all.	“You	take	some	time	to
think	it	over.	Melisande,	let’s	be	seeing	the	city,	and	we’ll	return	by	teatime.”

She	took	me	by	the	hand	in	her	casually	familiar	way	and	led	me	out	of	the
room,	down	the	hall,	down	the	stairs,	and	back	out	into	the	square.

“Where	are	we	going?”	I	asked.
“Sure	 I’d	 love	 to	 see	 the	 city,”	 said	 Gráinne.	 “But	 in	 truth	 there’s	 a

gentleman	here	to	introduce	ourselves	to.”
“What	 gentleman?”	 I	 demanded.	 “I	 don’t	 recall	 that	 being	 part	 of	 the

DEDE.”
“Not	that	DEDE	as	written,”	agreed	Gráinne.	“But	there	is	more	going	on

than	meets	the	eye	here.	Blevins	set	me	on	to	him,	and	explained	he	could	not
put	it	down	into	the	official	assignment	because	it	is,	what	was	that	phrase	he
was	using	now?	Deep	cover?	Black	cops?”

“Black	ops,”	I	said,	rolling	my	eyes.	“Black	operations.	Covert	activity.”
“Covert,	 aye,	 there	 you	 go,”	 said	Gráinne,	 without	 a	 shred	 of	 the	 sober

demeanor	one	associates	with	such	discussions.	“One	reason	he	wanted	us	to
come	 here	 together	 was	 so	 that	 you	 could	 be	 witness	 to	 it	 all,	 but	 off	 the
record,	 like.	 In	 fact,	 this	 whole	 DEDE	 is	 a	 different	 beast	 than	 you	 are
currently	thinking.”

I	 felt	 a	 wave	 of	 alarm	 but	 pushed	 it	 aside.	 This	 was	 irregular,	 but	 not
dangerous.	“Will	you	explain	yourself?”	I	said.

“Surely,”	said	Gráinne.	“There’s	a	Fugger	here,	a	direct	male	descendant	of
the	one	I	know	in	my	generation.	He	knows	to	expect	us,	and	he’ll	help	us
with	the	DEDE.”

The	 more	 she	 revealed	 the	 more	 confounding	 it	 seemed.	 “How?”	 I
demanded.	“How	on	earth	can	he	possibly	know	 to	expect	us?	Nobody	has
ever	been	close	to	this	DTAP	before.”

“Melisande,”	 she	 said	 in	 a	 confiding,	 delighted	 voice.	 “What	 is	 the	 one
thing	you	can	carry	through	time	with	you?”

“Information,”	I	said.
“Indeed,”	 she	 said.	 “And	 it’s	 a	 wide	 varieties	 of	 ways,	 so	 it	 is,	 that

information	 can	 be	 carried	 through	 time.	 If	 it’s	 going	 back	 in	 time,	 the
information’s	 got	 to	 move	 magically.	 But	 if	 it’s	 coming	 forward,	 it	 can	 be



planted	and	moved	through	generations.”
“Do	you	mean	you	told	this	fellow’s	ancestor	to	meet	you	in	San	Francisco

in	 1850?	 And	 they’ve	 passed	 the	 information	 along,	 accurately	 and	without
embellishment,	 for	 two	 and	 a	 half	 centuries?”	 I	was	 incredulous—this	was	 an
extremely	dangerous	way	to	work	with	historical	agents.

“It’s	not	nearly	that	specific,”	said	Gráinne	blithely.	“Think	of	it	more	as	a
mythology.	The	 Fuggers	 know—all	 of	 them—that	 there’s	 an	 immortal	 red-
haired	 Irish	 witch	 named	 Gráinne	 who	 is	 an	 ally	 of	 the	 family,	 in	 any
generation,	and	the	family	knows	this	and	keeps	it	close	to	themselves.	And	’tis
true	enough	that	this	witch,	in	1602,	did	recommend	to	the	family	patriarch	of
the	time	to	keep	an	eye	westward,	ever	westward,	over	the	generations.	It	has
served	 them	well,	 and	 this	 is	 as	westward	 as	 it	 gets.	 So	 I	was	 not	 surprised,
when	 I	 did	 my	 Internet	 research,	 to	 be	 confirmed	 in	 my	 belief	 that	 there
would	 be	 a	 Fugger	 already	 here,	 opening	 a	 bank	 and	 prepared	 to	 make
ungodly	profits.	And	he	is	already	an	ally	though	he	has	never	met	me,	nor	has
his	 sire,	grandsire,	great-grandsire	going	back	many	generations	 .	 .	 .	but	they
know	about	me.	It’s	delighted	he’ll	be	by	our	presence,	and	he’ll	help	us,	no
questions	asked.	’Tis	a	remarkable	boon	for	our	needs.”

“What	will	he	do?”	I	asked,	struggling	to	keep	up	with	all	this.	Did	Tristan
know	any	of	 this?	Surely	Frank	Oda	or	Mortimer	must,	as	 they	oversaw	the
Chronotron	 data	 and	 none	 of	 this	 could	 be	 managed	 without	 tremendous
Chronotron	oversight.	Why	had	I	not	been	told?

“Here’s	 the	 second	part	you	do	not	know,”	 she	 said.	“We’re	not	 actually
meant	to	bring	her	forward	in	time.”

“What?”	I	cried.	“Then	what	are	we	doing	here?”
“We’re	 here	 to	 recruit	 her,”	 said	 Gráinne.	 “Much	 as	 I	 recruited	 the

Fuggers.	 If	 she	comes	 forward	 in	 time,	what	do	we	have?	One	more	witch.
But	 if	 we	 leave	 her	 here,	 educated	 and	 motivated	 to	 pass	 a	 family	 legend
down,	then	we	can	sculpt	her	to	our	needs,	and	seven	generations	hence,	it’s
allies	we’ll	have	in	all	her	dutiful	descendants.	And	if	we	set	her	up	so	that	her
descendants	will	be	people	of	power	in	America,	then	when	we	come	to	them
in	 the	 twenty-first	 century,	 it’s	 powerful	 allies	 we	 will	 have.	 They	 will	 have
things	 that	 we	 need—because	 we	 will	 arrange	 now	 for	 them	 to	 have	 such
things.”

Again,	 I	 was	 utterly	 gobsmacked—what	 a	 very	 clever	 and	 extremely
dangerous	methodology.	And	shocking	that	I	had	not	been	told	of	it.	Again,	I
wondered:	Had	Tristan?	Was	 he	 also	 in	 the	 dark,	 or	 had	 he	 begun	 to	 keep



secrets	from	me?
Three	 banks	 had	 already	 opened	 in	 or	 near	 Portsmouth	 Square,	 and	 the

third	bank	was	owned	by	 the	 current	Mr.	Fugger.	Gráinne	wrote	 a	note	 to
have	 delivered	 to	 him,	 and	 after	 we	waited	 for	 a	 few	minutes	 in	 the	 brick
lobby	 (brick!	 In	 that	 time	and	place!	Proof	 these	were	no	ordinary	bankers),
the	gentleman	appeared,	in	very	fine	and	sober	attire,	and	received	Gráinne	as
if	she	were	Santa	Claus	and	he	a	toddler.	They	exchanged	certain	code	phrases
that	 she	had	planted	with	his	 ancestor,	 to	 reassure	each	other	 (or	 to	 reassure
him;	Gráinne	had	this	insouciantly	in	hand).	He	was	only	too	happy	to	follow
us	back	 to	 the	St.	Francis,	where	his	duty	would	be	 to	 set	up	Xiu	Li	 as	 the
wealthiest	Chinese	immigrant	in	all	of	California.

I	do	not	know—I	suppose	I	shall	never	know	now—if	Gráinne	offered	him
other	incentives	to	fork	over	a	chunk	of	his	private	fortune	to	a	total	stranger,
and	a	Chinese	woman	no	less.	But	determined,	even	eager,	was	he	to	fork	it
over.

“Now,”	 said	 Gráinne,	 as	 we	 all	 stepped	 lightly	 across	 the	 square,	 “it’s
hopeful	I	am	of	this	matter	being	wrapped	up	quick	enough,	but	’tis	a	matter
of	 logistics	 that	 we	 will	 have	 a	 gentleman	 caller	 who	 must	 be	 dispatched
politely.	This	may	require	you	to	pretend	to	be	Melisande’s	companion	for	an
hour.”

Young	Fugger	 regarded	me	with	 skepticism	but	was	 too	polite	 to	 express
his	disappointment.	His	eyes,	however,	 strayed	not	 infrequently	 to	Gráinne’s
curvier	shape	as	we	walked	back	toward	the	St.	Francis.

Back	in	the	upstairs	rooms,	we	found	a	grim	Xiu	Li.
“I	am	not	yet	resolved	to	go,”	she	said,	almost	pouting—if	pouting	can	be

applied	to	a	woman	of	such	mature	and	majestic	bearing.
“There	 is	 another	way,”	 said	Gráinne.	This	 immediately	 commanded	Xiu

Li’s	attention.	“Yes.	There’s	always	the	option	to	stay	here	and	swap	out	magic
for	dosh,	if	you	have	that	phrase	here.	Money.	This	gentleman	is	an	associate
of	ours,	and	he	will	happily	set	you	up	for	 life,	and	for	your	children’s	 lives,
and	your	children’s	children’s	lives.”

Xiu	 Li’s	 bright	 eyes	 narrowed,	 and	 she	 looked	 back	 and	 forth	 between
them.	I	might	as	well	have	not	been	present.	“There	is	always	a	condition	to
these	 matters,”	 she	 said.	 “What	 is	 the	 condition	 here?	 Must	 I	 marry	 this
Caucasian?	I	am	already	the	mistress	of	the	Celestial	Jong	Li.”

Gráinne	 shook	 her	 head.	 “No	 condition	 but	 that	 you	 think	well	 of	 us—
myself	 and	 the	gentleman	here.	And	 that	 you	breed,	 if	 you	haven’t	 yet,	 but



choose	the	man	yourself,	 sure.	Then	raise	your	children	to	think	well	of	our
memory,	and	to	raise	their	children	to	do	likewise,	and	their	children,	and	so
on	 down	 the	 line.	One	 day	 in	 the	 future	 I	might	 be	meeting	 one	 of	 your
descendants,	and	I	would	have	them	very	well-disposed	toward	me.”

With	a	wink	to	me,	as	if	I	were	a	part	of	all	of	this	unsettling	collusion,	she
commented,	“Worked	a	wonder	with	the	Fuggers,	might	as	well	try	it	again,
isn’t	it?”

Xiu	Li	thought	this	over.	“When	magic	disappears,”	she	said,	“are	witches
gone?	Do	the	powers	lie	dormant	through	the	generations	or	are	they	entirely
snuffed	out?”

“Oh,	the	magic	comes	back	just	fine,	so	it	does,”	said	Gráinne.	“Although	it
takes	the	witches	a	while	to	get	the	feel	for	it.”

“So	a	distant	daughter	of	mine—”
“—is	what	I’m	saying,”	said	Gráinne,	nodding.
Xiu	 Li	 pursed	 her	 lips	 and	 looked	 out	 the	window.	 It	 seemed	 to	me	 an

eternity	passed,	and	I	was	not	comfortable	about	this,	as	time	was	drawing	near
for	Francis	Overstreet	to	return	to	“test	the	wares,”	and	I	did	not	like	the	idea
of	pretending	to	be	a	prostitute	with	Mr.	Fugger	as	my	client.

Xiu	Li	finally	turned	to	us.	“I	will	agree	to	this.	But	I	want	a	contract	and
surety.”

Mr.	Fugger	 raised	his	handsome	 leather	briefcase.	 “I’ve	got	 it	 all	 arranged
here,”	he	said.	“But	this	is	hardly	a	place	to	do	respectable	business,	so	I’d	like
to	bring	you	both	to	supper	where	my	cook	will	treat	you	like	royalty.”

“Both?”	 I	echoed,	now	 feeling	even	more	 invisible,	 in	a	manner	 that	was
beginning	to	make	my	hackles	rise.	“There	are	three	of	us	here.”

The	 gentleman	 turned	 to	 me.	 “Miss	 Gráinne	 said	 you’d	 be	 wanting	 to
return	home	as	soon	as	possible.”

“Yes,	but—”
“There’s	no	need	of	you	to	stay	here,”	said	Gráinne	cheerfully.	“This	was

really	my	DEDE	all	along,	we	only	needed	you	to	come	along	to	cover	my
tracks.	If	I	return	a	few	scant	hours	after	you,	’tis	no	concern	of	anyone	there.”
With	a	wink.	“And	the	longer	you	stay	here	the	likelier	you	are	to	be	called	to
service,	not	 that	 anyone	will	be	 too	hot	 to	hoist	 that	 skirt	up	off	your	bony
hips.”

I	reviewed	my	options.	Gráinne	had	entirely	commandeered	the	situation—
mostly	 because	 I	 was	 so	 unprepared	 for	 any	 of	 these	 developments,	 but	 it
seemed	clear	enough	that	Blevins	had	entrusted	her	as	a	DOer.	I	could	not	see



a	benefit	to	my	remaining	here	any	longer.	And	frankly,	it	would	be	helpful	to
have	some	time	in	Cambridge	without	Gráinne	underfoot,	to	suss	out	how	all
of	this	had	come	to	pass.

“Thank	you,	yes,	I’ll	go	home	now,”	I	said.
“Excellent,”	 said	 Gráinne,	 and	 turned	 to	 Xiu	 Li.	 “Do	 you	 have	 much

experience	Sending	people?”
Xiu	Li	shrugged.	“As	children	my	sisters	and	I	did	it	as	a	game,	but	as	magic

weakened	it	became	very	difficult,	the	fun	not	worth	the	effort.”
“I’ll	be	 refreshing	your	memory,	 then,”	 said	Gráinne.	“I	 shall	Home	Mel,

and	you,	watching	me,	will	then	know	how	to	Home	me	after	our	agreeable
dinner.”

Xiu	Li	nodded.
“But	I	need	you	to	be	paying	particular	attention,”	said	Gráinne,	“as	a	few

things	will	be	different.	In	particular,	the	coordinates	of	where	we	are	to	end
up.”

“How	so?”	I	asked.	“We	are	both	returning	to	the	same	place.”
“No,”	 said	 Gráinne,	 in	 an	 amused-yet-apologetic	 smile.	 “We’re	 not,

actually,	Melisande	Stokes.”
Suddenly	I	had	a	terrible	feeling	in	the	pit	of	my	stomach—a	premonition,

which	is	not,	dear	reader,	something	I	am	prone	to.	I	sensed	it	had	something
to	 do	 with	 Gráinne’s	 detailed	 knowledge	 about	 photography,	 and	 the
significance	of	the	eclipse.	“Where	are	you	going?”	I	asked.

“Oh,	 it’s	 back	 to	 DODO	 headquarters	 for	 myself,	 sure,”	 she	 said.	 “I’ve
stacks	 to	 do	 there,	 and	 I	 can’t	 have	 you	 underfoot.	 So	 it’s	 elsewhere	 I	 am
Sending	 you,	 where	 there	 will	 be	 no	 magic	 strong	 enough	 to	 Send	 you
forward.	God	 ye	 good	 day,	Melisande	 Stokes.	 ’Tis	 been	 a	 pleasure	 to	 serve
with	you.	Fare	thee	well.”

Even	as	she	spoke,	the	room	began	to	dim	and	tilt	about	me,	and	the	lovely
aroma	 that	 always	wafted	 at	 the	 edges	 of	my	 attention	when	 I	was	 Sent—I
smelled	it,	and	then	.	.	.

.	.	.	And	then	I	awoke	three	weeks	ago,	naked,	cold,	on	the	grimy	pavers	of
a	London	street	at	dawn,	frantic	to	know	what	date	it	was,	like	a	perversion	of
Scrooge	at	 the	end	of	A	Christmas	Carol	 (which	came	out	 less	 than	a	decade
ago).

To	make	 short	 shrift	 of	 it:	 a	 beadle	 was	 called	 and	 I	 was	 bundled	 off	 to
Bedlam,	but	a	physician	there	sensed	there	was	something	different	about	me
(thank	 God!)	 and	 brought	 me	 to	 his	 home,	 for	 he	 and	 his	 wife	 to	 try	 to



“salvage.”	 They	 have	 it	 almost	 right:	 they	 take	 me	 for	 a	 witch	 (there	 are
witches	in	distant	branches	of	his	family,	and	he	has	watched	with	compassion
as	several	of	them	have	fallen	into	despair	as	their	powers	waned;	one	took	her
own	life).	So	they	have	offered	me	shelter,	food,	the	clothes	upon	my	back	.	.	.
on	the	sole	condition	that	I	make	no	attempt	to	communicate	with	any	witch
in	any	way.

Not	that	I	know	any	witches	in	1851	London	anyhow.	And	even	if	I	did,	it
would	be	a	miracle	 if	 she	had	the	power	 left	 to	Send	me	forward	before	the
eclipse.	Which	will	occur	in	just	seventeen	days.

Post	by	Mortimer	Shore	on
“General”	GRIMNIR	channel

DAY	1947	(BLACK	FRIDAY,	YEAR	5)

Mortimer	here,	writing	first	entry	on	new	GRIMNIR	system	from	safe
locale.
OK,	 so	 those	 of	 you	who	are	 into	 the	Norse	mythology	might	 have

read	 a	 story	 about	 Odin	 disguising	 himself	 as	 a	 regular	 mortal	 for
tactical	reasons.	The	name	he	adopted	was	Grimnir.
The	 old	 ODIN	 system	 is	 no	 longer	 accessible	 to	 me,	 they	 have

changed	the	passwords	and	kicked	me	out,	I’m	on	the	outs,	and	on	the
run,	with	a	few	of	the	others.	But	I	set	up	a	new	system	on	the	dark	net
that	we	can	use	to	stay	in	touch	with	each	other	and	make	a	record	of
all	that’s	happening.	And	I’m	calling	it	GRIMNIR.
I’m	not	much	of	a	narrative	writer,	but	here’s	what	has	gone	down

.	.	.
Two	 days	 ago,	 on	 Wednesday	 afternoon	 (the	 day	 before

Thanksgiving),	 after	 some	 delays,	Mel	 and	Gráinne	were	 Sent	 to	 the
1850	San	Francisco	DTAP,	supposedly	to	recruit	a	Chinese	KCW	there.
The	 old-school	 ODECs	 don’t	 have	 enough	 room	 inside	 of	 them	 for	 a
Sending	witch	and	two	DOers,	so	this	was	a	dual	Send	from	ATTO	#1,



which	 has	 plenty	 of	 room	 on	 the	 interior.	 By	 that	 point	 it	 had	 been
hoisted	up	and	mounted	on	the	back	of	its	tractor-trailer	rig,	making	it
ready	 for	 field	 trials	 on	 the	 streets	 of	 the	 greater	 Boston	 area
beginning	Friday.
This	was	billed	as	a	one-day	DEDE,	or	possibly	a	one-nighter,	but	as

I	said	it	got	off	to	a	late	start,	and	by	the	time	they	were	going	into	the
ATTO,	Mel	was	resigned	to	the	fact	that	it	was	probably	going	to	wipe
out	most	of	Thanksgiving	Day	and	that	she’d	take	Friday	off	instead.
At	the	same	time	(Wednesday)	there	was	a	lot	of	bureaucratic	back-

and-forth	 involving	 Tristan,	 Erszebet,	 and	 Blevins	 regarding	 this
unusual	 DEDE	 that	 had	 been	 planned	 for	 Tristan	 starting	 Friday
morning,	 where	 he	 was	 being	 sent	 back	 to	 20,000	 BC	 Germany.
Erszebet	was	all	like,	“I	am	only	following	orders.	Like	the	indentured
servant	 I	 have	 been	 since	 I	met	 you.”	 And	 so	 it	was	 up	 to	 Tristan	 to
verify	and	double-check	the	order	with	Blevins	and	interface	with	the
Chronotron	crew.
Gordon	Healey,	one	of	the	Chronotron	nerds,	ended	up	staying	late

and	 missing	 his	 flight	 home	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 help	 make	 sense	 of	 the
mission	and	dig	up	the	background	information	that	Tristan	needed	to
prep	for	it.	He	and	Erszebet	booked	a	slot	in	ODEC	#1	early	on	Friday
morning	(that’s	today),	since	the	ODECs	were	already	fully	booked	for
the	rest	of	the	day	and	the	ATTO	would	not	be	available.	I	volunteered
to	come	in	and	run	the	control	panel.
So	 we	 arrived	 this	morning,	 about	 an	 hour	 before	 the	 rest	 of	 the

staff	was	due	in.	Tristan	had	slept	well	although	he	still	looked	a	little
ruffled	 about	 this	 strange	 assignment	 (like	 I	 said:	20,000	 BC.	 Dude.).
Erszebet	had	a	 look	of	sort	of	grim	resignation	to	her—but	that’s	not
too	unusual	for	her.	We	checked	the	logs	to	see	if	Gráinne	and	Mel	had
made	 it	 back,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 them.	 A	 little	 unusual,	 but
nothing	that	would	really	raise	a	red	flag	yet.
I	stayed	on	the	outside	of	the	glass	wall	to	run	the	controls.	Erszebet

and	Tristan	went	 through	 the	usual	protocols	 in	 the	bio-containment
ward	 while	 I	 got	 ODEC	 #1	 powered	 up	 and	 ran	 the	 usual	 checks.
Through	the	glass	wall	I	saw	Tristan	come	out	of	the	sterilization	suite
in	 the	 usual	 bathrobe.	 He	 tossed	 me	 a	 salute	 and	 walked	 into	 the
ODEC.
Erszebet	began	to	follow	him	in.	Then	she	hesitated	mid-stride,	and



stepped	 back	 away	 from	 it.	 For	 a	 long	 moment	 she	 stared	 into	 the
ODEC.	She	kind	of	looked	a	little	queasy.
I	turned	on	the	intercom	and	asked	if	there	was	a	problem.
“Come	on,	Erszebet,”	I	heard	Tristan	say.
“You	will	come	out	of	there,”	she	said.
“What?”
“I	 say	 you	 will	 come	 out	 of	 there.	 Very	 quickly.	 I	 must	 tell	 you

something.”
A	sound	nearly	a	harrumph,	and	then	Tristan	came	out	of	the	ODEC.

Erszebet	closed	the	door	behind	him,	and	then	visibly	relaxed—I	hadn’t
realized	 she	 had	 been	 tense	 until	 I	 saw	 the	 tension	 leave	 her
shoulders.
“.	.	.	All	right,”	said	Tristan,	bemused.	“What’s	going	on?”
“There	is	no	real	assignment	to	send	you	on	this	DEDE,”	she	said.
Tristan	 was	 totally	 still	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then	 pursed	 his	 lips

together	until	they	were	colorless.
“What?”	he	said	at	last.
“It	is	all	faked.	Every	bit	of	it.	It	is	all	part	of	a	scheme.”
“What	scheme?	Who’s	behind	it?”
She	looked	troubled,	but	resigned.	“The	scheme	requires	getting	rid

of	 Melisande	 and	 yourself.	 Melisande	 is	 gone	 forever	 and	 now	 I	 am
supposed	to	get	rid	of	you.”
The	look	on	Tristan’s	 face	was	of	even	greater	shock	than	I	myself

was	feeling,	which	is	saying	a	lot.	“But	Mel’s	with	.	.	.”	he	protested.
“It	is	Gráinne’s	scheme,”	said	Erszebet.	“It	was	almost	mine	as	well.

But	I	have	been	awake	all	night	thinking	of	Melisande	and	it	is	wrong	to
do	this.	So	I	am	not	doing	it.”
There	 was	 complete	 silence	 in	 the	 chamber	 except	 for	 the

background	hum	of	the	ODEC.
“I	do	not	want	to	do	this	anymore,”	she	continued,	sounding	almost

plaintive,	which	if	you’ve	ever	heard	Erszebet	speak	is	a	hard	thing	to
imagine.	“I	am	quitting.	I	will	leave	and	do	something	el—”
Tristan	 had	 closed	 his	 hand	 around	 her	 wrist	 and	 was	 trembling

with	the	effort	of	not	shaking	her.	“What’s	happened	to	Mel?	What	 is
Gráinne	doing?	Explain	yourself!”
She	 looked	 cowed—or	 at	 least,	 as	 close	 to	 cowed	 as	 Erszebet

Karpathy	could	ever	look.	“She	wants	to	take	over	DODO	and	use	it	for



her	 purposes,”	 she	 said	 in	 a	 strangely	 small	 voice.	 “From	 San
Francisco,	she	has	already	Sent	Mel	somewhere	else,	someplace	Mel
will	not	be	able	to	come	back	from.”
“Where?	When?”
She	 avoided	 his	 gaze.	 “We	 agreed	 not	 to	 tell	 each	 other	 what	 we

were	doing.	Like	the	French	Resistance—it	is	safer	not	to	know.”
“How	the	fuck	 is	this	like	the	French	Resistance?”	Tristan	growled,

looking	angrier	 than	 I’ve	ever	seen	him.	He	 let	go	of	her	and	walked
away,	muttering	to	himself.
Erszebet’s	face	had	flushed	such	a	bright	shade	of	red	that	she	was

almost	 unrecognizable.	 I’d	 never	 known	 until	 this	 moment	 that	 she
was	capable	of	being	embarrassed.	“I	know,	of	course.”	She	looked	at
Tristan.	“And,	if	you	think	about	it,	so	do	you.	You	have	always	known
where	Mel	would	end	up.”
Tristan	turned	and	looked	at	her,	his	anger	suddenly	replaced	by	a

look	that	said,	Of	course.	I	get	it.	“London,”	he	said,	“1851.”
“Yes.	We	can	speak	more	of	 it	 later.	But	 today	 .	 .	 .	Gráinne	will	be

back	 from	 1850	 San	 Francisco,”	 said	 Erszebet.	 “She	 has	 Blevins
wrapped	around	her	pinkie	finger.	Frink	too.	She	also	has	the	affection
of	Mr.	Shiny-face	Gordon	Healey.	She	tried	to	seduce	Mortimer	but	she
says	he	is	too	much	of	a	nerd.”
“Geek,”	 I	corrected.	“I’m	a	geek.	 If	 I	were	a	nerd	she’d	have	me	 in

bed	by	now.”
“There	are	other	people,”	said	Erszebet.	“I	do	not	know	all	of	them.”
Tristan’s	 face	 still	 showed	 blank	 astonishment.	 “But	 what’s	 her

goal?	What	does	she	want?”
“She	wants	magic	 not	 to	 go	 away,”	 said	Erszebet.	 “That	 is	 not	 the

same	thing	as	letting	it	go	away	and	then	bringing	it	back.”
“Holy	 shit,”	 said	 Tristan	 under	 his	 breath.	 And	 then,	 as	 the	 full

implication	of	this	hit	him,	he	repeated	it	much	louder:	“Holy	shit!”
“I	will	leave,”	said	Erszebet,	with	nervous	decisiveness.	“It	is	best	if

you	leave	too,	Tristan	Lyons.”
“You’re	 not	 going	 anywhere	 without	 me,”	 said	 Tristan.	 “Not	 until

you’ve	told	me	everything	you	know.”
Erszebet’s	 breathing	 suddenly	 seemed	 labored,	 as	 if	 it	 were

dawning	on	her	that	she	couldn’t	casually	walk	away	from	her	aborted
mission.	“I	have	already	told	you	almost	everything.	But	I	will	stay	with



you	until	we	figure	out	how	to	help	Melisande.”
“Damn	right	you	will,”	said	Tristan.
“That	is	my	choice,”	she	informed	him,	rebounding	back	to	the	fierce

and	scornful	witch	around	whom	we	all	love	to	walk	on	eggshells.	“Do
not	treat	me	like	I	do	not	have	a	choice	in	this.	It	was	my	choice	right
now	 not	 to	 send	 you	 back	 to	 the	 Ice	 Age.	 I	 could	 have	 done	 it	 like
that”—she	snapped	her	 fingers	 for	emphasis.	 “Do	not	 treat	me	 like	 I
have	 done	 something	 wrong.	 I	 have	 done	 something	 right.	 You	 will
appreciate	that	or	I	will	walk	away.”
Tristan	collected	himself.	“Okay,”	he	said.	“You’re	right.	Thank	you

for	not	annihilating	me	when	you	had	the	chance,	I	realize	that	maybe
wasn’t	easy	for	you.”	A	brief	pause	as	he	considered	options.	“We’ll	go
to	 Frank	 Oda’s	 house	 and	 bring	 him	 up	 to	 date.”	 He	 turned	 to	 me.
“You’re	 logged	 in	 as	 being	 here	 with	 us	 right	 now.	 If	 we	 disappear
they’ll	 want	 to	 know	what	 you	 know.	 You	 should	 probably	 get	 out	 of
here	with	us.”
“We	have	an	hour,”	I	pointed	out.
“What	do	you	mean?”	Tristan	asked.
I’d	 already	 punched	 in	 the	 commands	 to	 power	 down	 the	 ODEC.

“Gráinne	can’t	come	back	until	at	least	one	of	the	ODECs	is	turned	on
for	her.”	I	was	checking	out	the	day’s	schedule	on	a	monitor.	“Earliest
that	 could	 happen	 is	 an	 hour	 from	now.	During	 that	 time,	 I’ll	 get	 as
much	intel	as	I	can	and	get	it	out	of	the	building.”	And	because	Tristan
hesitated:	“I’m	on	Team	Oda.	I	don’t	care	about	the	rest	of	it.”
“We	should	go,”	said	Erszebet	to	Tristan,	heading	back	into	the	bio-

containment	 ward,	 which	 was	 the	 only	 way	 out.	 “Everyone	 arrives
soon.	Let’s	be	far	away.”
They	 left,	 and	 I	 did	 some	 deep-breathing	 exercises	 to	 lower	 my

heart	 rate	 back	 to	 normal,	 and	 then	went	 about	my	morning	 as	 if	 it
were	 just	 another	 day.	 Except	 that	 I	 also	 quietly	 plugged	my	biggest
flash	drive	into	my	desktop	computer,	and	began	to	download	as	much
of	 ODIN	 as	 possible.	 The	 whole	 ODIN	 system—all	 of	 the	 message
threads,	NDAs,	HR	records,	DEDE	reports,	security	camera	video,	and
other	 bureaucratic	 junk	 that	 had	 piled	 up	 on	 our	 servers	 during	 the
five	years	that	DODO	had	been	in	existence—would	have	filled	my	flash
drive	 a	 thousand	 times	 over,	 so	 I	 tried	 to	 be	 selective,	 searching	 for
documents	 that	 referenced	 Mel,	 Tristan,	 Blevins,	 and	 other	 key



names,	and	focusing	on	certain	ranges	of	dates	when	it	seemed	like	a
lot	of	important	shit	had	gone	down—like	Halloween.	Even	so	I	ended
up	 accidentally	 grabbing	 a	 lot	 of	 stuff	 like	 the	 sexual	 harassment
policy	 that	 I	 didn’t	 really	 want	 or	 need,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 have	 time	 to	 be
more	 selective.	 Now	 that	 it’s	 all	 up	 on	 GRIMNIR	 I	 can	 maybe	 go
through	and	prune	it	later.
I	kept	my	head	down	as	people	came	in	and	the	office	filled	up	as	on

any	other	day,	except	that	head	count	was	low	because	a	lot	of	people
were	taking	vacation.	My	cube	is	on	the	edge	of	the	R&D	group	area,
so	I	saw	Dr.	Oda	come	in	and	do	a	stand-up	meeting	with	the	crew	that
was	going	to	be	taking	the	ATTO	out	on	the	road—a	driver,	obviously,
plus	a	MUON	and	 two	 technicians	who	were	going	 to	be	 in	 the	back,
operating	 the	 equipment	 and	 running	 tests.	 Nothing	 too	 fancy—they
just	wanted	to	verify	that	the	ATTO’s	onboard	power	supply	and	comms
features	would	operate	nominally	while	the	thing	was	bouncing	around
in	real-world	traffic	conditions.
My	cube	is	also	in	earshot	of	the	big	open	stairwell	that	runs	up	the

middle	of	the	building	and	so	eventually	 I	heard	Gráinne’s	voice—she
had	returned	 from	the	San	Francisco	DTAP,	without	Mel.	 I	heard	her
go	up	to	the	floor	above	me	and	enter	Blevins’s	office.	The	door	closed,
and	there	were	a	few	minutes	of	calm-before-the-storm	before	voices
were	raised	and	people	up	there	started	looking	stressed	out.	A	couple
of	DOSECOPS	personnel	came	up	the	stairs	double-time	and	blew	past
Blevins’s	receptionist	into	his	office	and	there	was	a	lot	more	jawing.	I
was	sitting	 there	 trying	 to	be	cool,	watching	 the	progress	bar	on	my
screen,	wondering	whether	I	should	just	yank	the	thumb	drive	and	get
out	of	there.
Then	 the	 decision	 was	 made	 for	 me	 by	 a	 DOSECOP	 who	 had

approached	me	from	behind,	a	little	bit	sneaky-like,	and	told	me	I	was
wanted	 in	 Blevins’s	 office	 immediately.	 I	 made	 a	 glance	 toward	 the
stairwell	and	saw	another	DOSECOP	loitering	there,	keeping	me	in	the
corner	of	his	eye,	so	I	figured	they	had	orders	not	to	let	me	just	bolt.	So
I	 got	 up	and	went	up	 the	 stairs	 into	Blevins’s	 office.	He	and	Gráinne
were	 in	 there	 with	 two	 of	 the	 higher-ranking	 DOSECOPS	 officers,
including	Major	Isobel	Sloane,	who	I	kinda	wondered	if	Gráinne	had	a
bit	of	an	influence	over.	Blevins	was	in	his	big	leather	swivel	chair	and
Gráinne	was	standing	behind	him,	sort	of	hovering,	and	both	of	 them



were	glancing	between	me	and	a	monitor	on	Blevins’s	desk.
“Where	 be	 they,	 then?”	 Gráinne	 demanded,	 eyes	 fixed	 on	me	 in	 a

way	that	made	me	feel	like	a	prey	animal.
“Who?”	 I	 asked,	 trying	 to	 look	 stupid,	which	 is	 actually	 something

I’m	pretty	good	at	when	I	have	to	be.
“Where’s	 Colonel	 Lyons?”	 demanded	 Blevins.	 “We	 know	 he	 and

Erszebet	came	into	the	building	early	this	morning	within	moments	of
your	arrival,	and	that	they	both	left	a	short	time	later.”
And	then	Blevins	pivoted	 the	monitor	around	and	 let	me	see	some

security	camera	footage	from	earlier	that	morning:	yours	truly	talking
to	Tristan	and	Erszebet.
I	have	no	idea	what	kind	of	look	was	on	my	face	at	that	moment,	but

I	 can	 tell	 you	 how	 they	 looked:	 Blevins	 was	 sort	 of	 blank-faced	 and
unnerved,	while	Gráinne	was	trying	to	kill	me	with	her	eyes.
“Yeah,	 I	 saw	 them,	 but	 they	 had	 a	 fight	 about	 something	 and	 they

both	stormed	out.	 I	wasn’t	really	paying	attention	because	I’m	a	little
hungover	and	anyhow	those	two	are	always	bickering.	I	think	Erszebet
said	she	was	going	home.”
“It’s	a	lying	bit	of	treachery,	is	this	one,”	Gráinne	declared.
And	then	I	glanced	down	at	Blevins	and	saw	a	change	come	over	his

face.	I	know	magic	can’t	work	outside	of	an	ODEC	or	an	ATTO	and	that
Blevins’s	office	was	neither	of	 those,	but	 I	swear	 it	was	 like	seeing	a
Jedi	mind	trick	in	action.	Whatever	Gráinne	had	done	to	Blevins	during
all	 of	 that	 time	 they’d	 spent	 together	 in	 ATTOs	 conducting	 psy-ops
“research,”	it	still	worked	on	him	somehow.	Maybe	it	wasn’t	magic	at
all.	Maybe	it	was	just	plain	old	psychological	influence.	But	it	was	clear
to	me	in	that	moment	that	Blevins	had	been	reduced	to	a	marionette.
But	not	a	very	precisely	controlled	one,	apparently.
“You,”	 announced	Blevins,	with	a	 flip	of	his	manicured	gray	mane,

“are	fired.”
“Don’t	 be	 firing	 him	 now!”	 Gráinne	 objected.	 “You	 want	 to	 be

interrogating	 him,	 you’re	 not	 allowed	 to	 do	 that	 if	 he’s	 not	 yours
anymore.”
I	caught	the	eye	of	Major	Sloane,	the	ranking	DOSECOPS	officer,	and

I	 thought	 maybe	 she	 was	 taken	 aback	 a	 little	 too,	 so	 I	 was	 maybe
mistaken	 about	 thinking	 she	 was	 Gráinne’s	 minion.	 I	 pointed	 out,
“You’re	not	allowed	to	do	it	anyway	because	this	is	a	free	country	and



we	 don’t	 just	 interrogate	 people	 here.	 Maybe	 Major	 Sloane	 could
explain	some	of	the	legalities.”
Blevins	 thought	 about	 it	 for	 a	moment,	which	was	 fine	with	me—I

just	 needed	 time	 to	 download	 as	 much	 of	 the	 ODIN	 database	 as
possible.	Major	Sloane	looked	back	at	me	like	she	was	taking	the	point
I	was	making.
Then	Blevins	called	out	 to	his	admin	 that	he	wanted	General	Frink

on	 the	 line	 as	 soon	 as	 possible,	 to	 discuss	 a	 matter	 of	 national
security.
“Where’s	Mel?”	I	asked	Gráinne.
“Detained	 in	 San	 Francisco,”	 she	 answered,	 sort	 of	 indignant,	 like

how	dare	I	even.
Getting	Frink	on	the	line	happened	incredibly	quickly,	apparently	he

was	taking	the	day	off	with	family	and	so	he	just	answered	his	phone.
The	 admin	 patched	 him	 through	 on	 voice	 and	 Blevins	 went	 off	 on	 a
rambling,	 bizarro	 version	 of	 the	 last	 couple	 of	 days’	 events,	 talking
about	how	Mel	was	AWOL	and	now	Tristan	and	Erszebet	were	up	to	no
good	and	assumed	 to	be	on	 the	 lam	with	 important	national	security
secrets,	 and	 I,	Mortimer,	was	 in	 cahoots	with	 them.	And	 he	 couldn’t
just	 call	 the	 cops	 because	 national	 security	 this	 and	 classified	 that,
and	 so	 he	 wanted	 to	 invoke	 special	 powers	 and	 procedures	 and
basically	 send	 out	 a	 DOSECOPS	 squad	 to	 round	 up	 Tristan	 and
Erszebet	and	just	let	the	chips	fall	where	they	may	in	terms	of	lawyers
and	arrest	warrants	and	all	of	those	other	minor	technicalities.	Every
so	often	he’d	pause	for	breath	and	General	Frink	would	grunt	into	the
phone	like,	Yeah,	I’m	still	here,	I’m	with	you,	bro.	Finally	Blevins	didn’t	so
much	 finish	 up	 as	 wind	 down	 for	 lack	 of	 anything	 more	 to	 say	 and
Frink	 says,	 “I	 am	 authorizing	 you	 to	mobilize	 the	 DOSECOPS	 Extra-
Facility	Ops	Team	and	get	this	done	as	surgically	as	you	can.”
Now,	I’d	never	even	heard	of	the	EFOT	before,	so	its	existence	must

have	 been	 a	 pretty	 closely	 guarded	 secret,	 but	 everyone	 else	 in	 the
room	seemed	to	know	exactly	what	 it	was.	Major	Sloane	nodded	and
said,	 “Already	mobilized,	General	Frink.	When	 I	got	word	earlier	 this
morning	 that	 trouble	 was	 brewing,	 I	 sent	 out	 the	 call.	 We	 have	 two
squads	 in	 the	 ready	 room	 fully	 armed	 and	 armored,	 deployable	 on
short	notice.”	As	if	reassuring	herself	this	was	the	case,	she	unlocked
her	phone	and	scanned	her	eyes	over	some	information.



“Well	done,”	Frink	said	over	the	phone.
“And	what	 is	 the	word	 from	our	surveillance	 team	at	 the	East-Oda

residence?”	 Blevins	 asked.	 I	 guess	 I	 shouldn’t	 have	 been	 surprised
they’d	already	covered	that	angle.
“Sir,	 Professor	 Oda	 is	 still	 on	 the	 premises	 here,	 of	 course,”	 said

Sloane,	 “but	 Colonel	 Lyons	 and	 Erszebet	 were	 just	 reported	 at	 the
residence	 with	 Mrs.	 East-Oda.	 Somehow	 they	 got	 in	 without	 being
spotted,	 but	 they	 got	 careless	 once	 they	 were	 in	 there,	 and
surveillance	saw	them	in	the	kitchen.”
“What	are	the	odds	that	if	we	go	in	quickly,	EFOT	can	take	them	into

custody	 without	 it	 becoming	 a	 cause	 célèbre	 in	 the	 neighborhood?”
Blevins	asked.
“Depends	 on	 whether	 Tristan	 puts	 up	 a	 fight,”	 said	Major	 Sloane,

“but	I	don’t	imagine	he	would.”
“Very	well,”	said	Blevins.	“Major	Sloane,	I	am	ordering	you	to	deploy

the	EFOT	squads	to	the	East-Oda	residence	and—”
He	stopped	 in	midsentence,	a	 little	surprised	because	every	phone

in	 the	room	had	started	ringing.	Even	mine.	And	 there	was	a	bit	of	a
funny	 moment,	 just	 then—not	 “ha-ha”	 funny—when	 Gráinne	 clearly
didn’t	know	what	 to	do.	Because	Gráinne	didn’t	have	a	phone.	And	 it
was	clear	from	the	look	on	her	face	that	she	hadn’t	been	expecting	this
interruption—whatever	it	was.
Everyone	else	was	 looking	at	 their	phones,	so	 I	did	 too,	and	what	 I

saw	was	 a	 text	 from	 one	 of	 the	 R&D	 crew	 saying,	 “OMG	 is	 that	 the
ATTO	 on	 Channel	 5?”	 And	 for	 a	 second	 I	 didn’t	 even	 catch	 the
reference.	 I	 thought	 he	 was	 referring	 to	 some	 internal	 top-secret
communications	 channel.	 It	 took	 a	minute	 to	 realize	 he	 was	 talking
about	the	local	television	network	news	station.
Meanwhile	 there’s	 all	 kinds	 of	 confusion	 and	 consternation	 from

others	 in	 the	 room,	 everyone	 shouting	 into	 their	 phones	 with	 their
fingers	plugged	into	the	other	ear,	Gráinne	looking	around	with	kind	of
a	wild	 desperate	 expression.	 “Dr.	Blevins,	 can	 that	 thing	 stream	 live
television?”	I	asked,	nodding	at	his	computer.
“I	haven’t	the	faintest	idea,”	he	said.	“You’re	the	sysadmin.”
“Point	taken,”	I	said.	“Let’s	all	trot	downstairs	to	my	workstation	and

I’ll	pull	up	the	stream.”	And	before	any	orders	could	be	issued	to	the
contrary	 I	ducked	out	the	door	and	headed	down	the	stairs.	Frankly	 I



didn’t	 care	whether	 they	 followed	me	or	not,	 but	when	 I	 reached	my
cubicle	 and	 looked	 back	 over	 my	 shoulder	 I	 saw	 them	 all	 traipsing
along	 behind	 me,	 on	 their	 phones	 or	 whatever,	 and	 all	 around	 the
whole	 office	was	 in	 pandemonium.	 I	 sat	 down	 and	 plucked	 the	 flash
drive	out	of	my	workstation	and	slipped	 it	 into	 the	 little	cargo	pocket
down	 on	 the	 calf	 section	 of	 my	 tactical	 pants,	 and	 then	 cleared	my
screen	and	brought	up	 the	 live	news	 feed	 from	 the	 local	network	TV
station.
And	 what	 we	 were	 seeing	 was	 the	 front	 of	 a	 Walmart,	 and	 the

caption	 on	 the	 screen	 said	 it	 was	 in	 Lexington,	 Massachusetts.	 The
same	store	where	Magnus	had	hightailed	it	to	a	few	weeks	ago,	before
he’d	coerced	Constance	Billy	into	Sending	him	back	to	Viking	Paradise
or	wherever.
The	 entire	 front	 of	 the	 store—the	glass	 entryway	where	 they	 keep

the	 shopping	 carts—had	 been	 punched	 in	 by	 a	 huge	 impact,	 all	 the
windows	destroyed.
Embedded	in	the	middle	of	all	that	destruction	we	could	see	the	rear

of	a	tractor-trailer	rig	that	had	obviously	just	been	driven	straight	into
the	front	of	the	building	at	high	speed,	and	come	to	rest	just	inside	the
store.	Looked	like	it	had	obliterated	some	checkout	lanes	en	route.
The	 rig	 was	 a	 common	 type	 seen	 around	 port	 facilities:	 a	 steel

shipping	 container	 resting	 on	 the	 bed	 of	 a	 trailer.	 The	 shipping
container	was	green,	with	rust	spots.
We	had	all	seen	it	before.
It	was	the	ATTO.
Before	 I	 could	ask	 the	question,	Major	Sloane—who’d	been	on	 the

phone—looked	 up	 at	 Blevins	 and	 said,	 “Confirmed.	 We	 lost	 contact
with	it	immediately	after	it	left	the	facility.	Obviously,	it	was	hijacked.”
“Police	 radio	 transmissions	 report	 several	 large	 naked	 Caucasian

males	 have	 emerged	 from	 the	 shipping	 container	 and	 are	 taking
hostages,”	said	the	TV	reporter.
Gráinne	was	the	 first	 to	put	 it	 together.	“Magnus!”	she	hissed,	and

then	let	fly	with	a	torrent	of	rage	in	what	I	assumed	was	Gaelic.	She’s
always	been	pretty	emotional,	but	 I’d	never	seen	her	 just	completely
lose	 it	 before.	 She’d	 have	 torn	 Magnus	 apart	 with	 her	 fingernails	 if
he’d	been	in	the	room.
“Major	Sloane,”	Blevins	said,	“get	 the	EFOT	squads	and	everything



else	you	have	to	that	Walmart	immediately.”
Everyone	split	up.	I	trotted	downstairs	and	walked	out	the	front	door

and	around	the	corner.	And	then	I	ran	like	a	motherfucker.	I	just	had	a
feeling	it	would	be	for	the	best.
So	that	was	the	moment	I	went	from	being	a	geek	with	the	coolest

job	a	recent	CS	grad	from	MIT	could	ever	in	a	thousand	years	hope	to
find	.	.	.	to	being	a	renegade.	A	serious	renegade.	Anonymous	has	got
nothing	on	me.
That’s	how	we	ended	up	here	at	the	Odas’	place.	I’m	not	even	sure

how	 Frank	 himself	 got	 back	 here.	 I	 mean,	 there’s	 an	 argument	 we
should	just	GTF	out	of	here	and	try	to	disappear,	but	(1)	disappearing	is
hard	and	 (2)	we	 can’t	 just	 ditch	 the	Odas	and	 (3)	we	haven’t	 violated
any	 laws	 and	 so	 there’s	 no	 reason	 the	 Cambridge	 PD	 should	 give	 a
crap	one	way	or	the	other.
Rebecca	is	(natch)	making	us	some	tea.	I’m	not	sure	when	she	will

relax	her	jaw	muscles	enough	to	ever	open	her	mouth	again,	but	that
doesn’t	mean	she	wants	to	throw	us	out.
We’re	 sort	 of	 expecting	 Blevins	 will	 be	 sending	 someone	 to

assassinate	us,	at	least	figuratively,	very	soon.	Which	is	why	I	wanted
to	get	this	whole	story	written	and	uploaded.

Journal	Entry	of
Rebecca	East-Oda

FRIDAY	AFTER	THANKSGIVING

Temperature	38F,	and	never	mind	about	the	rest	of	it.
Extraordinary	development:	Tristan,	Erszebet,	and	Mortimer	have	taken

up	 residence	 in	 the	 basement	 and	 we	 presume	 Frank	 is	 no	 longer	 an
employee	of	DODO,	but	it’s	all	rather	disordered	at	the	moment.	The	local
news	 is	 airing	 the	 most	 remarkable	 story	 about	 a	 raid	 at	 the	 Lexington
Walmart.	 Mel	 is	 stuck	 in	 1851	 London,	 thanks	 to	 the	 machinations	 of
Gráinne.	Tristan	and	Frank	immediately	preoccupied	with	sorting	out	how
to	build	a	homemade	ODEC	in	the	basement	so	that	if	Mel	can	find	a	KCW,



she	will	have	a	safe	re-entry	point	 to	 the	modern	day	(although	since	she
wouldn’t	 know	 we	 had	 it,	 how	 would	 she	 know	 to	 be	 Sent	 there?	 Never
mind.	Better	than	taking	no	action.).	Frank	suggested	shanghaiing	one	of
the	new	ATTOs,	toward	which	he	has	a	wounded	proprietary	pride—ATTO
#1	 seems	 to	 be	 embedded	 in	 the	 aforementioned	 Walmart	 with	 naked
berserkers	pouring	out	of	it,	but	three	others	have	been	constructed	and	six
more	 are	 nearly	 complete.	 Mortimer	 is	 trying	 to	 set	 up	 a	 secure	 mini-
intranet	in	our	basement,	as	he	has	a	flash	drive	called	GRIMNIR	with	an
enormous	 amount	 of	 ODIN	 material	 on	 it	 and	 he	 wants	 to	 upload	 it
someplace	 stable	 so	 that	 it	 can’t	 fall	 out	 of	 one	 of	 the	 pockets	 of	 his
ludicrous	trousers.	The	cats	have	disappeared	in	the	chaos.

THE	LAY	OF	WALMART

TRANSLATOR’S	NOTE	 (CONTD.):	Part	2,	written	 in	ballpoint	pen	on	printer
paper,	 was	 found	 in	 the	 ruins	 of	 a	 Walmart	 in	 suburban	 Boston,
Massachusetts,	 following	 a	 bloody	 siege	 by	 persons	 described	 in	 media
reports	as	a	gang	of	methamphetamine	addicts	connected	with	the	Russian
mafia.

PART	2

Ingibjörg	and	those	of	her	ilk
Sent	me	and	Magnus	to	more	ditapps
Than	memory	can	contain.	Twenty	and	two
Were	the	reckless	recruits,	all	renowned	warriors.

On	Sverðvík’s	shore	they	stood,	steaming,
Ready	for	the	recital.	Tales	from	Tóki,
Told	many	times,	from	Magnus’s	memories.



Mead	he	served	to	the	men,	full	horns.

Looming	from	a	longship’s	proud	prow,	he	spoke.
“The	ship	we	sail	today,	fighting	the	Fatlanders
Is	but	a	box,	oarless,	ordinary.	ATTO	they	name	it.
To	it	Ingibjörg	Sends	me.	It’s	on	a	great	cart.

“Vikings	love	to	shove	ships
Up	onto	the	shores	of	realms	ready	for	ruin.
Just	so,	I’ll	attack	with	the	ATTO
The	glass	gates	of	the	Walmart

“Like	a	dagger,	driving	deep,	not	stopping
Till	the	blue-vested	guard,	the	till-keepers,
Towers	of	trifles,	the	cart	crushes,
Ramming,	reaming	out	of	its	way.

“Furious	Ingibjörg,	future-fearing,
By	then	will	have	Sent	Storolf.”	Magnus’s	sword
Swung	round	toward	he	of	that	name,
Grizzled	but	great-framed,	giant-killer.

Storolf	recited:	“Inside	of	the	ATTO	are
Oddments,	weird	wares,	dangerous	distractions.
I	ignore	them.	Brace	my	body	on	the	bulkhead.
Ride	through	the	ruin	of	the	glass	gates.

“Silence	is	my	signal	to	dart	to	the	door.
From	it	I	face	east	down	a	wide	way.
Vexing	my	vision,	many	marvels.	Ignore	them.
Magnus	my	guide.	I	go	where	he	shows	me.

“Eastward,	thence,	lies	victory	for	vikings.
Counting	the	cairns,	the	merchandise-mounds.
Standing	in	the	center	of	the	wide	east-west	way,
Stop	at	the	sixth.	Atop	it’s	an	image:

“A	fair	lass,	tresses	flowing,
Like	the	lush	Linndalsfallet,



Where	it	rushes	over	rocks,
Teeth	shining	like	Snæfellsjökull.

“Cradled	in	the	lass’s	hands,	a	bottle.
Bewitching	brew,	beautifying	the	hair.
Below	it,	many	more	such,	stacked	like	soldiers.
That	is	the	landmark	that	leads	me	to	the	left.

“A	long	lane,	laden	with	loot.
Its	Rune	is	like	Berkano:	the	Beginning.
Its	number,	one	score	and	five.
Let	it	lead	me	north.	Little	more	to	say,

“For	in	fewer	than	five	paces
Is	what	my	hand	has	hungered	for
Since	I	found	myself	in	Fatland,
Alone	and	naked:	Numberless	knives,	new	and	needy.”

“Furious	Ingibjörg,	future-fearing,
By	then	will	have	brought	Brand.”	Magnus’s	sword
Swung	round	toward	he	of	that	name,
Berserker	of	Zealand,	brutal	and	bearlike.

Brand	recited:	“Vexing	my	vision,	many	marvels.
Storolf	shows	my	way.	Stop	not	where	he	does.
Brand	goes	beyond.	Count	cairns	thrice	more.
Number	nine	is	a	doll-dump:	toddlers’	toys

“Painted	purple	and	pink,	smiling	like	simpletons,
Box-bound.	Brand	there	turns	right.
A	long	lane,	laden	with	loot.
Shopkeepers	screaming.	Pay	no	mind.

“Clashing	carts	may	cause	trouble.	Don’t	be	deterred.
Vikings	can	vault	them,	berserkers	bash	them	aside.
All	the	way	to	the	wall	goes	Brand.
Heaped	there	are	hammers.	Axes	also.

“Spades,	saws	on	long	shafts,	all	manner



Of	death-dealers,	racked	and	ready
Or	stacked	like	firewood	on	the	floor.
Commandeer	a	cart,	kill	its	keeper	if	need	be,

“Fill	it	full	of	those	death-dealers,	leave	nothing
That	might	be	handy	for	hewing	heads
And	severing	sinews	in	the	struggle	to	come.”
Thus	the	berserker,	bright-eyed,	blood-lusting.

“Furious	Ingibjörg,	future-fearing,
By	then	has	Halfdan	Sent.”	Magnus’s	sword
Swung	round	toward	he	of	that	name,
White-bearded	king-slayer,	lord	of	legend.

Halfdan	recited:	“Vexing	my	vision,	many	marvels.
Ignoring	them,	I	wait.	Ingibjörg	sends	more.
In	the	meantime,	knives	from	Storolf,
Axes	and	hammers	from	Brand,	harden	my	hand.

“All	told,	my	band	is	four.	My	companions	three
Are	Thorolf,	Bild,	and	Glama.	Travel	to	the	tenth	cairn.
Turn	to	the	left.	Toys	stacked	to	the	ceiling.
Do	not	let	them	beguile	the	eye.

“Long	lanes,	laden	with	loot.
Wide	ways,	well	made	for	waging	war,
Like	the	roads	of	the	red-crested	Romans
Ordered	just	so,	as	warp	and	weft.

“Too	many	for	merchants	to	memorize,
Marked,	therefore,	with	runes	they	can	read.
Romans	wrote	them	first.	The	fat	ones	stole	them,
As	well	as	Arabs’	numerals,	arranged	below.

“For	each	district	of	the	treasure-town,
A	Roman	rune	written,	raised	high.
For	each	lane	lying	below	it,
An	Arabic	number	to	know	it.



“Their	runes	resemble	ours	often.
Others	are	different.	One’s	like	a	fish-hook.
That’s	in	the	northeast	of	the	store,
Norsemen’s	native	land,	all	the	good	gear.

“Forests	of	fishing-poles	you	can	see	from	afar.
Ropes	for	rigging.	Machetes	for	making	way
Or	bringing	battle.	Don’t	be	delayed	though.
Go	till	glass	gleams	on	all	sides.	Behind	those	wide	windows,

“Boxes,	brick-sized,	written	with	runes,	stacked	to	the	ceiling.
Glass	is	nothing	to	Glama.	Hammer	in	hand,	he	has	at	it
Shears	shelves,	loots	little	boxes,	carrying	them	in	carts
Down	long	lanes	to	the	wall	of	the	wonder	windows.

“Halfdan	hastens	down	the	glass-lined	lane
Till	the	way	to	the	wall’s	barred	by	a	counter.
Behind	it,	bang-sticks	of	the	Fatlanders
Counter-keepers	looking	askance.

“They’re	the	only	true	foes	we	must	fight	at	first.
Don’t	be	deceived	that	there’s	no	swords	at	their	sides.
Bang-sticks	instead,	shooting	sling-stones
Faster	and	more	fearsome	than	arrows.

“At	a	distance	they’re	deadly.	Get	close	quick.
For	of	fighting	at	arm’s	length,	axe	to	axe
They	know	nothing.	Rush	at	them	right	away
If	their	hands	are	empty.	Lie	low	otherwise.

“Hunker	down,	holding	my	tongue,
Till	I	hear	Heid,	who’s	the	only	one
Who	can	get	close	to	the	guards.
When	the	shield-maid	has	their	attention,

“That’s	the	time	to	burst	in	bravely.”
Thus	Halfdan,	gray-hamed,	picked	out	for	his	patience.

Magnus’s	sword-tip,	swinging	this	way	and	that



Picked	out	each	warrior,	each	shield-maid.

In	turn,	each	told	the	tale,	written	by	Tóki,
Foretelling	the	future	of	what	was	to	come,
The	doom	to	descend	on	the	Fatlanders’	storehouse,
What	deeds	each	warrior	would	do,	and	when.

Under	the	awning	of	the	longship,	idle	till	now,
Ingibjörg	waited,	sipping	stew	of	spotted	mushrooms,
Eyes	lazy,	but	half	in	this	world,
Fingers	fondling	her	broom-twigs.

Magnus	met	her	there,	sharing	the	shade,
Smelling	the	scent	of	eldritch	herbs,
Gathered	round	the	gunwales,	we	felt	the	glamour.
Ingibjörg	had	Sent	him,	sticks	thrown,	die	cast.

Storolf	she	Sent	next,	blade-bringer.
Brand	the	berserker,	Halfdan	the	wise,
Heid	the	shield-maiden,	Glama,	Bild,	Thorolf.
Tóki	was	taken.	Ship	sank	from	my	sight.

I	beheld	a	big	box,	shiny	steel.
It	must	be	the	ATTO.	I	darted	to	the	door.
Vexing	my	vision,	many	marvels.	I	ignored	them.
Magnus	my	guide.	I	went	where	he	showed	me.

North	of	the	nose	of	the	great	cart,	the	ATTO-bearer,
Where	it	had	crashed	to	a	halt	after	driving	deep,
A	forest	of	fabric,	as	had	been	foretold:
Clothing	of	all	colors,	made	for	men	and	women,

Bigger	than	any	bazaar.	Beyond	that,	the	marvel
Magnus	had	mentioned,	too	strange	to	speak	of:
Wonder-windows,	a	wall	of	them.	The	great	gift
Of	the	Fatlanders	is	these:	panes	of	perfect	glass

Showing	not	what	lies	beyond	them,
But	images,	effigies,	prophecies,	wonders.



Painted	in	piercing	light,	melding	many	hues.
Bright	as	berries,	flickering	like	fire.

Like	the	windows	of	Christian	cathedrals
When	lanced	by	the	light	of	the	sun.
But	not	frozen	forever,	as	those	are;
Images	in	movement,	flashing	and	flitting.

Tóki	was	here	to	take	treasure,
Reading	the	runes	in	those	windows.
North	went	I,	wandering	in	the	wake
Of	the	shield-maiden	Heid.	Her	hair

Was	braided	in	back,	hanging	below
Brushing	bare	buttocks.	Walking	behind,
My	gaze	was	beguiled.	Gladly	I’d	go
To	battle	behind	one	such	as	Heid.

She	raised	her	arms,	baring	herself
To	a	shocked	shopper,	a	fat	woman
Fondling	fabrics.	Heid,	heedless,
Elbows	bent,	hands	swung	down	behind	head.

A	knife	she	held	there,	stolen	by	Storolf,
Sheathed	safely.	She	stuck	it	into	her	braid
Where	the	tresses	came	together	at	the	nape	of	her	neck.
Tucked	in,	held	by	her	hair,	until	needed.

Remembering	Magnus,	Tóki	took	trousers,
Sacking	a	shelf-load,	but	went	onward
North	to	the	wonder-wall.	East	turned	Heid.
Tóki’s	eyes	tracked	her.	She	broke	into	a	run.

Screams	escaped	from	her	mouth.	Not	war-whoops
But	cries	of	terror.	Not	a	word	of	the	Angle-speech
Heid	spoke.	No	matter.	The	men	it	was	meant	for
Heard	it,	and	heeded.	Heid	was	now	bound

For	the	bang-sticks.	Kept	in	that	corner



Were	the	weapons	of	Walmart.	Three	guards
Gathered	there,	wondering	what	had	happened.
Cart’s	crash,	shoppers’	screams,	fleeing	Fatlanders

Alarm	had	raised.	And	now	a	lass,	not	a	stitch	on,
Screaming	for	succour,	coming	on	at	a	run.
What	harm	could	she	do	them?	Into	the	arms
Of	the	first	Heid	threw	herself.

Out	from	the	braid	came	that	blade,
And	into	the	back	of	his	neck.	As	he	dropped,
She	closed	on	the	next,	arm	whirring.
The	third	aimed	his	bang-stick,	ready	to	shoot

Till	an	axe	struck	home	in	his	head,
Hurled	by	Thorolf,	part	of	Halfdan’s	band,
Running	round	from	the	long	lanes
Marked	by	the	rune	of	the	fish-hook.

The	first	part	of	the	fight	was	now	finished.
From	the	ATTO,	attackers	kept	coming.
Asmund,	Icelandic	berserker,	far-famed.
Hrani,	the	shipwright	from	Sweden.

Arngrim,	Hjorvard,	Yngvar,	Snorri,
Mighty	Thord.	Magnus	gave	each	man	a	task.
Sending	them	this	way	and	that.
Hostages	were	herded	and	held.

Strange	sheets	of	wood,	wide	and	flat,
Formed	the	flanks	of	a	new	fortress
Wrapped	and	roofed	in	bright	blue	tarpaulins
Lashed	down	with	lines.

The	West-march	of	the	Walmart
Held	all	the	food	in	the	world,
Bottled	beer	by	the	boatload,
Frost-kept	food,	milk	and	meat.



Setting	up	for	a	siege	behind	barricades
The	Norsemen	fetched	food,	collected	clothing,
Turkish	trousers	with	flies	in	the	front
Kept	closed	with	clever	contraptions,

Tiny	teeth,	meshing	like	millipedes’	legs,
Gnashing,	knitting,	concealing	the	naked.
Zipper	the	Fatlanders	called	it.
Cock-catcher	it	was	to	Hunfast,	the	hapless.

Chains,	padlocks,	ropes	of	wrought	steel
Fetched	forth	from	the	long	lanes
Curved	round	the	captives’	necks.
But	all	turned	to	the	source	of	a	sound,

A	big	bang,	like	the	trunk	of	a	tree
Snapping	in	a	storm,	making	all	deaf.
A	Fatlander,	about	to	be	fettered
And	fastened	to	the	fortress’s	side,

Had	pulled	out	a	small	bang-stick,
Concealed	in	his	clothes,	shot	a	stone,
Struck	Saemundr,	Yngvar’s	son,
Beloved	brother,	oar-puller,	sword-swinger.

He	had	taken	on	a	troll	once,	outside	of	Eiðar,
Bested	him	in	battle,	hand	to	hand.
But	the	bang-stick’s	stone	had	struck	a	lung,
Saemundr’s	life-blood	gushed	out	of	his	mouth.

He	fell	like	a	tall	tree.	Magnus	took	a	machete,
Held	it	in	the	hero’s	hand,	sent	him	to	Valhalla.
Another	bang	bloodied	our	ears.	Thord	cursed.
A	stone	had	struck	him	in	the	arm.

A	third	bang	as	Thord	threw	down,	thrashed
The	man	who’d	murdered	Saemundr,
The	coward	who	killed	from	afar.



The	stone	struck	no	one,	hewing	a	hole

In	the	wooden	wall,	tearing	the	tarpaulin.
Face	down	on	the	floor,	the	Fatlander
Rose	not	again.	Murder-loving	Magnus,
Riven	by	rage,	grabbed	an	axe,

Swung	it	into	the	spine	of	the	shooter,
Severing	two	ribs,	just	by	the	backbone,
Adjusted	his	aim,	swung	again,
Rending	the	ribcage,	separating	the	spine.

The	shooter’s	screams	went	silent
As	wind	whistled	through	those	wounds.
His	struggles	ceased.	Magnus	opened	the	man
Like	the	spreading	wings	of	an	eagle,	blood-bright,
Lungs	loose,	open	to	the	air	now.
A	clashing	cart	was	fetched,	dumped	out,
Making	room	for	the	murderer’s	remains.

Magnus	shoved	him	out	through	the	glass	gates.
Fatlanders’	fear-cries	resounded,	Sirens	screamed.
Magnus	made	his	way	back	to	the	fast	fortress
We’d	made	around	the	wonder-windows.

Translator’s	note:	“The	Lay	of	Walmart”	breaks	off	at	this	point.	Surveillance
camera	footage,	combined	with	eyewitness	accounts	compiled	from	surviving
hostages,	agree	that	from	this	point	onward	the	author,	Tóki,	was	kept	busy
learning	how	to	extract	cartographical	data	from	computers	in	the	home	electronics
section.

	

Journal	Entry	of



Rebecca	East-Oda
NEXT	DAY,	 I .E . ,

SATURDAY	AFTER	THANKSGIVING

Temperature	39F.
Our	dining	area	has	been	designated	a	“War	Room”	and	 is	now	matted

with	 cables	 of	 various	 descriptions.	Most	 of	 these	 have	 something	 to	 do
with	Mortimer’s	 efforts	 to	 “boot	 up”	 the	new	GRIMNIR	 system,	which	 is
going	 to	 be	 his	 improvised	 ragtag	 replacement	 for	 ODIN.	 It	 runs	 on
something	called	the	dark	net,	of	which	the	less	said,	the	better.	Fielded	a
telephone	 call	 from	 a	 representative	 of	 the	 cable	 television	 company
complaining	 that	 we	 have	 been	making	 all	 sorts	 of	 connections	 to	 dodgy
servers	and	are	in	danger	of	having	our	service	cut	off.	Played	the	little	old
lady	 card,	 feigned	 ignorance,	 requested	 technical	 support	 which	 I	 knew
would	hold	them	off	for	days.

A	few	years	ago	when	we	dug	the	book	out	of	 the	vegetable	garden,	and
made	 all	 of	 that	 money,	 and	 transferred	 the	 property	 to	 the	 East	 House
Trust,	 and	 ceased	 to	become	 its	 legal	 owners,	 it	 felt	 as	 if	 I	 had	 sawed	my
right	leg	off.	But	only	for	a	few	days.	When	it	became	obvious	that	this	made
absolutely	no	practical	difference,	 I	 forgot	 it	had	happened.	Since	 then	 it
has	only	entered	my	awareness	when	we	receive	a	property	tax	bill	or	some
such,	and	I	see	the	official	name	on	the	address	label.	Today,	however,	it	is
much	on	my	mind,	as	it	gives	me	a	sort	of	detached	emotional	status	from
which	 to	 view	 all	 of	 these	 goings-on.	 SUVs,	 obviously	 belonging	 to	 some
sort	 of	 government	 agency,	 are	parked	on	 the	 streets	 around	us,	drawing
comment	from	the	neighbors.	Presumably	they	are	spying	on	us,	but	they
make	no	effort	to	cross	the	property	line.

At	 two	 in	 the	morning,	 three	 people	 climbed	 over	 the	 back	 fence	 and
caused	us	all	sorts	of	alarm	before	we	recognized	them:	Felix	Dorn,	Esme
Overkleeft,	and	Julie	Lee.	They	had	got	together	for	late-night	drinks	at	the
Apostolic	 Café	 and	made	 the	 decision	 to	 defect	 from	 DODO	 to	 join	 our
little	 ragtag	 reboot	 thereof	 (Julie	 being	 the	 obvious	 instigator	 given	 her
romance	 with	Mortimer).	 Then	 they	 all	 stayed	 up	 all	 night	 talking.	 Now



they	are	sleeping	in	shifts	in	Mei’s	old	room,	the	guest	room,	and	the	floor
of	my	sewing	room.	(Chira	Lajani,	they	report,	counts	herself	among	us	in
spirit,	 but	 dares	 not	 defect	 openly	 from	DODO	 lest	 it	 interfere	 with	 her
younger	 siblings’	 immigration	 status.	 She	might	 be	 able	 to	 function	 as	 a
mole,	but	these	are	early	days	yet.)

From	them	we	were	able	to	get	more	news	of	what	has	been	going	on	at
the	Walmart.	Our	access	to	the	message	traffic	on	the	ODIN	system	was	of
course	cut	off	 the	moment	Mortimer	 left	 the	building,	 and	since	 then	we
were	 limited	 to	 what	 we	 could	 glean	 from	 television	 news	 reports	 and
Internet	 rumors.	 The	 powers	 that	 be	 at	 DODO—which	 by	 this	 point
basically	means	Gráinne,	 since	 she	 seems	 to	 control	 Blevins	 absolutely—
are	not	even	aware	that	Felix,	Esme,	and	Julie	have	come	over	to	our	side,
and	may	not	appreciate	that	fact	until	the	three	of	them	fail	to	show	up	for
work	 on	Monday	morning.	 In	 the	meantime	 they	 still	 have	 access	 to	 the
ODIN	system	over	their	phones.

This	has	enabled	us	to	solve	a	riddle	that	bedeviled	our	minds	from	the
very	beginning	of	Magnus’s	siege	at	the	Walmart.

Clearly,	Magnus	made	 the	 rounds	 of	 the	 Viking	 world	 and	 recruited	 a
sort	of	all-star	team	of	marauders	who	were	willing	to	follow	his	lead.

And	 on	 one	 level	 it	makes	 sense	 for	 them	 to	 raid	 a	Walmart,	 which	 to
them	would	be	a	poorly	guarded	storehouse	of	near-infinite	wealth.

But	 beyond	 that	 it	makes	 no	 sense	 at	 all.	 They	must	 either	 stay	 in	 the
present,	or	return	to	the	past	via	the	ATTO.

If	they	stay	in	the	present,	they	will	inevitably	be	caught,	tried,	and	put	in
prison.	Magnus	must	know	this.

If	 they	return	to	the	past,	 they’ll	do	so	naked	and	empty-handed.	Why,
therefore,	go	to	the	effort	of	sacking	a	Walmart	and	gathering	loot	they	can’t
take	with	them?	Magnus	must	understand	this	too.

According	 to	 the	 “over	 the	 fence”	 gang—Julie,	 Felix,	 and	 Esme—the
answer	was	pieced	together	yesterday	afternoon	by	the	DOSECOPS	people
who	have	access	to	surveillance	camera	footage	from	the	Walmart.

As	soon	as	they	had	the	electronics	department	fortified	behind	plywood
and	blue	tarps,	and	their	hostages	secured	(except	for	the	one	unfortunate
who	was	rolled	out	into	the	parking	lot	after	being	blood-eagled),	Magnus
raided	 the	 pharmacy	 section	 and	 secured	 a	 large	 amount	 of	 lidocaine,
which	is	a	topical	anesthetic.

In	 the	 meanwhile,	 some	 of	 the	 hostages	 were	 being	 chained	 to



computers	 in	 the	 electronics	 section	 and	 put	 to	 work	 downloading
information	on	certain	 topics.	To	make	a	 long	story	short,	 it	 appears	 that
during	his	sojourn	in	the	present	day,	Magnus	became	aware	of	the	fact	that
the	New	World	contained	an	amount	of	gold	and	silver	that	was	beyond	the
dreams	 of	 the	 most	 avaricious	 Vikings.	 Their	 longships	 were	 perfectly
capable	of	making	the	voyage	across	the	Atlantic	by	hopping	from	Iceland
to	 Greenland	 to	 Newfoundland	 and	 thence	 down	 the	 coast.	 What	 they
lacked	was	information:	nautical	charts	showing	the	way,	and	land	maps	of
Mexico	 and	 Peru	 and	 other	 gold-rich	 areas.	 And	 so	 this	 is	 the	 sort	 of
information	that	 the	hostages	were	put	to	work	downloading	and	printing
out	on	paper.

Magnus’s	Vikings	then	took	turns	lying	facedown	on	the	floor.	Lidocaine
was	smeared	on	 their	bare	backs	and	 the	 treasure	maps	carved	 into	 their
skin	using	hobby	knives	from	the	store’s	art	supply	section.

This	 procedure	 has	 apparently	 been	 going	 on	 all	 night.	 When	 the
DOSECOPS	 people	 understood	 what	 was	 going	 on,	 they	 cut	 power	 to	 the
building.	But	the	Vikings	were	ready	for	that	with	candles	and	lamps	from
the	camping	section,	and	by	 then	they	had	already	printed	out	everything
they	needed	on	paper.	The	ATTO	has	its	own	built-in	power	supply	capable
of	 running	 for	days;	Frank	made	sure	of	 that.	One	of	DODO’s	spy	drones
has	 been	 circling	 above	 the	 store	 and	 has	 been	 picking	 up	 bursts	 of
GLAAMR	suggesting	that	some	of	the	Vikings	are	already	being	Sent	back.
So	they	must	have	a	witch	among	them	who	is	ensconced	in	the	ATTO	doing
the	Sending	and	god	only	knows	what	else.

All	 of	 this	 information	 is	 several	 hours	 old,	 and	 I’m	 writing	 it	 late
Saturday	morning.	 The	 television	 news	 shows	 no	 change	 in	 status	 at	 the
Walmart,	which	of	course	doesn’t	reflect	what	might	be	happening	within
the	ATTO;	the	police	haven’t	raided	yet,	no	hostages	have	been	released;	it
is	a	standoff.

It	appears	that	what	is	going	to	happen—or	already	has	happened,	many
centuries	ago,	on	this	or	some	other	Strand—is	that	Magnus’s	band	of	“all-
star”	 berserkers	 will	 end	 up	 in	 tenth-century	 Scandinavia	 with	 detailed
maps	carved	into	their	backs	showing	them	how	to	traverse	the	Atlantic	and
Caribbean	and	sack	the	Americas	for	their	unimaginable	wealth	of	precious
metals,	then	bring	it	all	back	to	Scandinavia,	or	anywhere	else	they	feel	like
living.

It	is	difficult	to	see	how	this	could	be	stopped.	DODO	could	Send	some



DOers	even	 further	back	 in	 time	 to	 try	 to	change	history	 to	somehow	foil
Magnus’s	plan,	but	two	can	play	at	that	game—Magnus	can	just	as	well	Send
people	further	back	yet	to	intercept	the	DOers,	and	so	on.

Needless	to	say,	any	Strand	on	which	Magnus’s	plan	succeeds	will	have	a
very	different	future	from	the	one	we	are	living	in.	Tristan	is	of	the	opinion
that	 DODO	 spy	 planes	 are	 probably	 flying	 high	 above	 Mexico	 City	 and
Cuzco	 at	 this	 moment,	 looking	 for	 signs	 of	 GLAAMR	 indicating	 the
temporal	equivalent	of	a	nuclear	strike.

We	 all	 wish	Melisande	 were	 among	 us	 to	 help	 us	 think	 it	 all	 through.
Unfortunately	 she	 remains	 marooned.	 Mortimer,	 logging	 in	 to	 ODIN
through	 Esme’s	 phone,	 has	 been	 able	 to	 pull	 up	 some	 message	 traffic
confirming	 that	Gráinne	Sent	Mel	 to	Victorian	London	 in	 the	 summer	of
1851—only	weeks	before	the	eclipse	that	marked	the	end	of	magic.	By	that
time,	 the	 few	 remaining	 witches	 who	 could	 do	 magic	 at	 all	 were	 much
enfeebled,	especially	in	London,	as	that’s	where	the	Great	Exhibition	was,
and	 thus	 there	 was	 an	 immense	 concentration	 of	 magic-dampening
technology	all	amassed	in	one	place.	So	there	is	great	concern	that	even	if
Mel	were	 able	 to	 land	 on	 her	 feet	 in	 that	DTAP	 and	make	 contact	with	 a
practicing	witch,	 it	would	be	too	 late	to	get	her	back.	In	any	case,	 there	is
little	 we	 can	 do	 except	 try	 to	 provide	 a	 place	 for	 her	 to	 land.	 If	 she
materializes	 in	 one	 of	 the	 existing	 ODECs,	 she’ll	 immediately	 be	 in
Gráinne’s	power.	So	we	need	to	build	or	obtain	an	ODEC	of	our	own.	Frank,
who	has	 spent	 the	 last	 couple	of	 years	designing	 and	 constructing	 room-
temperature	ODECs,	is	of	course	the	leading	authority	in	the	world	when	it
comes	to	that.	He	seems	to	have	had	a	premonition	of	what	was	to	come	(or
perhaps	he	received	a	warning	from	the	future?),	for	he	has	for	the	last	few
weeks	 been	 laying	 plans	 to	 improvise	 a	 room-temperature	 ODEC	 in	 our
cellar.	Many	of	the	parts,	he	says,	can	be	obtained	from	Home	Depot,	but
others	 are	 highly	 specialized,	 including	 room-temperature
superconductors	 that	 are	 easy	 to	 obtain	 with	 the	 resources	 of	 DODO	 at
one’s	back	but	almost	impossible	for	mere	civilians	to	acquire.

UPDATE,	WRITTEN	LATE	SATURDAY



Television	 reveals	 that	 the	 siege	 has	 been	 lifted.	 The	 Walmart	 was
stormed	 by	 SWAT	 teams	 after	 several	 hours	 had	 gone	 by	 with	 no	 sign	 of
activity.	 The	 hostages	 were	 found	 bound	 and	 gagged	 with	 duct	 tape	 but
otherwise	unharmed.	No	arrests	have	been	made;	police	are	claiming	that
the	perpetrators	made	 their	escape	 from	the	building	by	crawling	along	a
sewer	line,	or	some	such	nonsense.

On	the	television	footage,	which	is	all	shot	from	a	distance,	using	drones
and	helicopters	with	long	lenses,	it’s	possible	to	see	two	different	groups	of
officers	inside	the	Walmart:	the	local	police	SWAT	team,	which	is	roaming
all	over	the	store,	and	DODO’s	EFOT	squad	(whose	existence	we’ve	all	just
learned	 about	 this	 weekend—sort	 of	 DOSECOPS	 on	 steroids),	 which	 has
surrounded	the	tractor-trailer	rig	and	is	not	allowing	anyone	else	near	it.
Apparently	the	tractor	and	trailer	were	so	badly	damaged	as	to	be	unusable.
Now,	however,	another	tractor-trailer	has	showed	up	in	the	parking	lot,	as
well	 as	 some	 sort	 of	 enormous	 forklift	 from	Massport	 that	 is	 capable	 of
picking	 the	ATTO	off	of	 the	one	and	transferring	 it	 to	 the	other.	 I’m	sure
that	 the	 ATTO	 is	 about	 to	 disappear	 into	 the	 bowels	 of	 the	 military-
industrial	complex,	never	to	be	seen	again.

Exchange	of	posts	on	“ATTO	Operations”
ODIN	channel

DAY	1949	(SUNDAY	AFTER	THANKSGIVING,	YEAR	5)

Note:	Posts	 recovered	 from	a	 telephone	belonging	 to	 Julie	Lee,	who
had	access	to	ODIN	until	the	following	day.

Post	from	MAJ	Isobel	Sloane,	00:16:
Here	is	yet	another	update—hopefully	the	last—from	the	Walmart.	The
obstructions	that	had	been	preventing	the	forklift	from	getting	into	the
building	 were	 finally	 cleared	 away	 about	 an	 hour	 ago.	 We’ve	 had	 to
work	 around	 the	 police	 crime	 scene	 teams.	 Since	 there	 is	 no



particular	 urgency,	we	have	 taken	 a	 “go	 along,	 get	 along”	 approach,
which	is	why	it	has	been	so	slow.	They	were	irritated	by	our	insistence
on	 padlocking	 the	 ATTO	 the	moment	we	 arrived	 and	 keeping	 people
out	of	it,	but	thanks	to	some	calls	from	on	high	(kudos	to	LTG	Frink,	I
suppose)	they	eventually	got	the	message	that	the	ATTO	was	a	no-go
area	on	national	security	grounds.
The	forklift	 is	now	maneuvering	into	position	alongside	the	tractor-

trailer	and	getting	ready	to	move	the	ATTO.

Reply	from	LTG	Octavian	Frink,	00:21:
Thank	you,	MAJ	Sloane,	despite	the	late	hour	I	am	monitoring	from	my
office	 at	 the	 Pentagon.	What	 is	 the	 status	 of	 the	 ATTO	 itself?	 Has	 it
suffered	any	damage?

From	MAJ	Sloane,	00:30:
It	 took	superficial	damage—one	good	reason	for	housing	 it	 in	a	beefy
steel	 shipping	 container.	 From	 the	 fact	 that	 Magnus’s	 team	 were
successfully	 Sent	 into	 it	 and	 later	 Homed,	 we	 have	 ample	 evidence
that	 it	 remains	 fully	 operational.	 The	 external	 status	 lights	 all	 show
green.
BTW	I	don’t	know	if	you	have	video	feed	on	this,	but	the	forklift	has

removed	it	from	the	ruined	rig	now	and	is	taking	it	into	the	parking	lot.
Should	have	it	on	the	good	rig	in	a	couple	of	minutes.

From	LTG	Frink,	00:35:
Do	we	know	how	Magnus’s	personnel	were	Homed?

From	MAJ	Sloane,	00:37:
Haven’t	 had	 time	 to	 do	 a	 full	 after-action	 report.	 Will	 analyze	 it.
Presumably	 they	 had	 their	 own	MUON	 in	 the	 ATTO	 and	 she	 Homed
them	one	by	one	after	they	had	the	maps	cut	in	their	backs.

From	LTG	Frink,	00:40:
Is	 Dr.	 Blevins	 awake	 and	 monitoring	 this?	 I	 feel	 the	 need	 of	 some
expert	 opinions.	 My	 understanding	 is	 that	 MUONs	 cannot	 Send	 or
Home	themselves;	some	other	MUON	must	do	it	for	them.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	00:45:



ATTO	is	now	on	the	good	rig	and	the	truck	driver	is	conducting	routine
inspection	 prior	 to	 departure.	 I’ll	 ride	 shotgun	 with	 him.	 There	 is	 a
security	concern	around	possibility	of	media	vehicles	tailing	us	back	to
DODO	HQ	and	so	remainder	of	ETOF	squads/vehicles	will	block	streets
and	run	interference	until	we	are	clear	of	the	area.

From	LTG	Frink,	00:49:
I	have	confirmed	with	staff	here	that	air	space	has	been	shut	down,	so
you	 don’t	 have	 to	 worry	 about	 media	 choppers.	 Drone	 frequencies
being	jammed.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	00:51:
LOL	 I	 see	 drones	 falling	 out	 of	 the	 sky	 all	 over	 the	 place.	 Very
satisfying.

From	LTG	Frink,	00:52:
I	 have	 not	 seen	 a	 response	 to	my	 query	 about	MUONs	being	 able	 to
self-Send.	Dr.	Blevins	must	be	out	of	commission.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	00:55:
Not	an	expert	but	my	understanding	is	that	they	can’t	self-Send.

From	LTG	Frink,	00:56:
In	 that	 case,	 when	 Magnus’s	 MUON	 had	 finished	 Homing	 all	 of
Magnus’s	other	personnel,	what	did	she	do?	Remain	in	the	ATTO?	She
would	be	marooned	in	the	present	day,	correct?

From	MAJ	Sloane,	01:01:
General	 sitrep:	 truck	 driver	 reports	 good	 to	 go,	 have	 deployed	 DO-
SECOPS	personnel/vehicles	for	traffic	management	detail.
In	answer	to	LTG	Frink’s	last	question,	hostile	MUON	did	not	remain

in	the	ATTO.

From	LTG	Frink,	01:02:
How	do	you	know	that?

From	MAJ	Sloane,	01:03:
Well,	 when	 we	 first	 entered	 the	 store	 at	 conclusion	 of	 the	 hostage
situation,	 I	 went	 into	 the	 ATTO	 to	 check	 it.	 It	 was	 empty.	 We	 then



padlocked	the	door.	It	has	remained	padlocked	since.

From	LTG	Frink,	01:05:
I	would	like	you	to	double-check	it	before	departure.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	01:05:
Roger	wilco.	Stand	by.

From	LTG	Frink,	01:15:
Has	anyone	on	site	heard	from	MAJ	Sloane?	I	would	like	a	sitrep.	It	has
been	ten	minutes.

From	MAJ	Sloane,	01:19:
Sorry	for	delay,	 it	was	a	mess	in	there.	Everything	is	fine,	proceeding
to	DODO	HQ,	will	report	in	upon	arrival.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:03:
It	is	very	late	and	I	want	to	turn	in	but	would	like	positive	confirmation
that	the	ATTO	is	safe	and	sound	at	DODO	HQ	before	I	shut	this	damned
thing	off.	I	have	not	heard	a	sitrep	in	something	like	forty-five	minutes.
What	is	status?	Major	Sloane?

From	LTG	Frink,	02:05:
Major	Sloane?	Are	you	monitoring	this	channel?
Will	 someone	 else	 on	 this	 channel	 please	 supply	 Major	 Sloane’s

phone	number?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:07:
She	 is	 not	 answering	 her	 phone.	 It	 went	 off	 the	 network	 after	 she
checked	the	ATTO.	It	may	have	fallen	out	of	her	pocket	there.	ATTO	is
electromagnetically	shielded.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:10:
So	we	have	no	way	of	tracking	or	communicating	with	Major	Sloane?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:11:
Correct.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:12:



Lieutenant	Jesperson,	where	are	you	exactly?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:13:
Down	in	DOSECOPS	C4.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:14:
Has	the	ATTO	arrived?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:15:
Negative.	DOSECOPS	personnel	standing	by	to	receive	it.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:16:
Patch	me	through	to	ranking	DOSECOPS	officer	in	escort	vehicle.

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:18:
Escort	vehicles	already	arrived.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:19:
Escort	vehicles	arrived	without	 the	vehicle	 they	were	escorting?	How
many?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:19:
Both	of	them.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:20:
We	 only	 had	 two	 escort	 vehicles?	 What	 is	 remainder	 of	 DOSECOPS
staff	doing?	Christmas	shopping?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:23:
Staking	out	the	East-Oda	residence,	as	per	Dr.	Blevins’s	orders.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:25:
I	am	pulling	him	out	of	slumberland	right	now.	Am	I	to	understand	that
we	have	lost	the	ATTO?	Does	anyone	know	where	the	ATTO	is?

From	Dr.	Roger	Blevins,	02:36:
Okie,	 unsettling	 news	 that	 we	 have	 temporarily	 lost	 track	 of	 the
precise	whereabouts	of	ATTO,	but	Boston’s	a	small	town,	we’ll	 find	 it
in	a	jiffy	once	we	get	local	police	involved.



From	LTG	Frink,	02:41:
FOR	FUCKS	SAKE	WE	CANNOT	GET	LOCAL	COPS	INVOLVED!	We	have
to	track	this	down	with	national	security	resources.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	02:45:
Sorry,	a	bit	groggy,	not	thinking	straight.	Of	course	you’re	right,	Okie.
But	those	resources	are	considerable	as	you	know	and	how	far	could	it
have	gone?

From	LTG	Frink,	02:49:
In	an	hour	and	a	half?	Approximately	a	hundred	miles.
In	case	you	are	too	groggy	to	remember	Mr.	Reinhardt’s	7th	grade

geometry	lessons,	that	implies	a	search	area	of	31,142	square	miles.
Has	 it	 not	 occurred	 to	 any	 of	 you	 that	 if	 a	MUON	stayed	behind	 in

that	 thing,	 she	 could	 have	 played	 with	 people’s	 minds?	 And	 that
Magnus	could	by	now	have	Sent	more	hostiles	into	it?

From	1LT	Jesperson,	02:52:
General	Frink,	Dr.	Blevins,	all	of	 this	 traffic	 is	going	out	on	 the	ATTO
Operations	 channel	 which	 has	 wide	 distribution	 inside	 of	 DODO.
Suggesting	 we	 switch	 over	 to	 DOSECOPS	 RESTRICTED	 channel.
Please	acknowledge.

From	LTG	Frink,	02:53:
Yes.

From	Dr.	Blevins,	02:53:
Acknowledged. [message	thread	ends	here]

Post	by	Felix	Dorn	on
“General”	GRIMNIR	channel

DAY	1949



As	 you	 all	 know,	 I’m	 not	 one	 for	 writing	 long	 reports,	 but	 Tristan	 is
twisting	my	arm	to	jot	down	some	notes	on	what	I	observed	during	my
last	 couple	of	days	at	DODO.	He	wants	 this	on	 the	 record	so	we	can
document	and	explain	our	actions	if	this	all	comes	to	light	eventually.
During	 the	 last	 week	 or	 so	 I	 began	 to	 see	message	 traffic	 on	 the

“Deutsch”	 ODIN	 channel,	 which	 is	 simply	 a	 channel	 that	 is	 used	 by
German-speaking	staff	members	like	me	for	general	discussion.
To	make	a	long	story	short,	it	was	obvious	from	these	messages	that

a	DEDE	to	Prussia	was	being	planned	on	short	notice	and	that	its	date
was	unusually	late—I	could	guess	from	some	of	the	references	that	it
was	going	to	be	the	late	1840s	or	even	the	early	1850s.
DEDEs	 of	 that	 nature	 are	 extremely	 unusual	 because	 magic	 had

already	become	 very	weak	by	 that	 time	and	 so	 there	 is	 a	 risk	 of	 the
DOer	 ending	 up	 trapped	 in	 the	 past	 (as	 Mel	 seems	 to	 be	 now
unfortunately).	We	don’t	even	have	any	legit	KCWs	post	about	1845	and
so	these	DOers	on	the	message	threads	were	asking	questions	about
some	 sketchy	 witches	 that	 we’d	 been	 in	 contact	 with	 circa	 1840,
wondering	if	they	were	still	alive	ten	years	later.
The	 DOers	 asking	 these	 questions	 were	 tough	 guys.	 Fighters	 and

Snake	Eaters.	Not	the	kind	of	people	you	would	send	on	a	scouting	or
intel-gathering	type	of	mission.
I	 started	asking	around,	buying	people	beers,	 chewing	 the	 fat	with

the	Chronotron	staff,	trying	to	get	to	the	bottom	of	it.	The	whole	thing
just	seemed	weird	to	me,	especially	combined	with	Mel’s	very	unusual
DEDE	 in	 1850	 San	 Francisco	 and	 the	 one	 that	 had	 been	 planned	 for
Tristan.	As	context	you	have	to	remember	that	the	operational	wing	of
DODO	has	 been	 pretty	much	 in	mothballs	 for	 the	 last	 few	months—
we’ve	 been	 winding	 up	 ops	 in	 different	 theaters	 but	 not	 starting
anything	 new.	 This	 felt	 like	 something	 new,	 but	 also	 something	 very
weird.
What	I	 learned	was	that	Blevins	had	been	asking	a	lot	of	questions

about	Berkowski,	the	photographer	who	took	the	daguerreotype	of	the
July	 1851	 solar	 eclipse	 that	 put	 a	 stake	 through	 the	 heart	 of	magic.
And	 not	 just	 about	 him	 but	 about	Daguerre	 and	Niépce	 and	 Schulze
and	 some	 of	 the	 other	 inventors	 who	 worked	 on	 early	 forms	 of
photography.	Blevins	had	set	up	a	small	private	channel	on	the	ODIN
system	to	discuss	his	interest	in	this	topic	and	had	invited	three	of	the



Chronotron	 geeks	 but	 was	 otherwise	 keeping	 it	 under	 wraps.	 I	 was
able	to	talk	to	one	of	those	guys	about	it.	He	said	it	had	been	started	a
little	 after	 Halloween	 and	 that	 Gráinne	 was	 definitely	 in	 the	 loop,
driving	some	of	the	questions	and	the	discussion.
Erszebet	has	come	over	to	our	side	now	and	has	confirmed,	just	 in

the	 last	 few	 hours,	 that	 Gráinne	 has	 pretty	 much	 seized	 control	 of
Blevins’s	mind	by	repeatedly	using	some	pretty	hard-ass	magic	on	him
during	their	many	hours	in	the	ATTO	together.
What	this	all	adds	up	to	is	that	Gráinne	is	looking	for	a	way	to	roll	it

all	back.	She	wants	to	change	history	so	that	photography,	and	other
magic-jamming	technologies,	were	never	developed	in	the	first	place.
Maybe	it	begins	with	assassinating	Berkowski,	which	would	push	back
the	end	date	by	a	few	years,	but	that’s	just	the	beginning	of	what	she
wants	to	do.	She	wants	to	morph	our	entire	historical	timeline	into	one
where	science	and	technology	never	advanced	out	of	the	late	medieval
age	and	magic	still	flourishes.	To	avoid	Shear,	she’ll	have	to	do	it	one
small	 change	 at	 a	 time.	 That	 implies	 a	 program	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be
executed	patiently	over	a	long	period	of	time,	using	the	full	resources
of	 the	 Chronotron	 and	 the	 ODECs	 (until	 there	 are	 no	 more
Chronotrons	or	ODECs	because	duh,	 to	quote	Mortimer).	And	 that	 in
turn	means	 she	 has	 to	 control	 the	 organization	 from	 the	 top	 down.
Blevins	she	has	in	her	pocket.	Mel	and	Tristan	had	to	be	gotten	out	of
the	way	by	other	means.
And	 she	 came	 close	 to	 nailing	 it	 on	 the	 first	 try.	 Two	 unexpected

outcomes	messed	up	her	plan.	First	of	all,	Erszebet	had	a	change	of
heart	and	decided	not	to	Send	Tristan	into	Gráinne’s	trap.	And	second,
just	at	the	moment	when	the	EFOT	squads	were	about	to	pounce	on	us
and	 round	us	all	 up,	Magnus	 launched	his	 raid	on	 the	Walmart.	 It	 is
obvious	 from	 the	 way	 Gráinne	 has	 reacted	 to	 this	 that	 she	 wasn’t
expecting	it	and	she’s	furious.
So,	the	good	news	is	that	Tristan’s	safe	and	that	Magnus	has	thrown

a	huge	monkey	wrench	 into	whatever	Gráinne	was	planning.	The	bad
news	 is	 that	 we	 don’t	 know	 how	 to	 get	 Mel	 back	 and	 that	 the	 full
resources	 of	 the	 Department	 of	 Diachronic	 Operations	 are	 now	 at
Gráinne’s	beck	and	call.



Diachronicle	
In	which	I	meet	my	final	witch

TODAY	 I	ACCEPTED	A	LOAN	 from	my	patrons	 to	afford	a	custom-fitted	corset,
perhaps	 because	 I	 now	know	 that	 I	 shall	 be	wearing	one	 for	 the	 rest	 of	my
days.	The	 end	 of	magic	 approaches	 and	my	 last	 chance	 for	 escape	 has	 been
denied	me.

The	Great	Exhibition—that	very	event	which	had	such	a	dreadful	influence
on	magic’s	 demise—provided	me	 an	 opportunity	 to	 take	 the	 air	 at	 last.	My
patrons	 expressed	 an	 interest	 in	 attending	 it,	 now	 that	 the	 initial	 flood	 of
visitors	has	calmed	somewhat	(it	still	bustles	like	a	city	inside),	and	allowed	that
I	might	go	with	them	without	any	danger	or	embarrassment	to	myself.

I	 doubt	 that	 in	 the	 twenty-first	 century	 any	 gathering	 could	 marvel	 the
general	 population	 the	 way	 that	 the	 Crystal	 Palace	 marvels	 today.	 An
enormous	glass	building	framed	by	iron—nearly	a	million	square	feet	and	more
than	 one	 hundred	 feet	 high.	 In	 its	 sheer	 spectacle	 it	 rivals	 anything	 in	 Las
Vegas.	Within	were	 tens	of	 thousands	of	 items	and	exhibits,	visited	by	more
than	forty	thousand	people	a	day.	It	had	been	built	essentially	as	a	giant	two-
story	 greenhouse,	 leaving	 old-growth	 trees	 undisturbed	 on	 site	 and	 thus
creating	 in	 certain	 open	 areas	 the	 quaint	 feeling	 of	 an	 antique	 movie	 set.
(Except	movies	do	not	yet	exist.)	I	was	given	leave	to	roam,	with	instructions
to	 meet	 up	 at	 the	 reconstructed	 Medieval	 Court	 (between	 the	 Sculpture
Garden	and	Africa)	in	two	hours.

The	wonders	waiting	within	 include	 all	 sorts	 of	mechanical	 and	 technical
marvels,	 and	 samples	 of	 the	 raw	 materials	 processed	 or	 created	 by	 them.
Foucault’s	pendulum	 is	 there,	hanging	 from	a	 roof	beam	 to	demonstrate	 the
rotation	 of	 the	 earth.	 There	 are	 envelope-folding	 machines,	 musical
instruments,	 inventions	 from	 abroad	 and	 fabrics	 from	 everywhere,	 an



elementary	voting	machine,	at	least	two	enormous	diamonds	(one	pink),	a	rash
of	 photographs	 and	 daguerreotypes	 (I	 avoided	 those,	 instinctively),	 tinned
foods,	a	stuffed	elephant	or	two,	a	 locomotive,	and	for	the	price	of	a	penny,
the	novel	experience	of—gasp!—public	lavatories!	And	foodstuffs	from	all	over
the	world,	or	at	least	the	British	Empire,	which	here	in	1851	is	nearly	the	same
thing.

I	had	studied	the	catalog	and	exhibition	layout	ahead	of	time,	naturally,	and
had	 plotted	 a	 course	 before	 we	 arrived.	 We	 entered	 via	 the	 vast,	 vaulted
Southern	Transept,	between	wares	 from	China,	Tunis,	 and	 India,	 and	at	 the
Crystal	Fountain	I	bid	my	patrons	au	revoir	and	turned	 left.	The	air	had	the
humid,	peaceful	heaviness	of	greenhouses.	I	hurried	past	offerings	from	Africa
and	Canada,	Ceylon,	 Jersey,	and	Malta,	past	 inventive	 labor-saving	hardware
for	housework	and	industry,	past	sumptuous	furniture	and	items	of	leather,	fur,
rock,	paper,	 scissors	 (not	a	 joke),	and—wait	 for	 it—hair,	 then	mounted	 stairs
and	continued	westward	until	I	had	pressed	on	through	the	bustle	of	fascinated
faces,	all	the	way	to	the	Western	Nave,	where	I	knew	I’d	find	the	telescopes
and	other	lens-related	hoo-haa	items	amongst	the	“philosophical	instruments.”

I	had	come	here	with	the	wan	hope	that	astronomy	might	be	of	interest	to
witches,	being	as	ancient	as	magic	is.	And	I	hoped	perhaps	my	presence	might
leave	 a	 trace	 of	 glamour	 that	 only	 they	 could	 see—in	which	 case	 perhaps	 I
would	be	approached	by	one	of	them.	A	far-fetched	wish,	I	realize,	but	I	was
in	desperate	straits	(although	not	yet	as	desperate	as	I	now	feel).

My	 eyes	 scanned	 the	 crowd,	 wishing	 I	 knew	what	 it	 was	 that	 identified
somebody	as	a	witch.	Standing	with	a	handsome	older	couple	near	one	of	the
largest	 telescopes	 (Buron’s,	 I	believe	 the	nameplate	 said)	was	a	very	beautiful
young	lady,	perhaps	twenty,	who	looked	like	Erszebet	Karpathy.

Because	it	was	Erszebet	Karpathy.
To	 be	 honest,	 she	 did	 not	 look	 exactly	 like	 Erszebet	 in	 our	 era.	 While

certainly	 grave	 and	 serious,	 her	 demeanor	 was	 lighter,	 her	 presence	 more
buoyant.	 She	 was	 smiling	 at	 something	 the	 man	 had	 just	 said.	 It	 was	 a
charming,	 unself-consciously	 girlish	 grin.	 She	 did	 not	 carry	 the	 weight	 of
centuries	 upon	 her	 shoulders.	 She	 was	 truly,	 as	 they	 say,	 in	 the	 bloom	 of
youth.	In	that	first	moment	of	recognition,	I	understood,	in	I	way	I	could	not
have	before,	what	 all	 those	decades	of	waiting	 for	us	had	done	 to	her	 spirit.
For	 a	 passing	 moment	 I	 was	 pierced	 with	 guilt	 for	 what	 we	 had	 done	 by
convincing	her	to	preserve	herself.

And	then	I	realized,	with	a	shock,	that	this	was	that	moment.	This	was	the



moment	 she	 had	 referred	 to	 when	 first	 we’d	 met:	 the	 moment	 that	 I
convinced	her	to	stay	alive	into	the	twenty-first	century.

Since	 she	 had	 indeed	 preserved	 herself,	 I	 already	 knew	 that	 I	 would	 be
successful—apparently	 with	 only	 one	 Strand’s	 effort!	 This	 suggested	 our
encounter	would	 be	 an	 easy	 one,	 and	 further—oh,	 the	 joy	 of	 it!—she	 could
Home	me.	 I	was	 saved!	 I	 had	 never	 felt	more	 grateful	 to	 her	 than	 I	 did	 that
moment,	although	she	had	not	officially	even	met	me	yet.

I	 took	several	hurried	 steps	 towards	her,	wondering	how	coy	I	 should	be,
and	then	realizing	I	hadn’t	the	time	to	be	coy	whatsoever.

“Miss	 Karpathy	 Erszebet?”	 I	 said,	 approaching	 with	 a	 polite	 but	 familiar
smile.

She	and	the	two	older	adults	turned	to	look	at	me.	As	she	sobered	slightly,
she	 looked	more	familiar,	and	her	 familiarity	 in	that	setting	was	so	reassuring
that	I	could	barely	keep	myself	from	embracing	her.

“Miss	Karpathy,	I	am	a	friend	of	yours	you	haven’t	met	yet,”	I	said	quietly,
barely	 audible	 above	 the	 general	 hubbub.	 I	 had	 to	 risk	 assuming	 the	 two
guardians	 knew	 her	 for	 a	 witch.	 “I	 have	 been	 Sent	 here	 with	 a	 very	 great
request	to	ask.”

She	frowned,	and	looked	confused.	Then	she	glanced	at	the	man	and	said,
“Papa,	 Ki	 o˝?”	 Then	 turned	 to	 me	 and	 said,	 in	 halting	 English,	 “Do	 you
Hungarian?	I	can	only	some	little	bit	English.”

“Kicsit,”	 I	 said,	 wishing	 her	 native	 language	 was	 Akkadian	 or	 classical
Hebrew	or	something	I	was	more	familiar	with.	Given	how	strong	her	accent
was	after	at	least	a	century	in	America,	it	should	not	have	surprised	me	that	she
did	not	yet	speak	English,	yet	it	was	jarring	to	suddenly	have	a	language	barrier
between	us.

“I	speak	English,”	said	the	man.	“I	will	be	your	translator.”	Seeing	the	wary
look	on	my	face,	he	said,	with	stern	reassurance,	“I	assume	you	are	working
with	a	witch	and	perhaps	somebody	powerful.”

“May	we	speak	in	private?”	I	asked.
He	 looked	 around	 at	 the	 crowd.	 “We	hide	 in	 plain	 sight,”	 he	 said.	 “We

attract	more	attention	if	we	huddle	in	a	corner.	Here	nobody	pays	attention,
we	are	ignored.”

He	had	the	air	of	a	man	unused	to	changing	his	mind,	and	for	a	moment	I
felt	stymied.

“Nem,	 Papa,”	 said	 lovely	 young	 Erszebet,	 and	 gave	me	 a	 shy	 smile.	 “Én
teázni	 vele.	 Azt	 szeretné	 gyakorolni	 az	 angol	 tudásom.”	 To	me:	 “We	 have	 tea,



yes?”
With	 a	 sweetness	 and	grace	of	movement,	 the	pure	 fluidity	of	 youth,	 she

held	her	hand	out	to	me	with	a	smile,	and	smiled	even	more	happily	when	I
took	it.

“Add	nekem	néhány	shillinget,”	she	said	over	her	shoulder	to	the	man,	whose
solemnity	melted.	“Én	is	fizetek	vissza,	amikor	hazaérünk.”	He	drew	a	coin	from
the	wallet	in	his	vest	pocket,	she	accepted	the	money	with	a	grateful	smile	and
began	 to	 pull	 me	 through	 the	 crowd,	 down	 the	 stairs,	 to	 the	 West
Refreshment	Court	(flanked	by	those	exotic	public	lavatories).	She	selected	a
tea-cart	surrounded	by	little	tables	and	chairs	full	of	flagging	matrons.

When	we	were	close	to	the	tea-cart,	she	gave	me	a	conspiratorial	grin,	her
eyes	twinkling	as	I	had	never	known	Erszebet’s	eyes	to	twinkle.	“I	speak	very
good	English,”	 she	whispered	 in	my	 ear.	 “But	 I	 do	not	want	him	 to	know
that.”

“Thank	God,”	 I	 said	 impulsively.	“Erszebet,	 I	 am	glad	 to	hear	 it,	because
truly	I	must	speak	to	you	alone.”

“Very	well,	let	us	speak	over	cakes	and	tea,”	she	said,	and,	smiling,	she	held
up	the	coin	with	a	flourish.

When	we	had	settled	at	a	small	 table	with	our	refreshments,	 she	said,	eyes
still	 sparkling,	 “So	 you	 have	 been	 Sent	 from	 the	 future.	 That	 has	 never
happened	to	me	before	and	I	am	very	happy	to	meet	you.	Please	tell	me	about
the	 future.	 Father	would	 say	 it	 is	wrong	 to	 ask	 that,	 but	 I	 am	 so	 curious.	 I
hope	 it	 is	 better	 than	 the	present.	The	present	 is	 very	difficult	 for	us,	 for	 so
many	reasons.	Please	tell	me	magic	is	repaired	soon.	Surely	it	must	be,	or	you
could	not	have	been	Sent.”

I	 had	 never	 heard	 Erszebet	 speak	 so	 exuberantly,	 without	 an	 absence	 of
rampaging	insults,	in	all	the	time	I’d	known	her.	I	hated	that	I	had	to	be	the
one	to	give	her	the	news.

“I	 am	 here	 to	 warn	 you	 that	 things	 will	 get	 much	 worse	 before	 they
improve,”	 I	 said,	 “and	 they	 can	only	 improve	 at	 all	 if	 you	will	 agree	 to	 the
request	I	am	about	to	make.”	I	hesitated	for	a	moment.	Surely	Erszebet	knew
many	 witches.	 Should	 I	 ask	 her	 to	 tell	 all	 of	 them	 to	 preserve	 themselves?
Would	that	not	give	us	more	witches	to	collect	in	the	twenty-first	century?

And	yet	that	would	create	such	a	muddle,	and	I	had	no	Chronotron	or	even
quipu	to	ask	for	clarity.	I	decided	to	stay	within	the	bounds	of	what	I	knew	we
needed	to	accomplish.	“And	you	must	keep	this	request	a	secret.	It	is	only	for
you.”



“I	 love	 secrets,”	 she	 said,	 grinning	 again.	 Grinning,	 she	 looked	 like	 a
teenager.	 “I’m	 very	 good	 at	 keeping	 secrets.”	 She	 lowered	 her	 voice	 to	 a
whisper,	and	said	confidingly,	delighted	with	herself,	“I	have	a	secret	lover	my
parents	do	not	know	about.	Not	even	Mother	suspects,	and	she’s	a	very	able
witch!”

“I	promise	not	to	tell	her	you	have	a	 lover,”	I	said,	 forcing	myself	 to	grin
right	back	at	her.	“If	you	do	not	tell	her	this.	But,	Erszebet,	this	is	something
you	cannot	even	tell	your	lover.”

“That	 is	easy,	we	do	not	actually	 talk	very	much,”	 she	 said	 slyly,	with	 the
tiniest	blush	of	a	 recent	ex-virgin.	She	giggled.	Erszebet	Karpathy	giggled.	 It
took	 so	much	willpower	 to	keep	my	 face	 smiling,	 to	not	close	my	eyes	 and
shudder	a	bit	at	what	I	was	about	to	ask	of	her.

“Erszebet,	 magic	 is	 about	 to	 end	 completely.	 Totally.”	 She	 blinked,	 and
suddenly	 was	 serious	 and	 attentive,	 vaguely	 more	 similar	 to	 the	 Erszebet	 I
knew.	“It	will	stay	extinguished	for	many,	many	years,	and	then	we	will	bring
it	back—you	and	I,	and	some	other	people.”	She	blinked	again,	doe-eyed	and
speechless.	 “But,	Erszebet,	 this	 is	 the	most	 important	 part:	 it	 does	not	 come
back	for	such	a	long	time	that	you	would	have	died	of	old	age	first.	So	I	have
come	here	to	tell	you	to	cast	a	spell	upon	yourself	that	will	prolong	your	life	as
long	 as	 possible.	 To	 slow	 your	 aging	 enough	 that	 you	 can	 live	 for	 two
hundred	years.”

She	looked	almost	in	a	state	of	shock.	“Who	are	you?”	she	asked.	“Who	are
you	that	would	ask	me	to	do	this?”

“My	name	is	Melisande	Stokes,	and	I	am	your	friend,”	I	said.	“I	wish	I	did
not	have	to	ask	this	of	you,	but	you,	and	only	you,	will	be	able	to	save	magic
someday—as	long	as	you	cast	that	spell	upon	yourself.”

She	gave	me	a	distressed	 look—not	 the	haughty	 irritation	of	my	Erszebet,
but	a	childlike	confusion.	“Why	me?”	she	asked.

“I	don’t	know,”	I	admitted.	I	had	never	stopped	to	think	about	this,	since
my	 experience	 of	 our	 relationship	 was	 that	 she	 had	 reached	 out	 to	 me.
“Perhaps	it	 is	because	fate	has	placed	me	here	at	this	moment	in	time,	when
magic	is	about	to	end.	It	is	perhaps	that	random.	I	don’t	honestly	know.	What
I	do	know	is	 that	 it	 is	your	destiny	 to	 fix	 it.	Extend	your	 life,	 and	Send	me
back	to	my	own	time,	and	we	will	meet	there	eventually	and	work	together.”

Her	dark	green	eyes	darted	from	side	to	side	as	she	considered	this.	“If	this
news	is	true,	then	I	would	prefer,”	she	said,	“that	I	extend	both	our	lives	and
you	go	 through	 this	 journey	with	me.	Then	when	 the	 time	comes,	we	will



meet	your	colleagues	and	work	together.”
I	believe	my	heart	actually	stopped	for	a	beat.	“That’s	not	possible,”	I	said,

thinking	fast.	“I	already	exist	in	that	time	period,	I	will	be	an	old	woman	and	a
young	 one	 simultaneously	 on	 the	 same	 Strand.	 Surely	 that	 will	 cause
diakrónikus	nyírás.”

She	 thought	 this	 over,	 her	 mouth	 setting	 into	 a	 harder	 line	 now,	 a
foreshadowing	of	the	Erszebet	to	come.	“This	is	a	terrible	thing	you	are	asking
me,”	she	said.	“A	very,	very	difficult	thing.”

“I	realize	that,	Erszebet,”	I	said.	“But	so	important.	And	you	choose	to	do
it.	And	 it	 is	 the	 right	 thing.	You	are	 there	with	me,	 in	 the	 future,	 and—”	I
hesitated.	It	would	be	a	lie	to	tell	her	that	she	was	glad	of	making	that	choice.
She	had	only	ever	expressed	regret	and	bitterness.	But	I	had	to	convince	her	to
do	it.	“In	the	future	you	know	that	it’s	the	right	thing	to	have	done.”

She	stared	at	me	levelly	a	moment.	“Am	I	happy?”	she	asked.	“Am	I	joyful?
My	lover	tells	me	I	am	joyful.	It	is	my	favorite	thing	to	be	these	days.”	I	stared
at	her	like	a	deer	in	headlights	startled	fawn,	and	she	knew	the	answer	before	I
could	prevaricate.	“I	see,”	she	said.	“Not	happy.	Not	joyful.”

“But	 .	 .	 .	 satisfied	 that	 you	 have	 done	 the	 right	 thing,”	 I	 insisted.	 “This
makes	you	the	most	significant	witch	in	the	history	of	the	world.”

“And	if	I	say	no?”
“Magic	will	end	forever,	completely,	seventeen	days	from	now,	and	it	will

never	return.”	I	realized	that	was	likely	a	lie,	that	some	agent	from	some	other
nation	would	still	manage	to	recruit	some	other	witch—that	I	was	asking	this
not	for	the	good	of	magic	but	only	for	the	good	of	the	United	States’	ability	to
close	the	Magic	Gap.	I	chose	not	to	clarify	this	point.

“So,”	she	said,	“magic	will	end	in	seventeen	days	no	matter	what	I	do,	but
in	 the	next	 seventeen	days,	 if	 I	 put	 this	 spell	 on	myself,	 I	will	 bring	 it	 back
someday.”

“Yes.”
“What	do	I	do	for	all	the	many	long	years	that	I	am	alive?	How	do	I	make

my	way?	I	am	trained	only	to	do	magic.”
“I	don’t	 know,”	 I	 said,	 taken	 aback.	 “But	 I	 know	 that	 you	 land	on	your

feet.	When	we	meet,	more	than	a	century	from	now,	you	have	been	staying
somewhere	for	many	years	where	all	your	needs	are	taken	care	of,	so	somehow
you	must	stumble	across	money.	Perhaps	you	marry	a	wealthy	man	and	inherit
his	 fortune.	Perhaps	you	become	a	schoolteacher	or	scientist	or	take	up	with
the	Fuggers—remember	that	name,	Erszebet,	and	ODEC,	and	Facebook,	and



—”	My	mind	whirled:	What	else	was	I	supposed	to	tell	her?	What	else	had	the
ancient	Erszebet	claimed	I’d	 told	her?	“I	don’t	know,	Erszebet.	 I	wish	I	did.
All	I	know	is	that	if	you	had	not	agreed	to	do	this,	I	would	not	be	here	right
now.”

“I	Sent	you	back?”
“Not	 this	 time.	 But	most	 of	 the	 times	 that	 I	 have	 been	 Sent	 places,	 you

Send	me.”
She	frowned.	“Why	do	you	want	to	be	Sent	so	often?”
“We	work	for	the	government	of	the	United	States.	It	requires	us	to	move

around	through	time.”
Her	eyes	brightened	 for	 a	moment.	“Will	 I	do	 that	 too?	Move	around	 in

time?”
“You	never	expressed	an	interest,	but	I	suppose	you	could.	We	can	discuss

it—but	only	if	you	agree	to	put	the	spell	on	yourself	and	Send	me	forward	to
my	own	time.”

She	pursed	her	lips.	“Why	does	magic	end	in	seventeen	days?”
“It’s	very	complicated,”	I	said.	“Technology—like	everything	you	see	here

in	 the	 Crystal	 Palace—it	 interferes	 with	 magic.	 In	 just	 over	 a	 fortnight,	 an
extremely	 significant	 technological	 achievement	will	 occur	 and	 that	will	 end
magic.”

“Why	not	just	prevent	the	technological	achievement?”	asked	Erszebet.
“It’s	too	important	to	the	rest	of	the	world.”
“More	important	than	magic?”
“Yes,”	 I	 said,	 and	 she	 looked	 displeased	 in	 a	 way	 that	made	 it	 clear	 this

would	be	harder	than	I’d	anticipated.
“Technology	should	not	be	more	important	than	magic,”	she	said	earnestly.

Very	earnestly,	and	naively,	because	she	was	actually	only	nineteen	years	old.
Not	one	hundred	and	eighty	appearing	to	be	nineteen.	“I	will	 interfere	with
this	technology.	What	is	it?”

“It’s	too	far	away,”	I	said.	“It’s	something	that	happens	in	Prussia.”
“I	have	friends	in	Prussia,”	she	said	immediately.	“I	can	communicate	with

them	and	tell	them	to	sabotage	whatever	it	is.”
“That	will	cause	diakrónikus	nyírás,”	I	said.
She	looked	terribly	deflated.	“I	wish	I	did	not	know	this,”	she	said.
“There	 is	no	other	way,”	 I	 said.	 I	had	never	believed	much	 in	 fate,	but	 I

was	shaken	by	how	remarkable	it	was,	that	I	had	been	sent	to	this	DTAP	as	an
act	 of	 Gráinne’s	 treachery,	 and	 yet	 being	 here—it	 turned	 out—was



unavoidable.	Perhaps	on	other	Strands	I	got	here	by	different	methods.
“I	need	to	think	about	this,”	she	said.	“This	is	so	much,	so	very	much,	to

ask	of	anyone.	Do	you	understand?”
“I	do.	I	wouldn’t	ask	if	it	was	not	incredibly	important.	Please	let	me	give

you	 the	 information	 that	 you	 need	 in	 case	 we	 are	 separated.”	 Out	 of	 my
reticule	I	took	my	journal	and	a	pencil,	and	wrote	down	ODEC,	Facebook,	the
approximate	date	we	were	to	connect	in	the	future,	Tristan	Lyons,	and	Fuggers
(Bank).	 Then,	 remembering	 that	 she	 had	 impressed	 Tristan	 with	 her
understanding	of	 the	ODEC’s	mechanics,	 I	 scribbled	what	 fractured	physics-
engineering	babble	I	could	remember	from	five	years	earlier,	when	Tristan	and
Oda-sensei	 were	 first	 bonding	 over	 developing	 the	 ODEC.	 I	 tore	 the	 leaf
from	my	 journal	 and	 handed	 it	 to	 her.	 She	 hesitantly	 took	 it,	 looked	 at	 it,
grimly	tucked	it	into	her	own	reticule.	I	felt	faint	with	gratitude.	“So	you	will
say	yes?”	I	said.

“It	would	be	easier	 if	 somebody	else	aged	with	me.”	She	 looked	relieved.
“Perhaps	my	lover!”

“That’s	 a	 bad	 idea,”	 I	 said.	 “Do	 you	 know	 the	 saying,	 three	may	 keep	 a
secret	 if	 two	 of	 them	 are	 dead?	 It	 will	 be	 hard	 enough	 for	 you	 to	 pass
undetected.”

“Then	you	shall	 stay	here	and	keep	me	company	until	you	die.	By	then	I
will	have	found	somebody	else.	I	will	be	a	freak	of	nature	if	I	try	to	remain	in
one	 community	 for	 very	 long.	 They	 will	 grow	 suspicious.	 I	 will	 need
companions.	You	must	be	my	first	companion.”

“Erszebet,”	 I	 said,	 “I	 cannot	 do	 that.	 I	must	 get	 home.	 I	must	warn	my
friends	against	some	terrible	things	that	are	happening.	If	I	do	not	warn	them,
even	your	sacrifice	may	ultimately	be	for	nothing.”

She	looked	very	weary	then,	and	rubbed	her	face	with	her	hand.	“This	is	far
too	much	for	me	to	think	about	all	at	once,”	she	said.	“I	need	some	time.”

“There	 is	 no	 time,”	 I	 said	 with	 urgency.	 I	 glanced	 around	 and,	 with	 a
sinking	heart,	saw	her	parents	approaching	us,	her	father	with	a	scolding	look
on	 his	 face.	 “Please	 think	 about	 it,”	 I	 said,	 “and	meet	me	 again	 as	 soon	 as
possible.	Tomorrow?”

“Tomorrow	we	go	home	to	Budapest,”	she	said,	looking	down.	“I	cannot
help	you.	And	I	will	not	extend	my	life	to	help	you	in	the	future,	it	is	far	too
painful	a	calling.”

“Please,”	 I	 said,	“please,	Erszebet,	 reconsider.	 If	 you	do	not	do	 this,	 I	 am
mired	here	forever.”



“I	would	not	be	your	jailor,	but	I	cannot	be	your	savior,”	she	said,	almost
apologetically.	Then	she	rose,	with	a	 forced	smile	on	her	 face,	as	her	parents
reached	us.

Her	mother	gave	me	a	look	that	might	shatter	concrete,	and	then	in	a	low
voice	 began	 to	 interrogate	 Erszebet	 right	 in	 front	 of	me	 in	Hungarian.	My
Hungarian	was	weak	but	 the	 sentences	were	 fairly	 rudimentary:	 “Who	Sent
her?	Where	is	she	from?	What	does	she	know	about	magic	dying?	What	can
we	do?”

Perhaps	Erszebet	was	not	the	witch	I	should	have	spoken	to?
“Tell	 your	 mother!”	 I	 said	 urgently	 to	 Erszebet,	 as	 her	 parents	 began	 to

move	 her	 away	 from	 me.	 “Tell	 her	 everything!”	 And	 to	 the	 mother,	 in
bumbling	Magyar:	“Erszebet	can	help	the	magic.	I	told	her	how.	But	I	can	do
nothing.	She	must	do	it.”

Her	parents	looked	astonished.	After	a	stunned	moment,	they	both	glanced
at	me	and	then	back	to	her,	and	she	seemed	to	wither	under	their	gaze.	To	see
Erszebet	Karpathy	cowed	was	even	more	disorienting	than	to	see	her	joyful.

Her	father	took	her	arm	and	very	forcefully	began	to	lead	her	through	the
crowd.	I	was	certain—I	am	certain—never	to	see	her	again.

In	a	daze,	 I	wandered	over	 to	 the	 reconstructed	Medieval	Court,	which	I
alone	 of	 all	 those	 tens	 of	 thousands	 knew	 from	 personal	 experience	 to	 be	 a
hack	job	abounding	in	solecisms.	The	good	doctor	and	his	wife	collected	me
and	brought	me	home,	expressing	great	concern	that	I	seemed	so	exhausted	by
the	outing,	and	declaring	that	for	the	next	week	or	two	I	must	have	bedrest	or
the	 equivalent.	 They	 do	 not	 perceive	 themselves	 as	 keeping	me	 a	 prisoner.
Indeed,	they	believe	themselves	to	be	nothing	but	my	benefactors.	They	were
very	willing	to	bring	me	all	 the	paper	and	ink	I	could	ask	for,	although	they
had	no	idea	I	would	ask	for	as	much	as	all	this.

For	 when	 I	 returned	 from	 the	 meeting	 with	 Erszebet,	 I	 realized	 I	 must
make	an	accounting	of	everything,	as	there	shall	never	otherwise	be	any	record
of	it.	Tristan,	I	suspect,	must	also	be	lost	now	too,	and	he	is	not	the	sort	who
would	stop	to	record	a	narrative	like	this.	So	this	is	all	that	will	ever	remain	of
us.

I	 shall	now	take	 this	 sheaf	of	papers	 to	 the	Fugger	Bank	on	Threadneedle
Street	and	deposit	it	in	a	safety	deposit	box.	I	have	lost	all	hope	of	returning	to
my	own	time.

And	so,	dear	reader,	with	Jthoeuser	nwaorld	sE,	nas	ttrhye		ionfk	dries,	I	disappear.



Rebecca	East-Oda
DECEMBER	6

Nothing	 good	 to	 report.	 Yesterday—or	was	 it	 the	day	before?—realized,
while	eating	Chinese	take-out,	 that	a	week	had	passed	since	the	events	in
the	 Walmart.	 Frank,	 Tristan,	 Mortimer,	 and	 the	 others	 have	 scarcely
ventured	out	of	 the	house	during	that	 time,	except	to	run	to	the	hardware
store	for	parts,	or	farther	afield	to	collect	obscure	ODEC	components	from
various	scientific	and	industrial	supply	houses.	These	are	being	assembled
into	 a	 contraption	 that	 has	 taken	 over	 half	 of	 the	 cellar.	 For	 a	 while	 it
seemed	that	this	was	coming	together	quickly,	and	morale	was	high	as	the
big	 components	 were	 being	 hammered	 and	 welded	 together	 with
impressive	 speed.	Meanwhile	 Julie	 (on	her	motorcycle)	 and	Felix	 (in	 his
SUV)	 kept	 making	 runs	 to	 the	 Amazon	 Locker	 over	 by	 MIT	 to	 collect
packages	 of	 various	 sizes	 containing	 electronics	 that	Mortimer	 has	 been
incorporating	 into	 the	 “server	 rack”	 taking	 over	my	 pantry.	 A	 bundle	 of
cables	 as	 thick	 as	my	waist	 now	 snakes	 from	 there	down	 the	dumbwaiter
shaft	into	the	cellar	where	it	is	connected	to	various	devices	built	into	the
walls	of	the	ODEC.

So	the	physical	changes	are	impressive.	This	had	gulled	me	into	thinking
that	actual	progress	was	being	made	toward	getting	Mel	back	home.	But	last
night,	just	before	he	turned	in,	Frank	broke	the	news	to	me	that	the	entire
project	 is	 futile	unless	he	 can	get	his	hands	on	a	 larger	quantity	of	high-
temperature	 superconductors.	 He	 already	 had	 some	 samples	 on	 hand,
which	have	been	 incorporated	 into	 the	device,	 but	he	needs	 ten	 times	 as
much	of	the	stuff	in	order	to	make	an	ODEC	large	enough	to	accommodate
a	person.

All	of	the	work	that	the	crew	have	been	doing	since	Black	Friday	has	been
in	the	hope	that	these	materials	could	be	obtained.	Only	two	companies	in
the	world	manufacture	 them.	One	 is	 in	 China	 and	 has	 been	 slow	 to	 deal
with.	Julie,	who	is	fluent	in	Mandarin,	has	spent	many	hours	on	the	phone
with	them	trying	to	cajole	them	into	overnight-shipping	some	samples,	but
they	see	us	as	too	small	a	customer	to	be	worth	bothering	with.	The	other



possible	source	is	right	here	 in	the	Boston	area—they	are	on	Route	128	in
Waltham,	 so	 only	 a	 few	miles	 away—and	 Frank	 had	 high	 hopes	 that	 they
would	 supply	 what	 he	 needs	 until	 yesterday,	 when	 his	 order	 ran	 afoul	 of
some	kind	of	internal	roadblock	within	the	company.	I	suspect	some	kind
of	meddling	by	Blevins.

Post	by	Mortimer	Shore	on
“New	ODEC”	GRIMNIR	channel
DAY	1957	(7	DECEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Hey	all,	I	could	just	walk	upstairs	and	deliver	this	news	in	person	but
I’m	too	tired	to	stand	up	and	I	know	people	are	sleeping.
Breaking	 news:	 if	 you	 check	 out	 a	 couple	 of	 these	 links	 from	 this

morning’s	Wall	Street	Journal	and	some	other	biz	sites	you	will	see	that
we	have	 just	been	Pearl	Harbored	as	 far	as	getting	what	we	need	 to
finish	 the	 new	 ODEC.	 TC	 Materials	 Science	 Group—our	 erstwhile
friends	 out	 in	 Waltham—have	 just	 been	 purchased	 lock,	 stock,	 and
barrel	by	a	hedge	fund	operating	out	of	lower	Manhattan.	This	explains
why	 they	 suddenly	 clammed	 up	 a	 couple	 of	 days	 ago	 and	 stopped
processing	our	order.
So	as	 you	might	 expect	 I	 have	been	 learning	whatever	 I	 can	about

said	hedge	fund.
We	have	all	 been	assuming	 that	Blevins	had	something	 to	do	with

our	 recent	 difficulties	 in	 getting	 these	 supercons.	 That	might	 be	 the
case	with	the	company	in	Shenzhen,	which	is	a	big	DODO	supplier,	but
what’s	 happening	 today	 seems	 unrelated.	 There	 is	 another	 player,
apparently.
This	hedge	fund	has	also	recently	taken	big	positions	in	a	number	of

mining	 companies	 operating	 in	 Mongolia,	 Congo,	 and	 Bolivia,	 which
are	the	only	places	to	get	the	rare	earths	and	other	unusual	minerals
needed	to	manufacture	the	high-temp	superconductors	we	need.
So	 it	would	 appear	 that	 someone	with	 a	 lot	 of	money	 is	making	 a

concerted	 effort	 to	 corner	 the	 world	market	 on	 exactly	 the	 stuff	 we



need	 in	 order	 to	 conduct	 diachronic	 operations,	 or	 for	 that	 matter
magic	of	any	kind.
I	 have	a	 few	 feelers	out	 to	 friends	of	mine	 in	 the	 “gray	hat”	world

who	 I	 was	 not	 allowed	 to	 have	 contact	 with	 when	 I	 was	 a	 U.S.
government	employee.	They	might	be	able	to	dig	up	more.

Follow-up	from	Mortimer	Shore,	four	hours	later:
I	 have	 heard	 back	 from	 a	 friend	 of	 mine	 who	 got	 scared	 straight	 a
couple	of	years	ago	and	ended	up	working	as	a	programmer	for	a	Wall
Street	quant	fund.	He	knows	his	way	around	the	financial	systems.
It’s	 a	 big	 data	 dump,	 but	 the	 bottom	 line	 seems	 to	 be	 that	 our

adversary	in	this	case	is	not	Blevins	or	DODO.
It’s	the	Fugger	Bank.

Reply	from	Tristan	Lyons:
Makes	 me	 wonder	 about	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the	 ATTO	 from	 the
Walmart.	We	assumed	that	was	Magnus’s	work	.	.	.	but	who	knows?

ENTRY	FROM	PERSONAL	JOURNAL	OF

Karpathy	Erszebet
written	in	Magyar	in	a	leather-bound	diary	on	linen	paper

London,	13	July	1851

Dear	Diary,
Today	I	was	at	the	Great	Exhibition	in	London,	with	my	parents,	when	I	was

approached	by	a	woman	who,	while	not	a	witch,	knew	much	about	magic	and	why	it
has	been	waning.	She	warned	me	that	magic	will	soon	die	and	requested	me	to
participate	in	its	resuscitation.	This	required	two	things	of	me:	first,	that	I	cast	a	spell
upon	myself	to	extend	my	life	out	by	more	than	a	century,	and	second,	that	I	Home
her	back	to	the	future	time	from	where	she	comes.	Overwhelmed	by	the	enormity	of



her	request,	I	refused.
However,	Mother,	seeing	the	distress	on	my	face,	demanded	to	know	what	it	was

we	spoke	of,	and	when	I	told	her,	she	said	that	of	course	we	must	prevent	this	Mr.
Berkowski	from	taking	his	accursed	photograph	and	ending	magic	(this	is	the	event
that	completely	destroys	magic).	As	soon	as	we	were	back	in	our	room	at	the	inn,	she
began	to	scry	in	an	attempt	to	find	a	sister-witch	in	the	area	of	Koenigsbourg,	Prussia,
who	might	be	able	to	deter	Mr.	Berkowski.

Father	pointed	out	with	some	impatience	that	this	would	merely	delay,	by	some
small	time,	the	actual	snuffing-out	of	magic,	and	that	if	Miss	Stokes	was	so
determined,	that	surely	I	should	follow	her	resolve	and	put	a	spell	on	myself	to
lengthen	my	life.	I	said	I	could	not	bear	to	do	this.	When	Mother	agreed	with	Father,
I	told	her,	“You	are	free	to	use	such	a	spell	on	yourself	if	you	like,	then.”

“I	am	already	too	old	for	such	a	spell	to	work	well,”	she	said.	“I	had	you	too	late	in
life	and	I	am	already	an	old	woman	and	my	health	wanes	with	my	power.	It	has	to	be
you.”

I	dared	her	then	to	set	the	spell	on	me.	She	said	it	would	be	bad	magic	to	use	such	a
spell	against	an	unwilling	witch—especially	her	own	daughter.

Exchange	of	posts	on
“General”	GRIMNIR	channel

DAY	1959	(9	DECEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	Frank	Oda,	11:17:
Has	anyone	 seen	or	heard	 from	Julie?	She	went	 off	 on	her	bike	 two
hours	ago	 to	pick	up	some	parts	and	should	have	been	back	a	while
ago.	It’s	not	like	her	to	not	report	in.

Reply	from	Tristan	Lyons,	11:20:
Good	 catch,	 Frank,	 we	 have	 been	 a	 little	 distracted	 by	 the	 sudden
disappearance	of	the	DOSECOPS	SUVs	from	the	street.	They	all	took	a
powder	about	forty-five	minutes	ago.

From	Rebecca	East-Oda,	11:25:
Good	riddance.	The	neighbors	will	be	pleased	too.



From	Julie	Lee,	14:30:
Sorry	for	the	mysterious	absence,	everyone.	I’m	fine	and	I’m	hanging
out	in	a	top-floor	hotel	room	at	the	waterfront	Westin	with	none	other
than	Major	Isobel	Sloane.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	14:31:
WHAT!?	Glad	you	are	okay	but	please	explain.

From	Julie	Lee,	14:45:
I	was	on	my	way	back	to	the	house	with	the	delivery,	 just	a	couple	of
blocks	out,	when	I	noticed	that	all	three	of	the	DOSECOPS	SUVs	were
blasting	down	the	street,	headed	for	the	main	drag.	So,	on	the	spur	of
the	moment,	I	decided	to	follow	them.	Couldn’t	have	kept	up	with	them
on	the	highway	but	of	course	they	were	in	Boston	traffic	and	so	it	was
pretty	easy	to	keep	pace.	I	had	to	make	a	few	illegal	sidewalk	runs	and
cut	through	some	parking	lots	but	was	able	to	track	them	across	the
Mass	 Ave	 Bridge	 and	 across	 the	 South	 End	 into	 Southie	where	 they
ended	up	passing	through	a	guarded	gate	into	the	container	terminal.
There’s	a	big	slip	there	lined	with	cranes	where	they	load	and	unload
the	 container	 ships.	 Thousands	 of	 containers	 stacked	 all	 over	 the
place,	trains,	trucks,	etc.
I	couldn’t	get	through	the	gate,	so	I	was	kind	of	stymied	at	that	point.

I	looked	around	for	a	tall	building	and	noticed	the	Westin	a	few	blocks
away—it’s	 like	 twenty	stories	high	and	 I	 could	see	 its	 top	 floors,	 so	 I
knew	 it	 had	 a	 view	 of	 the	 area.	 So	 I	 gunned	 it	 over	 there.	 The
neighborhood	 is	kinda	 forbidding,	 lots	of	big	 industrial-type	buildings
but	 no	 place	 to	 come	 in	 off	 the	 street.	 I	 left	my	motorcycle	with	 the
parking	attendants	and	went	 into	the	lobby	and	asked	the	lady	at	 the
front	 desk	 whether	 there	 was	 a	 bar	 or	 coffee	 shop	 on	 the	 top	 floor
where	I	could	have	a	drink	and	look	out	over	the	harbor	and	she	was
like	 no,	 all	 of	 our	 dining	 establishments	 are	 down	 low	 and	 the	 top
floors	are	all	rooms	and	suites	for	our	guests.	I	asked	if	any	of	those
was	 available	 and	 she	 said	 she	 could	 get	me	 one	with	 a	 view	 of	 the
harbor	so	I	plunked	down	my	credit	card	and	said	I	would	take	it.
While	 I’m	 there	 filling	 out	 the	 paperwork,	 I	 see	 a	 woman

approaching	in	my	peripheral	vision.	She’s	coming	from	the	direction
of	 the	 coffee	 shop	 in	 the	 lobby,	 holding	 a	 latte	 cup.	 I	 figured	 she



wanted	to	 talk	 to	 the	 front-desk	 lady	but	 instead	she	approached	me
and	said,	“Excuse	me,	this	might	sound	very	weird	and	I’m	sorry	if	this
makes	you	uncomfortable	but	I	have	the	strongest	feeling	that	I	know
you	from	somewhere	and	I	was	wondering	if	I	could	chat	with	you	for	a
minute.”	 So	 I	 look	 up	 at	 her	 and	 holy	 shit	 it’s	 Isobel	 Sloane	 from
DOSECOPS!	She’s	dressed	 in	a	sweatshirt	and	sweatpants	and	some
Crocs	 that	 I’m	going	 to	 take	a	wild	guess	were	 looted	 from	Walmart
and	 she	 basically	 looks	 fine,	 but	 a	 little	 spacey	 and	 disoriented.	 As
evidenced	by	the	fact	that	she	didn’t	know	my	name.	We’ve	had	coffee
together	lots	of	times	at	the	DODO	cafeteria	and	she	totally	knows	me.
Obviously	 something	 weird	 was	 going	 on	 so	 I	 said,	 “Sure,	 I	 would

totally	 love	 to	 chat	with	 you,	 hang	on	 a	 sec	 and	we	 can	go	up	 to	my
suite	 and	 get	 some	 room	 service	 and	 just	 chill	 out	 for	 a	 little	 bit.”
Which	she	was	fine	with.
So,	ten	minutes	later	we’re	up	in	this	fancy	suite.	Pricey,	but	the	only

room	 I	could	get	with	a	view	of	 the	harbor.	 I	was	super	nervous	 that
we’d	be	followed,	but	nothing	of	the	sort	happened,	and	as	soon	as	we
got	 inside	 I	 locked	 and	 security-bolted	 the	 door.	 I	 got	 Isobel	 settled
down	on	 a	 comfy	 chair	 in	 the	 living	 room	area	 of	 the	 suite	 and	 then
looked	out	the	window	and	down	into	the	container	port	area.
DOSECOPS	has	a	fleet	of	half	a	dozen	black	SUVs,	as	you	know,	and

all	six	of	 them	were	down	there,	clustered	together	 like	cockroaches
along	 the	 side	 of	 the	 big	 slip	where	 the	 container	 ships	 tie	 up	 to	 be
loaded	and	unloaded.	 I	could	see	people	standing	around	them	but	 it
was	 too	 far	away	 to	make	out	 faces.	Some	of	 them	were	 looking	out
into	 the	harbor.	 And	 right	 there,	 just	 a	mile	 or	 two	 out,	 south	 of	 the
airport,	was	a	big	container	ship	steaming	away.	Piled	with	hundreds
of	containers,	of	course.	And	everything	about	the	body	language	of	the
people	around	the	SUVs	was	“goddamn	it	we	just	literally	missed	the
boat.”
More	 in	a	 few	minutes	but	 I’m	gonna	hit	 “send”	on	 this	so	you	get

the	update.

From	Mortimer	Shore,	14:59:
I	 checked	 the	 shipping	 records.	 That’s	 the	 Alexandre	 Dumas.	 She’s
owned	 by	 a	 French	 shipping	 company.	 They	 name	 all	 of	 their	 ships
after	writers,	I	guess.



From	Tristan	Lyons,	15:03:
Where’s	she	headed?

From	Mortimer	Shore,	15:06:
Le	Havre	apparently.

From	Julie	Lee,	15:12:
CONTINUED
So	 when	 I	 saw	 how	 it	 was	 down	 along	 the	 waterfront	 I	 turned	 to

Isobel	 who	 was	 just	 chilling,	 sipping	 her	 latte	 and	 looking	 out	 the
window,	and	I	said,	“So,	Isobel,	it’s	good	to	see	you!”
“Isobel.	 Right.	 That’s	me,”	 she	 said.	 Like	 she’d	 forgotten	 her	 own

name.
“We	have	been	worried,”	I	said.
“Who	has	been	worried?”	she	asked.
“People	who	work	with	you	and	who	knew	you	had	gone	missing,”	I

told	her.	“You	have	been	missing	for	over	a	week.”
“Oh,	 I	wasn’t	missing,”	 she	 said,	 and	 kind	 of	 nodded	 down	 toward

the	harborfront	area	below	us.	She	seemed	completely	unconcerned.
“You	were	down	there?”	I	prompted	her.
“Yes,	 there’s	 a	 shipping	 company,	 with	 an	 office,	 and	 a	 lot	 of

shipping	containers	that	they	look	after.”
“Might	one	of	those	containers	be	green,	with	some	rust	spots	and

some	equipment	inside?”	I	asked.
“You	mean	the	ATTO?”	she	asked	without	skipping	a	beat.
“Yeah,	the	ATTO.”
“That’s	mostly	where	I	was.	It	was	in	the	warehouse.	It’s	not	green

anymore,	though.	We	painted	it	red.”
“We?	So,	you	were	involved	in	this	painting	project?”
“Yeah,	I	didn’t	have	anything	else	to	do,	so	I	helped	out	a	little.	It	was

fun.”
“Where	is	the	ATTO	now	with	its	shiny	new	coat	of	red	paint?”
“They	 just	 loaded	 it	 onto	 the	 ship	 a	 little	 while	 ago.	 Then	 I	 found

myself	out	on	the	street	and	so	I	decided	to	go	get	some	coffee.	That’s
when	I	saw	you.”
“Were	you	being	held	prisoner?”	I	asked.
“No.”



“Was	there	another	woman	in	the	ATTO	part	of	the	time?”
“Yes.	She	was	always	there.”
“Was	it	Gráinne?”	I	asked.	“Irish	accent?”
“Oh,	no,”	she	said,	as	if	that	would	be	preposterous.
So	then	I	 thought	about	what	kind	of	witch	Magnus	would	probably

have	with	him	and	asked,	 “Did	 she	 look	or	 sound,	 like,	Scandinavian
maybe?”
And	she	said,	“Nope.”
“Do	you	remember	what	she	looked	like?”
She	shrugged.	“Maybe	like	Italian	or	Spanish?”
I	couldn’t	think	of	any	Italian	or	Spanish	witches	on	our	payroll	so	I

let	that	go	and	asked,	“And	is	she	in	the	ATTO	right	now?”
“Oh,	 no.	 They	 shut	 it	 down	 and	 locked	 it	 before	 they	 put	 it	 on	 the

ship.”
“So	where	did	the	woman	go?”
“I	 don’t	 know.	 She	went	 away	 in	 a	 car	 with	 the	 shipping	 company

guys.”
“So	all	of	them—all	of	the	shipping	company	guys—they	all	left?”
“Yeah.”
“And	pretty	much	left	you	where	you	were	standing.”
“Yeah.”
“But	it	looks	like	they	didn’t	hurt	you	or	anything.”
“Oh,	no.	Why	would	they	do	that?”
“Just	asking,	Isobel.”
And	at	about	this	point	a	change	started	coming	over	Isobel’s	face.

Until	then	she’d	been	super	relaxed,	like	she’d	been	sitting	on	a	beach
washing	 down	 Xanax	 with	 strawberry	 margaritas	 and	 listening	 to
global	chill	music,	but	now	it	was	like	the	circuit	breakers	in	her	brain
were	 flipping	 back	 on.	 She	 seemed	 preoccupied,	 and	 sort	 of
embarrassed.	I	felt	a	little	bad	for	her	and	I	didn’t	want	to,	like,	 jump
down	her	throat	or	anything.	So	I	just	sat	there	quietly	and	let	her	work
it	all	out.
“Wow,”	she	said.	“Oh,	shit.”
“You’ve	been	missing	for	a	week,”	I	said.
She	nodded.	“I’ve	been	missing	for	a	week.	I	need	to	call	my	mom.

And	my	boss.	And	the	cops.”
“Do	you	remember	DODO	now?”	I	asked	her.	“And	DOSECOPS.”



“Yeah.	Sure.”
“Well,	they’re	all	down	there,	staring	at	the	ass	of	that	big	ship	as	it

cruises	out	of	the	harbor,”	I	said.	“And	I	can	take	you	down	there	if	you
want.	 But	 maybe	 you	 could	 show	 me	 the	 shipping	 company	 on	 the
way?”
“Sure.	Yeah,	 I	need	 to	get	down	 there,”	she	said,	and	by	 that	point

she	was	fully	back	to	normal.	The	Isobel	Sloane	we	are	accustomed	to.
She	stood	up	and	kind	of	patted	herself	down,	but	she	didn’t	have	her
phone	or	any	of	her	DOSECOPS	electronic	gear,	just	the	Walmart	togs
she’d	been	given.
So	we	went	down	and	got	on	my	motorcycle	and	she	had	me	drive

along	 the	north	 side	 of	 the	 shipping	 channel,	which	 is	 just	 one	 long,
long	 row	 of	 warehouses	 with	 little	 shipping	 companies	 all	 over	 the
place.	It’s	hard	to	tell	one	from	the	next,	and	Isobel’s	memories	were
fuzzy,	so	my	expectations	were	pretty	low.	But	as	we	were	getting	near
the	end,	where	the	road	terminates	with	a	view	of	the	harbor	and	the
airport,	 I	was	 sorta	 hit	 over	 the	 head	with	 an	 incredibly	 focused	 and
powerful	 sense	 of	 GLAAMR.	 And	 it	 quite	 obviously	 emanated	 from
behind	 the	 door	 of	 one	 company,	 which	 was	 unmarked	 except	 for	 a
suite	 number	 (2739)	 and	 a	 little	 piece	 of	 paper	 about	 the	 size	 of	 a
business	card	with	a	drawing	on	it,	a	pattern	of	circles,	wide	at	the	top
and	 tapering	 to	 the	bottom,	with	a	stem	and	a	 leaf	at	 the	 top.	Like	a
bunch	of	grapes.	It	was	locked,	and	through	the	frosted	glass	window	I
could	 kind	 of	 make	 out	 a	 filing	 cabinet	 and	 a	 water	 cooler.	 Normal
office	 stuff.	 Isobel	 seemed	 pretty	 sure	 that	 this	was	 the	 place	 she’d
been	hanging	out	 for	 the	 last	week.	 It	smelled	 like	paint.	But	 I	didn’t
need	her	help	anymore	to	know	that	this	was	it.	I’m	a	witch.	I	can	tell.
The	GLAAMR	behind	that	door	was	almost	enough	to	knock	me	down.
I	dropped	her	off	on	the	other	side	of	the	channel,	near	the	gates	to

the	 container	 port,	 and	 then	 came	back	 to	 the	 hotel,	where	 I’m	now
safely	locked	in	my	suite.	As	long	as	I	paid	for	the	damn	thing	I	intend
to	get	the	most	out	of	it!

From	Tristan	Lyons,	15:39:
Fantastic	stuff,	Julie.	Glad	to	hear	Isobel	is	fine.	Stay	safe.

From	Mortimer	Shore,	16:42:



BOG	Container	Lines	Inc.	is	the	survival	into	modern	times	of	Bunch	of
Grapes,	which	is	an	extremely	old	presence	in	the	shipping	industry.	I
mean,	 it’s	 named	 after	 a	 tavern	 in	 Boston	 from	 the	 1600s	 that	 was
named	after	a	tavern	in	London	that	dates	back	to	at	least	the	1200s.
Suite	2739	is	a	registered	business	address	for	them.	One	of	many.	I’m
still	 waiting	 for	 some	 query	 results	 to	 come	 back	 so	 that	 we	 can
discover	their	inevitable	connection	to	the	Fuggers.	I	don’t	even	know
why	I	bother.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	17:03:
Mortimer,	Julie,	you	are	flying	to	London	tomorrow.	Pack.

From	Mortimer	Shore,	17:05:
My	man,	that	is	fascinating	and	I’m	totally	packing,	but	I	just	wanted	to
point	out	that	Paris	is	closer	to	Le	Havre.	Assuming	that	is	where	you
are	trying	to	get.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	17:07:
Yeah,	 I	 have	Google	Maps	 too.	Marginally	harder	 for	 the	bad	guys	 to
track	your	going	 into	France	 if	 you’re	arriving	 from	a	nearby	country
via	ferry,	vs.	arriving	in	a	commercial	airliner	from	Boston.

From	Mortimer	Shore,	17:44:
Tristan?	You	around?	I	can’t	find	you	anywhere	in	the	house.

From	Rebecca	East-Oda,	18:19:
Tristan	 and	 Felix	 are	 incommunicado.	 I	 am	 giving	 them	 a	 lift	 to	 a
helicopter	charter	service	at	Logan	Airport.	They	have	a	lot	of	cash	and
a	lot	of	equipment.

ENTRIES	FROM	PERSONAL	JOURNAL	OF

Karpathy	Erszebet
ON	THE	TRAIN	HOME	TO	BUDAPEST,	14	JULY	1851



Dear	Diary,
Mother	has	been	working	upon	me,	or	rather	trying	to,	with	her	ever-weakening

abilities,	for	I	can	feel	her	inside	my	very	skull	at	times	over	the	past	few	days,	trying
to	convince	me	to	put	the	spell	upon	myself	willingly.	I	will	not.	I	considered	it,	but	I
know	I	lack	the	fortitude	to	survive	the	endless	decades	to	come.

BUDAPEST,	23	JULY	1851

Dear	Diary,
I	have	resigned	myself	to	learning	a	skill,	to	earn	a	proper	living	when	magic	is	no

more.	With	each	passing	day,	I	feel	a	diminishing	of	power	and	clarity	of	mind,	an
almost	physical	heaviness.	I	push	through	it.	I	have	decided	I	might	learn	to	be	a
seamstress,	for	at	least	then	I	shall	spend	my	life	around	beautiful	gowns	(which	I	am
fond	of)	even	if	I	soon	lack	the	means	to	own	them.

BUDAPEST,	26	JULY	1851

Dear	Diary,
As	the	days	go	by,	Mother	keeps	to	her	chambers,	and	Father,	when	I	see	him,

mostly	scowls	at	me.	The	day	after	tomorrow	is	when	this	horrible	eclipse	will	happen
and	then	it	will	all	be	over.

MISSION	LOG	OF	TRISTAN	LYONS
Written	in	ballpoint	pen	on	pocket	notebook
DAY	1960	(10	DECEMBER,	YEAR	5)



General	 intro:	 I	 have	 no	 idea	 whether	 the	 finder	 of	 this
notebook	 is	 going	 to	 consider	 me	 a	 hero,	 a	 traitor,	 or	 a	 nobody,
but	 I	 want	 to	 go	 on	 record	 stating	 I	 firmly	 believe	 my	 actions
are	(a)	important	and	(b)	based	on	a	good-faith	reading	of	my
service	oath,	as	well	as	a	larger	commitment	to	the	principles	of
the	 United	 States	 Constitution	 and	 the	 post-Enlightenment
worldview	from	which	it	sprang.

(Here’s	where	Mel	would	make	some	crack	about	how	I	take
myself	too	seriously,	but	she’s	stuck	in	1851	at	the	moment.)

Furthermore,	I	don’t	know	whether	the	reader	will	have	access
to	 digital	 electronic	 devices,	 or	 for	 that	 matter	 any	 post-
medieval	technology	whatsoever,	and	so	I’m	writing	this	in	ink	on
paper	so	that	you	don’t	need	gadgets	to	read	it.

Hell,	it	could	be	that	by	the	time	we	reach	France	the	whole
continent	will	be	nothing	but	smoking	ruins	.	.	.

I’m	in	a	steel	box	on	a	big	boat.	I	came	here	with	my	friends
Felix	 Dorn	 and	 Rebecca	 East-Oda.	 I	 talked	 them	 into	 this
adventure.	 Not	 to	 say	 they’re	 not	 grown-ups	 or	 anything	 (for
the	record,	Rebecca	is	a	grandmother),	but	I	take	responsibility
for	 this,	 and	 if	 there	 are	 legal	 proceedings	 to	 follow,	 they
should	be	exonerated,	because	this	whole	thing	was	my	call.

As	general	background,	just	to	help	the	reader	calibrate	the
level	of	weird	that’s	going	on,	I	believe	that	the	building	we	all
know	 as	 the	 Pentagon	 was	 called	 the	 Trapezoid	 when	 it	 was
first	built,	circa	World	War	II,	and	that	it	remained	the	Trapezoid
all	through	the	Cold	War	and	the	decades	that	followed.	It	only
became	 the	 Pentagon	 a	 few	 months	 ago.	 But	 when	 it	 did,	 it
wasn’t	 only	 the	 building	 itself	 that	 changed,	 but	 everyone’s
memories	of	it	as	well.	So	everyone,	including	me,	thinks	it	has
been	 the	 Pentagon	 from	 the	 moment	 its	 cornerstone
(vertexstone?	 whatever)	 was	 laid,	 and	 has	 memories	 consistent
with	that,	and	it’s	what	you’ll	read	in	old	documents	and	see	on
old	maps.	I	have	memories	of	the	Trapezoid	but	they	have	the



same	 surreal	 and	 suspect	 vibe	 about	 them	 as	 things	 seen	 in
dreams,	or	hallucinated	during	LSD	trips.

It	was	converted	into	the	Pentagon	on	Halloween,	just	about
two	months	ago,	when	a	significant	chunk	of	the	United	States
military-industrial	 complex	 was	 taken	 over	 by	 witches	 in	 a
carefully	 premeditated	 coup	 d’état.	 They	 remain	 in	 power—well,
one	 does.	 If	 you,	 the	 reader	 of	 this	 document,	 are	 a	 Special
Forces	operative	who	just	finished	taking	me	and	Felix	down	in
a	 raid,	 or	 a	 Military	 Intelligence	 analyst	 at	 the	 Pentagon,	 then
you	actually	work	for	her.	The	witch,	that	is.	Sorry	to	break	it
to	you.

The	 witches’	 goal	 is	 to	 roll	 back	 scientific	 and	 technical
progress	 to	 roughly	 the	 late	 medieval	 period.	 I	 think	 they	 are
probably	okay	with	a	Leonardo	da	Vinci	level	of	tech,	but	once
we	get	into	Galileo	or	even	Francis	Bacon,	these	witches	get	the
heebie-jeebies	 and	 want	 to	 put	 a	 stop	 to	 it.	 Cf.	 my	 earlier
remarks	about	the	Enlightenment.

Okay,	 so	 Felix	 read	 the	 above	 while	 I	 was	 peeing	 into	 an
empty	 water	 bottle	 (we	 are	 saving	 it	 in	 case	 we	 end	 up	 having
to	drink	our	own	urine	in	a	few	days),	and	he	has	advised	me
to	get	on	with	some	more	concrete	details	of	what’s	happening.
Thanks,	buddy.

But	 I’ve	 done	 some	 stuff	 here	 that	 from	 a	 narrow-minded
point	of	view	looks	just	incredibly	batshit	illegal,	and	I	need	to
explain	that.

In	retrospect,	we	should	never	have	built	the	ATTO.
The	 whole	 diachronic	 operations	 thing	 was	 never	 perfect—

actually	we	had	some	pretty	hairy	misadventures	from	day	one
—but	at	least	it	was	under	some	kind	of	control	as	long	as	we



just	had	a	few	ODECs	that	were	totally	locked	down	in	secure
facilities,	 with	 necessary	 bio-containment	 procedures	 in	 place,
etc.	We	used	them	for	one	thing	and	one	thing	only:	time	travel,
according	to	a	clear	set	of	rules	and	procedures.

Our	critical	mistake	was	the	recent	policy	shift	toward	using
ATTOs	(portable	 ODECs)	 for	psy-ops	 in	 the	present	 day.	(Note:
Melisande	Stokes	was	always	iffy	about	the	psy-ops	tack,	not
that	she	had	a	say	in	policy,	but	given	the	impact	this	has	had
on	 her	 fate,	 she	 at	 least	 deserves	 her	 opinion	 to	 go	 on	 the
record.)	 On	 the	 face	 of	 it	 the	 psy-ops	 redirection	 seemed
reasonable,	or	at	least	no	crazier	than	diachronic	operations,	but
we	 didn’t	 reckon	 on	 Gráinne	 and	 the	 fact	 that	 she	 would
immediately	 begin	 using	 those	 very	 techniques	 to	 influence
DODO’s	top	leadership.

And	Gráinne,	in	turn,	didn’t	reckon	on	Magnus.
Who	didn’t	reckon	on	the	Fuggers	(see	below).
So	lots	of	people	are	surprised.
I	won’t	re-tell	the	whole	story	here	because	it	can	be	gleaned

from	documents	on	GRIMNIR,	especially	Julie	Lee’s	entry,	but	I
do	want	to	record	(a)	what’s	happened	since	then	and	(b)	what
I’m	pretty	sure	is	the	behind-the-curtain	truth	to	What’s	Going
On.	 Which	 I	 will	 do	 first.	 I’m	 leaving	 out	 an	 enormous	 amount
here—I’m	 not	 “showing	 my	 work”	 as	 my	 grade-school	 math
teacher	 would	 complain,	 because	 I	 don’t	 know	 how	 much	 ink	 is
left	in	this	ballpoint.

After	 Magnus	 finished	 getting	 what	 he	 wanted	 out	 of	 the
Walmart	(treasure	maps,	basically)	and	made	his	getaway,	there
must	have	been	one	witch	remaining	in	the	ATTO,	since	a	witch
can’t	Send	herself.	(I	see	empty	cold	cut	wrappers	and	a	whole
lot	 of	 used	 water	 bottles,	 so	 somebody	 was	 hanging	 out	 here
for	a	while.)

After	the	siege,	when	DOSECOPS	showed	up	and	Major	Isobel
Sloane	 went	 in	 to	 check	 the	 (still-operating)	 ATTO,	 the	 witch



clearly	 used	 some	 kind	 of	 mind-influencing	 technique	 on
Sloane.

The	tractor-trailer	containing	said	witch	was	then	shanghaied
to	 Conley	 Terminal,	 given	 a	 false	 identity,	 and	 sent	 off	 to
France.	Major	Sloane	was	maintained	in	an	altered	mental	state
for	a	full	week	while	that	happened;	eventually	she	turned	up
unharmed	 in	 Julie’s	 hotel	 lobby,	 and	 I’m	 guessing	 the	 truck
driver	has	turned	up	somewhere	with	a	similar	story.

BUT:	 after	 hashing	 this	 out	 ad	 nauseam,	 I	 need	 to
change/add	one	detail:

The	 warehouse	 and	 all	 that’s	 happened	 since	 is	 clearly	 a
Fugger	operation—which	means	it	must	have	been	a	(new-to-us)
Fugger	 witch,	 not	 Magnus’s	 witch,	 who	 was	 controlling	 Major
Sloane.

This	 in	 turn	 means	 that	 Magnus’s	 witch	 got	 “jumped”	 by
some	other	(Fugger)	witch	who	manifested	in	the	ATTO	at	some
point	 post–Walmart	 siege	 and	 Homed	 Magnus’s	 witch	 back	 to
Viking-era	Norway	or	wherever,	with	or	without	her	consent.

No	idea	why	the	Fuggers	stole	the	ATTO	from	DODO,	or	why
they	are	getting	it	not	just	out	of	the	country	but	specifically
to	France,	which	happens	to	have	old,	secret	laws	governing	the
use	of	magic	for	diachronic	operations.

If	 this	 all	 seems	 even	 beyond	 the	 scope	 of	 the	 Fuggers,
remember—DODO’s	 own	 Dr.	 Cornelius	 Rudge	 is	 a	 Fugger	 agent
(hi,	 Dr.	 Rudge!),	 meaning	 the	 Fuggers	 know	 whatever	 DODO
knows.	 And	 always	 have.	 Also:	 they	 are	 obviously	 waiting	 to
collect	ATTO	#1	in	Le	Havre.

So	we	decided	to	beat	them	to	it,	so	that	we	have	a	way	to
get	Mel	home.



Felix	 and	 I	 packed	 duffel	 bags	 with	 all	 the	 gear	 we	 could
carry	and	found	a	chopper	pilot	who	was	willing	to	fly	us	and
Rebecca	 out	 to	 the	 Alexandre	 Dumas.	 We	 circled	 the	 ship	 a
couple	of	times	and	identified	the	ATTO.	Even	though	it	has	a
new	 paint	 job,	 it	 has	 some	 identifying	 characteristics,	 such	 as
the	side	door,	that	make	it	stand	out	clearly	if	you	know	what
to	look	for.

We	hailed	the	ship	on	VHF.	I	gave	the	captain	the	same	story
we’d	been	telling	the	helicopter	pilot,	which	was	that	this	was	an
“enforcement	 operation”	 related	 to	 a	 “sensitive	 national	 security
situation”	 and	 that	 it	 would	 be	 best	 if	 he	 just	 clammed	 up
and	didn’t	make	a	fuss	until	I	could	come	and	talk	to	him.	And
then	I	requested	permission	to	come	aboard,	which	is	the	polite
thing	to	do.

We	landed	on	the	top	of	the	container	stack	and	set	a	rope,
which	 I	 used	 to	 let	 myself	 down	 to	 the	 door.	 I	 cut	 off	 the
padlock	with	a	battery-powered	grinder	and	got	it	open.	We	let
down	 a	 rope	 ladder	 and	 helped	 Rebecca	 and	 the	 chopper	 pilot
get	 down	 and	 inside.	 I	 went	 back	 up	 onto	 the	 top	 of	 the
container	 stack	 and	 walked	 forward	 to	 the	 ship’s
superstructure,	 which	 projects	 up	 above	 the	 level	 of	 the
containers.	The	captain	was	waiting	for	me.	I	was	in	full	quasi-
military	 tactical	 gear,	 and	 I	 guess	 I	 looked	 convincing.	 The
captain	 is	 Spanish,	 the	 crew	 is	 Filipino,	 and,	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the
day,	none	of	them	wants	any	trouble.	They	just	want	to	drive
this	thing	to	Le	Havre	and	cash	their	paychecks.	I	explained	to
the	captain	that	there	was	a	situation	in	the	red	container	that
he	 needed	 to	 see	 with	 his	 own	 eyes.	 It	 took	 a	 little	 social
engineering,	 which	 Mel	 always	 says	 I’m	 not	 very	 good	 at,	 but
after	 a	 few	 minutes	 he	 sort	 of	 rolled	 his	 eyes	 and	 agreed	 to
come	back	and	have	a	look.

So	 now	 it’s	 me	 and	 Rebecca	 and	 the	 chopper	 pilot	 and	 the
ship’s	 captain	 all	 together	 in	 the	 red	 container,	 and	 I	 can	 tell



that	the	ATTO	system	has	been	turned	on.	The	first	few	times
I	 experienced	 the	 inside	 of	 a	 running	 ODEC,	 I	 came	 out	 of	 it
deeply	confused,	like	a	kid	who’d	been	roofied	at	a	frat	party,
but	over	the	years	I’ve	become	accustomed	to	it.	I	can	maintain
some	 level	 of	 conscious	 awareness	 and	 come	 out	 of	 it	 a	 little
spacey,	but	basically	intact.

The	same	was	not	true	of	the	ship’s	captain	and	the	chopper
pilot,	who	just	became	listless	and	generally	out	of	it	as	soon
as	I	shut	the	ATTO	door.	Felix,	for	his	part,	was	smart	enough
to	just	hang	out	on	top	of	the	stack	until	this	part	of	it	was
over.

Witches	 have	 no	 problem	 in	 ODECs/ATTOs,	 and	 Rebecca	 had
been	practicing	enough	with	Erszebet	so	that	she	could	give	the
captain	 and	 the	 chopper	 pilot	 a	 mild	 talking-to,	 there	 in	 the
ATTO.	Outwardly	it	just	looked	like	a	school	librarian	lecturing
a	 couple	 of	 schoolboys	 who	 brought	 their	 books	 back	 a	 day
overdue,	but	I	could	feel	the	GLAAMR	all	over	the	place	as	she
made	 sure	 their	 memories	 of	 all	 this	 would	 be	 seriously
muddled.	Go	Rebecca.

Then	 we	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 shut	 off	 the	 ATTO.	 The
captain	 went	 back	 to	 his	 business	 without	 a	 word.	 The	 pilot
climbed	into	his	chopper	and	took	off,	headed	back	to	Boston,
taking	Rebecca	back	with	him	(not	that	she	isn’t	game	for	an
adventure	 at	 this	 point,	 but	 she’s	 exhausted	 after	 her	 first
successful	 psy-ops	 mission	 and	 Frank	 will	 probably	 forget	 to
eat	if	she’s	not	around).

As	for	the	ship’s	crew,	all	they	know	is	that	they	saw	some
weird	stuff	happen,	but	it’s	not	in	their	interest	to	talk.

Felix	and	I	went	back	into	the	ATTO,	removed	all	of	our	ropes



and	 carabiners	 from	 the	 outside,	 and	 locked	 the	 door	 behind
us.

TL;DR	Magnus	hijacked	the	ATTO,	the	Fuggers	hijacked	it
from	 Magnus,	 and	 now	 we	 have	 hijacked	 it	 from	 the	 Fuggers.
As	long	as	Felix	and	I	keep	it	powered	down,	people	can’t	be	Sent
to	it.

Now	we	wait.

ENTRY	FROM	PERSONAL	JOURNAL	OF

Karpathy	Erszebet
BUDAPEST,	TRAIN	STATION,	28	JULY	1851

Dear	Diary,
Today	has	been	the	most	horrifying	of	my	young	life,	although	I	fear	it	is	only	the

beginning	of	many	days,	and	weeks,	and	decades	of	woe.
This	morning,	Mother	suddenly	emerged	from	her	room,	descended	the	stairs,	and

called	me	into	the	great	room,	with	a	fierce	determination	on	her	face,	but	otherwise	so
wan	as	to	look	waxen,	and	so	haggard	as	to	be	almost	unrecognizable.	“Erszebet,”	she
said,	and	seemed	about	to	say	more—

—so	I	stood	there	in	a	wholly	receptive	state	awaiting	her	words.	But	she	did	not
continue	to	speak	to	me	directly.	Rather	she	uttered	ugly	incantations	I	had	never
heard	before,	and	a	terrible	feeling	came	over	my	body,	as	if	I	were	bound	with	hot
iron,	while	being	frozen	on	the	inside.	I	screamed	in	alarm	and	pain,	but	the	sensation
only	grew	more	intense.	It	seemed	to	last	for	a	very,	very	long	time.	Hours—

—and	then	suddenly,	it	stopped.	And	I	found	myself	lying	prone	across	the
ottoman.	My	skin	felt	unnaturally	tight	on	me	and	I	felt	somehow	heavier.	Mother



was	lying	prostrate	near	me,	in	the	doorway,	as	pale	as	death.
“I’ve	done	it,”	she	said	grimly.	“Better	bad	magic	than	no	magic	at	all.	Now	you

will	be	here	for	Melisande	Stokes.”
“I	will	undo	it,”	I	said	between	clenched	teeth,	fighting	off	panic.
“I	do	not	think	so,”	she	said.	She	turned	away	from	me	and	tried	to	raise	herself	up

but	lacked	the	strength.
“Give	me	an	hour	to	regain	my	spirit,	and	I’ll	undo	the	spell,”	I	insisted.	“And

then	I	will	leave	here	and	you	shall	never	see	my	face	again.”
“In	an	hour,	there	will	be	no	more	magic,	anywhere	upon	this	earth,”	said	Mother

hoarsely,	sinking	back	onto	the	carpet	and	covering	her	pale	face	with	one	pale	hand.
“The	solar	eclipse	has	already	begun.	Somewhere	in	Prussia,	this	Mr.	Berkowski	has
set	up	his	photography	equipment.	In	mere	minutes	it	will	all	be	over.”

I	have	no	words,	dear	diary,	to	express	the	feeling	that	came	over	me.	I	have	refuted
any	connection	to	my	parents;	immediately	I	packed	a	small	suitcase	and	left	the	house
with	no	idea	of	where	to	go.	Then	I	went	to	the	train	station	and	bought	a	ticket	to
Praha	to	stay	with	my	paternal	cousin,	Dagmar,	as	I	know	a	little	bit	of	Czech.

Now	even	if	I	wished	to	help	Miss	Melisande	Stokes	to	return	to	her	time,	I	would
be	unable	to.	She	is	in	part	to	blame	for	my	predicament,	for	if	she	had	not	come,	I
would	not	have	heard	her	remedy	and	then	neither	would	Mother,	and	now	I	would
be	like	Mother,	or	any	other	witch—a	normal	mortal	woman.	Such	simplicity	is	to	be
denied	me.	It	is	a	very	bitter	fate.

In	the	absence	of	any	other	remedy	I	suppose	I	must	rely—as	my	foremothers	have
in	the	worst	of	their	years—upon	the	mercy	of	the	Fuggers.

Exchange	of	posts	on
“Ops”	GRIMNIR	channel

DAY	1970	(20	DECEMBER,	YEAR	5)

Post	from	Tristan	Lyons,	05:30:
Anyone	there?	This	is	a	burner	phone	I	picked	up	in	Boston,	you’re	just
going	 to	 have	 to	 take	 my	 word	 for	 it	 that	 it’s	 me.	 Seeing	 one	 bar,
apparently	a	cell	tower	in	Penzance.

Reply	from	Mortimer	Shore,	05:31:



Pirates	 of	 Penzance	 reading	 you.	 Welcome	 to	 the	 English	 Channel,
bro!

From	Tristan	Lyons,	05:33:
They	call	it	La	Manche	where	we’re	going,	but	thanks.	Everything	fine
here	 in	 the	ATTO.	 I	 think	 I	 read	 the	 entire	works	 of	Dickens	 and	 did
80,000	push-ups.

From	Mortimer	Shore,	05:35:
Heh	I	think	I	drank	80,000	pints	in	the	local.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	05:37:
What	is	sitrep?	Got	numbers	for	me?

From	Mortimer	Shore,	05:40:
All	good.	BTW,	 I’m	going	 to	 lose	you	 in	a	short	while	but	 later	 in	 the
morning	you	will	come	in	range	of	the	island	of	Jersey,	which	is	where
we	registered	our	shipping	company.	Esme	is	hanging	out	there.	And
Julie’s	en	route	Le	Havre.	Rebecca’s	in	London	en	route	Gatwick	(last	I
heard).	Frank	and	Erszebet	are	at	the	house	back	home.	Erszebet’s	in
charge	of	feeding	the	cats	LOL.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	05:45:
Hang	on,	we	have	a	shipping	company?

From	Mortimer	Shore,	05:47:
<grin>	we	do	now	.	.	.	it	was	the	easiest	way	to	manage	the	numbers.
Turns	 out	 that	 you	 can’t	 just	 paint	 any	 old	 number	 on	 the	 back	 of	 a
shipping	container	and	have	it	work	.	.	.	there’s	an	owner	code,	and	a
check	digit,	and	some	other	details	.	.	.	all	covered	by	an	ISO	spec	that	I
had	to	get	my	head	around.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	05:51:
Figured.	That’s	why	I	asked	Rebecca	to	put	you	on	it.

From	Mortimer	Shore,	05:55:
So,	before	you	get	out	of	range,	here’s	the	number:	EHTU	314	1597.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	05:57:



You	used	pi?	Really?

From	Mortimer	Shore,	05:58:
Just	 an	 accident:)	 The	 7	 is	 the	 check	 digit,	 if	 that’s	 not	 right	 the
computers	in	Le	Havre	will	reject	it.
EHTU	is	East	House	Trust—all	part	of	the	shipping	company	thing—

had	to	do	it	so	it	wouldn’t	cause	trouble	going	through	customs	in	Le
Havre.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	06:00:
So	 if	 I	 paint	 this	 on	 the	back	of	 the	ATTO,	 everything	 is	 going	 to	 just
happen	automagically?

From	Mortimer	Shore,	06:02:
According	to	our	modern	standards	of	magic,	yeah:)
See	you	in	Le	Havre.

Post	by	Rebecca	East-Oda	on
“Ops”	GRIMNIR	channel

THREE	HOURS	LATER,	09:21

Note:	Spotty	Internet	so	have	written	this	in	real-time	commentary	but
will	now	upload	all	at	once.
Have	 reached	Portsmouth,	which	none	of	us	was	expecting.	 In	 the

guise	of	dotty	but	 vigorous	spinster	 tourist	 (which	 isn’t	 too	 far	off,	 in
some	 sense),	 enjoyed	 a	 gusty	 walk	 from	 the	 railway	 station	 to	 the
harbor,	 where	 I	 am	 now	 comfortably	 ensconced	 at	 a	 table	 in	 a
waterfront	pub.	Will	explain	what	I’m	doing	here.
Tristan,	 I	 expect	 you’ll	 be	 back	 in	 cyberspace	 by	 the	 time	 I	 upload

this,	and	so	you	might	be	wondering	what	I’m	doing	on	this	side	of	the
Atlantic	at	all.
Briefly,	the	answer	is	that	I	came	over	to	London	because	we	had	to



manage	a	number	of	legal	and	financial	transactions	related	to	setting
up	 the	new	shipping	company	under	 the	umbrella	of	 the	East	House
Trust.	Frank	and	I	are	co-trustees	and	so	a	lot	of	documents	needed	to
be	signed.	Our	scanner	was	on	the	blink	and	apparently	fax	machines
are	 no	 longer	 au	 courant.	 It	 was	 simpler	 for	 me	 to	 just	 be	 in	 this
country.	So	I	got	on	a	plane.
Frank	could	not	join	me	because	he	is	still	working	on	the	ODEC	in

our	basement—some	parts	unexpectedly	came	in.
I	 was	 planning	 to	 fly	 home	 today.	 I’d	 have	 liked	 that.	 But	 we’ve

received	 some	new	 information	 about	 ATTO	#2	 and	 I’ve	 changed	my
plans	accordingly.
This	is	a	long	story,	but	via	Chira	Lajani,	we	received	a	“leak”	from

DODO	 two	 days	 ago	 suggesting	 that	 hasty	 arrangements	were	 being
made	 (presumably	 by	 Gráinne	 even	 if	 Blevins	 or	 Frink	 signed	 off	 on
them)	 to	 get	 ATTO	 #2	moved	 into	 a	 cargo	 plane—a	 747F	 capable	 of
swallowing	a	whole	shipping	container.
It	turns	out	that	there	are	persons	called	“plane	spotters”	who	have

nothing	better	to	do	with	their	time	than	to	keep	track	of	the	comings
and	goings	of	airplanes.	They	are	all	on	the	Internet,	naturally.	Thanks
to	 them,	 Mortimer	 was	 able	 to	 identify	 a	 747F	 that	 made	 a	 flight
yesterday	from	Hanscom	to	Gatwick.
I	took	the	train	from	London	to	Gatwick	and	arrived	in	time	to	watch

from	the	roof	of	a	nearby	hotel	as	ATTO	#2	was	unloaded	in	plain	view
and	 placed	 on	 a	 tractor-trailer.	 I	 recognized	 it	 as	 an	 ATTO	 from	 the
side	door,	which	makes	it	different	from	other	shipping	containers.	We
don’t	know	why	DODO	wants	an	ATTO	over	here,	but	here	it	is.
Hailed	a	taxi	and	asked	the	driver	to	attempt	to	follow	the	rig.	It	left

the	airport	southbound,	as	if	headed	for	Brighton,	but	we	lost	track	of
it.	 Had	 the	 driver	 deposit	 me	 in	 Brighton	 and	 paid	 him	 a	 frightful
amount	of	money,	but	there	was	little	to	see	there—it’s	a	resort	town,
with	not	much	in	the	way	of	port	facilities.
On	 a	 hunch	 I	 took	 the	 train	 here	 to	 Portsmouth	 today.	 By	 hunch	 I

mean	common	sense:	there	was	a	brochure	about	Portsmouth	in	the
Brighton	 train	 station,	 complete	 with	 detailed	map	 of	 its	 large	 port,
with	freight	and	passenger	connections	across	the	Channel	(including
a	 direct	 connection	 to	 .	 .	 .	 Le	 Havre.	 Maybe	 just	 a	 coincidence	 that
DODO	wants	 their	ATTO	directly	 across	 the	Channel	 from	where	 the



Fuggers’	ATTO	is	bound,	but	maybe	not.).
My	perch	here	 in	 this	pub	gives	me	a	direct	 view	 through	a	chain-

link	 fence,	 topped	 with	 copious	 snarls	 of	 razor	 wire,	 into	 a	 huge
parking	 lot	 adjoining	 the	 ferry	 terminal.	 Several	 score	 tractor-trailer
rigs	and	shipping	containers	are	scattered	about	the	place.
One	of	them	is	ATTO	#2.	It	has	been	dismounted	from	its	trailer	and

is	quietly	sitting	in	a	corner	of	the	parking	lot.	I’m	keeping	my	eye	on	it.

Update,	forty	minutes	later:
I	 am	 still	 in	 the	 pub.	 Management	 have	 apparently	 decided	 I	 am	 a
harmless	trainspotter	type.	Which	I	suppose	I	am.
Here	is	where	my	story	stops	being	about	an	old	lady	spy	and	adopts

witchy	overtones.
A	 few	minutes	 ago	 I	 began	 to	 pick	 up	 a	 strong	 sense	 of	 GLAAMR

from	 the	ATTO.	 I	 can	both	 feel	 it	 and	 see	 it	 (Erszebet	 gets	 credit	 for
being	a	good	teacher).	Clearly,	the	thing	has	been	turned	on.	Meaning
there	 is	 a	 witch	 in	 there.	 Gráinne	 herself?	 Possible,	 but	 maybe	 she
would	want	to	stay	near	Blevins	to	pull	his	strings.
A	white	 van	 has	 pulled	 up	 to	 the	 side	 of	 the	ATTO,	 just	 next	 to	 its

door.	From	it,	men	are	unloading	some	kind	of	cargo	and	tossing	it	in
through	the	ATTO’s	side	door.	I	gather	it	doesn’t	weigh	much—perhaps
clothing,	stuffed	 into	garbage	bags.	 I	presume	these	people	are	from
DODO/Gráinne	since	DODO/Gráinne	caused	this	new	ATTO	to	be	here.
Hmm.	Perhaps	it	is	another	coincidence,	but	the	passenger	ferry	to

Le	Havre	departs	in	one	hour.

Update,	twenty	minutes	later:
Oh	dear,	hang	on	a	moment:	Magnus	 just	showed	up	in	an	Uber!	How
very	 confusing.	 I	 thought	 he	 and	 Gráinne	 were	 utterly	 at	 odds	 with
each	other	re:	Walmart	shenanigans.
Supposition:	in	light	of	the	Fuggers’	stealing	ATTO	#1,	they	(Gráinne

and	 Magnus)	 realized	 they	 would	 have	 to	 make	 common	 cause	 to
retrieve	it.	Still,	I	wonder	what	each	of	them	intends	to	do	with	it	once
they	have	it	back.	Are	they	going	to	share	it?	Neither	of	them	plays	nice
in	the	sandbox	with	others.

Update,	a	few	minutes	later	(10:31):
Strong	GLAAMR	from	the	ATTO,	and	men	are	coming	out	of	it	now,	one



by	 one,	 every	 few	minutes.	Dressed	 in	 civilian	 clothing.	But	 they	 are
Vikings.	I	think	it’s	the	same	crew	that	sacked	the	Walmart.

Update,	fifteen	minutes	later:
White	 van	 just	 took	 Magnus	 and	 eight	 of	 his	 Vikings	 over	 to	 the
passenger	 terminal.	 They	 are	 getting	 on	 the	 ferry	 to	 Le	 Havre.	 I’m
going	to	get	on	the	ferry	too,	and	try	not	to	let	Magnus	see	me.	Going
to	click	“send”	on	 this	now.	Hopefully	 I	will	be	able	 to	update	you	all
soon.	If	I	do	not,	assume	it	is	because	the	Walmart	Vikings	have	gotten
to	 me,	 in	 which	 case	 somebody	 please	 remind	 Frank	 to	 water	 the
garden.
(If	 you	 had	 told	 me	 five	 years	 ago,	 when	 Mel	 and	 Tristan	 first

knocked	on	our	door,	that	I	would	find	myself	writing	that	sentence	I’d
have	laughed	you	down	the	street.)

Scribbled	addendum	in	pencil	at	the	bottom
of	Melisande

Stokes’s	Diachronicle,	in	her	handwriting

After	requesting	a	safety	deposit	 box	here	at	the	private	offices	of	the
Fugger	 Bank	 on	 Threadneedle	 Street,	 and	 giving	 the	 agent	 my	 name,	 I	 was
informed	I	already	owned	a	box.	Amazed,	 I	asked	it	to	be	brought	to	me,	and
saw	that	it	contained	a	sealed	envelope.	Addressed	to	me.	In	Mortimer’s	gangly
penmanship	(albeit	somewhat	ink-blotted).
I	have	memorized	its	contents	and	will	leave	it	here	in	the	box,	attached	to

my	Diachronicle,	for	thoroughness.
I	depart	the	bank	in	far	higher	spirits	than	I	arrived.

Handwritten	note	on	Fugger	Bank	stationery



Came	 back	 to	 1848	 to	 leave	 this	 for	 you	 to	 read	 in	 1851—trippy,	 huh?
We’re	trying	 to	Home	you.	 If	 you’re	 reading	 this	 before	July	28,	1851,	cross
the	 Channel	 ASAP	 to	 Collinet—aka	 Norman	 Language	 campsite.	 Near	 Le
Havre,	 inland,	 on	 river	 Dives,	 if	 you	 don’t	 remember.	 The	B&B	 in	 our	 era	 is
Chez	 Envouteur	 and	 the	 family	 women	 were	 openly	 witchy	 (descendants	 of
Thyra	and	Imblen,	talk	about	clan	loyalty	w00t!)	until	magic	stopped	so	if	you
ask	 for	 the	 witch’s	 house	 the	 locals	 may	 know	 where	 to	 send	 you.	 Fingers
crossed	witch	of	1851	is	cooperative—have	her	Send	you	to	her	own	backyard
in	our	time	where	(if	you	get	this)	there	will	be	an	ATTO	waiting	to	receive
you.
Keep	your	head	down	and	stay	low	when	you	arrive.
Gotta	 go,	writing	 this	wearing	 nothing	 but	Mr.	 Fugger’s	 greatcoat	 and	 he’s

really	not	amused	lol	—Mortimer

Exchange	of	posts	on
“Ops”	GRIMNIR	channel
1.5	HOURS	LATER

Post	from	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:17:
You	there?

Reply	from	Tristan	Lyons,	12:19:
Yeah.	Just	got	bars.

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:20:
Welcome	back	to	the	world!	I’m	on	Jersey.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	12:23:
Glad	 there’s	a	world	 to	get	back	 to.	Didn’t	 know	what	 I’d	 find	on	 the
other	end	of	the	ocean.



From	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:27:
It’s	been	a	 little	hairy	while	you	were	gone	 .	 .	 .	 lots	 to	report.	But	no
major	Shears	as	far	as	we	can	tell.	In	spite	of	Magnus’s	best	efforts.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	12:28:
Yeah	.	.	.	I’m	reading	the	message	from	Rebecca	.	.	.	wow.

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:36:
The	ferry	with	Magnus	and	the	other	Vikings	(and	Rebecca)	is	going	to
reach	Le	Havre	shortly	before	 you—you	might	even	be	able	 to	 see	 it
out	the	ATTO	door	as	you’re	approaching	Le	Havre.	Taking	into	account
the	 time	zone	change,	 your	ETA	 is	around	5:30—a	 little	after	sunset.
Then,	unloading	should	happen	as	per	usual.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	12:40:
Let’s	 talk	 a	 little	 more	 about	 “per	 usual.”	 Port	 operations	 isn’t	 my
strong	suit.

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:45:
Actual	 unloading	 of	 the	 ship	 probably	 won’t	 start	 until	 tomorrow
morning.	Your	container	will	come	off	almost	immediately	because	of
where	 it	 is.	The	crane	will	set	 it	down	on	the	wharf.	That’s	when	you
disable	the	radio	tracking	device.	A	straddle	carrier	will	pick	it	up	and
take	it	to	a	temporary	storage	location	farther	from	the	ship.	There’ll
be	some	customs	formalities—we’ll	 take	care	of	 that,	but	 if	you	have
any	contraband	you	should	throw	it	overboard	now.	A	forklift	puts	it	on
a	 tractor-trailer.	 The	 driver	 of	 the	 tractor-trailer	 works	 for	 us.	 He’ll
drive	it	away	and	take	it	where	we	told	him	to.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	12:48:
And	where	is	that?	I’ve	been	a	little	out	of	the	loop.

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:50:
Nice	 little	 town	 in	Normandy.	 I	 think	 you	 have	 been	 there	 .	 .	 .	many
times	as	it	were:)

From	Tristan	Lyons,	12:53:
:)	What	are	the	Fuggers	going	to	think	when	their	ATTO	makes	a	wrong



turn?

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	12:56:
We	don’t	know	their	plans	of	course,	but	presumably	they	were	going
to	take	it	someplace	safe.	And	Magnus	and	his	crew	mean	to	intercept
it	 along	 the	way	 although	we’re	 not	 sure	 about	 the	Magnus/Gráinne
relationship	 at	 the	 moment.	 Neither	 Magnus	 nor	 the	 Fuggers	 know
about	us	.	.	.	hopefully.	So	when	we	get	it	to	the	farmhouse,	we’ll	have
at	least	a	few	minutes’	breathing	room	to	turn	it	on	and	open	a	window
for	Mel	to	come	home.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	13:05:
Okay,	here’s	where	this	time	travel	shit	gets	really	mind-bending	.	.	.
The	Fuggers	and	Magnus	might	not	know	about	us	TODAY	but	they’ll

sure	 as	 hell	 know	 about	 us	 TOMORROW	when	 they	 notice	 that	 their
ATTO	has	gone	missing.	And	they	have	at	least	one	ATTO	of	their	own,
dockside	in	Portsmouth.	So	what’s	to	prevent	them	from,	I	don’t	know
.	.	.

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	13:15:
Don’t	 torture	 yourself.	 The	most	 they	 can	 do	 is	 Send	 a	 naked	 Viking
into	 our	 ATTO	 when	 we	 turn	 it	 on	 to	 receive	 Mel.	 She	 already	 has
instructions	to	hit	the	deck	and	stay	safe	as	soon	as	she	arrives.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	13:20:
Have	 re-read	 your	 last	 transmission	 several	 times,	 and	 don’t
understand.	How	 is	 “hitting	 the	deck”	going	 to	 keep	her	 safe	 from	a
naked	Viking?

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	13:22:
That’s	your	job.

From	Tristan	Lyons,	13:24:
????

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	13:26:
Keeping	her	safe.	Got	any	weapons	in	there?

From	Tristan	Lyons,	13:28:



Tossed	them	overboard,	as	you	just	instructed.

From	Esme	Overkleeft,	13:30:
Hmm	.	.	.	how’s	your	hand-to-hand	combat	skills?

From	Tristan	Lyons,	13:32:
A	 little	 rusty,	 frankly.	 Fortunately	 I	 have	Felix	 to	 practice	 on.	Or	 vice
versa.

ALTHOUGH	THERE	IS	NO	LONGER	need	of	it,	I	suppose	out	of	habit	I	shall	write
this	in	a	tone	akin	to	the	Diachronicle,	that	is	to	say,	in	accordance	with	the
literary	inflections	of	my	most	recent	(and	enforced)	DTAP.

I	 fell	 through	 fragrant	 darkness,	 and	 fell	 tumbling	 hard	 to	 ground	 on	 a
painfully	cold,	metallic	floor	that	shook	and	rumbled	as	if	it	were	a	truck	being
pulled	 down	 a	 country	 road	 somewhere,	 which	 meant—the	 ATTO!	 I	 had
arrived!	I	was	safe!

—No,	I	wasn’t!—there	were	three	figures	grappling	violently	above	me	in
the	eerie	amber-green	glow	of	the	ATTO.	Their	efforts	caused	the	rumbling.
Two	were	clothed,	and	they	were	fighting	with	a	third	who	was	naked.

And	who	was	winning.
“Stokes!	Turn	it	off!	TURN	.	.	.	IT	.	.	.	OFF	.	.	.”
Tristan’s	voice	was	 familiar	 even	 though	 sounding	a	 little	 strangled:	 as	my

eyes	focused	I	saw	that	he	was	in	a	headlock,	his	neck	crooked	in	one	of	the
naked	man’s	massive	 arms.	With	 his	 free	 hand,	 the	man	was	 swatting	 away
Felix	 Dorn	 with	 an	 almost	 casual	 air.	 The	 stranger	 had	 tangled	 blond	 hair
tumbling	down	over	his	shoulders,	and	a	reddish	beard.	He	was	immense.

Being	Sent	is	no	picnic	in	the	best	of	circumstances,	and	being	in	a	working
ODEC	 is	 always	disorienting.	 I	 forcefully	 tamped	down	 the	part	 of	me	 that
wanted	 to	 celebrate	my	 return	 to	 the	modern	world,	 trying	 to	 focus	on	 the
fact	that	my	friends	were	losing	a	fight	to	a	man-mountain	.	.	.	and	trying	to
remember	how	the	ATTO	was	laid	out.	I’d	never	had	much	to	do	with	the



ATTOs,	 as	 they	 were	 for	 psy-ops	 and	 I	 had	 always	 remained	 focused	 on
diachronic	work.

Still	keeping	Tristan’s	neck	in	the	crook	of	his	arm,	the	Viking	(I	assumed
he	was	a	Viking)	came	 toward	me	at	a	ponderous	gait,	kicking	empty	water
bottles	out	of	the	way	as	he	planted	his	feet.	Tristan	was	flailing	out,	trying	to
grab	anything	that	would	serve	as	an	anchor.	Felix	fell	to	his	knees,	staggered
by	 an	 elbow	 to	 the	 face.	The	Viking’s	 gaze	was	 fixed	on	 something	behind
me.	I	turned	and	saw	the	control	panel	at	the	forward	end	of	the	ATTO.

I	scrambled	on	hands	and	knees	in	that	direction,	hurled	myself	toward	the
panel,	 and	 mashed	 the	 big	 red	 button	 that	 served	 as	 the	 emergency	 “off”
switch.

My	own	momentum	then	sent	me	sprawling	back	to	the	icy-cold	floor,	my
head	clearing	now	that	the	system	was	shut	down.	I	drew	myself	up	into	a	fetal
position,	spun	around,	and	watched	the	progress	of	the	fight.

Felix’s	 face	 was	 gushing	 blood,	 probably	 from	 a	 broken	 nose.	 He	 was
getting	 unsteadily	 back	 to	 his	 feet,	 and	 seemed	 to	 have	 his	 eye	 on	 a	 fire
extinguisher	bracketed	to	the	wall	at	the	other	end	of	the	ATTO.

Tristan	had	managed	to	reach	up	and	get	one	hand	on	the	Viking’s	face,	and
was	now	groping	around	trying	to	insert	a	finger	in	an	eye	or	mouth,	but	the
Viking	kept	jerking	his	head	away.	Tristan	finally	got	purchase	on	a	handful	of
Viking	hair,	but	it	was	a	feeble	grip	compared	to	what	the	other	had	on	him.

I	 was	 struck	 by	 the	 Viking’s	 calm	 patience.	 This	 was	 not	 a	 berserker—
indeed,	he	seemed	more	like	a	parent	controlling	a	three-year-old	throwing	a
temper	tantrum.

The	door	of	the	ATTO	was	flung	open	from	without,	and	slanting	sunlight
flooded	in.	Backlit	and	framed	in	the	entrance	was	a	female	form;	the	ATTO
light	 showed	 her	 to	 be	 a	middle-aged	woman,	wearing	 a	 simple	 housedress
with	 a	 heavy	 cardigan	 over	 it.	 She	was	 brandishing	 a	 long,	 double-barreled
shotgun.	Her	breath	came	out	like	clouds.	I	smelled	apples	baking.

There	was	 a	 long	moment	while	we	 all	 considered	matters.	 The	woman
with	the	shotgun	was	clearly	as	 surprised	by	the	situation	 inside	the	trailer	as
we	were	by	her	sudden	appearance.	Certainly	she	had	a	lot	to	take	in.

Felix	stopped	moving	for	the	fire	extinguisher	and	held	up	his	bloody	hands.
Tristan	couldn’t	see	what	was	happening.	I	watched	the	woman	between	the
tree-trunk	 legs	 of	 the	 Viking,	 whose	 manhood	 hung	 down,	 somewhat
obscuring	 my	 view.	 I	 do	 believe	 this	 organ	 contracted	 a	 smidge	 when	 the
woman	trained	the	shotgun	at	him.	(In	fairness,	the	cold	winter	air	coming	in



the	open	door	may	have	accounted	for	some	of	that.)	Certainly	the	gun	got	his
attention:	this	wasn’t	the	first	time	he’d	seen	a	modern	firearm.	This	confused
me,	 for	 I	 knew	 all	 the	DODO	Anachrons	 by	 sight,	 and	 he	was	 not	 one	 of
them.

The	 sunlight	 glanced	 off	 his	 shoulder,	 highlighting	 a	 red	 scar—fresh	 and
angry-looking—cutting	horizontally	across	one	of	his	cannonball	deltoids.

The	 woman	 demanded,	 “Relâchez-le	 immédiatement!”	 Then	 getting	 no
reaction,	she	tried	in	English,	“Leave	him	go!”

Tristan,	hearing	her	voice	(he	couldn’t	see	the	door),	said	in	a	strangulated
voice,	in	Norman,	“She	has	a	bang-stick!”

This	was	the	moment	I	realized	the	man	probably	was	a	Viking,	so	I	tried
Old	Norse	 (a	 recent,	 somewhat	half-baked	addition	 to	my	 linguistic	arsenal).
“Whoever	you	are,	that	thing	will	kill	you.”

The	Viking	 released	Tristan	 so	 abruptly	 that	Tristan	 fell	 to	 the	 floor.	The
Viking	turned	around	to	face	me,	then	reached	up	and	patted	the	scar	on	his
shoulder.	“I	know	it,”	he	returned	in	Norse.	“A	coward	hit	me	with	one	of
those	accursed	weapons	in	the	Walmart.”

“Walmart?”	I	repeated,	flummoxed.	“What	were	you	doing	in	a	Walmart?”
Tristan	made	a	brief	 sound	 that	might	have	been	coughing	or	might	have

been	 laughter.	 “Welcome	 back,	 Stokes,”	 he	 said.	 “You	 have	 a	 lot	 to	 get
caught	up	on.”

THE	ATTO	HAD	been	plonked	down	in	 the	yard	next	 to	 the	 same	Normandy
farmhouse	whence	 I’d	 been	Homed	 in	 1851.	Very	 little	 about	 the	 property
had	 changed:	 there	 were	 now	 telephone	 wires	 connected	 from	 the	 road;	 a
satellite	dish;	a	sign	reading	CHEZ	ENVOUTEUR,	a	bed-and-breakfast.

The	woman	 had	 run	 inside	 to	 fetch	 ice	 for	 Felix’s	 nose,	 and	white	 terry
bathrobes	 for	 me	 and	 the	 Viking,	 who	 called	 himself	 Thord	 (the	 woman,
Tristan	said,	was	Anne-Marie).

I	waited	for	my	bathrobe	to	arrive	while	burying	my	face	against	Tristan’s
chest.	I	never	wanted	to	let	go	of	him,	and	his	arms	gripped	me	tight.	Having
just	 been	 steeped	 in	 Victoriana	 for	 the	 past	 several	 weeks,	 I	 noted	 that	 his
delight	in	seeing	me	once	again	(important	detail:	seeing	me	entirely	unclothed
for	the	first	time	ever)	was	reflected	in	every	inch	of	his	healthy	and	vigorous
frame,	 not	 excluding	 the	 matrimonial	 organs	 bestowed	 upon	 him	 by	 the
Creator	for	the	propagation	of	the	race.	I	put	my	arms	around	the	small	of	his



back	and	pulled	him	into	me,	just	to	give	him	a	hint	that	I	had	noticed.
Pressing	my	head	 into	his	 shoulder,	he	muttered,	“Damn,	 I’m	glad	 to	 see

you.”
“Yes,”	I	said,	then	pulled	away	and	looked	right	at	him,	eye	to	eye,	nose	to

nose.	“I	can	tell.”
He	reddened	a	little,	then	a	lot,	then	he	started	laughing	and	pulled	me	back

against	him.
We	had	been	avoiding	this	for	five	years.	Time	to	sort	it	out.

BUT	NOT	 IMMEDIATELY.	This	was	France,	 so	 first	we	 all	 had	 to	 go	 inside	 for
coffee,	Felix	 trying	 to	avoid	water	 from	 leaking	onto	his	 jeans	as	he	 iced	his
swelling	 face.	 Anne-Marie	 offered	 me	 a	 woolen	 dress,	 which	 I	 accepted
gratefully.	 She	 was	 nervous	 about	 Thord	 until	 Tristan	 took	 her	 aside	 and
explained	to	her	that	“our	Viking	friend”	would	be	docile	now.

Most	of	 the	 farmhouse’s	ground	floor	was	one	great	room,	kitchen	at	one
end,	dining	space	at	the	other,	the	whole	of	it	spanned	with	a	huge	plank	table
that	looked	like	it	was	a	thousand	years	old.	We	sat	at	one	end	of	this	as	Anne-
Marie	prepped	food	and	drink	just	beyond	the	other	end.

Over	 croissants	 and	 tartine	 (which	 of	 course	 Tristan	 practically	 inhaled
without	tasting),	Tristan	and	Felix	caught	me	up	on	all	the	dazzling	adventures
and	misadventures	I	had	missed	while	I	was	in	San	Francisco	and	London,	the
chief	 topics	 of	 conversation	 being:	 the	 Walmart	 raid;	 the	 ATTO	 heist
shenanigans;	 and	 word	 from	 Frank	 that	 a	 shipment	 of	 high-temperature
superconductors	had	just	appeared	on	the	doorstep	of	the	East	House.	(Given
that	the	Fuggers	owned	the	company,	this	put	us	in	their	debt.)	To	bring	me
up	to	the	minute,	there	was	this	further	summation:	Frank	was	busy	wiring	up
the	superconductors	in	his	cellar	to	create	an	ODEC;	Julie	had	rented	a	hotel
suite	in	Le	Havre	and	was	staying	there	to	ensure	a	base	of	operations	near	the
port;	 Rebecca	 and	 Mortimer	 were	 even	 now	 joining	 her	 there	 from	 their
sundry	 deployments;	 and	 Esme	 was	 expected	 to	 arrive	 in	 Le	 Havre	 at	 any
moment	from	Jersey.

Thord,	 amazed	 by	 the	 first-time	 effects	 of	 caffeine,	 was	 pacing	 agitatedly
around	the	farmhouse	(by	around	I	mean	circumambulating	it	barefoot	despite
the	 winter	 chill).	 Anne-Marie	 had	 fairly	 decent	 English,	 and	 as	 she	 moved
from	our	 end	of	 the	 room	 to	hers,	 she	 seemed	 so	unfazed	by	what	 she	was
overhearing	that	I	assumed	(correctly)	Tristan	had	already	told	her	more	than



the	average	abettor	would	know.
“So	if	I’ve	got	this	all	straight,”	I	said,	“now	that	you’ve	stolen	the	ATTO

from	 the	Fuggers	who	 stole	 it	 from	Magnus	who	 stole	 it	 from	DODO,	 the
Fuggers	 are	 wondering	 what	 became	 of	 what	 they	 thought	 would	 be	 their
ATTO.”

Tristan	nodded.	“From	their	point	of	view,	it	vanished	from	the	container
port	in	Le	Havre.	They	had	a	tractor-trailer	ready	and	everything.	They	were
expecting	to	tow	it	away	from	there	and	take	it	 to	.	 .	 .	who	knows	where.”
He	waved	his	 hand	vaguely	 toward	 the	 interior	of	 France.	 “Someplace	 safe,
anyway.	We	still	don’t	know	who	their	witch	is.”

“It’s	rather	unsportsmanlike	of	us	to	deprive	them	of	an	ODEC	on	the	heels
of	their	making	it	possible	for	us	to	build	our	own.”

“Sportsmanship	is	for	sportsmen,”	muttered	Felix,	a	bit	nasally	with	the	ice
pack	pressed	to	his	face.

“Anyhow,	it	was	all	happening	at	the	same	time	an	ocean	apart	and	we’re
telling	you	to	come	here,	so	we	had	to	be	here,”	Tristan	added.

“What	do	you	mean,	telling	me.	You’ve	already	 told	me.”	Then	I	realized
something	didn’t	make	 sense.	 “Wait—how	did	 you	Send	Mortimer	 back	 to
tell	me	to	come	here?”

“We	haven’t	yet,”	 said	Tristan.	“Julie’s	going	 to	Send	him	when	 they	get
here.”	Seeing	the	look	on	my	face	he	added,	“I	know,	it’s	pretty	freaky,	don’t
think	about	it	too	much.”

“I	can’t	even	.	 .	 .”	I	 shook	my	head.	“Never	mind.	So	who’s	Thord,	and
what’s	his	involvement	in	all	this?”

“Yes,”	said	Anne-Marie	suddenly,	from	the	kitchen	area.	“Who	is	Thord?”
“He’s	obviously	one	of	the	Vikings	Magnus	recruited,”	said	Felix.	“But	no

idea	why	he’s	here	now.”
“We	could	just	ask	him.	I	don’t	think	he’s	used	to	coffee,”	Tristan	joked.
Tristan	went	outside	to	collect	Thord,	still	clad	in	his	terry	bathrobe	(which

somehow	simply	made	him	seem	even	more	naked).	He	arrived	inside	staring
wide-eyed	 at	 the	 exotic	 domestication	 of	 the	 great	 room.	 Anne-Marie—
whom	he	regarded	with	the	greatest	respect,	even	fear—gestured	to	the	end	of
the	 bench,	 which	 he	 plopped	 down	 onto	 wordlessly	 and	 quickly,	 like	 a
chastised	 child.	 I	 told	 him	my	name,	 and	 asked	 if	we	might	 interview	him,
explaining	 that	Tristan	 and	 I	both	had	 limited	 abilities	 to	 speak	his	 language
(which	 had	 linguistic	 ties	 to	 what	 Tristan	 had	 learned	 in	 these	 very	 fields,
when	they	were	still	woods,	a	thousand	years	ago).	He	agreed,	and	began	by



confirming	Felix’s	assumption.
“When	we	returned	to	Sverdvik	after	the	raid,	I	was	the	only	one	without

the	 scars	 in	my	back,”	Thord	 said.	“This	was	because	 I	had	been	 injured	by
the	bang-stick.	I	said	to	Magnus,	‘Fuck	you	and	your	plan,	Magnus,	I	did	not
want	 to	 come	 in	 the	 first	 place	 and	now	 look.’	 So	 I	did	not	 let	 them	carve
maps	 in	 my	 back	 because	 I	 knew	 that	 I	 would	 then	 be	 part	 of	 his	 plan
forever.”

Anne-Marie	had	cleared	the	coffee	and	pastries,	replacing	them	immediately
with	 beer,	 and	 now	was	 setting	 out	 plates	 of	 charcuterie	 and	 a	 fresh	 loaf	 of
bread,	which	Thord	began	tearing	into	at	an	impressive	pace.	He	chewed	for	a
few	 moments,	 gazing	 out	 the	 window	 at	 the	 sun	 on	 the	 trees,	 while	 I
translated	 for	 Felix	 (and	 Anne-Marie,	 who	 was	 swapping	 out	 ice	 packs	 for
Felix’s	nose).	Thord	swiveled	his	blue-grey	eyes	back	to	us,	washed	the	bread
down	with	a	 swig	of	beer,	and	continued:	“Magnus	after	 that	began	to	have
dreams.	They	were	dreams	of	his	past—of	his	boyhood	in	Normandy	and	his
days	as	a	Varangian	Guard.	But	in	every	single	one	of	those	dreams,	his	life	was
cut	short	by	murder.	He	consulted	a	witch	who	explained	that	he	was	in	fact
seeing	 other	 Strands,	 and	 that	 on	 each	 and	 every	 one	 of	 those	 Strands,	 the
young	Magnus	had	in	fact	been	assassinated	by	agents	sent	back	in	time	by	his
enemies.	Magnus	became	 like	 ice	on	 a	 frozen	 river	when	 it	 is	 being	melted
from	below	by	 the	warming	water	 of	 the	 coming	 spring,	 and	 becomes	 thin
and	brittle	 and	you	can	 almost	 see	 through	 it.”	Having	delivered	 this	 poetic
metaphor,	Thord	belched,	sighed,	and	speared	a	slice	of	ham.	“He	understood
that	he	would	cease	to	exist	entirely,	or	be	turned	into	a	mere	wraith,	unless
he	made	an	alliance	with	others	skilled	in	Sending	and	Homing.	Thus	he	had
the	witch	Send	him	 forward	 to	 the	ODEC	 in	Boston.	There,	of	 course,	he
found	himself	 in	 the	power	of	Gráinne,	who	was	most	 angry	with	him,	but
also	 satisfied,	 in	 a	way,	 that	Magnus	 had	 come	 crawling	 back	 to	 ask	 for	 her
help.”

After	another	pause	 for	him	to	eat	 (and	belch)	and	me	to	 translate,	Thord
continued:	“Gráinne	and	Magnus	made	a	pact	to	fight	the	Fuggers	and	get	this
ATTO	 back	 in	 their	 possession.”	 He	 waved	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 the	 yard.
“Magnus	cannot	do	magic,	but	he	can	fight,	and	is	a	good	leader.	Gráinne	can
do	magic,	but	only	 in	 an	ODEC,	and	 she	 is	otherwise	helpless	 and	weak	 in
this	world	 of	Walmarts	 and	 so	 on.	 So,	 they	 could	 help	 each	 other.	Magnus
supplies	muscle	so	that	Gráinne	can	get	things	done.	In	exchange,	he	becomes
rich	by	raiding	gold	from	wherever	he	chooses	to	go,	back	in	the	old	days.	So,



Magnus	came	back	 to	Sverdvik	 saying,	 ‘The	Fuggers	have	 stolen	 the	ATTO
from	us,	now	we	are	going	to	steal	it	back,	I	need	volunteers.’”

Tristan	nodded.	“Gráinne,	through	Blevins	of	course,	made	arrangements	to
fly	ATTO	#2	over	to	Portsmouth	on	a	cargo	plane.	Magnus	and	a	bunch	of
Vikings	 manifested	 in	 that	 ATTO	 yesterday—those	 must	 have	 been	 his
volunteers	from	Sverdvik.”

Thord	listened	to	my	translation	of	this,	then	nodded.	“He	tried	to	recruit
me.	I	repeated	to	him	that	he	could	go	fuck	himself.	The	others	went,	as	you
said.	They	would	 cross	 from	England	 to	Normandy	on	 a	 big	 ship	 and	 then
follow	the	ATTO	from	Le	Havre	to	the	 fortress	of	 the	Fuggers,	wherever	 it
might	 be,	 and	 then	 slaughter	 them	 and	 get	 it	 back.	Or	 perhaps	 hijack	 it	 en
route.”	He	shrugged.	“Like	we	do.”

“But	the	plan	failed,”	Tristan	prompted	him,	as	I	quietly	translated	for	Felix.
“The	plan	failed,	as	you	know,	because	you	stole	the	ATTO	and	so	it	did

not	go	onto	the	wagon	that	the	Fuggers	had	waiting	but	instead	departed	by
some	other	way.	There	was	a	big	mess,	 and	what	 it	came	down	to	was	 that
Magnus	begged	me	to	solve	his	problem	for	him.	‘When	the	ATTO	is	turned
on—which	it	must	be,	so	that	they	can	save	the	woman	Melisande—then	you,
Thord,	can	be	Sent	there	at	the	same	moment.	They	will	try	to	turn	it	off	as
soon	as	 they	have	Melisande	back.	You	must	prevent	 them	 from	hitting	 the
red	button.	Then	we	can	Send	more	fighters,	and	witches,	and	fill	the	whole
ATTO	with	our	people	in	a	short	period	of	time,	and	then	it	will	be	ours.	It’s
just	a	bit	of	wrestling,	after	all,	and	you’re	good	at	that.’”

I	 saw	 a	 little	 grimace	 on	Tristan’s	 face,	 and	 a	 shake	 of	 the	 head,	which	 I
took	to	mean:	Actually	you’re	a	crap	wrestler,	you’re	just	overwhelmingly	strong.

“This	plan	almost	worked,	as	you	saw,”	Thord	continued.	“But	when	I	saw
Anne-Marie	 with	 the	 bang-stick	 pointed	 at	me,	 I	 thought	 to	myself,	 ‘Fuck
this,	I	have	a	wife	and	children	in	Iceland,	I	don’t	need	to	pry	any	more	bang-
stick	rocks	out	of	my	body	or	even	perhaps	die	just	to	make	everything	perfect
for	Magnus.’	 So	 now	 I	will	 just	wait	 here	 in	 this	 future	 until	 someone	 can
Home	me.”

At	 this	 moment	 we	 heard	 car	 tires	 crunching	 the	 gravel	 on	 the	 drive
outside.

“That’ll	be	Julie,”	said	Felix.	“She	can	Home	Thord.”
“She	 should	 take	 you	 to	 the	 hospital	 first,”	 said	 Tristan.	 “So	 you	 stop

bleeding	all	over	Anne-Marie’s	furniture.”
“It’s	just	a	broken	nose,”	said	Felix.	“I	can	go	to	the	local	walk-in	clinic.”



Tristan	 gave	 him	 a	 look,	 which	 he	 did	 not	 see	 because	 the	 ice	 pack
obscured	 it.	“We’re	 in	 the	middle	of	nowhere,	 there’s	one	car,	and	 it	has	 to
end	up	back	in	Le	Havre.	Go	the	hell	to	Le	Havre.”

Felix	was	so	startled	by	Tristan’s	intensity	that	he	removed	the	ice	pack	to
give	Tristan	 a	WTF	bro?	 look.	Tristan	 immediately	 stared	 at	 the	 floor.	 Felix
glanced	at	me,	then	back	to	Tristan,	back	to	me.	He	looked	around	the	room,
noting	who	else	was	here—just	Thord—and	figured	it	out.

“Right,	 I	 should	 go	 to	 Le	 Havre,”	 he	 said.	 “Julie	 can	 Home	 Thord
tomorrow.”

“Right,	by	tomorrow	morning	everyone	will	have	congregated	in	Le	Havre
and	you	can	all	pile	in	the	car	and	come	back	out	here	together,”	said	Tristan
in	 a	 rapid	 monotone,	 as	 if	 needing	 to	 rationalize	 being	 alone	 with	 me
overnight	as	nothing	more	than	a	matter	of	logistics.

DEAR	READER:	It	was	not	a	matter	of	logistics.	But	you	knew	that.
When	you	know	something	is	going	to	happen	but	it	hasn’t	happened	yet,

there	 is	 a	 surfeit	 of	 tension,	 both	 pleasurable	 and	 otherwise.	 So	 it	 was	 for
several	awkward	moments,	as	Julie	came	in	to	greet	us,	registered	my	presence
—and	 Thord’s—and	 helped	 Felix	 into	 the	 car.	 She	 was	 about	 to	 ask	 if	 I
wanted	to	return	with	her	to	Le	Havre—Tristan	alone	needed	to	stay	here,	to
handle	 Thord—but	 then	 she,	 like	 Felix,	 understood	 the	 circumstances,	 and
turned	her	head	away	trying	to	hide	a	delighted	little	smirk.

Tristan	 felt	 compelled	 to	 see	 the	 Viking	 settled	 in	 for	 the	 evening,	 to
unburden	 Anne-Marie	 of	 her	 hostess	 duties.	 She	 vanished	 into	 her	 private
rooms,	clearly	relieved.

Other	than	the	room	where	Thord	was	to	stay	overnight,	 there	were	two
guest	bedrooms	upstairs.	They	both	had	double	beds.	I	chose	the	cozier	room
with	 one	 small	 dormer	 window.	 I	 half-closed	 the	 door	 and	 turned	 off	 the
lamp,	 leaving	 the	 small	 nightlight	 on.	 I	 began	 to	 undress,	 then	 hesitated,
feeling	self-conscious,	and	sat	on	the	bed,	waiting.

Eventually	I	heard	Thord’s	door	open	and	shut,	and	Tristan’s	slow	footfall
on	 the	 landing	 between	 rooms.	 Seeing	 the	 dim	 light	 from	 my	 room,	 he
entered	and	stood	in	the	doorway.	Ever	the	gentleman.	Even	when	I	did	not
wish	him	to	be	so.

“Just	 come	 in,”	 I	 suggested.	 “Don’t	 pretend	 there’s	 anywhere	 else	 you’re
planning	to	spend	the	night.”



He	 strode	 up	 to	 the	 bed	 and	 hovered	 beside	 me	 a	 moment,	 his	 arousal
nearly	in	my	face	even	as	his	own	face,	absurdly,	attempted	to	remain	subdued.
“We	should	have	some	understanding	of—”

“After	 five	 years,	 if	 there’s	 anything	we	 still	 don’t	 understand,	 fuck	 it,”	 I
said,	and	ran	my	hand	up	the	front	of	his	body.	Then	back	down	it.

He	 grabbed	 me	 and	 in	 one	 smooth	 movement	 picked	 me	 up	 and	 then
tossed	me	face	up	onto	the	bed,	settling	his	weight	carefully	upon	me,	nudging
my	 thighs	 apart	with	his	 knees.	 It	 felt	 so	 good	 to	be	 trapped	beneath	him	 I
almost	fainted.	Except—

“This	 generally	 works	 better	 when	 there	 are	 no	 clothes	 in	 the	 way,”	 I
pointed	out.

“Jesus,	 Stokes,	 it’s	 been	 five	 years,	 why	 the	 sudden	 rush?”	 he	 shot	 back,
with	 a	 very	 rare	 impish	 grin.	 “On	 some	 other	 Strand	 I’ve	 probably	 already
torn	your	dress	off.”

“I	want	to	go	to	that	Strand,”	I	said	at	once.	“Take	me	there.”

I	WAS	AWAKENED	by	a	deep,	subsonic	throbbing	that	I	felt	through	the	frame	of
the	bed	before	I	heard	it.	I	rolled	over	on	my	stomach	and	buried	my	face	in	a
pillow,	but	the	sound	didn’t	go	away.	I	groped	out	with	one	hand	and	found	a
warm,	rumpled	place	where	Tristan	was	supposed	to	be.

The	 noise	 got	 louder.	 Was	 it	 a	 wave	 of	 Diachronic	 Shear	 cresting	 over
Normandy?	 I	 rolled	 onto	my	 side,	 opened	my	 eye,	 and	 saw	Tristan	 in	 the
dawn	light	gazing	out	the	little	dormer	window,	watching	events	in	the	yard.
He	looked	interested,	but	not	alarmed.

Finally	I	got	up,	pulled	a	robe	around	myself,	and	went	to	look.

IT	WAS	A	helicopter.	A	preposterously	large	helicopter,	bug-like,	with	a	round
cockpit	 in	 the	 front	 and	 nothing	 behind	 it	 save	 a	 long	 skinny	 spar	 running
back	to	its	tail	rotor.	It	was	hovering	over	the	yard.	Dangling	from	it	were	four
cables,	which	were	 being	 attached	 to	 the	 corners	 of	 the	ATTO	 by	men	 in
black.

The	 roar	of	 its	 rotors	grew	even	 louder,	 the	cables	grew	 taut,	 the	ATTO
rose	off	the	ground	and	ascended	for	perhaps	a	hundred	meters.	Then,	slowly,
it	flew	off.	An	unmarked	van	pulled	out	of	the	yard	and	drove	away,	carrying



the	men	in	black.
It	was	just	past	sunup.
Tristan	and	 I	dressed	and	went	downstairs.	Anne-Marie	didn’t	 seem	to	be

around,	and	neither	was	Thord.
Beyond	 the	 head	 of	 the	 table	 were	 windows	 looking	 out	 onto	 the

farmhouse’s	 kitchen	 garden,	 currently	 bare	 and	 dead,	 and	 rolling	 fields	 and
hedgerows	beyond	that.	Seated	at	the	head	of	the	table	with	his	back	to	that
view,	enjoying	a	cup	of	café	crème	and	reading	a	French	newspaper,	was	our
old	friend	Frederick	Fugger.	As	before,	he	was	dressed	in	an	impeccable	grey
suit,	though	as	a	nod	to	the	rustic	setting	he	was	wearing	a	turtleneck	sweater
instead	of	a	shirt	and	tie.

“Thord’s	 been	 seen	 to,”	 he	 said.	 “We	 Homed	 him	 before	 moving	 the
ATTO.	Anne-Marie	is	in	town	shopping	for	groceries,	at	our	suggestion.”

“At	five	in	the	morning?”	I	said,	dumbfounded.
“It’s	after	eight,”	protested	Frederick	pleasantly.
“You	own	the	grocers,”	Tristan	guessed.
“Not	 literally.	Please,	make	yourselves	comfortable.	The	coffee	is	nice	and

hot	and	the	cream	is	fresh.”
My	 eyes	met	Tristan’s.	He	 shrugged.	There	was	 no	 reason	 not	 to.	 For	 a

minute	or	two	we	busied	ourselves	pouring	coffee	and	cream,	then	took	seats.
Frederick	finished	the	article	he	was	reading,	then	folded	the	paper	neatly	and
arranged	it	on	the	cracked	and	weathered	planks	of	the	old	table.

“I	wanted	to	be	the	first	to	congratulate	you	on	the	rescue	of	Dr.	Stokes,”
he	said.	“The	two	of	you	look	very	happy	together.	I’ve	taken	the	liberty	of
ordering	a	bottle	of	1851	Château	Miqueu,	to	be	delivered	to	your	room—a
very	 old	 vintage,	 obviously,	 but	 it’s	 been	well	 cellared	 and	 I	 hope	 it	 is	 still
drinkable.”

“We’ll	let	you	know	if	it	passes	muster,”	Tristan	said	drily.
“Please	 do,”	 Frederick	 returned.	 “The	winery	 has	 been	 a	 property	 of	 the

Fuggers	since	Roman	times	and	has	a	high	standard	to	uphold.”
“Does	it?”	I	asked.	“I’ve	never	heard	of	it.”
Frederick	smiled.	“You	wouldn’t	have.	It	is	a	private	concern.	Its	proceeds

are	 consumed	 entirely	 within	 the	 bank	 and	 do	 not	 appear	 on	 the	 retail
market.”

“Well,	thank	you	for	the	gift,”	I	said.	And	I	was	tempted	to	add	something
like,	It’s	the	least	you	could	do	after	stealing	our	ATTO,	but	I	held	back.	It	wasn’t
really	our	ATTO,	after	all.



Frederick	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “I’d	 like	 to	 bring	 to	 your	 attention	 certain
perhaps	unintended	consequences	of	your	recent	actions	that	you	might	have
overlooked,	 given	 the	 rush	 of	 events	 and	 given,	 if	 I	 may	 speak	 frankly,	 a
certain	naiveté	about	matters	financial	that	is	entirely	understandable	given	that
you	 have	 devoted	 your	 lives	 to	 the	 study	 of	 other	 topics.	 Fortunately,	 the
world	contains	some	people	who	specialize	in	such	matters,	and	I	happen	to	be
one	of	them.”

“All	right,”	Tristan	said,	“let’s	have	it.”
“Briefly,”	 Frederick	 said,	 “it’s	 unthinkable	 for	 the	 ATTO	 to	 be	 floating

around	loose.	Dire	consequences	would	ensue.”
“For	whom?”	I	asked.	Not	disagreeing	with	him,	just	wanting	details.
“Dire.	Consequences.”
“For	us?	For	the	Fuggers?	On	this	Strand?	Other	Strands?”
“It’s	all	the	same,”	he	said.	“Surely,	after	all	you’ve	been	through,	you	have

arrived	at	 a	 level	of	 sophistication	where	 this	 is	obvious	 to	you.	You	 simply
haven’t	admitted	it	to	yourself	yet.”

“I’ve	been	a	little	preoccupied,	as	you	pointed	out,”	I	said,	“and	the	coffee
hasn’t	kicked	in	yet.”

He	 picked	 up	 his	 newspaper—one	 of	 those	 financial	 rags	 only	 read	 by
investment	types.	He	unfolded	it,	thumbed	to	the	back	pages,	and	then	with	a
big	dramatic	movement	snapped	the	whole	newspaper	inside	out	to	display	a
page	completely	covered	with	numbers	so	tiny	that	they	just	looked	like	a	grey
fog	from	this	distance.	“Look	at	all	of	this	information,”	he	said.	“Where	does
it	come	from?	What	does	 it	mean?	The	changes	 in	the	prices	of	 these	stocks
and	commodities	and	bonds	all	reflect	flows	of	information.	Information	about
the	 weather,	 politics,	 trends	 in	 what	 consumers	 want,	 discovery	 of	 new	 oil
fields,	 invention	 of	 new	 technologies.	 You	 grew	 up,	 like	 most	 people,
believing	that	 it	was	all	confined	to	a	single	Strand.	That	there	was	only	one
copy	of	the	world.	Now	you	know	the	truth:	that	information	flows	not	just
along	a	particular	Strand	but	between	them,	all	the	time,	in	subtle	ways	known
only	to	a	few.

“We’re	 bankers.	That	 is	 really	 all	we	 are.	 If	 you’ve	 been	 imagining	 some
sort	of	fabulous	conspiracy,	you	are	in	for	a	disappointment.	Bankers,	you	see,
don’t	actually	do	very	much.	We	take	our	percentage.	That	is	all.	We	subsist
on	movements	of	money—across	space,	across	time,	and	between	Strands.”

“How	does	money	move	between	Strands?”	Tristan	asked.
Frederick	looked	a	little	pained.	“I’m	not	going	to	tell	you	everything.”



“Ooh,	a	riddle!”	I	said.	“Let	me	think.	Information	moves	between	Strands.
Prices	 change	 in	 response	 to	 information.	 Money	 moves	 in	 response	 to
prices.”

Frederick	had	a	good	poker	face.
“And	right	now,”	Tristan	said,	“a	big	chunk	of	information	has	moved	into

the	past,	in	the	form	of	treasure	maps	carved	into	the	backs	of	Magnus	and	his
crew.	 Longships	 are	 going	 to	 be	 heading	 across	 the	Atlantic	 to	 raid	Mexico
and	Peru	and	bring	their	gold	and	silver	back	to	Europe.	The	changes	made	to
history	 will	 be	 incalculable.	 And	 the	 Fugger	 policy	 on	 all	 of	 this	 is	 what,
exactly?”

“There’s	no	point	 in	getting	emotional	 about	 it,”	Frederick	 said.	“Money
will	flow	where	money	will	flow.”

“And	you’ll	collect	your	percentage,”	I	said.
“The	 most	 we	 can	 really	 do	 is	 manage	 these	 things	 as	 best	 we	 can,”

Frederick	said.	“Magnus’s	ship	has,	quite	literally,	sailed.	We	cannot	undo	that.
But	for	a	legion	of	ATTOs	to	be	moving	freely	about	the	world,	and	witches
and	 Normans	 and	 SEALs	 popping	 in	 and	 out	 of	 them”—he	 shuddered
—“there	would	be	Shear	all	over	the	place,	and	Shear	destroys	things.”

“And	destroyed	things	don’t	make	money,”	Tristan	said.
“A	burning	factory	cannot	ship	product.”
“What	does	this	mean	for	us?”	I	asked.
Frederick	 shrugged.	 “Some	 Strands	 will	 go	 the	 way	 that	 Gráinne	 and

Magnus	want	them	to	go.	In	other	Strands,	their	plans	may	be	frustrated.	Your
level	of	involvement	is	up	to	you.”

“Now	 that	 we	 have	 our	 own	 ODEC,	 you	 mean,”	 I	 said.	 “In	 the	 East
House	basement.”

He	made	the	slightest	of	nods.	“You’re	welcome,	by	the	way.”

“SO	WHAT	DO	we	do	with	it,	now	that	it	works?”	asked	Mortimer.
We	were	all	sitting	around	the	dining	room	table	at	Frank	and	Rebecca’s—

the	original	quintet,	plus	Mortimer,	Julie,	Esme,	and	Felix.	Coals	gleamed	in
the	 hearth	 and	 the	 air	 was	 fragrant	 with	 pine	 branches,	 frankincense,	 and
lapsang	souchong	tea.	It	was	New	Year’s	Day.

“We	 figure	out	what	Gráinne’s	doing	 and	we	undo	 it,”	 said	Tristan.	“Or
we	prevent	her	from	doing	it	to	start	with.”

“And	how	do	we	figure	out	what	she’s	doing?”	asked	Julie.



“You	might	 start	 by	 asking	me,”	 said	Erszebet.	 “I	was	 her	 co-conspirator,
you	know.”

“What	is	Gráinne	planning	to	do,	Erszebet?”	I	asked	immediately.
For	 one	 breathless	moment	 every	 one	 of	 us	 stared	 at	 Erszebet—who	was

now,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	years,	uniquely	qualified	 to	help	us	move	 forward.
The	hopeful	tension	around	the	table	was	palpable.

“She	 wants	 to	 undo	 technology,”	 said	 Erszebet,	 in	 the	 same	 tone,
examining	her	manicure.	“Tch.	Obviously.”

The	hopeful	tension	collapsed.	Tristan	clenched	his	jaw	a	moment	and	then
said,	in	a	controlled	voice,	“But	how,	exactly,	Erszebet?”

Erszebet	waved	her	hand	at	him	as	if	he	were	a	bug.	“I	was	not	involved	in
the	tactical	details,	my	involvement	was	entirely	spiritual.”

“Thank	you,”	said	Tristan,	grinding	his	teeth	to	keep	his	sarcasm	in	check.
“Glad	we	asked,	that	was	really	helpful.”

I	pressed	my	hand	over	his	as	a	silent	suggestion	to	shut	it.	Erszebet	noticed
—and	was	immediately	more	interested	in	that	intimate	gesture	than	she	was
in	the	future	of	humanity.	“Ah!”	she	said,	her	eyes	darting	between	my	hand,
my	face,	and	Tristan’s	face.	“I	knew	it!	Did	I	not	say	this	would	happen?”	she
demanded	of	Rebecca	and	Frank,	triumphant.	And	then	to	me,	blithely	self-
congratulatory:	“I	always	knew	you	were	a	good	match.”

“Are	you	 sure	you	have	no	clue	what	Gráinne’s	next	move	might	be?”	 I
asked,	squeezing	Tristan’s	hand	now	in	a	signal	to	remain	quiet.

Erszebet	 shrugged	 scornfully.	 “Do	 I	 look	 like	 I	 would	 dirty	 my	 mind
thinking	the	way	Gráinne	does?”

“Ah,”	said	Oda-sensei	peaceably.	“Of	course,	that’s	how	we	sort	it	out.	We
think	 like	 Gráinne.	 We	 peel	 away	 the	 leaves	 of	 history	 that	 uncover
photography.	Where	does	it	start?”

“Camera	obscura?”	I	suggested.	“Da	Vinci?”
Frank	Oda	 shook	his	head.	“That	merely	 redirected	 light	 in	 action,	 it	did

not	collapse	the	wave	function,	it	did	not	embed	any	given	moment	in	time.”
“Daguerreotypes,”	 said	 Erszebet,	 with	 distaste.	 “I	 remember	 those

becoming	so	popular	so	quickly.	Like	this	social	media	obsession	just	after	the
turn	of	the	millennium,	or	automobiles	a	hundred	years	ago.”

“But	what	led	to	daguerreotypes?”	asked	Oda-sensei.	True	to	form,	despite
the	urgency	of	the	moment,	he	was	enjoying	this	as	an	academic	exercise.

“Photosensitive	paper,”	I	said.	“That’s	silver	nitrate,	right?	Lenses.	Mirrors,
maybe?”



He	nodded.	“These	are	the	things	she	will	undo.	If	you	kill	Louis	Daguerre,
you	trigger	Diachronic	Shear,	but	if	you	undermine	the	development	of	lens-
grinding	 technology	 and	you	do	 it	on	enough	Strands,	 then	Louis	Daguerre
will	 turn	 his	 innovative	 brilliance	 in	 some	 other	 direction.	 The	 same	 with
photosensitive	chemicals.”

“Now	 that	 you	 say	 that,	 it	 does	 sound	 familiar,”	 said	Erszebet—Gráinne’s
erstwhile	deputy.

“But	 the	 technology	 behind	 grinding	 lenses	 applies	 to	more	 than	 just	 the
development	 of	 photography,”	 said	 Tristan.	 “The	 development	 of	 optical
technology	 has	 influenced	 the	 course	 of	 human	 history—it’s	 given	 us
telescopes	and	microscopes	and	spectacles—”

“Well,	 if	 she	 is	 successful,	 now	 it	 won’t,”	 said	 Oda—still	 as	 if	 this	 was
nothing	more	 than	 a	 most	 interesting	 theoretical	 problem	 set.	 “So	 if	 she	 is
successful,	human	history	will	retroactively	alter.”

“And	 silver	 nitrate,”	 said	 Tristan,	 looking	 a	 little	 spooked.	 “That	 was
discovered	by	Albertus	Magnus	in	the	thirteenth	century.”

Oda	nodded.	“She	can’t	kill	him	off,	but	she	would	have	to	interfere	with
his	accomplishments	and	discoveries.	And	he	was	one	of	the	greatest	thinkers
of	his	 age,	 so	 that,	 too,	would	 alter	what	we	believe	 to	be	our	heritage	 and
destiny.”

“Undoing	 photography	 from	 the	 roots	 up	 essentially	 undoes	 the
development	of	science	in	general,”	Esme	said.

“Well,	I’m	not	going	to	stand	by	and	let	that	happen,”	said	Mortimer	drily.
“That	would	totally	mess	with	my	undergraduate	curriculum.”

No	 one	 laughed.	 There	 was	 a	 pause.	 A	 long	 pause.	 Outside,	 I	 heard
someone	knocking	on	a	nearby	door.

“If	we	really	think	she’s	going	to	do	this,	we	have	to	stop	her,”	I	said.
“Of	 course	 she	 is	 going	 to	do	 this,”	 said	Erszebet.	 “I	would	do	 it,	 in	her

position.”
“Would	you	really?”	I	asked.	“It’s	pretty	evil.”
She	 gave	 me	 her	 signature	 cutting	 side-eye.	 “Why?	 History	 evolves	 one

way	or	another,	history	 itself	 is	not	evil,	even	 if	 there	are	evil	people	 in	 it.	 I
know	what	 you	 are	 about	 to	 say,”	 she	 said,	 as	 I	 held	 up	 a	 protesting	 hand.
“You	are	going	to	say,	just	to	name	one	example,	slavery	is	evil,	and	to	that	I
say,	perhaps	it	is,	but	we	would	not	have	this	world	without	it.”

“That	doesn’t	make	it	acceptable,”	I	said.
“If	 I	 could	 rewrite	 the	world	 so	 there	was	never	 any	 slavery,	 I	would	do



that,	yes,	absolutely,	but	then	human	history	would	be	unrecognizable	to	us,
and	 you	 would	 not	 like	 what	 replaced	 what	 you	 already	 know,	 because
everyone	wants	familiar	things.	You	want	to	stop	Gráinne,	not	because	she	is
trying	to	do	something	evil,	but	because	she	is	trying	to	make	things	unfamiliar
to	you.	And	that	is	inconvenient	for	your	view	of	how	life	is	to	be	lived,	with
Walmarts	and	cotton	underwear	and	things	for	which	you	need	this	so-called
rare	 earth.	 You	want	 to	 have	 always	 had	 those	 things.	 That’s	 all.	 Gráinne’s
plans	are	inconvenient	to	your	lifestyle.	You	have	no	valid	complaint	beyond
that.”

“If	she	interferes	with	the	development	of	science,”	said	Tristan,	“we	have	a
very	valid	complaint.”

“No,”	said	Erszebet	 stubbornly.	“Humanity	existed	without	making	much
of	science	for	a	very	long	time.	This	is	true	regardless	of	what	magic	ever	did
or	 did	 not	 do.	 Science	 has	 brought	 good	 and	 evil	 to	 the	 table,	 in	 equal
measure.	 I	 have	watched	 that	 happen.	To	have	 the	world	without	 scientific
developments	is	not	to	have	a	better	world	or	a	worse	world—just	a	different
world	from	the	one	we	know.”

“That’s	 such	 bullshit,”	 said	 Tristan	 harshly.	 “Come	 on,	 Erszebet,	 you’re
being	 .	 .	 .	 academic.	 Obviously	 science	 and	 technology	 has	 improved	 the
existence	of	humanity.”

“Tell	that	to	the	people	in	Hiroshima	and	Nagasaki,”	she	said.	“Tell	that	to
the	atmosphere	that	is	choking	on	carbon	emissions.”

“I’ll	 tell	 it	 to	 the	 hundreds	 of	 millions	 of	 people	 who	 would	 be	 dead
without	 basic	 antibiotics,”	 he	 retorted	 impatiently.	 “This	 is	 a	 ridiculous
conversation.”	He	got	up	from	his	seat	and	paced	in	the	small	triangular	space
described	by	the	table,	the	hearth,	and	the	kitchen	door.

Then	the	doorbell	rang.	Everyone	looked	surprised	except	for	Tristan,	who
invited	the	rest	of	us	to	remain	seated	while	he	took	care	of	it.	Through	the
windows	we	could	see	a	FedEx	truck	idling	in	the	street.	A	little	surprising,	on
a	holiday,	but	we	had	been	receiving	deliveries	at	 the	 strangest	 times	as	 rush
orders	came	in	 for	 the	ODEC	project,	and	so	we	all	assumed	it	was	another
shipment	of	exotic	superconductors.

“Erszebet,”	 said	 Rebecca,	 speaking	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 “Are	 you	 arguing
against	fighting	Gráinne?”	She	asked	it	in	a	very	neutral	tone,	simply	a	request
for	information,	all	judgment	reserved.

“No,”	said	Erszebet.	“I	am	happy	to	fight	her.	She	is	 too	powerful.	Every
witch	is	enthralled	with	Gráinne,	except	Julie	and	you,	who	are	still	 learning



how	to	do	good	magic.	I	myself	was	in	thrall	to	Gráinne,	and	I	almost	did	her
urging,	 even	 though	 I	 knew	 it	was	 evil.	 Luckily	 for	 you,	 I	 am	 too	 good	 a
person	and	too	loyal	a	colleague	to	kill	you	off.”

Tristan	came	back	in	carrying	a	small	package	that	he	had	received	from	the
FedEx	man.	He	carried	it	into	the	kitchen,	set	it	on	the	counter,	and	carefully
slit	it	open	with	his	pocketknife.

“Give	me	 an	ODEC,”	 Erszebet	was	 continuing,	 “and	 I	will	 help	 you	 to
preserve	 the	 world	 as	 you	 know	 it,	 which	 you	 seem	 to	 think	 is	 the	 best
world.”

“Even	though	you	don’t	agree,”	I	said.
“I	do	not	think	there	is	any	‘best’	world.	I	am	not	judgmental	that	way.”	But

there	was	a	hint	of	a	smile	in	one	corner	of	her	mouth,	as	if	she	understood,
and	enjoyed,	how	maddening	she	was.

“With	all	respect,	it	seems	to	me,”	said	Mortimer,	“that	the	operative	part
of	 this	 conversation	 is:	 give	 Erszebet	 and	 Julie	 and	Rebecca	 an	ODEC	 and
they’ll	help	us	stymie	Gráinne.	We	have	the	ODEC.	We	have	the	three	weird
sisters.	No	offense.”

“None	taken,”	Julie	said.	“I	like	being	weird.”
“Am	I	right?	And	then	if	you	guys	want	to	get	into	philosophical	bickering,

you	can	do	it	on	your	coffee	break	or	something.”
Erszebet’s	face	suddenly	fell.	“Only	we	do	not	have	a	Chronotron.”
Frank	 nodded.	 “I	 can	 reproduce	 some	 of	 its	 functions	with	my	 old	 code

base—the	 iPad	 app	 I	 wrote	 years	 ago.	 But	 you’re	 right.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 no
replacement	for	the	Chronotron.”

“And	before	you	ask,”	Mortimer	said,	“there’s	no	replacing	that.	We	may
be	able	to	build	a	makeshift	ODEC	in	the	basement,	but	the	Chronotron	is	a
multibillion-dollar	project.”

“It’ll	 be	 fine,”	 said	 Tristan,	 still	 working	 on	 the	 package	 in	 the	 kitchen.
“We’re	not	 trying	 to	 launch	any	new	campaigns.	We’re	not	being	proactive.
We’re	being	reactive	now—reactive	to	Gráinne.	We	wait	for	her	to	make	the
first	move,	by	sending	DOers	to	the	DTAPs	we	know	so	well.	Then	we	go	to
those	same	DTAPs	and	stop	them.”

“Fuckin’	A!”	Mortimer	said.
Tristan	came	 in	 from	 the	kitchen	carrying	 a	white	plastic	bag	 that	he	had

extracted	 from	 the	 package.	 He	 continued,	 “We	 start	 by	 going	 back	 and
talking	to	our	KCWs,	explaining	how	it	is,	asking	them	if	they	are	willing	to
come	over	to	our	side.	I	think	many	will	say	yes.	So	we	can	develop	our	own



witch	network,	our	own	system	of	safe	houses.	And	in	the	present	day,	we	still
have	friends	within	DODO.”

“How	can	you	be	so	sure?”	Erszebet	demanded.	“Gráinne	is	subtle.	These
people	who	claim	to	be	your	friends	may	in	reality	be	her	agents,	trying	to	win
your	trust.”

“Then	explain	this,”	Tristan	said.	He	reached	into	the	plastic	bag	and	pulled
out	 a	dingy,	 tangled	 jumble	of	yarn,	which	 I	did	not	 immediately	 recognize
because	I	hadn’t	seen	it	for	years.	Erszebet	knew	it	before	it	was	half-revealed.

“My	 számológép!”	 she	 cried,	 with	 the	 wide-eyed	 wonder	 of	 the	 girl	 I’d
only	ever	seen	in	1851.	She	began	to	scramble	to	her	 feet,	but	Tristan	saved
her	the	need	by	tossing	it	to	her	over	the	table.

“Merry	 belated	Christmas!	 It	 occurred	 to	me	 you	might	 need	 something
like	this.	I’ve	spent	the	past	month	tracking	it	down.”

“How?”	I	asked,	amazed.
“Classified,”	Tristan	 said.	“All	bureaucracy,	no	cloak-and-dagger.	 It’s	been

stuffed	in	a	filing	cabinet	for	five	years.”
“You	 are	 a	 good	 man,”	 said	 Erszebet	 almost	 tearfully.	 She	 clutched	 the

számológép	 to	 her,	 cradled	 it	 against	 her	 heart	 as	 if	 it	 were	 a	 delicate	 pet.
“Thank	you.	Thank	you.”

“Ask	and	it	shall	be	given!”	said	Julie.	“Tristan,	your	timing	rocks.”
“Do	you	know	how	to	use	one	of	those?”	asked	Rebecca	quietly,	to	Julie.

“I	have	no	idea.”
“Mortimer	and	I	can	work	together	to	rebuild	the	app,”	Frank	assured	her.

“It	 will	 never	 be	 the	 Chronotron,	 but	 it	 will	 be	 more	 powerful	 than	 the
számológép	and	easier	for	those	of	us	not	used	to	the	analog	models.”

“Is	 there	 enough	 room	 left	 in	 the	 cellar	 for	 that	 project?”	 asked	 Tristan,
wresting	his	attention	from	the	cooing	Erszebet.

“We	have	a	guest	room	upstairs,”	said	Oda-sensei.
“You’re	all	fools,”	said	Rebecca.	“This	cannot	be	the	headquarters	for	a	new

diachronic	 endeavor.	 Besides	 the	 fact	 that	 I	want	 it	 to	 be	 safe	 for	 family	 to
visit,	Blevins	will	be	after	all	of	us.	I’m	surprised	they	haven’t	already	knocked
our	door	down.”

“Actually,	I’ve	been	thinking	about	that,”	Tristan	said,	and	finally	sat	down
again.	“It’s	 the	dog	that	didn’t	bark.	Why	hasn’t	Blevins	 sent	a	DOSECOPS
squad	to	knock	the	door	down?	What’s	holding	him	back?”

“Probably	not	Gráinne,”	I	said.	“Gráinne’s	pretty	hawkish.”
“Let’s	cut	to	the	chase:	it’s	the	Fuggers,”	Tristan	said.	“They	made	sure	we



could	 build	 an	 ODEC	 in	 the	 basement	 here.	 They’ve	 obviously	 made	 a
decision	that	it’s	better	to	have	us	around	as	a	counterbalance	to	Gráinne	than
to	 cede	 total	 control	 of	 history	 to	 her	 and	 her	 minions.	 And	 so	 we	 are
protected,	somehow.	We	can	stay	here	as	long	as	we	want.”

“Until	the	Fuggers	change	their	minds,”	Rebecca	said,	in	a	tone	that	made
it	clear	this	wasn’t	good	enough.

“I	don’t	 think	they’ll	do	that,	 though,”	Tristan	said.	“They’ll	protect	us—
they	might	even	fund	us,	indirectly,	untraceably—as	long	as	we’re	holding	up
our	end	of	the	deal.”

“Which	is	.	.	.	?”	I	asked,	although	I	already	knew	the	answer.
“To	 figure	out	what	Gráinne’s	 up	 to,	 somehow—then	 go	wherever	 she’s

sending	her	DOers,	and	fight	them.	With	wit	and	words	when	we	can,	with
swords	when	we	have	to.”

“Yesss!”	Mortimer	said
“Works	for	me,”	said	Esme	instantly.
“Me	too,”	said	Felix.
“I’m	in,”	Julie	said.
“Excellent,”	said	Frank,	looking	pleased,	as	Rebecca	made	a	well-fine-be-that-

way	gesture	of	allowance.
“I	have	already	agreed,”	Erszebet	contributed	moodily.
Tristan	glanced	at	me.	“Stokes?”
“As	if	I	had	a	choice,”	I	said.	“Of	course	I’m	in.”
And	that,	dear	reader,	is	who	we	are,	and	what	we	now	are	doing.

THE	END



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The	authors	would	like	to	thank	Ed	Allard,	James	Gwertzman,	Karen	Laur,	Sean
Stewart,	Ned	Gulley,	 Professor	Natasha	Korda,	Billy	Meleady,	Chrysal	 Parrot,
George	Fifield	and	Lynne	Adams,	 Janice	Haynes	and	Beckie	Scotten	Finn,	 the
Gorgeous	Group,	Liz	Darhansoff,	Jennifer	Brehl,	and	Marc	H.	Glick,	Esquire.



CAST	OF	CHARACTERS

WARNING:	CONTAINS	SPOILERS
(*	=	historical	figure)

Twenty-first-century	Cambridge,	MA	(or	DC)
Tristan	Lyons,	Major	(later	Lieutenant	Colonel)	in	the	U.S.	Army;	founder	of

DODO
Dr.	Melisande	Stokes,	initially	lecturer	in	Harvard’s	Department	of	Ancient	and

Classical	Linguistics,	then	Tristan’s	first	recruit	to	DODO
Dr.	Frank	Oda,	retired	MIT	physicist,	husband	of	Rebecca	East-Oda
Rebecca	East-Oda,	his	wife;	a	witch
Erszebet	Karpathy,	a	Hungarian	witch
Dr.	Roger	Blevins,	chair	of	Harvard’s	Department	of	Ancient	and	Classical

Linguistics,	later	head	of	DODO
Lieutenant	General	Octavian	Frink,	Director	of	National	Intelligence	and

Blevins’s	eventual	boss	at	DODO
Dr.	Constantine	Rudge,	head	of	IARPA,	advisor	to	DODO,	intimate	of	the

Fuggers
Brigadier	General	Schneider,	Tristan’s	initial	boss	at	IARPA
Lieutenant	Colonel	Ramirez,	Schneider’s	aide
Les	Holgate,	Blevins’s	nephew	and	Frink’s	protégé,	appointed	advisor	to	DODO
Mortimer	Shore,	MIT	student,	systems	administrator,	swordsman,	and	general

geek	at	DODO
Julie	Lee,	classical	oboist,	waitress,	DODO	agent,	and	witch
Macy	Stoll,	head	of	C/COD	at	DODO
Chira	Yasin	Lajani,	DOer,	Lover	class
Felix	Dorn,	DOer,	Strider	class



Dr.	Esme	Overkleeft,	DOer,	Sage	class
Major	Isobel	Sloane,	officer	in	command	of	DOSECOPS,	DODO’s	security

force
The	Maxes,	ODEC	builders
The	Vladimirs,	ODEC	geeks
Frederick	Fugger,	a	man	of	business
Senators	Hatcher,	Cole,	Effingham,	and	Villesca,	and	Chairwoman	Atkinson,

members	of	the	secret	Senate	committee	overseeing	DODO’s	budget
Gordon	Healey	(offscreen),	a	Chronotron	nerd
Mei	East-Oda	(offscreen),	daughter	of	Frank	and	Rebecca
Darren	(offscreen),	theatrical	swordfighting	instructor
Tanya	Wakessa	Washington	(offscreen),	DODO	witch	recruit
Dr.	Eloise	LeBrun,	HOSMA
Dr.	Stephen	Moore,	HOSMA
Dr.	Hilton	Fuller,	HOSMA
Nadja,	witch	recruit
Dr.	Srinavasan	(offscreen),	in-house	physician
Sundry	DOSECOPS	and	Secret	Service	officers
Constance	Billy,	Anachron	witch	from	fourteenth	century
An	unidentified	witch	in	collusion	with	the	Fugger	Bank
(In	France)	Anne-Marie,	proprietress	of	Collinet	B&B

1640	Cambridge,	America
Goody	Mary	Fitch,	a	witch
Elizabeth	Fitch,	her	young	daughter
Goodman	Griggs,	their	neighbor
Ferrymen	(brothers)
*Hezekiah	Usher,	merchant	and	bookseller
*Stephen	Day,	printer
A	cooper

1560s	Antwerp
*Winnifred	Dutton,	witch



*Thomas	Dutton	(offscreen),	her	husband,	factor	to	Thomas	Gresham
*Thomas	Gresham	(offscreen),	banker,	Winnifred’s	paramour	and	father	of	her

child
*Anne	Dutton,	twelve-year-old	child	of	Winnifred	Dutton	and	Thomas

Gresham,	witch

1601	London
Gráinne,	an	Irish	witch,	spy	for	Gráinne	Ó	Máille
*Grace	O’Malley	(Gráinne	Ó	Máille),	“Pirate	Queen	of	Connacht”	(offscreen,

Ireland)
Athanasius	Fugger,	banker
Sir	Edward	Greylock,	courtier
*Queen	Elizabeth	I	(offscreen)
*William	Shakespeare,	playwright	(offscreen)
*Christopher	Marlowe,	playwright	and	spy,	believed	deceased
*Richard	Burbage,	actor
*Edward	Alleyn,	actor	(offscreen)
*George	Clifford,	Earl	of	Cumberland	(offscreen),	cofounder	of	East	India

Company
Pym,	proprietor	of	Tearsheet	Brewery
Morag,	wench	at	Tearsheet
Mary,	wench	at	Bell	Tavern
Rose,	an	English	witch
Herbert,	a	handsomely	armed	young	nobleman
George,	his	not-so-handsomely	armed	older	friend
The	Constable	of	Southwark
Lord	Simon	Beresford,	Sir	Edward	Greylock’s	intended	father-in-law
*Sir	Francis	Bacon	(offscreen)
Jacques	Cardigan,	one	of	Sir	Francis’s	“Good	Pens”	at	Greyfriars	(offscreen)
*Nathaniel	Bacon,	Sir	Francis’s	half	brother,	married	to	Anne	Dutton	(offscreen)
*Three	daughters	of	Nathaniel	and	Anne,	all	witches	(offscreen)

1203–4	Constantinople



Magnus	of	Normandy,	Varangian	Guard
Basina,	out-of-wedlock	member	of	the	royal	family
*Alexios	III	Angelos,	Byzantine	Emperor
*Euphrosyne	Doukina	Kamatera,	his	Empress
Avraham	ben	Moises,	a	Jew	of	Pera
Rachel,	his	eldest	daughter,	a	witch
Sarah,	his	wife,	a	witch
Bruno	of	Hamlin,	a	crass	Varangian	Guard
*The	Crusaders:	European	warriors,	Venetian	sailors,	churchmen,	camp

followers,	etc.	Underfunded	and	undermanned,	but	sailing	first-rate	ships
with	ample	armaments,	this	army	had	been	called	to	liberate	the	Holy	Land
by	way	of	Alexandria	in	Egypt;	political	and	financial	manipulations	resulted
in	its	detouring	to	Constantinople,	to	replace	Emperor	Alexios	III	with	his
nephew,	Alexios	IV	(who’d	offered	to	pay	the	cash-strapped	army	for	this
service—but	then	failed	to	follow	through,	leading	to	the	eventual	rape	of	the
city).

*Marquis	Boniface	of	Montferrat,	leader	of	the	crusading	army	(offscreen)
(In	Collinet,	Normandy)	Imblen,	a	witch

1850	San	Francisco
Xiu	Li,	Chinese	witch
*Celestial	Jong	Li,	her	paramour
Francis	Overstreet,	proprietor	of	the	St.	Francis	Hotel
Mr.	Fugger,	a	banker

1851	London
A	physician	and	his	wife,	Mel’s	self-appointed	guardians
Mr.	and	Mrs.	Karpathy,	and	the	young	Erszebet
Mr.	Fugger,	a	banker
(In	Prussia)	*Berkowski,	daguerreotypist	of	the	fateful	solar	eclipse	(offscreen)

1045	Normandy
Thyra,	witch	of	Collinet

Vikings



Tóki	Olafsson,	skald	from	tenth-century	Svelvik
Ingibjörg,	witch	of	tenth-century	Svelvik
Twenty-two	Vikings,	including	Storolf,	Brand,	Halfdan,	Thorolf,	Bild,	Glama,

Heid,	Asmund,	Hrani,	Arngrim,	Hjordvard,	Yngvar,	Snorri,	Hunfast	“the
Hapless,”	Saemundr,	and	Thord



GLOSSARY

	

Acronyms
ATTO Ambient	Temperature	Tactical	ODEC
CHRONTEL document	label;	intelligence	gathered	by	DOers
C/COD Conventional/Contemporary	Operations

Department
CRONE Chronodynamic	Research	for	Optimizing	Next

Engagement
DEDE Direct	Engagement	for	Diachronic	Effect
DNI Director	of	National	Intelligence
DODO Department	of	Diachronic	Operations
DOer Diachronic	Operative
DOOSH Diachronic	Operative	Occupational	Safety	and

Health
DORC Diachronic	Operative	Resource	Center
DORCCAD DORC	Cartographic	and	Architectural	Database
DOSECOPS Diachronic	Operations	Security	Operations
DoVE Department	of	Violence(s)	Ethnology
DTAP Destination	Time	and	Place
EFOT Extra-Facility	Operations	Team
GLAAMR Galvanic	Liminal	Aura	Antecedent	to	Manifold	Rift
GRIMNIR neo-ragtag	successor	to	ODIN;	not	an	acronym
HOSMA Historical	Operations	Subject	Matter	Authority
IARPA Intelligence	Advanced	Research	Projects	Agency
IPOPWI Infinite	Pasts,	One	Present,	Weighted	Influence
KCW Known	Compliant	Witch



MAGOPs Magical	Operations
MAGSEC Magical	Security
MARS Martial	Arts	Research	Summary
NEER Northern	Europe,	Early	Renaissance
NELM Northern	Europe,	Late	Medieval
NOCHRON document	label;	not	to	be	viewed	by	Anachrons
ODEC Ontic	Decoherence	Cavity
ODIN Operational	DODO	Intranet
OPIFDI One	Present,	Infinite	Futures,	Diffuse	Influence
PEP Performance	Enhancement	Plan
POOJAC Policy	on	Official	Jargon	and	Acronym	Coinage
QUIPU Quantum	Information	Processing	Unit
RAFSTIQUORDOT mnemonic	for	what	to	do	during/after	Diachronic

Shear
SARF Supervised	Anachron	Residential	Facility
SLIT Something	Less	Than	Infinite	Time
UDET Unity	of	DOer-Experienced	Time

Terms 	
áireamhán Irish	name	for	broom-quipu	object	used	like	abacus

by	witches
Anachron historical	person	brought	forward	in	time	to	modern

day
Diachronic	Shear infernal,	catastrophic	response	of	the	universe	to	too-

extreme	changes	being	wrought	as	a	result	of
diachronic	activity

diakrónikus	nyírás Hungarian	term	for	Diachronic	Shear
lomadh Irish	word	for	Diachronic	Shear
Shiny	Hat ultra-paranoid	secure	operating	system
Strand parallel	universe
számológép Hungarian	name	for	quipu-like	object	used	like

abacus	by	witches
Wending witch	practice/superpower	of	jumping	sideways

between	Strands



ABOUT	THE	AUTHORS

NEAL	STEPHENSON	is	the	author	of	Seveneves,	Reamde,	Anathem,	the	three-volume
historical	epic	The	Baroque	Cycle	(Quicksilver,	The	Confusion,	and	The	System	of
the	World)	as	well	as	Cryptonomicon,	The	Diamond	Age,	Snow	Crash,	and	Zodiac.
He	is	(with	Nicole	Galland)	one	of	the	seven	coauthors	of	the	Mongoliad
Trilogy.	He	lives	in	Seattle,	Washington.

NICOLE	GALLAND	is	the	author	of	six	previous	novels:	The	Fool’s	Tale;	Revenge	of
the	Rose;	Crossed;	I,	Iago;	Godiva;	and	Stepdog.	She	is	(with	Neal	Stephenson)	one
of	the	seven	coauthors	of	the	Mongoliad	Trilogy.	She	lives	on	Martha’s
Vineyard.

Discover	great	authors,	exclusive	offers,	and	more	at	hc.com.



ALSO	BY	NEAL	STEPHENSON

SEVENEVES
SOME	REMARKS

REAMDE
ANATHEM

THE	SYSTEM	OF	THE	WORLD
THE	CONFUSION

QUICKSILVER
CRYPTONOMICON

THE	DIAMOND	AGE
SNOW	CRASH

ZODIAC



ALSO	BY	N ICOLE	GALLAND

STEPDOG
GODIVA
I , 	 IAGO

CROSSED
REVENGE	OF	THE	ROSE

THE	FOOL ’S	TALE






COPYR IGHT

This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	Names,	characters,	places,	and	incidents	are	products	of	the	author’s
imagination	or	are	used	fictitiously	and	are	not	to	be	construed	as	real.	Any	resemblance	to	actual	events,
locales,	organizations,	or	persons,	living	or	dead,	is	entirely	coincidental.

THE	RISE	AND	FALL	OF	D.O.D.O.	Copyright	©	2017	by	Neal	Stephenson.	All	rights	reserved
under	International	and	Pan-American	Copyright	Conventions.	By	payment	of	the	required	fees,	you
have	been	granted	the	nonexclusive,	nontransferable	right	to	access	and	read	the	text	of	this	e-book	on-
screen.	No	part	of	this	text	may	be	reproduced,	transmitted,	downloaded,	decompiled,	reverse-
engineered,	or	stored	in	or	introduced	into	any	information	storage	and	retrieval	system,	in	any	form	or
by	any	means,	whether	electronic	or	mechanical,	now	known	or	hereafter	invented,	without	the	express
written	permission	of	HarperCollins	e-books.

FIRST	EDITION

Cover,	title	page,	contents	page,	and	part	opener	background	©	Shutterstock	(detail)
Bird	illustration	by	Joel	Holland

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data

Names:	Stephenson,	Neal,	author.	|	Galland,	Nicole,	author.
Title:	The	rise	and	fall	of	D.O.D.O.	:	a	novel	/	Neal	Stephenson	and	Nicole	Galland.
Description:	First	edition.	|	New	York,	NY	:	William	Morrow,	[2017]
Identifiers:	LCCN	2016051782	(print)	|	LCCN	2016043352	(ebook)	|	ISBN	9780062409164

(hardcover	:	alk.	paper)	|	ISBN	9780062409157	(paperback)	|	ISBN	9780062409171	(Ebook)
Subjects:	|	BISAC:	FICTION	/	Fantasy	/	Contemporary.	|	GSAFD:	Fantasy	fiction.
Classification:	LCC	PS3569.T3868	R57	2017	(ebook)	|	LCC	PS3569.T3868	(print)	|	DDC	813/.54—

dc23
LC	record	available	at	https://lccn.loc.gov/2016051782

ISBN	978-0-06-240916-4	(hardcover)
ISBN	978-0-06-269586-4	(Barnes	&	Noble	signed	edition)
EPub	Edition	JUNE	2017	ISBN	978-0-06-240917-1



ABOUT	THE	PUBL ISHER

Australia
HarperCollins	Publishers	(Australia)	Pty.	Ltd.
Level	13,	201	Elizabeth	Street
Sydney,	NSW	2000,	Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au

Canada
HarperCollins	Canada
2	Bloor	Street	East	-	20th	Floor
Toronto,	ON	M4W	1A8,	Canada
www.harpercollins.ca

New	Zealand
HarperCollins	Publishers	New	Zealand
Unit	D1,	63	Apollo	Drive
Rosedale	0632
Auckland,	New	Zealand
www.harpercollins.co.nz

United	Kingdom
HarperCollins	Publishers	Ltd.
1	London	Bridge	Street
London	SE1	9GF,	UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk

United	States



HarperCollins	Publishers	Inc.
195	Broadway
New	York,	NY	10007
www.harpercollins.com