The Girl Who Circumnavigated Fairyland In a Ship of Her Own Making

                                 By




                        Catherynne M. Valente




                          OceanofPDF.com
Chapter I: Exeunt, on a Leopard

    In Which a Girl Named September is Spirited Off By Means of
Leopard, Learns the Rules of Fairyland, and Solves a Puzzle.




    Once upon a time, a girl named September grew very tired indeed of
her parents' house, where she washed the same pink and yellow teacups and
matching gravy boats every day, slept on the same embroidered pillow, and
played with the same small and amiable dog. Because she had been born in
May, and because she had a mole on her left cheek, and because her feet
were very large and ungainly, the Green Wind took pity on her, and flew to
her window one evening just after her eleventh birthday. He was dressed in
a green smoking jacket, and a green carriage-driver’s cloak, and green
jodhpurs, and green snowshoes. It is very cold above the clouds, in the
shanty-towns where the Six Winds live.

    “You seem an ill-tempered and irascible enough child,” said the Green
Wind. “How would you like to come away with me and ride upon the
Leopard of Little Breezes, and be delivered to the great sea which borders
Fairyland? I am afraid I cannot go in, as Harsh Airs are not allowed, but I
should be happy to deposit you upon the Perverse and Perilous Sea.”
     “Oh, yes!” breathed September, who disapproved deeply of pink and
yellow teacups, and also of small and amiable dogs.

     "Well, then, come and sit by me, and do not pull too harshly on my
Leopard's fur, as she bites."

     September climbed out of her kitchen window, leaving a sink-ful of
soapy pink-and-yellow teacups with leaves still clinging to their bottoms in
portentous shapes. One of them looked a bit like her father, in his long
coffee-colored trench-coat, gone away over the sea with a rifle and
gleaming things on his hat. One of them looked a bit like her mother,
bending over a stubborn airplane engine in her work overalls, her arm
muscles bulging. One of them looked a bit like a squashed cabbage. The
Green Wind held out his hand, snug in a green glove, and September took
both his hand and a very deep breath. One of her shoes came loose as she
hoisted herself over the sill, and this will be important later, so let us take a
moment to bid farewell to her prim little mary-jane with its brass buckle as
it clatters onto the parquet floor. Good-bye, shoe! September will miss you
soon.




     "Now," said the Green Wind, when September was firmly seated in the
curling emerald saddle, her hands knotted in the Leopard's spotted pelt,
"there are important rules in Fairyland, rules from which I shall one day be
exempt, when my papers have been processed at last and I am possessed of
the golden ring of diplomatic immunity. I am afraid that if you trample
upon the rules, I cannot help you. You may be ticketed, or executed,
depending on the mood of the Marquess.”

    "Is she very terrible?"

    The Green Wind frowned into his brambly beard. "All little girls are
terrible," he admitted finally, "but the Marquess, at least, has a very fine
hat."

    "Tell me the rules," said September firmly. Her mother had taught her
chess when she was quite small, and she felt that if she could remember
which way knights ought to go, she could certainly remember Fairy rules.

    "Firstly, no iron of any kind is allowed. Customs is quite strict on this
point. Any bullets, knives, maces, or jacks you might have on your person
will be confiscated and smelted. Second, the practice of alchemy is
forbidden to all except young ladies born on Tuesdays--"

    "I was born on a Tuesday!"

    "It is certainly possible that I knew that," winked the Green Wind.
"Third, aviary locomotion is permitted only by means of Leopard or
licensed Ragwort Stalk. If you find yourself not in possession of one of
these, kindly confine yourself to the ground. Fourth, all traffic travels
widdershins. Fifth, rubbish takeaway occurs on second Fridays. Sixth, all
changelings are required to wear identifying footwear. Seventh and most
important, you may in no fashion cross the borders of the Worsted Wood, or
you will either perish most painfully or be forced to sit through a very
tedious tea service with several spinster hamadryeds. These laws are
sacrosanct, except for visiting dignitaries and spriggans. Do you
understand?"




    September, I promise you, tried very hard to listen, but the rushing
winds kept blowing her dark hair into her face. "I...I think so..." she
stammered, pulling her curls away from her mouth.




    “Obviously the eating or drinking of Fairy foodstuffs constitutes a
binding contract to return at least once a year in accordance with seasonal
myth cycles.”

    September started. “What? What does that mean?”

    The Green Wind stroked his neatly pointed beard. “It means: eat
anything you like, precious cherry-child!” He laughed like the whistling air
through high branches. “Sweet as cherries, bright as berries, the light of my
moony sky!

    The Leopard of Little Breezes yawned up and further off from the
rooftops of Omaha, Nebraska, to which September did not even wave good-
bye. One ought not to judge her: all children are Heartless. They have not
grown a heart yet, which is why they can climb tall trees and say shocking
things and leap so very high grown-up hearts flutter in terror. Hearts weigh
quite a lot. That is why it takes so long to grow one. But, as in their reading
and arithmetic and drawing, different children proceed at different speeds.
(It is well known that reading quickens the growth of a heart like nothing
else.) Some small ones are terrible and fey, Utterly Heartless. Some are dear
and sweet and Hardly Heartless At All. September stood very generally in
the middle on the day the Green Wind took her, Somewhat Heartless, and
Somewhat Grown.

    And so September did not wave good-bye to her house, or her mother’s
factory, puffing white smoke far below her. She did not even wave good-
bye to her father when they passed over Europe. You and I might be
shocked by this, but September had read a great number of books, and knew
that parents are only angry until they have discovered that their little
adventurer has been to Fairyland, and not the corner pub, and then
everything is alright. Instead, she looked straight into the clouds until the
wind made her eyes water. She leaned into the Leopard of Little Breezes,
whose pelt was rough and bright, and listened to the beating of her huge and
thundering heart.




    “If you don’t mind my asking, Sir Wind,” said September after a
respectable time had passed, “how does one get to Fairyland? After awhile,
we shall certainly pass India and Japan and California and simply come
round to my house again.”

    The Green Wind chuckled. “I suppose that would be true, if the earth
were round.”
    “I’m reasonably sure it is…”

    “You’re going to have to stop that sort of backwards, old-fashioned
thinking, you know. Conservatism is not an attractive trait. Fairyland is a
very Scientifick place. We subscribe to all the best journals.”

    The Leopard of Little Breezes gave a light roar. Several small clouds
skipped huffily out of their path.

    “The earth, my dear, is roughly trapezoidal, vaguely rhomboid, a bit of
a tesseract, and altogether grumpy when its fur is stroked the wrong way! In
short, it is a puzzle, my autumnal acquisition, like the interlocking silver
rings your Aunt Margaret bought back from Turkey when you were nine.”

    “How did you know about my Aunt Margaret?” exclaimed September,
holding her hair back with one hand.

    “I happened to be performing my usual noon-time dust-up just then.
She wore a black skirt, you wore your yellow dress with the monkeys on it.
Harsh Airs have excellent memories for things they have Ruffled.”

    September smoothed the lap of her now-wrinkled and rumpled orange
dress. She liked anything orange: leaves, some moons, marigolds,
chrysanthemums, cheese, pumpkin, both in pie and out, orange juice,
marmalade. Orange was bright and demanding. You couldn’t ignore orange
things. She once saw an orange parrot in the pet store and had never wanted
anything so much in her life. She would have named it Halloween and fed it
butterscotch. Her mother said butterscotch would make a bird sick and
besides the dog would certainly eat it up. September never spoke to the dog
again, on principle.

    “The puzzle is not unlike those rings,” said the Green Wind, tipping his
gaze over his green spectacles. “We are going to unlock the earth and lock it
up again, and when we have done it we shall be in another ring, which is to
say Fairyland. It won’t be long now.”

    And indeed, in the icy blue clouds above the world, a great number of
rooftops began to coalesce. They were all very tall and very rickety:
cathedral towers made of nailed boards, cupolas of rusted metal, obelisks of
tattered leaves and little more, huge domes like the ones September had
seen in books about Italy, but with many of their bricks punched out,
broken, turned to dust. Just the sorts of buildings where wind howls hardest,
whistles loudest, screams highest. The tips and tops of everything were
frozen--including the folk that flew and flittered through the town, bundled
up tight much like the Green Wind himself, their jodhpurs and jackets black
or rosy or yellow, their cheeks puffed out and round, like the cherubs
blowing at the corners of old maps.

    “Welcome, September, to the city of Westerly, my home, where live all
the Six Winds in nothing at all like harmony.”

    “It’s…very nice. And very cold. And I seem to have lost one of my
shoes.”

    The Green Wind looked down at September's toes, which were
beginning to turn slightly purple. Being at least a bit of a gentleman, he
shuffled off his smoking jacket and guided her arms into it. The sleeves
were far too big, but the jacket had learned a drop or two of manners in its
many travels, and adjusted itself around September’s little body, puffing up
and drawing in until it was quite like her own skin.

    “I think I look a little like a pumpkin,” whispered September, secretly
delighted. “I’m all green and orange.”

    She looked down. On her wide, emerald velvet lapel, the jacket had
grown a little orange brooch for her, a jeweled key. It sparkled as though
made out of the sun itself. The jacket warmed slightly with bashfulness, and
with hoping she’d be pleased.

    “The shoe is a very great loss, I won’t lie,” clucked the Green Wind.
“But one must make sacrifices if one is to enter Fairyland.” His voice
dropped confidentially. “Westerly is a border town, and the Red Wind is
awfully covetous. Terribly likely your shoe would have been stolen
eventually, anyway.”

    The Green Wind and September entered Westerly smoothly, the
Leopard of Little Breezes being extra careful not to jostle the landing. They
strode down the Squamish Thoroughfare, where big-cheeked Blue and
Golden Winds went about their grocery shopping, piling their arms with
tumbleweeds for rich, thorny salads. Clouds spun and blew down the street
the way old paper blows in the cities you and I have seen. They were
heading for two spindly pillars at the end of the Thoroughfare, so enormous
that September could not see right away that they were people, incredibly
tall and thin, their faces huge and long. She could not tell if they were men
or women, but they were hardly thicker than a pencil, and taller than any of
the belltowers and high platforms of Westerly. Their feet went straight
down through the clouds, disappearing in a puff of cumulus. They both
wore long, thin glasses, darkened to keep out the bright Westerly sun.

    “Who are they?” whispered September.

    “That’s Latitude, with the yellow belt, and Longitude, with the paisley
cravat. We can’t get very far without them, so be polite.”

    “I thought latitude and longitude were just lines on maps.”

    “They don’t like to have their pictures taken. That’s how it is with
famous folk. Everyone wants to click, click, click away at you. It’s very
annoying. They made a bargain with the Cartographer’s Guild several
hundred years ago--symbolic representations only, out of respect, you
understand.”

    September felt very quiet in front of Latitude and Longitude. Being
young, she was used to most people being taller than she was. But this was
on another order entirely, and she hadn’t eaten anything since breakfast, and
travel by Leopard is very tiring. She didn’t think she ought to curtsey, as
that was old-fashioned, so she bowed from the waist. The Green Wind
looked amused and copied her bow.

    Latitude yawned. The inside of his mouth was bright blue, the color of
the ocean on school maps. Longitude sighed in a bored sort of way.
    “Well, you wouldn’t expect them to speak, would you?” The Green
Wind looked slightly embarrassed. “They’re celebrities! They’re very
private.”

    “I thought you said there would be a puzzle,” said September, catching
Latitude’s yawn. The Green Wind picked at his sleeve, as though miffed
that she was not more impressed.

    “When you solve a jigsaw puzzle,” he said, “how do you do it,
pumpkin-dear?”

    September shuffled her cold foot on the smooth blue stone of the
Thoroughfare. “Well…you start with the corners, and then you fill in the
edges to make a frame, and then work inward until all the pieces fit.”

    “And, historically, how many winds are there?”

    September thought back to her book of myths, which had been bright
orange and therefore on of her favorite possessions.

    “Four, I think.”

    The Green Wind grinned, his green lips curling under a green
mustache. “Quite so: Green, Red, Black, and Gold. Of course those are
roughly family designations, like Smith or Gupta. And actually there is also
Silver and Blue, but they’ve made trouble off the coast Tunisia and have
had to go to bed without supper. So the fact remains: today, we are the
corners,” he gestured at the placid Latitude and Longitude. “They are the
edges. And you,” he gently pulled a strand of September’s hair free of her
brooch. “And you, September, are the middle pieces, all funny-shaped and
stubborn.”

     “I don’t understand, Sir.”

     “Well, it’s all in the verbiage. One of the pieces is: a girl hopping
widdershins on one foot, nine revolutions. One is: wear motley colors. One
is: clap hand over one eye. One is: give something up. One is: have a feline
in attendance.”

     “But that’s easy!”

     “Mostly easy. But Fairyland is an old place, and old things have
strange hungers. One of the last pieces is: there must be blood. The other is:
tell a lie.”

     September bit her lip. She had never been fond of jigsaw puzzles, even
though her grandmother loved them, and had glued 1000 piecers all over
her house as a kind of wallpaper. Slowly, trying to remember it all, she
clapped one hand over her eye. She raised one foot and hopped in what she
hoped was widdershins around the Leopard of Little Breezes. Her orange
dress flapped against the green jacket, shining in the sun. When she
stopped, September unfastened the jeweled orange key from her lapel and
pricked her finger sharply with its pin. Blood welled up and dripped onto
the blue stones. She laid the key gently at the feet of the impassive Latitude
and Longitude and drew a deep breath.

     “I want to go home,” she lied softly.
    Latitude and Longitude turned smoothly towards each other, as though
they were on pedestals. They began to bend and fold like staircases,
reaching out for each other and interlocking, hand into hand, foot onto knee,
arms akimbo. They moved mechanically in their strange circus dance,
jerkily, joints swinging like dolls. The street shook a little, and then was
still. Ever so briefly, Latitude and Longitude kissed, and when they parted,
there was a space between their mouths just large enough for a Leopard
carrying a Harsh Air and a little girl. All September could see on the other
side were clouds.

    Solemnly, the Green Wind held out his gloved hand to the girl in
orange.

    “Well done, September,” he said, and lifted her onto the Leopard’s
emerald saddle.




    One can never see what happens after exeunt, on a leopard. It is against
the rules of theatre. But cheating has always been the purview of fairies,
and as we are about to enter their domain, we ought to act in accordance
with local customs.

    For, you see, when September and the Green Wind had gone through
the puzzle of the world on their great cat, the jeweled key rose up and
swooped in behind them, as quiet as you like.



                                       #
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter II: The Closet Between
Worlds

    In Which September Passes Between Worlds, Asks Four Questions and
Receives Twelve Answers, and Is Inspected by a Customs Officer.




    By the time a lady reaches the grand, golden evening of her life, she
has accumulated a great number of things. You know this--when you visited
your grandmother on the lake that summer you were surprised how many
portraits of people you didn’t recognize hung on the walls, how many
porcelain ducks and copper pans and books and collectible spoons and old
mirrors and scrap wood and half-finished knitting and board games and
fireplace pokers she had stuffed away in the corners of her house. You
couldn’t think what use a person would have for all that junk, why they
would keep it around for all this time, slowly fading in the sun and all
turning the same shade of parchmenty-brown. You thought your
grandmother was a bit crazy, to have such a collection of glass owls and
china sugarbowls.

    That is what the space between Fairyland and our world looks like. It is
grandmother’s big, dark closet, her shed out back, her basement, cluttered
with the stuff and nonsense of millenia. The world didn’t really know where
else to put it, you see. The earth is frugal, she doesn’t toss out perfectly
good bronze helmets or spinning wheels or water clocks. She might need
them one day. As for all the portraiture, when you’ve lived as long as she
has, you’ll need help remembering your grandchildren, too.

    September marveled at the heaps of oddities in the closet between
worlds. The ceiling was very low, with roots coming through, and
everything had a genteel fade to it, the old lace and code-breaking
machines, the anchors and heavy picture frames, the dinosaur bones and
orreries. As the Leopard proceeded through the dimly-lit passage,
September looked into the painted eyes of pharaohs and blind poets,
chemists and serene philosophers. September could tell they were
philosophers because they had on drapey clothes, like curtains. But most of
the portraits were just people, wearing whatever they had liked to wear
when they were living, raking hay or writing diaries or baking bread.

    “Sir Wind,” September said, when she had recovered herself and her
eyes had adjust to the darkness, “I want to ask you a question, and I want
you to answer me seriously and not call me any pretty names or tease me.”

    “Of course, my…September. And you can call me Green. I feel we’re
becoming very well acquainted.”

    “Why did you take me out of Omaha? Do you take very many girls?
Are they all from Nebraska? Why are you being so nice to me?”

    September could not be sure, but she thought the Leopard of Little
Breezes laughed. It might have been a snort.
    “That’s rather more than one question. Therefore I think it’s only fair I
give you rather more than one set of answers.” He cleared his throat
dramatically. “One: Omaha is no place for anybody. Two: No, my schedule
keeps me quite busy enough. Three: See above. Four: So that you will like
me, and not be afraid.”

    Up ahead, there was a line of folk in long, colorful coats, moving
slowly, checking watches, smoothing hair under hats. The Leopard slowed.

    “I said no teasing,” said September.

    “One: I was lonely. Two: I have been known to spirit a child or two
away, I shan’t lie. It is the nature of winds to Snatch and Grasp at things,
and Blow Them Away. Three: Nebraska does not grow many of the kinds of
girls who ought to go to Fairyland. Four: If I were not nice, and did not
know the way to Fairyland, and did not have a rather spectacular cat, you
would not smile at me or say amusing things. You would tell me politely
that you like teacups and small dogs and to please be on my way.”

    They came up short and took their place in line. Everyone towered
above September--the line might have been long or short, she could not tell.
September leapt off of the Leopard and onto the dry, compact dirt of the
closet between worlds. The Green Wind hopped lightly down beside her.

    “You said I was ill-tempered! Was that really why?”

    “One: There is a department in Fairyland entirely devoted to spiriting
off young boys and girls (mostly orphans, but we are have become liberal in
this late age) so that we may have a ready supply of a certain kind of story
to tell when winter comes and there is nothing to do but drink fennel-beer
and peer at the hearth. Two: See Above. Three: dry, brown places are prime
real estate for children who want to escape them. It’s much harder to find
wastrels in New York to fly about on a Leopard. After all, they have the
Metropolitan Museum to occupy them. Four: I am not being very nice at all.
See how I lie to you and make you do things my way? That is so you will
be ready to live in Fairyland, where this sort of thing is considered the
height of manners.”

    September curled her fists. She tried very hard not to cry.

    “Green! Stop it! I just want to know--”

    “One! Because you were born in--”

    “If I was special,” finished September, halfway between a whisper and
a squeak. “In stories, when someone appears in a poof of green clouds and
asks a girl to go away on an adventure, it’s because she’s special, because
she’s smart and strong, and can solve riddles and fight with swords and give
really good speeches, and…I don’t know that I’m any of those things. I
don’t even know that I’m as ill-tempered as all that. I’m not dull or
anything, I know about geography and chess and I can fix the boiler when
my mother has to work, but what I mean to say is: maybe you meant to go
to another girl’s house and let her ride on the Leopard. Maybe you didn’t
mean me at all, because I’m not like storybook girls, I’m short and my
father ran away with the army and I wouldn’t even be able to keep a dog
from eating a bird.”
    The Leopard turned her prodigious, spotted head and looked at
September with large, solemn, yellow eyes.

    “We came for you,” she growled. “Just you.”

    The big cat licked the child’s cheek roughly. September smiled, just a
little. She sniffed and wiped her eyes with the sleeve of the green jacket.

    “NEXT!” boomed a deep, severe voice which echoed all over the
closet. It was so strong that they were blown back into the folk who had
silently joined the line behind them. The party in front of them, all pink
eyeshadow and spangled, spiky hair, exploded past a tall podium in a flutter
of papers and luggage.

    At the top of the podium loomed an enormous gargoyle, its face a mass
of bronze and black rock, waggling stone eyebrows and stern metal jaw. Its
lolling eyes burned red flame. Its heavy arms clicked and whirred, greasy
pistons pumping. The creature’s chest was plated in gnarled, knuckled
silver, half-open along a thick seam, showing a thudding, white-violet heart
within.

    “PAPERS!” The gargoyle thundered. Portraits rattled along the earthen
walls. Its breath was smoky and hot, and in its mechanical jaw, a steel
tongue rattled. September shrank against the Leopard, the force of the
gargoyle’s breath pushing at her face.

    “BETSY BASILSTALK YOU COME OUT OF THERE THIS
SECOND!” The Green Wind hollered back, though not quite so loud,
having no leather-bellow lungs to help him along.
     The creature paused. “NO,” it bellowed.

     “You’re not impressing anyone, you know,” sighed the Green Wind.

     “SHE’S IMPRESSED. LOOK, SHE’S ALL SHAKING AND
THINGS.”

     “Betsy, I will thrash you a good one, and you know I can. Don’t forget
who whipped the Lord of Leafglen and rode him about like a dog. I am not
a tourist, Betsy. I will not be treated like one.”

     “No, you’re not a tourist,” growled a thick, phelgmy, but much quieter
voice. The gargoyle’s eye-flames snuffed out and its great shoulders sagged.
A little woman hopped up onto the podium, no bigger than September, and
perhaps a bit smaller. Her muscled chest was shaped like a bear’s, her legs
thick and knobbly, her short hair sludged up and spiked along her scalp,
sticking up in knifepoints. She chewed on a hand-rolled cigarette; the
smoke smelled sweet, like vanilla and rum and maple syrup and other
things not terribly good for you. “You’re not a tourist,” she repeated in a
grumbly, gravelly voice, “you’re Greenlist, and that means No Good
Scoundrel, and that means No Entry Allowed, Orders of the Marquess.”

     “I filed my immigration request with the stamps of the Four
Clandestines, weeks and weeks ago. I even have a letter of reference from
the Seelie Parliament. Well, the clerk. But it’s on official letterhead and
everything and I think we all know that stationary makes a statement.”

     Betsy quirked her hairy eyebrow at him and hopped back into the
gargoyle-puppet, quick as a blink. It roared to life, all fiery eyes and
clanking arms.

    “GO AWAY. OR SEE WHO GETS THRASHED.”

    “Green,” whispered September, “is she…a gnome?”

    “Too right I am,” grumbled Betsy, squeezing out of the puppet again. It
slumped in her absence. “And very perceptive of you, that is. What gave it
away?”

    September’s heart still hammered all over the place from the yelling of
the gargoyle. She held her trembling hand a little above her head.

    “Pointy,” she squeaked, and cleared her throat. “Gnomes have…pointy
hats? I thought…pointy hair is as good as a hat, maybe?”

    “She’s a regular logician, Greeny. My grandmother wears a pointy hat,
girl. My great-grandmother. I wouldn’t be caught dead in one any more
than you’d like to wear a frilly bonnet. Gnomes are modern now. We’re
better than modern, even. Just look, you,” and Betsy flexed an extremely
respectable bicep, the size of an oil can. “None of this flitting about in
gardens and blessing thresh-holds for me. I went to trade school, I did. Now
I’m a customs agent with my own great hulking hunk of heave here. What
have you got?”

    “A Leopard,” answered September quickly.

    “True,” considered Betsy. “But you have haven’t got papers or both
shoes, and that’s a trouble.”
    “Why do you need that thing?” September asked. “None of the airports
back home have them.”

    “They do, you just can’t see them right,” grinned Betsy Basilstalk. “All
customs agents have them, otherwise, why would people agree to stand in
line and be peered at and inspected? We all live inside the terrible engine of
authority, and it grinds and shrieks and burns so that no one will say: lines
on maps are silly. Where you live, the awful machinery is smaller, harder to
see. Less honest, that’s all. Whereas Rupert here? He’s as honest as they
come. Does what it says on the box.”

    She scratched the hulking shell behind what might have been an ear. It
remained still and dark.

    “Then why tell me it’s all puppets and engines? Don’t you want me to
let you peer at me?” asked September.

    Betsy beckoned her closer, until they stood nose to nose and all
September could smell was the vanilla and rum and maple syrup of her
cigarette, which was all through her skin, too.

    “Because when humans come to Fairyland, we’re supposed to trick
them and steal from them and whap them about the ears--but we’re also
supposed hex them up so that they can see proper-like. Not everything, just
enough so as to be dazzled by mushroom-glamours, not so much that we
can't fool you twice with Fairy gold. It's a real science. Used to be done
with ointment. It’s in the rulebook.”

    “Are you going to put something very foul in my eyes, then?”
    “I told you, kid. Gnomes are modern now. I have personally picketed
the Hallowmash Pharmacy. There’s other ways of opening your thick head.
Like Rupert. He’s great with thick heads. Most people, I show them Rupert,
they see anything I tell them to. Now, papers, please.”

    The Green Wind looked sidelong at September and then at his feet.
September could swear he was blushing, blushing green through his beard.
“You know very well, Betsy,” he whispered, “that the Ravished need no
papers. It’s in the manual, page 764, paragraph 6.” The Green Wind
coughed politely. “The Persephone clause.”

    Betsy gave him a long look that plainly said: so that’s what’s afoot, you
old bag of air? She blew her sweet, thick smoke up into his face and
grunted.

    September knew she could not have been the only one.

    “Don’t answer for you, though, tall thing. All right, she can go, but you
stay.” Betsy chewed her cigarette. “And the cat, too. I’m not violating the
Greenlist for the likes of you.”

    The Green Wind stroked September’s hair with his long fingers.

    “Time for us to part, my acorn-love. I’m sure my visa will come
through soon…maybe if you put in a good word for me with the embassy.
In the meantime, remember the rules, don’t go swimming for an hour after
eating, and never tell anyone your true name.”

    “My true name?”
    “I came for you, September. Just you. I wish you the best that can be
hoped for, and no worse than can be expected.”

    He leaned in close and kissed her cheek, courtly, gentle, dry as desert
wind. The Leopard licked her hand passionately.

    “Close your eyes,” he whispered.

    September did, and felt a warm, sunny wind on her face, full of the
smells of green things: mint and grass and rosemary and fresh water, frogs
and leaves and hay. It blew her dark hair back, and when she opened her
eyes, the Green Wind and the Leopard of Little Breezes had gone. In her ear
floated his last airy sigh: check your pockets, my chimney-child.

    Betsy waved her hands in the air as if to disperse an unpleasant
perfume. “He’s such a lot of bother. You’re better off--theatrical folk are
nothing but a bundle of monologues and anxiety headaches.”

    The Gnome pulled a little green leather book and a polished ruby-
handled stamp from behind the podium. She opened the book and began
stamping with a vicious delight.

    “Temporary Visa, Type: Pomegranate. Housing Allotment: None.
Alien Registry, Category: Human, Ravished, Non-Changeling. Size:
Medium. Age: Eleven. Privileges: None, or, As Many As You Can Catch.
Anything to declare?”

    September shook her head. Betsy rolled her red-rimmed eyes.
    “Customs Declaration: One shoe: Black. One dress: Orange. One
smoking jacket: Not Yours.” The Gnome peered down from her podium.
“One kiss: Extremely Green,” she finished emphatically, stamping the book
hard and handing it down to September. “Off you go now, don’t hold up the
line!”

    Betsy Basilstalk grasped September by her lapels and hauled her off
her feet, past the podium, towards a rooty, moldy, wormy hole in the back
wall of the closet between worlds. At the last moment she stopped, spat out
a Fairy curse like a wad of tobacco, and pulled a little black box out of her
pocket. She slid a red rod out of it and the lid snapped open. It was filled
with a vaguely golden jelly.

    “Pan’s hangover, kid,” Betsy cursed again. “Old habits die hard.” She
dug her greasy finger into the stuff and flung it at September’s eyes. It
dripped down her face like yolk.

    The gnome looked profoundly embarrassed. “Well,” she mumbled,
looking at her toes, “What if Rupert fell down on the job and you got there
and all you could see was sticks and grasshoppers and a lot of long, empty
desert? It’s a long way to go for desert. Anyway I don’t have to explain
myself. On your way, then!”

    Betsy Basilstalk gave the girl a hard shove into the soft, leafy wall of
the closet. With a wriggle, a squeeze, and a pop, September slid, backward,
through to the other side.
      #




OceanofPDF.com
Chapter III: Hello, Goodbye, and
Manythanks

    In which September Nearly Drowns, Meets Three Witches (One a
Wairwulf), And Is Entrusted with the Quest for a Certain Spoon.




    Salt water hit September like a wall. It roared foamily in her eyes,
snatched at her hair, dragged at her feet with cold, purple-green hands. She
gasped for air and got two lungs-ful of freezing, thick sea.

    Now, September could swim quite well. She had even won second
medal at a tournament in Lincoln. She had a trophy with a winged lady on
it, though she had always wondered what use a flying girl would have for
swimming. The lady should have had webbed feet, September was sure.
But in all her after-school practices her coaches had never impressed upon
her the importance of practicing her butterfly stroke while being dropped
from a great height without any ceremony at all into an ocean. With Fairy
ooze in one’s eyes. Really, September thought, how could they leave
something like that out?

    She floundered and dipped beneath the giant waves, only to bob up
again, spluttering, gulping air. She kicked hard, struggling to get her legs
properly under her and orient towards the shore--if there was a shore--so
that the waves would carry her towards land--if land there was--and not
away from it. Riding the crest of a horrid wave sickeningly upward, she
turned her head as fast as she could, and glimpsed through the last, stubborn
streaks of ointment, a fuzzy, orangeish strand off to the west. Against the
will of the water she hauled her body until she was more or less pointed at it
and stroked as fast as she could on the swell of the next wave, letting it push
her and punch at her and drag her, whatever it liked, as long as it was closer
and closer to land. September’s arms and legs burned and her lungs were
seriously considering giving the whole thing up, but on she went, and on
and on--until, quite unexpectedly, her knees knocked on sand and she fell
face first as the last waves slid up past her onto a rose-colored shore.

     September coughed and shook. On her hands and knees, she threw up a
fair bit of the Perverse and Perilous Sea onto the beach. She squeezed her
eyes shut and shivered until her heart stopped beating quite so fast. When
she opened her eyes, she was steadier, but elbow deep in the beach and
sinking fast. Thick red rose petals, twigs, thorny leaves, yellowish chestnut
husks, pine cones and rusty tin bells littered the shoreline as far as she could
see. September scrambled and tripped and waded through the strange,
sweet-smelling rubbish, trying to find some solid ground beneath the
blackberry brambles and robins’ eggshells and wizened, dried toadstools.
The land was not very much more solid than the sea, but at least she could
breathe--in sharp, jerky gulps, as the brambles pricked at her and the twigs
pulled at her hair.

     I have not been in Fairyland nearly long enough to start crying,
September thought, and bit her tongue savagely. That was better, she could
think, and the flotsam of the beach did seem to get shallower as she pushed
through the wreckage. Finally, the wreckage was only knee deep, and she
could trudge through it like so much heavy snow. At the far edge of the
shore were tall silvery cliffs, spotted with brave, stubborn little trees that
had found purchase on the rocks, and grew straight out sideways from the
cliffside. At their tops, great birds wheeled and cried, their long necks
glowing bright blue in the afternoon light. She was alone on the beach,
breathing heavily. She rubbed her eyes to get the last of the gnome-ointment
out, where it had hardened like sleep-dust. When September’s eyes were
clean of salt and gnome, she looked back down the beach, in the direction
she had come. Suddenly, it didn’t look like rose petals and sticks and
eggshells at all. It glittered gold, real gold, all the way down to the violet-
green water. Doubloons and necklaces and crowns, pieces of eight and
plates and bricks and long, glittering sceptres. It shone so brightly
September had to shade her eyes. No matter how she walked, to the left or
right, the shore stayed firmly golden now.

     September shivered. She was terribly hungry, and dripping rather
dramatically. She wrung out her hair and the skirt of her orange dress onto a
huge golden crown with crosses on it. The jacket, mortified that it had been
so distracted from its duties by a mere momentary drowning, hurriedly
puffed out, billowing in the sea wind until it was quite dry. Well, September
thought, it’s all certainly very strange, but the Green Wind is not here to
explain it anymore, and I can’t stay on the beach all day like a sunbather. A
girl in want of a Leopard still has feet. She looked out at the rolling purple-
green waves of the sea once more. A stirring fluttered in her that she could
not name, something deep and strange, to do with the sea and the sky. But
deeper than the stirring was her hunger, and her need to find something that
bore fruit or sold meat or baked bread. She folded up the stirring very
carefully and put it away at the bottom of her mind. Tearing her eyes from
the glittering waves, she began to walk.

    After a moment, she prudently knelt down and gathered up a
particularly jewel-encrusted sceptre. You never know, she thought, I might
have to ransom things, or bribe folk, or even buy something. September was
not prone to stealing, but neither was she entirely stupid. She began to walk
up the beach, using the sceptre as a walking stick.




    The going was not easy. Gold is very slippery to walk on and insists on
sliding all over the place. She found that her bare foot was actually a bit
more suited to the task than the shod one, as she could grasp at the
gleaming ground with her toes. Nevertheless, every step set off a little
cascade of coins. By afternoon, September thought she had probably
stepped on the collective national worth of Finland. Just as this rather
grown-up thought crossed her mind, a long, peculiar shadow fell across her
path.

    In Omaha, signposts are bright green with white writing, or
occasionally white with black writing. September understood those signs,
and all the things they pointed to. But the signpost before her now was
made of pale, wind-bleached wood, and towered above her: a beautiful
carved woman with flowers in her hair, a long goat’s tail winding around
her legs, and a solemn expression on her sea-worn face. The deep gold light
of the Fairyland sun played on her carefully whittled hair. She had wide,
flaring wings, like September’s swimming trophy. The wooden woman had
four arms, each outstretched in a different direction, pointing with authority.
On the inside of her easterly arm, pointing backward in the direction
September had come, someone had carved in deep, elegant letters:

    TO LOSE YOUR WAY

    On the northerly arm, pointing up to the tops of the cliffs, it said:

    TO LOSE YOUR LIFE

    On the southerly arm, pointing out to sea, it said:

    TO LOSE YOUR MIND

    And on the westerly arm, pointing up to a little headland and a
dwindling of the golden beach, it said:

    TO LOSE YOUR HEART

    September bit her lip. She certainly didn’t want to lose her life, so the
cliffs were right out, even if she thought she could climb them. Losing her
mind was not too much better, and besides, there was nothing about with
which to fashion a seagoing vessel, unless she wanted to sink promptly on a
raft of gold. She had already lost her way, walking for miles in that
direction, and anyway, if one’s way is lost one cannot get anywhere and she
definitely wanted to get somewhere, even if she didn’t know where
somewhere was. Somewhere mainly involved food and a bed and a
fireplace, whereas Here had only Fairy gold and a roaring, cold sea.
    Only the heart was left.




    You and I, being grown-up and having lost our hearts at least twice or
thrice along the way, might shut our eyes and cry out: Not that way, child!
But as we have said, September was Somewhat Heartless, and felt herself
reasonably safe on that road. Children always do.




    Besides, she could see smoke off in the distance, wafting upward in
thin curlicues.

    September ran off towards the spiraling smoke. Behind her, the
beautiful, four-armed woman who pointed the way closed her eyes and
shook her birchwood head, rueful and knowing.




    “Hello!” called September as she ran, tripping over the last of the gold
bricks and sceptres. “Hello!”

    Three figures hunched blackly around a large pot, a cauldron really,
huge and iron and rough. They were dressed very finely, two women in
high-collared, old-fashioned dresses with bustles, hair drawn back in thick
chignons, and a young man in a lovely black suit with tails. But what
September chiefly noticed was their hats.
     Any child knows what a witch looks like. The warts are important, yes,
the hooked nose, the cruel smile. But it’s the hat that cinches it: pointy and
black with a wide rim. Plenty of people have warts and hooked noses and
cruel smiles, but are not witches at all. Hats change everything. September
knew this with all her being, deep in the place where she knew her own
name, and that her mother would still love her even though she hadn’t
waved goodbye. For one day her father had put on a hat with golden things
on it and suddenly he hadn’t been her father anymore, he had been a soldier,
and he had left. Hats have power. Hats can change you into someone else.

     These hats were not Halloween witch-hats, made out of thin satin or
construction paper and spangled with cheap glitter. They were leather,
heavy and old, creased all over, their points slumped to one side, being too
majestic and massive to be expected to stand up straight. Old, knotted silver
buckles gleamed malevolently on their sides. The brims jutted out, sagging
a little, the kind of brims you might expect cowboys to have, the kind that
isn’t for show, but to keep out wind and rain and sun. The witches hunched
a little under the weight of their hats.

     “Hello?” September said, a little more politely--but only a little.

     “What?” snapped one of the women, looking up from her muttering.
She held a beaten black book in one hand, heavily dog-eared.

     “I said ‘hello!’”

     “Yes, that’s me.”

     “What?” said September, confused.
    “Are you very dull or a very deaf?” said the other woman, flinging an
alarmed lizard into the cauldron.

    “Oh!” cried the young man. “A little deaf child! How sweet! We
should adopt her and teach her to write symphonies. She’ll be all the rage in
town. I’ll buy her a powdered wig and a tricorn!”

    “I’m not deaf,” said September, who was very cross when she was
hungry. “Or dull. I said hello, and you said nothing sensible at all.”

    “Manners, child,” said the woman with the book, her cruel witch’s
smile curling up the corners of her lips. “If you haven’t got your manners,
you might as well toss it all and become a witch.” She peered at the
cauldron and after a moment’s disapproving stare, spat into it. “My name is
Hello,” she continued as if nothing had happened. “So you see the
confusion. This is my sister, Goodbye, and our husband, Manythanks.”

    “He’s married to both of you? How odd!” Suddenly their eyes
narrowed and they stood very straight. September hurried to correct herself.
“I mean--my name is September. How do you do?”

    “We do perfectly well,” said Goodbye coldly, pinching off one of the
black pearl buttons at her throat and tossing it into the brew. “It all works
out very nicely, really. My sister and I are very close, and very efficient, and
when we were young it seemed like a great waste of time for us both to go
through the tiresome nonsense of courtship and blushing behind curtains
and love potions and marriage. So we went through it once, together. We
estimate that we saved each other two full years of living. And besides, all
witches must keep up a certain level of deviance in their personal lives, or
we should be expelled from the union.”

    Hello smiled as demurely as a witch can manage. “We chose
Manythanks for his many virtues, and because, besides being a wonderful
cook and a superb mathematician, he is also a wairwulf.”

    “Really? A real werewolf? And you turn into a wolf when the moon is
full?”

    Manythanks grinned.

    “No, dear,” said Hello, “a wairwulf.” She rolled her r a little, otherwise
it seemed quite the same word to September. “It’s quite different. Twenty-
seven days a month my love is a fine wolf, with a great powerful jaw and a
thumping tail. During the full moon he becomes human, as he is now. My
husband is the wolf, hers is the man.”

    “That doesn’t seem quite fair,” said September. “She gets a lot more
husband.”

    “Oh, we agreed upon it long ago. I don’t like men to talk too much, and
she doesn’t like them too much underfoot,” laughed Hello. Goodbye smiled
at her husband with a deep fondness.

    “Aren’t you…afraid of the wolf?” asked September, who secretly felt
she might get over such fear, if the wolf would love her and guard her and
not get mud on the covers.
     “I’m quite civilized, I promise,” smiled Manythanks. “Wairwulves are
cultured. We have choirs and charity races and rotary clubs. It’s when we’re
human that you must take care.”

     “Now what is it you want, child? As you can see, we’re quite busy.”
Goodbye sniffed deeply at the pot.

     Be bold, thought September. An ill-tempered child should be bold.
“I…I hoped you might have something for me to eat. I’ve only just gotten
here and…well, I’m not lost, because I haven’t any idea where to go that I
might get lost on the way to.” Even to September that did not sound quite
right. “I’d like to get lost, because then I’d know where I was going, you
see. But the Green Wind wasn’t terribly clear about what to do once I got
here, only what not to do, so getting lost would be making very good
headway, all things considered. But I don’t know where I am and the beach
was full of garbage and then it wasn’t--”

     “Fairy gold,” interrupted Manythanks. “It lays about waiting for a
Fairy to pick it up on her way to the human world. You must have had some
gnome ointment gobbed on you or you wouldn’t be able to see it at all.
Some things any old ravished child can see. Some things are only meant for
locals. ”

     “Yes, Betsy…she showed me Rupert, but then she threw that stuff at
me, too.” September clutched her sceptre a little tighter.

     “She must have taken a shine to you. I assume Rupert was very terrible
and frightening? A good scare will knock your eyeballs sideways enough to
see a few brownies. But not enough for Fairy gold, and other things beside.
Else playing tricks on tourists would not be half as fun.” The wairwulf
sighed heavily. He had little wrinkles at the corners of his eyes. “But there’s
rationing these days, and gnomestuff is precious. Have you got any left?”
Manythanks peered at her eyes and sighed in disappointment. September
did not like being examined so closely.

       “I’m very hungry, Sir Wulf,” she whispered hopefully. “Is that soup?”

       “Don’t you dare!” breathed Goodbye. “It’s our spell and you can’t have
any.”

       September brightened a little. This was what she had come for: witches
and spells and wairwulves. “What sort of spell?”

       All three looked at her as though she had asked what color a carrot is.

       “We’re witches,” said Hello. Manythanks pointed meaningfully at his
hat.

       “But witches do all kinds of spells--”

       “That’s sorceresses,” corrected Goodbye.

       “And magic--”

       “That’s wizards,” sighed Hello.

       “And they change people into things--”

       “That’s thaumaturges,” huffed Manythanks.
     “And make people do things--”

     “Enchantresses,” sneered Goodbye.

     “And they do curses and hexes--”

     “Stregas,” hissed both sisters.

     “And change into owls and cats--”

     “Brujas,” growled Manythanks.

     “Well…what do witches do, then?” September refused to feel foolish.
It was hard enough for a human to get into Fairyland. True stories must be
nearly impossible to get out.

     “We look into the future,” grinned Goodbye. “And we help it along.”

     “Why do you need lizards and buttons for that? And such nice
clothes?”

     “Look who’s a witch now?” mocked Hello, snapping her book shut.
“What could you know about it? The future is a messy, motley business,
little girl.”

     “We have to dress well,” whispered Goodbye, “or the future will not
take us seriously.”

     Manythanks put his hands out to his wives. “She’s just a child. We
were once children. She knows nothing of the future. Be kind. We can
afford to be kind to this one when there is so much ahead of her.”
Manythanks reached into his pocket and took out a fat bundle wrapped in
wax. He unwrapped it corner by corner, slowly, as if revealing the vanished
dove at the end of a magic trick.

       Inside was a thick slice of deeply red cake, so moist it wet the paper,
slathered with rich red icing. It glowed in the slight gloam of the seaside.
The wairwulf bent down to her, the black tails of his suit whipping in the
wind, and offered it, balanced delicately on one flat hand.

       September tried not to snatch it too fast. She swallowed it in three
wulfish bites, so starving was she. But--hadn’t the Green Wind said
something about eating Fairy food? Well, reasoned September. This isn’t
the same thing at all. It’s witch food.

       “I don’t suppose,” gulped September, when the cake had settled in her
belly, “that you would tell me what was ahead of me, so I could look out for
it.”

       “Hello, I believe we have an utterly unique specimen on our hands: a
child who listens,” laughed Goodbye. Goodbye laughed a lot.

       Manythanks shook his head. “That’s really more a seer’s business,
love--”

       “I’d be happy to show you your future, little one,” interrupted Hello,
but her voice was dark. The witch dipped her bare hand into the gurgling,
boiling soup of the cauldron. She hauled out a handful of lumpy muck, the
color of bruises and jam gone off. She flung it at the earth, where it steamed
and wriggled and reeked. All three witches peered at the gob intently.
Mankthanks poked at it with a neatly-trimmed fingernail. It quivered. The
sisters looked meaningfully at one another. September tried to peer as well,
but did not feel she had the hang of it.

    “My future looks lumpy,” she said uncertainly.

    Goodbye broke ranks with her family and swooped around the great
cauldron, kneeling before September. The witch suddenly looked very
beautiful, her pale hair swept back, her eyes dark and bright. September did
not remember her looking so beautiful before, when she was stirring the
pot. But now, Goodbye’s face fairly glowed, her lips perfectly rose-colored,
her cheeks high, aristocratic, even blushing a little. “September,” she
breathed. Her voice was pure honeywine, warm and deep and sweet.
“That’s what you said your name was, yes? I prefer October, myself, but it’s
such a pretty name. Your parents must have loved you very much, to give
you a name like that. Do you like my name? It’s unusual, like yours.”

    “Y…yes.” September felt odd. She wanted to please Goodbye very
much, but more, she wanted Goodbye to like her, to love her, even, and to
tell her more about how much they were alike. The witch laughed again.
But now it a long, rippling laugh full of notes, almost a song.

    “My sister has no shame at all, September. That’s a very secret thing
she did--right in front of you! You see, the future is a kind of stew, a soup, a
vichyssoise of the present and the past. That’s how you get the future: you
mix up everything you did today with everything you did yesterday, and all
the days before, and everything anyone you ever met did, and anyone they
ever met, too. And salt, and lizard, and pearl and umbrellas and typewriters
and a lot of other things I’m not at liberty to tell you because I took vows
and a witch’s vows have teeth. Magic is funny like that. It’s not a linear
thinker. The point is, if you mash it all up together and you have a big
enough pot and you’re very good at witchcraft, you can wind up with a
cauldron full of tomorrow. That lump of greasy, slimy goop is a prophecy,
and my sister cast it for you.”

    “What does it say?”

    “Oh, so many things, September, if you know how to look. Would you
like to know how? Would you like to be able to divine the meaning of that
blob there, the color of mashed potatoes, or that vein of jelly? Would you
like to be a witch?”

    “Witchery is a life of wonder,” said Hello, “all the wheeling stars at
your command, all the days of the future laid out before you like dolls in
bronze armor!”

    “And a really top-notch hat,” added Manythanks.

    “The Marquess has a fine hat, too,” said September, shaking her head
to clear Goodbye’s sudden perfume. “I’ve been told.”

    Their faces darkened a little.

    “Well, I’m sure we’ll all be wearing tweed trousers by fall,” Goodbye
snapped sarcastically. She shut her eyes and shook her head. When she
opened them again they were once more pools of deep violet, glistening
with promises. “But we were discussing your prospects, my dear. For as
much as I would like to bring you into my coven this very day, something
bars me from accepting such a charming, polite, intelligent young ward. For
a witch is nothing without her Spoon, and the Marquess stole mine years
ago, because she is capricious and selfish and a brat.” Hello and
Manythanks drew back from her as though the Marquess might appear that
very moment and punish the brazen witch soundly. Goodbye hurried on.
“But if some intrepid, brave, darling child went to the City and got it back
for me, well, a witch would be grateful. You’ll know it right away, it’s a big
wooden spoon, streaked with marrow and wine and sugar and yogurt and
yesterday and grief and passion and jealousy and tomorrow. I’m sure the
Marquess won’t miss it. She has so many nice things. And when you come
back we’ll make you a little black bustle and a black hat and teach you to
call down the moon-gulls and dance with the Giant Snails that guard the
Pantry of Time.”

    September’s stomach hurt. She found it terribly hard to speak.“I’ve
only just gotten here, Miss Goodbye. I…I don’t think I want to be anything
but myself just yet. It would be like deciding on the spot to become a
geologist back home. What if I don’t like rocks when I’m older? Witchery
sounds very nice now, but I’m sure I should take better care with my…my
prospects.”

    “But the future, child! Just think of it! If you see something you don’t
like--pop! In go leek and licorice and you can change it. What could be
better?”

    “Does it really work that way? Can you really change the future?”
    Manythanks shrugged. “I’m sure it’s been done once or twice,” he said.

    September wrenched her eyes away from Goodbye’s loveliness. Her
head cooled and cleared and smoothed itself out. “Miss,” she said, “don't
you really just want your Spoon back?”

    Goodbye stood up abruptly and brushed off her black dress. The
perfume was gone, and she shrank a bit, still a somewhat handsome woman,
but the glow, the perfect colors of her, were muted and usual again.

    “Yes,” she said curtly. “I can’t get it, the Marquess has lions.”

    “Well…you don’t have to shine at me and offer me a bustle, you know.
I…I could get it for you. Maybe I could get it for you. Anyway, I could try.
What did I come to Fairyland for, after all? To wander around on the beach
like my grandfather, looking for dropped wedding rings?” September
laughed for the first time since leaving Omaha, picturing her grandfather in
his patched jacket waving his metal detector over the beach of Fairy gold. A
quest, she thought, excitement rising in her like bread, a real quest like a
real knight, and she doesn’t even see that I’m short and I don’t have a
sword.

    “Well…how gallant of you, child,” said Hello. “She didn’t mean to
offend with her shining…it’s only that the Marquess is fearful and fell.
Long ago, she hunted witches. She rode out on a great panther and wielded
her iceleaf bow against us. She broke our mother’s Spoon across her back
and killed our brothers, Farewell and Wellmet. Fine witches in the prime of
their craft, all pierced with her arrows, laid out in the snow. And all because
we would not give her what she wanted.”

    “What did she want?”

    Goodbye answered, her voice thick and ugly. “A single day. She
commanded us to simmer for her a single day, the day of her death, so that
she could hide from it. And we would not serve her.”

    September let go a long held breath. She stared into the roiling black-
violet soup, thinking furiously. The trouble was, September didn’t know
what sort of story she was in. Was it a merry one or a serious one? How
ought she to act? If it was merry, she might dash after a Spoon and it would
all be a grand adventure, with funny rhymes and somersaults and a grand
party at the end with red lanterns. But if it was a serious tale, she might
have to do something important, something involving with snow and arrows
and enemies. Of course, we would like to tell her. But no one may know the
shape of the tale in which they move. And perhaps we do not truly know
what sort of beast it is, either. Stories have a way of changing faces. They
are unruly things, undisciplined, given to delinquency and the throwing of
erasers. This is why we must close them up into thick, solid books, so they
cannot get out and cause trouble.

    Surely she must have suspected the shape of her tale when the Green
Wind appeared in her kitchen window. Certain signs are unmistakeable. But
now she is alone, poor child, and there do not seem to be too terribly many
fairies about, and instead of dancing in mushroom rings she must contend
with very formal witches and their dead brothers, we must pity her. It is
terribly easy for me to tell you what happened to her--why, I need only
choose a noun and a few verbs and off she goes! But September must do the
choosing, and the going, and you must remember, from your own
adventuring days, how harsh a task lies before her at this moment.

      But a machinist’s daughter can be shrewd and practical. And can’t
there be snow and enemies and red lanterns and somersaults? And at least
one mushroom ring? That would be the best thing, really, if she can manage
it.

      There must be blood, the girl thought. There must always be blood.
The Green Wind said that, so it must be true. It will all be hard and bloody,
but there will be wonders, too, or else why bring me here at all? And it's the
wonders I'm after, even if I have to bleed for them.

      Finally, September stepped forward and quite without knowing she
meant to do it, dropped to one knee before the witch Goodbye. She bent her
head to hide her trembling and said: “I am just a girl from Omaha. I can
only do a few things. I can swim and read books and fix boilers if they are
only a little broken. Sometimes I can make very rash decisions when really
I ought to keep quiet and be a good girl. If those are weapons you think
might be useful, I will take them up and go after your Spoon. If I return,”
September swallowed hard. “I ask only that you give me safe passage back
to the closet between worlds, so that I can go home when it is all over and
sleep in my own bed. And…a favor.”

      “What sort of favor?” said Goodbye warily.
    September frowned. “Well, I can’t think of anything good just now. But
I will do, by and by.”

    The moon peered over the clouds at them. With great solemnity, Hello
and Goodbye spat into their hands and shook on the bargain.

    “What about the lions?” Goodbye said fearfully.

    “Well, I have some experience with big cats. I expect lions are no more
fearsome than leopards,” answered September, though she was not quite so
sure as she sounded. “Only, tell me, where does the Marquess live? How
can I get there?”

    As one, the three witches pointed west, through a cleft in the cliffs.
“Where else?” said Manythanks. “The capital. Pandemonium.”

    “Is it very far?”

    They all looked shamefacedly at their feet. More than very, then.

    “Goodbye,” said Hello.

    “Many thanks,” said Goodbye.

    “Farewell,” said Manythanks, and kissed her very lightly on the cheek.
The wairwulf’s kiss joined the Green Wind’s there, and the two of them got
along very well, considering.
    The full moon shone jubilantly as September strode up over the dunes
and into the interior of Fairyland with her belly full of witch-cake. She
smelled the sweet, wheat-sugar scent of sea grass and listened to distant
owls call after mice. And then she suddenly remembered, like a crack of
lightning in her mind: check your pockets. She lay her sceptre down in the
grass and dug into the pocket of her green smoking jacket. September
pulled out a small crystal ball, glittering in the moonlight. A single perfectly
green leaf hung suspended in it, swaying back and forth gently, as if blown
by a faraway wind.



                                       #




                              OceanofPDF.com
Chapter IV: The Wyverary

    In Which September Is Discovered by a Wyvern, Learns of a Most
Distressing Law, and Thinks of Home (But Only Briefly).




    September woke in a meadow full of tiny red flowers. She had walked
through the night, watching the moon slowly fall down into the horizon and
all the dark morning stars turn in the sky like a silver carousel. It was
important, she reasoned, not to fall asleep in the dark where deviant things
might carry her off. No matter how tired she was, how sore her bare foot,
she would wait til morning, when she could be assured of the sun to keep
her warm while she dreamed. And the sun had pulled up a warm blanket of
her light over the little girl, tucking her in with gentle beams. September’s
long hair had dried on the meadow-grass and her orange dress was only a
little stiff now, from the salt of the sea. She yawned and stretched.

    “What happened to your shoe?” said a big, deep, rumbling voice.
September froze in mid-stretch. Two blazing, flame-colored eyes danced
before her. A dragon was staring at her with acute interest, crouching like a
cat in the long grass. His tail waved lazily. The beast’s lizardish skin glowed
a profound red, the color of the very last embers of the fire. His horns (and
these horns led September to presume the dragon a he) jutted out from his
head like a young bull’s, fine and thick and black. He had his wings tucked
neatly back along his knobbly spine--where they were bound with great
bronze chains, and fastened with an extremely serious-looking lock.

    “I…I lost it,” said September, holding herself utterly still so as not to
spook either the dragon or herself, her arms still stuck out into the air. “It
fell into the sink as I was climbing onto a Leopard.”

    “That’s not losing it,” the beast rumbled sagely, “that’s leaving it.”

    “Um,” said September.

    “Don’t wear shoes myself,” the dragon haroomed. “Tried when I was a
wee thing, but the cobblers gave me up for lost.” He rose up on heavily
muscled hind legs and, balancing carefully on one of them, flexed one
enormous, three-toed scarlet foot. His black claws clicked together with a
sound like typewriter keys clacking. “You’re very quiet! Why don’t you say
something? Why don’t you do a trick? I’ll be impressed, I promise. Start
with your name, that’s easiest.”

    September put down her arms and folded them in her lap. The dragon
hunched in close, his smoky-sweet breath flaring huge red nostrils.
“September,” she said softly. “And…well, I’m very scared and I don’t know
if you’re going to eat me or not, and it’s hard to do tricks when you’re
scared. Anyway, where I come from, it’s a known fact that dragons eat
people and I prefer to be the one doing the eating, if eating is to be done.
Which it hasn’t been since last night. I don’t suppose you have cake? I think
dragon food would be all right, it’s only Fairy food I’m to watch out for.”
    “How funny you are!” crowed the beast. “First off, I am not a dragon. I
don’t know where you could have gotten that idea. I was very careful to
show you my feet. I am a Wyvern. No forepaws, see?” The Wyvern
displayed his proud, scaled chest, the color of old peaches. He balanced
quite well on his massive hindquarters, and the rest of him rose up in a kind
of squat S-shape, ending in the colossal head, which bore many teeth and a
thick jaw and snapping bits of fire-colored whiskers. “And you must have
very rude dragons where you come from! I’ve never heard the like! If
people show up to a dragon’s mountain yelling about sacrifices and O ye
FELL BEAST SPARE MY VILLAGE this and GREAT DRAGON I
SHALL MURDER THEE that, well, certainly, a fellow might have a
chomp. But you oughtn’t judge, any more than you judge a lady for eating
the lovely fresh salad that a waiter brings her in a restaurant. Secondly, no, I
don’t have any cake.”

    “Oh. I didn’t mean any offense.”

    “Why should I be offended? Dragons are a bit more than cousins, but a
bit less than siblings. I know all about them, you see, because they begin
with D.”

    “What is your name, Wyvern? I should have been more polite.”

    “I am the Honorable Wyvern A-Through-L, small fey. I would say ‘at
your service’ but that’s rather fussy and I’m not, you see, so it would be
inaccurate.”
    “That’s a very funny name for…” September considered her words.
“Such a fine beast,” she finished.

    “It’s a family name,” A-Through-L said loftily, scratching behind one
horn. “My father was a Library. So properly speaking, I am a Lyvern, or…a
Libern? A Wyverary? I am still trying to find the best term.”

    “Well, I think that’s very unlikely,” said September, who preferred
Wyverary.

    “However unlikely it may seem, it is the truth, and therefore one
hundred percent likely. My sainted mother was the familiar of a highly
puissant Scientiste, and he loved her. He polished her scales every week
with beeswax and truffle oil. He fed her sweet water and bitter radishes
grown by hand in his laboratory, and therefore much larger and more bitter
than usual radishes. He petted her, and called her a good Wyvern, and made
a bed for her out of river rushes and silk batting and old bones. (They didn’t
come from anyone he knew, so that was all right, and a Wyvern nest has to
have bones, or else it’s just not home.) It was quite a good situation for my
mother, even if she hadn’t liked him a great deal and thought him very wise.
As all reptiles know, the bigger the spectacles, the wiser the wearer, and the
Scientiste wore the biggest pair ever built. But even the wisest of men may
die, and that is especially true when the wisest of men has a fondness for
industrial chemicals. So went my mother’s patron, in a spectacular display
of Science.”

    “That’s very sad,” sighed September.
    “Terribly sad! But grief is wasted on the very roasted. Without her
companion, my mother lived alone in the ruins of the great Library, which
was called Compleat, and a very passionate and dashing Library indeed.
Under the slightly blackened rafters and more than slightly caved-in walls,
my mother lived and read and dreamed, allowing herself to grow closer and
closer to Compleat, to notice more and more how fine and straight his
shelves remained, despite great structural stress. That sort of moral fortitude
is rare in this day and age. By and by, my siblings and I were born and
romped on the balconies, raced up and down the splintered ladders, and
poured over many encyclopedias and exciting novels. I know just
everything about everything--so long as it begins with A through L. My
mother was widowed by a real estate agent some years ago and I never
finished the encyclopedia. Anyway, mother told us all about our father
when we were yearlings. We asked: why do we not have a Papa? And she
said: your Papa is the Library, and he loves you and will care for you. Do
not expect a burly, handsome Wyvern to show up and show you how to
breathe fire, my loves. None will come. But Compleat has books aplenty on
the subject of combustion, and however odd it may seem, you are loved by
two parents, just like any other beast.”

    September bit her lip. She did not know how to say it gently. “I had a
friend back home named Anna-Marie,” she said slowly. “And her father
sold lawnmowers all over Nebraska, and some in Kansas, too. When Anna-
Marie was little, her daddy ran off with a lady from Topeka with the biggest
lawn in the county. Anna-Marie doesn’t even remember her daddy, and
sometimes when she’s sad, her mother says she didn’t have one, that she’s
an angel’s daughter and no awful lawnmower salesman had a thing to do
with her. Do you think, maybe…it could have been like that, with your
mother?”

     A-Through-L looked pityingly at her, his blazing red face scrunched up
in doubt. “September, really. Which do you think is more likely? That some
brute bull left my mother with egg and went off to sell lonemozers, or that
she mated with a Library and had many loved and loving children? I mean,
let us be realistic! Besides, everyone says I look just like my father. Can’t
you see my wings? Are they not made of fluttering vellum pages? If you
squint you can even read a history of balloon travel!”

     A-Through-L lifted his wings slightly, to show their fluttering, but the
great bronze chain kept them clamped down. He waggled them feebly.

     “Oh, of course. How silly of me. You must understand, I am new to
Fairyland,” September assured him. But really, his wings were leathery and
bony, like a pterodactyl’s, and not like vellum at all, and there was certainly
nothing written there. September thought the creature was a little sad, but
also a little dear.

     “Why are your wings chained up?” She asked, eager to change the
subject. A-Through-L looked at her as though she must be somehow
addled.

     “It’s the law, you know. You can’t be so new as all that. Aeronautic
locomotion is permitted only by means of Leopard or licensed Ragwort
Stalk. I think you’ll agree I’m not a Leopard or made of Ragwort. I’m not
allowed to fly.”
    “Whyever not?”

    A-Through-L shrugged. “The Marquess decreed that flight was an
Unfair Advantage in matters of Love and Cross-Country Racing. But she’s
awfully fond of cats, and no one can tell Ragwort to sit still, so she granted
special dispensations.”

    “But surely you’re bigger than the Marquess. Couldn’t you say no?
Squash her or roast her or something?”

    A-Through-L marveled. His mouth dropped open a little. “What a
violent little thing you are! Of course I’m bigger and of course I could say
no, and of course in the days of Good Queen Mallow this would never have
happened and we’re all very upset about it, but she’s the Marquess. She has
a hat. And muscular magic besides. No one says no to her. Do you say no to
your Queen?”

    “We don’t have a Queen where I live.”

    “Then I’m sorry for you. Queens are very splendid, even when they
call themselves Marquesses and chain up poor Wyverns. Well, very
splendid and very frightening. But splendid things are often frightening.
Sometimes it’s the fright that makes them splendid at all. What kind of
place did you come from, with no Queens and bad fathers and Anna-
Marees?”

    “Just one Anna-Marie. I come from Nebraska.” September thought.
Home seemed very far away now, and she did not yet miss it. She knew,
dimly, that this made her a bad daughter, but Fairyland was already so large
and interesting that she tried not to think about that. “It’s very flat and
golden, and my mother lives there. Every day she goes to a factory and
works on airplane engines because everyone’s fathers left for the war, and
there was no one left to make airplanes. She’s very smart. And pretty. But I
don’t see her much anymore and my father went away with all the others.
He said he would be safe, because he would be mainly learning things
about other armies and writing them down, not shooting at them. But I
don’t think he’s safe. And I don’t think my mother does, either. And the
house is dark at night and there are howling things out on the prairies. I
keep everything as clean as I can so that when she comes home she’ll be
happy, and tell me stories before bed, and teach me about boilers and things
that she knows.” September rubbed her arms to keep warm in a sudden
breeze that kicked and bucked through the field of little red flowers. “I
don’t really have many friends back home. I like to read and the other kids
like to play baseball or play with jacks or curl their hair. So when the Green
Wind came to my window, I knew what he was about, because I’ve read
books where things like that happen. And I didn’t have anyone to miss,
except my mother.” September wiped her nose a little. “I didn’t wave
goodbye to her when we flew away. I know I ought to have. But she goes to
the factory before I’m awake in the morning and just leaves biscuits and an
orange on the table and so I thought maybe I wouldn’t say goodbye to her,
since she doesn’t say goodbye to me. I know it was vicious of me! But I
couldn’t help it. And really, she leaves little notes with the biscuits and
sometimes funny drawings and I didn’t leave her anything so it’s not fair at
all. But I don’t want to go home either because there aren’t gnomes and
witches and wyveraries at home, just nasty kids with curly hair and a lot of
teacups that need washing, so I will say I’m sorry later, but I think it’s better
to be in Fairyland than not in Fairyland on the whole?”

    A-Through-L carefully put his claw around her shoulders. His talons
quite dwarfed her. She wrapped her arms around one and leaned against it
the way she might have leaned against an oak trunk back home.

    “Except…things are not all well in Fairyland, are they? The witches’
brothers are dead and they’ve no Spoons and your wings are all chained and
sore--don’t say they aren’t, Ell, I can see where they’ve rubbed the skin
away. And can I call you Ell? A-Through-L is so very many syllables.
Things are not right here, and I haven’t even seen a proper Fairy at all, with
glittering wings and little dresses. Just sad folk and no food. And that’s
more than I’ve said to anyone in forever, even the Green Wind. I do wish he
had been allowed to come with me. I believe I am sick to death of hearing
what is and is not allowed. What is the purpose of a Fairyland if everything
lovely is outlawed, just like in the real world?”

    “How poor you are, September. You make my heart groan. I know
about Homesickness. It begins with H. What will you do?”

    September sniffed and straightened up. She was not one to feel sorry
for herself for long. “Mainly, I am going to Pandemonium, to steal the
Spoon which belongs to the witch Goodbye, so that she can cook up the
future again, and not feel so sad.”

    A-Through-L sucked in his breath. “That’s the Marquess’s Spoon,” he
whispered.
    “I don’t care if it is! What a dreadful person the Marquess must be,
with her ugly chains and her bow and her silly hat! I shan’t feel at all bad
about stealing from her!”

    The Wyverary drew his huge foot back and settled down on his
haunches just exactly like a cat, so that his face was on a level with
September’s. She saw now that his eyes were kindly, not fearsome at all--
and a beautiful shade of orange.

    “I am going to the City myself, human girl. After my mother was
widowed, my siblings and I went each our separate ways: M-Through-S to
be a governess, T-Through-Z to be a soldier, and I to seek our old
grandfather--the Municipal Library of Fairyland, which owns all the books
in all the world. I hope that he will accept me and love me as a grandson,
and teach me to be a librarian, for every creature must know a trade. I know
I have bad qualities which stand against me--a fiery breath being chief
among these--but I am a good beast and I enjoy alphabetizing, and perhaps
I may get some credit for following in the family business.” The Wyverary
pursed his great lips. “Perhaps we might travel together, for a little while?
Those beasts with unreliable fathers must stick together, after all. And I
may be a good deal of help in the arena of Locating Suppers.”

    “Oh, I would like that, Ell,” said September happily. She did not like to
travel alone, and she missed the Leopard and her Green Wind fiercely. “Let
us go now, before the sun gets low again. It is cold in Fairyland at night.”

    The two of them began to walk west, and the chains around the
Wyverary’s red wings jangled and clanked. September was not even so tall
as his knee, so after awhile he let her climb the chains and ride upon his
back, sliding her sceptre through the links. September could not know that
humans riding Marvelous Creatures of a Certain Size was also not allowed.
A-Through-L knew, but for once he did not care.

    “I shall amuse you along the way,” he boomed, “by reciting all of the
things I know. Aardvark, Abattoir, Abdication, Adiago, Alligator, Araby…”



                                      #




                              OceanofPDF.com
Chapter V: The House Without
Warning

    In Which September Measures the Distance to Pandemonium,
Receives a Brief Lecture in History, Meets a Soap Golem, and Is
Thoroughly Scrubbed.




    September bit into a fat, juicy persimmon. Well, something like a
persimmon. Rather larger, greener, and tasting of blueberry cream, but it
looked terribly like a persimmon, and so September had resolved to call
them that. A-Through-L still worried a poor tree, which was so tall and
stubbornly thick that no small girl could ever have hoped to climb it, even if
she had known that there was fruit up there in its yellowy-silver branches.
Still, if a dragon--a wyvern--brings it to me, September thought, it’s dragon
food and not Fairy food at all, and no one should blame me for breakfast.
September insisted she was full between peals of laughter, but the Wyverary
seemed to delight in charging the tree with a cheerful snarl and smacking
into it full force until the helpless fruit gave up and came tumbling down.
After each blow, A-Through-L sat back on his enormous haunches and
shook his head, sending his whiskers a-flying. The sight of it kept
September laughing helplessly, her skirt tumbling-full of oozing, green-
orange, blueberryish persimmons.
       The sun hitched up her trousers and soldiered on up into the sky.
September squinted at it and wondered if the sun here was different than the
sun in Nebraska. It seemed gentler, more golden, deeper. The shadows it
cast seemed more profound. But September could not be sure. When one is
traveling, everything looks brighter and lovelier. That does not mean it is
brighter and lovelier, it just means that sweet, kindly home suffers in
comparison to tarted-up foreign places with all their jewels on.

       “How far is it to Pandemonium, Ell?” yawned September. She
stretched her legs, flexing the bare toes of her left foot.

       “Can’t say, small one.” The beast thwacked into the tree again.
“Pandemonium begins with P, and therefore I don’t know very much about
it.”

       September thought for a moment. “Try ‘Capital’ instead. That starts
with C. And Fairyland stars with F, so you could, well, cross-reference.”

       A-Through-L left off the nearly-persimmon tree and cocked his head to
one side like a curious German Shepherd. “The Capital of Fairyland is
surrounded by a large, circular river,” he said slowly, as if reading from a
book, “called the Barleybroom. It consists of four districts: Idlelily,
Seresong, Hallowgrum, and Mallowmead. Population is itinerant, but
summer estimates hover around ten thousand daimonia--that means spirits-
-”

       “And pan means all,” whispered September, since the Wyverary could
not be expected to know, on account of the P involved. In September’s
world, many things began with pan. Pandemic, Pangaea, Panacea, Panoply.
Those were all big words, to be sure, but as has been said, September read
often, and liked it best when words did not pretend to be simple, but put on
their full armor and rode out with colors flying.

    “The highest point is Groangyre Tower, home of the Royal Inventors’
Society (Madness Prerequisite), the lowest is Janglynow Flats, where once
the ondines waged their Algae Wars. Common imports: grain, wishing fish,
bicycle parts, children, sandwiches, brandywine, silver bullets--”

    “Skip to the part where it says ‘I Am This Many Miles Away from a
Girl Named September,’” suggested the girl helpfully.

    A-Through-L grimaced at her, curling his scarlet lips. “All books
should be so accommodating, butler-wise,” he snorted. “As you might
expect, the geographical location of the capital of Fairyland is fickle and
has a rather short temper. I’m afraid the whole thing moves around
according to the needs of narrative.”

    September put her persimmon down in the long grass. “What in the
world does that mean?”

    “I…I suspect it means that if we act like the kind of folk who would
find a Fairy city whilst on various adventures involving tricksters, magical
shoes, and hooliganism, it will come to us.”

    September blinked. “Is that how things are done here?”

    “Isn’t that how they’re done in your world?”
    September thought for a long moment. She thought of how children
who acted politely were often treated as good and trustworthy, even if they
pulled your hair and made fun of your name when grown-ups weren’t
around. She thought of how her father acted like a soldier, strict and plain
and organized--and how the army came for him. She thought of how her
mother acted strong and happy even when she was sad, and so no one
offered to help her, to make casseroles or watch September after school or
come over for gin rummy and tea. And she thought of how she had acted
just like a child in a story about Fairyland, discontent and complaining, and
how the Green Wind had come for her, too.

    “I suppose they are, in my world. It’s hard to see it, though, on the
other side.”

    “That’s what gnome ointment is for,” winked the Wyvern.

    “Well, we’d better be at it, then,” said September. “At least I shall have
no trouble with the shoes.” She kept a persimmon or two for a late lunch--
the pockets of her smoking jacket were quite full, yet the jacket was quite
sensitive about its figure, and did not bulge in the slightest. A-Through-L
squirmed down to the ground to allow her to climb up onto the bronze lock,
where she sat pertly, clutching the wiry red stripe of fur that ran down the
Wyverary’s long neck. She drew her sceptre from the belt of the smoking
jacket and extended it to the horizon like a sword. Blue mountains rose on
either side of their path, shining and faceted like lumps of sapphire.

    “Onward, noble steed!” She cried loudly.
    Nothing much happened. A few birds cat-called and trilled.




    As the two of them travel along, I shall take a moment’s pause, as is
my right. For it deserves remarking that if one is to obtain a monstrous
companion, a Wyvern--or a Wyverary--is really a top-notch choice. Firstly,
they rarely tire, and their gait is remarkably even, considering the poultry-
like disposition of their feet. Secondly, when they do tire, they snore, and no
ravening bandit would dare to come near. Thirdly, being French in origin,
they have highly refined tastes and are unlikely to seek out unsavory things
to eat, such as knights’ gallbladders or maidens’ bones. They much prefer a
vat or two of truffles, a flock of geese, and a lake of wine, and they will
certainly share. Lastly, their mating seasons are brief and infrequent, and the
chances of experiencing one of them is so small as to be beyond the notice
of any native guidebook, or indeed the concern of any small girl with brown
hair who might be utterly innocent of such things. Truly, it hardly bears
mentioning.

    September knew none of this. She knew only that A-Through-L was
huge and warm and kind, and smelled like roasting cinnamon and chestnuts,
and seemed to know simply everything. The rest of the alphabet held
considerably less charm once she saw the world from her perch on his back.




    A-Through-L walked late into the afternoon. The alpine grass full of
little red flowers turned gradually to a wide, wet valley, full of rich
chocolate mud and bright, iridescent flowers nodding on pearly stalks taller
than September. September tried very hard to look intrepid on her beast’s
back, and Ell tried on a look of grim determination. It did not seem to be
moving Pandemonium any closer to them. After a long while, she tucked
the sceptre between two links of chain and laid her cheek against Ell’s back.
Perhaps a city takes a long time to rouse in the morning, when it has not had
its breakfast yet, she thought. Or perhaps it has other young girls to tend to
first.

         And then, suddenly, a house rose up before them, as though it had been
crouching in wait for hours and sprang out when it thought it might scare
them most. It looked much like a Spanish mosque--if a giant had firmly
stepped on it. All the curly door-frames and tiled mosaics were broken and
leaning, each blue-green wall propping up the other. Fragrant red wood lay
about in rough piles, and pools of seeping black mud dotted the halls. Moss
covered every shattered pillar. September and her Wyverary stood before a
beautifully carved archway leading into a little courtyerd where a shabby
fountain gurgled valiantly. The arch read:




                              The House Without Warning
    “What is this place?” breathed September, climbing down the
Wyverary’s red flank. She was becoming quite agile at it.

    A-Through-L shrugged. “Too many W’s,” he whispered. “If only my
sister were here!”

    “It is my mistress’s house,” came a thick, wet voice behind them.

    September turned to see a most curious lady standing serenely on a
patch of tile depicting a great blue rose. The woman stood in the precise
center of the rose. A rich, clean perfume surrounded her in a light pinkish
haze, for the woman was carved entirely from soap. Her face was a deep
olivey green castile, her hair a rich and oily Marseille, streaked with lime-
peels. Her body was patchwork: here strawberry soap with bits of red fruit
showing through, there saffron and sandalwood, orange and brown. Her belt
was a cord of hard, tallowy honey-soap, her hands plain blue bathing soap,
and her fingernails smelled like daisies and lemons. Her eyes were two
piercing, faceted slivers of soapstone. On her brow someone had written
TRUTH, in the kind of handwriting teachers always have: clear and curling
and lovely.

    “My name is Lye,” the soap-woman said. A few bubbles escaped her
mouth. She was utterly still. No soapy muscle trembled. “It is my part to
welcome you, to show you to the baths, to tend to you and to all weary
travelers, until my mistress returns, which will not be long now, I’m sure.”

    “Why does it say ‘truth’ on your forehead?” asked September shyly.
She could be quite brave in the presence of a Wyverary, but tall and lovely
ladies made her shy, even if they were made of soap.

    “I am a golem, child,” answered Lye calmly. “My mistress wrote it
there. She was marvelous clever, and knew all kinds of secret things. One of
the things she knew was how to gather up all the slips of soap the bath
house patrons left behind and arrange them into a girl-shape and write truth
on her forehead and wake her up and give her a name and say to her: be my
friend, and love me, for the world is terrible lonely and I am sad.”

    “Who was your mistress, Lye?” said A-Through-L, settling into the
courtyerd as best he could, his feet crunched up against a broken pillar.
“She sounds like someone who spends a lot of time in libraries, which are
the best sorts of people.”

    Lye sighed--her bayberry soap shoulders rose and fell abruptly, as
though no one had really taught her how to sigh before. “She was a
beautiful young girl with hair like new soap and big green eyes and a mole
on her left cheek and she was a Virgo and she liked a hot bath first and then
a very cold one right after and she always went barefoot and I miss her. I
am sure she did spend a lot of time in libraries, for she was always reading
books, little ones she could hang from her belt and regular ones with garish
covers and big ones, too, so big she’d lay on her stomach in the spine to
read them. Her name was Mallow and she has been gone for years and
years but I am still here and I keep going and I never stop because I don’t
know how to stop because she said I’d never have to stop.”

    “Mallow!” cried the Wyverary, his scaly red eyebrows shooting up.
“Queen Mallow?”
    “I am sure she could have been Queen if she wanted to, she was
marvelous clever, as I said.”

    “Who is Queen Mallow?” asked September, who felt quite left out of
the excitement. “You mentioned her before. And why is there a Marquess
now if there was a Queen before? It seems to me that if you want to mess
about with monarchy you might at least get your traditions straight.”

    “Oh, September, you don’t understand!” said Ell, curling his tail down
around her. “Before the Marquess came with her lions and her great old
panther with his ivory collar, Fairyland dwelt in the eternal summer of
Good Queen Mallow, the Bright and the Bold. She loved us and governed
with rhyming songs and cherries for all on Sundays. When she rode out on
holidays, she wore a crown of red pearls the selkies gave her, and all the
pookas did gymnastics just to make her laugh. Every table groaned with
milk and wheat and sugar and hot chocolate. Every horse was fat. Every
churn was full. Queen Mallow danced in circles of silver mushrooms to
bring on the spring--and apparently, before she became Queen, ran a bath
house.”

    “But Mallow begins with M. How do you know so much about her?”
asked September.

    “Everyone knows about Good Queen Mallow,” replied the Wyverary,
shocked that September did not.

    “Master Wyvern, if you please, where has my mistress gone? It has
been many years, and I have drawn many baths, but she has never come
back to me, and I cannot sleep or eat because she didn’t teach me how to
sleep or eat and it is dark at night and bits of me slough off in the rain.”

     “Oh, darling Lye,” cried the Wyverary. “How I wish I could bring you
good news! But late in the golden reign of the Queen, the Marquess arrived
and destroyed her. Or made her sit in a corner. Reports vary. And now there
are complicated proclamations and the lamentations of the hills and my
wings are locked down to my skin and no one has cocoa at all. Some of us
hope that in the dungeons of the Briary the Queen is still alive, and playing
solitaire to pass the years, waiting for a knight to release her, to repeal the
Marquess’s laws and restore cocoa to Fairyland kettles.”

     A single liquid tear melted the cheek of the soap golem. “I suspected,”
she whispered thickly. “I suspected when the place began to break down
and crumble and cry big dusty tears at night. I suspected, because I am not
very good company. Why stay with a silly golem when you can be Queen?
Even if she said I was her friend.”

     “I’m sure she meant to come back,” said September, trying to comfort
the great, kind-hearted golem. “And we are going to Pandemonium, to steal
back a part of what the Marquess has taken away.”

     “A girl with green eyes, perhaps?”

     “Well, no, a Spoon.” September suddenly felt her lovely quest was a bit
small and shabby. But it was hers. “Do you know how far it is from here to
Pandemonium?”

     “What an odd question,” said Lye.
    “I’m not from these parts, you see,” demurred September, who was
beginning to feel she ought to have that stitched on her jacket.

    “Wherever you are, child, the House Without Warning lies between
you and Pandemonium. However you turn, you cannot get to the City
without passing through the House, without being cleaned and prepared,
without having the road washed from you and your feet made soft and your
spirit thoroughly scrubbed. I thought all cities were like that. How could
they bear to have a great lot of filthy, exhausted folk milling around inside
them, grumpy and nervy and dingy?” The soap golem extended her long,
stiff arm, her skin a spiral of buttery greens. September took it. “When you
leave this place, human child, you will find Pandemonium. The two are tied
together, like a ship and a pier. Like my mistress and I, once, years and
years ago.”




    The soap golem led them to the center of the House Without Warning,
which was not really a house at all but many small rooms connected by
long tiled halls and courtyards which would once have been charming, but
were now covered in slime and green with age, falling apart, morose. Lye
thoughtfully led A-Through-L to a great waterfall whose pool would
accommodate him, but drew September further into the depths of the
House. The soft smacking sounds of her soapy heels against the floor were
pleasant, lulling. No one else seemed to be about. Everything was quiet, but
not frighteningly so. The place seemed to be, well, napping. Finally, they
entered the largest courtyard yet. In the midst of copper statues and
fountains cluttered with verdigris rested three huge bath-tubs. The floor
showed two winged hippocamps rampant in cobalt and emerald. The tubs
covered their hooves like great horseshoes.

    Lye pulled at September’s jacket and she wriggled out of it--but when
the golem tugged at her orange dress as well, September quailed.

    “What's wrong?”

    “I…don’t like to be naked. In front of strangers.”

    Lye thought for a moment. “My mistress used to say that you couldn’t
ever really be naked unless you wanted to be. She said: even if you’ve taken
off every stitch of clothing, you still have your secrets, your history, your
true name. It’s quite difficult to be really naked. You have to work hard at it.
Just getting into a bath isn’t being naked, not really. It’s just showing skin.
And foxes and bears have skin too, so I shan’t be ashamed if they’re not.”

    “Did Mallow tell you her true name?”

    Lye nodded slowly. “But I won’t tell you. It’s a secret. She told me and
then cut her finger and mine and blood came out of her and liquid soap
came out of me and they mingled and turned golden and she kissed the
place where I’d been wounded and told me her name and not to tell, not
ever. So I won’t. She already knew mine.” The soap golem pointed shyly to
the word written on her forehead.

    “The Green Wind told me not to tell anyone my true name. But I don’t
know of any name truer than September, and if I didn’t tell anyone that was
my name, what would they call me?”
    “It cannot be your true name, or you would be in awful trouble, telling
everyone like that. If you know someone’s true name, you can command
them, like a doll.” Lye stopped uncomfortably, as though the subject caused
her pain. “It’s very unpleasant.”

    “Can’t you call Mallow back then, if you know her name?”

    Lye sobbed a little, a terribly awkward noise at the back of her throat,
like snapping a bar of soap in half. “I’ve tried! I’ve tried! I’ve called and
called and she won’t come so she must be dead! And I don’t know what to
do except keep the baths full.”

    September took a step back from the force of the golem’s grief. She
slowly pulled off her orange dress--which to tell the truth had become rather
filthy--and her precious remaining shoe. In the cooling evening, she stood
naked before the impassive golem, uncomplaining. “The baths smell very
nice,” she whispered. She only wanted the golem to stop being sad.

    A breeze came sighing along the courtyard and picked up her clothes
and her shoe, shaking them and soaking them in the fountain water to get
the seawater and beach-grime out of it. The green smoking jacket spluttered
and wrinkled, most upset.

    Lye lifted September up suddenly and put her down in the first tub,
which was really more like an oak barrel, the kind you store wine in, if you
need to store rather a lot of wine, for it was enormous. September’s head
ducked immediately under the thick, bright gold water. When she bobbed
up again, the smell of it wrapped her up like a warm scarf: the scent of
fireplaces crackling and warm cinnamon and autumn leaves crunching
underfoot. She smelled cider and a rainstorm coming. The gold water clung
to her in streaks and clumps, and she laughed. It tasted like butterscotch.

    “This is the tub for washing your courage,” Lye said, her voice as even
and calm as ever, performing her allotted task, grief packed away for the
duration of a bath.

    “I didn’t know one’s courage needed washing!” gasped September as
Lye poured a pitcher of water over her head. Or that one needs to be naked
for that sort of washing, she thought to herself.

    Lye poured a bucketful of golden water over September's head. “When
you are born,” the golem said softly, “your courage is new and clean. You
are brave enough for anything: crawling off of staircases, saying your first
words without fearing that someone will think you are foolish, putting
strange things in your mouth. But as you get older, your courage attracts
gunk, and crusty things, and dirt, and fear, and knowing how bad things can
get and what pain feels like. By the time you’re half-grown, your courage
barely moves at all, it’s so grunged up with living. So every once in awhile,
you have to scrub it up and get the works going, or else you’ll never be
brave again. Unfortunately, there are not so many facilities in your world
who provide the kind of services we do. So most people go around with
grimy machinery, when all it would take is a bit of spit and polish to make
them paladins once more, bold knights and true.”

    Lye broke off one of her deep blue fingers and dropped it into the tub.
Immediately, a creamy froth bubbled up, clinging to September’s skin and
tickling.

     “Your finger!” she cried.

     “Don’t fear, little one. It doesn’t hurt. My mistress said: give of
yourself and it will return to you as new as new can be. And so my fingers
do, when the bathers have gone.”

     September looked inside herself to see if her courage was shining up.
She didn’t feel any different, besides the pleasure of a hot bath and clean
skin. A little lighter, maybe, but she could not be sure.

     “Next tub!” said Lye and lifted her up, still covered with golden foam,
out of the oak barrel and into a shallow, sloping bronze tub like noble ladies
in films used. September loved the movies, though they could not afford to
go often, and in her most private moments she thought her mother was
prettier than any of the girls on the screen.

     The water of the bronze tub gleamed icy and green, redolent of mint
and forest nights and sweet cakes, hot tea and very cold starlight.

     “This is for washing your wishes, September,” said Lye, breaking off
another of her fingers with a thick snap. “For the wishes of one’s old life
wither and shrivel like old leaves if they are not replaced with new wishes
when the world changes. And the world always changes. Wishes get slimy
and their color fades, and soon they are just mud like all the rest of the mud,
and not wishes at all, but regrets. The trouble is, not everyone can tell when
they ought to launder their wishes. Even when one finds oneself in
Fairyland and not at home at all, it is not always so easy to remember to
catch the world in its changing, and change with it.”

    Lye dropped in her finger, which did not foam this time, but melted,
like butter in a pan, over the surface of the green water. September sank
under and held her breath, as she often did at home, practicing for a
swimming meet. I used to wish my father would come home, and my
mother would let me come sleep with her like when I was a baby. I used to
wish I had a friend at school who would play games and read books with
me, and then we would talk about what wonderful things had happened to
the children in the books. But all that seemed faraway now. Now I wish…I
wish the Marquess would leave everyone alone. And that I could be a…a
paladin, like Lye said. A bold knight and true. And that I will not cry when I
get afraid. And that Ell really is part-library, even though I know he
probably isn’t. And that my mother will not be angry when I get home.

    September’s hair floated up above her head in drifting curls. Lye
scrubbed her, even under the water, with a rough brush until her skin
tingled. Abruptly, the soap golem lifted her up and dropped her into the next
tub, a silver clawfoot filled with creamy hot milk. It smelled of vanilla and
rum and maple syrup, just like Betsy Basilstalk’s cigarette. Lye stroked
September’s hair in the new bath and lifted several pitchers of it over her
head. She broke off her thumb and swirled it three times through the bath,
counter-clockwise. All traffic travels widdershins, giggled September to
herself. It fizzed and sparkled, showering the surface with blue sparks.

    “Lastly,” Lye said, “we must wash your luck. When souls queue up to
be born, they all leap up at just the last moment, touching the lintel of the
world for luck. Some jump high and can seize a great measure of luck,
some jump only a bit and snatch a few loose strands. Everyone manages to
catch some. If one did not have at least a little luck, one would never
survive childhood. But luck can be spent, like money, and lost, like a
memory, and wasted, like a life. If you know how to look, you can examine
the kneecaps of a human and tell how much luck they have left. No bath
can replenish luck that has been spent on avoiding an early death by
automobile accident or winning too many raffles in a row. No bath can
restore luck lost through absent-mindedness and over-confidence. But luck
withered by conservative, tired, riskless living can be plumped up again--
after all, it was only a bit thirsty for something to do.”

     Lye pushed September down into the milk again. She shut her eyes and
sank into the warm cream, enjoying it, flexing her aching toes. She did not
know whether her luck was even then growing more robust, but she found
she did not much care. Baths are marvelous whether or no, she thought, and
Fairy baths best of all.

     The soap golem pulled September at last from the luck-bath and began
drying her with long, flat, stiff banana leaves, baked brown by the sun. She
tousled her clean, wet hair. When September was beginning to feel quite
dry and happy, the Wyverary ducked into the courtyard, shaking his scales
like an indignant cat. He tried to shake out his wings, but the chain stopped
him short, and he winced. September’s sceptre jangled against the padlock.

     “Brrr!” he boomed. “I suppose I’m clean, if it matters. Books don’t
judge one for being a touch well-traveled.”
     The soap golem nodded. “And ready for the City to take you in.”

     The little breeze returned September’s clothes, crisp and clean and dry,
scented lightly with a bit of water from the baths of courage, and wishing,
and luck. She could not be sure, but she thought the breeze might have
purred a bit, rather like a leopard.

     “If you see her,” said Lye softly, almost whispering. “My mistress. If
you see her, tell her I am still her friend, and there are ever so many more
games to play…”

     “I shall, Lye, I promise,” said September, and reached up suddenly to
hug the golem, though she hadn’t meant to. Lye slowly enfolded her soap-
arms around the child. But when September reached up to kiss the golem’s
brow, Lye drew back sharply before her lips could touch the word written
there.

     “Careful,” Lye said. “I am fragile.”

     “That’s all right,” said September suddenly, feeling the warm
cinnamon courage of her bath bubble up inside her, fresh and bright. “I’m
not.”




     The House Without Warning was possessed of a small door nestled up
beside a marble statue of Pan blowing his horn--if only September knew
that Pan is also a man, and not merely a prefix! Well, nevermind. But it was
too late for warnings now, as the House well knew. The door straightened
up and opened gallantly for the Wyverary and the girl. Seagulls cried from
inside, and many voices jangled together, but all was dark within. Slowly,
they stepped through into the black.

    “Ell,” said September as they crossed the threshold, “what sort of tubs
did you wash in?”

    The Wyverary shook his great head and would not speak.




                                       #




                             OceanofPDF.com
Chapter VI: Shadows In The Water

    In Which September Crosses a River, Receives a Lesson in Evolution,
and Loses Something Precious, But Saves a Pooka.




    The Barleybroom River roared and splashed as September and the
Wyverary stepped through the bath-house door onto a rich, wet, green bank.
At least, September presumed it was the Barleybroom. Something colorful
and hazy floated in the center of the river as it foamed along round it in a
great circle. September almost tripped for gawking. Folk surrounded them,
pushing, laughing, shouting, all laden with every kind of suitcase and
traveling pack, from brass-banded steamer trunks to green handkerchiefs
tied around knotty sticks of hawthorn. September tried to look as though
she belonged there, back straight, eyes ahead. Black river mud squelched
between toes of her one bare foot.

    Every sort of creature jostled for position, trying gamely to get to a
long, pale pier first: centaurs and satyrs and brownies and will o’ the wisps,
birds with girls’ legs and girls with birds’ legs, trolls with splendid epaulets
and dwarves in velvet trousers and waistcoats, hobgoblins plying violins as
they walked, mice taller than September, and a great number of human-
seeming ladies and lords and children. September caught the eye of one of
them, a little girl in a neat hazelnut-husk dress. She had red columbines
tangled up in her blonde hair. She danced around her mother, teasing and
pulling at her skirt. The girl clapped her gaze on September in mid-leap.
She winked wickedly and shivered her shoulders--and suddenly the girl was
a sleek black jackal pup, with a gold stripe down her back. Now, jackals are
not the wicked creatures some irresponsible folklorists would have children
believe. They are quite sweet and soft, and their ears are clever and
enormous. Such a lovely creature the little girl had become. Only her
narrow blue eyes were the same. Her great tall ears twitched and she
continued on pestering her mother with yips and nips.

     “Did you know,” said the Wyverary happily, snuffling the fresh air with
his huge nostrils, “that the Barleybroom used to be full of tea? There was an
undertow of tea leaves, flowing in from some tributary. It used to be, oh, the
color of brandy, with little bits of lemon peel floating in, and lumps of sugar
like lily pads.”

     “It’s not tea now, at least, I’ve never had tea colored indigo.”

     “Well, the Marquess said that sort of thing was silly. Everyone knows
what a river looks like, she said. She got the Glashtyn to dam the tributary
and drag along nets to catch all the leaves, and eat up all the lemon peels
and sugar cubes. They cried while they did it. But you see now, it’s a nice,
normal blue color.” The Wyverary scowled. “Proper, I guess,” he sighed.
The jackal-girl chased her tail.

     “What is that girl, Ell?”
    “Mmm? Oh, just a Pooka, I suspect. Starts with P. None of mine, you
know.”

    Finally, the procession fanned out before a great, gnarled pier of
driftwood and ropy yellow vines. A great barge moored there, tiered like a
black cake. Green paper lanterns swung from its ledges and arches; fell
designs had been long ago carved into its wood. All along the top were old
men leaning against monstrous poles. Ribbons and lily-strands streamed
from the pole-tips. The whole effect was very gay and festive, but the old
men were haggard and salty and grim.

    “The Barleybroom Ferry!” crowed the Wyverary. “Of course, never
was a need for it before, when a body could fly into Pandemonium as quick
as you like. But progress is the goal of all good souls.”

    September stared open-mouthed as they slowly inched nearer to the
gangplank. She tugged at the tip of A-Through-L’s wing.

    “It’s a Fairy,” she whispered.

    “Of course it is, girl! What did I just say?”

    “No, not a ferry, a Fairy.”

    The toll-man was ancient and hunched, his grey hair caught up in
several wild pigtails around two barnacled goat-horns. He had rheumy eyes
and glasses as thick as beer-mug bottoms and three gold hoops in one ear.
He wore a thick Navy peacoat with brass buttons and sailcloth trousers--and
two iridescent wings jutted out of the back of his tailored coat, rimmed in
gold, glittering as the sunlight made spinning violet prisms inside them.
They were bound with a delicate iron chain, thin, but enough to keep them
flat and useless against the old ferryman’s back.

    “Fare,” he growled as their turn came.

    The Wyverary cleared his prodigious throat. September started. “Oh!”
she cried. “I suppose I’m the one with the purse strings.” She pulled her
sceptre from the links in Ell’s chain. I knew I might need such a thing!
September was quite pleased with herself for displaying such excellent
foresight. With the end of one of Ell’s claws, she chipped two rubies from
the bulb of the sceptre and held them out proudly.

    “‘’E’s too big,” sniffed the ferryman. “Have to pay double for
Excessive Baggage.”

    “I am not baggage,” gasped the Wyverary.

    “Dunno. She keeps her shiny whatnot on ya. Might be Baggage. Sure
and you’re Excessive. Double fare, anyhow.”

    “It’s fine!” hushed September, and chipped a third gleaming red stone
from the sceptre. All three glittered on her palm like pricks of blood. “Easy
come, easy go. I certainly shan’t be going without you!”

    “On with it,” gruffed the ferryman, waggling his caterpillary eyebrows
and scooping up the gems.

    The Wyverary gave one giant leap and settled gracefully on the top
level of the great black ferry. September walked with her head straight, up
the plank and around the spiral staircase to join him. Perhaps it was Lye’s
bath, but she felt quite bold and intrepid, and having paid her own way,
quite grown-up. This, inevitably, leads to disastrous decisions, but
September could not know that, not then, when the sun was so very bright,
and the river so blue. Let us allow her these new, strange pleasures.

    No?

    Very well, but I have tried to be a generous narrator, and care for my
girl as best I could. I cannot help that readers will always insist on
adventures, and though you can have grief without adventures, you cannot
have adventures without grief.

    Chaise longues in blue and gold dotted the sunny deck of the Fairy.
Lithe blue women and great pale trolls lay out, bathing in the light. A-
Through-L snorted happily along with the creaking and groaning sounds of
the ferry uncoupling from the pier.

    “Isn’t it lovely to be on our way,” he sighed, “to be near the City? The
great City, where everyone has hope of becoming marvelous!”

    September did not answer. A shadow fell over her, as she thought of
how often she had heard older girls in her school bathrooms talk about how
they would go one day to a place called Los Angeles and be stars, be
beautiful and rich, marry the men from the movies. A few said they might
chuck California and go to New York, where they would also be beautiful
and rich, but instead of movie stars they would be dancers and
photographers’ models and marry great writers. September had been
dubious. She had not wanted to go to either city. They seemed awful and
huge and too crammed with marriageable men. She did not want to think
that Pandemonium could be like that. She did not want Fairyland to be full
of older girls who wanted to be stars.

     “Look sharp, girl,” grumbled the ferryman, who had come up to take
his place at the pole. He did not take it up, however, and yet the ferry sailed
smoothly through the water. He just leaned against it and squinted at the
distant city. “Small’ns who daydream are like to fall off, and you’dn’t want
that.”

     “I can swim,” said September with mild indignation, recalling her
adventure in the ocean.

     “Sure and you can. But the Glashtyn have run of the Barleybroom, and
they swim better.”

     September wanted to ask about the Glashtyn, but her mouth ran away
from her.

     “Are you a Fairy, Sir?”

     The ferryman gave her a withering look.

     “Well, I mean, I think you are one, but I’d rather ask. I wouldn’t like
someone to assume I’m something I’m not! And what I mean to say is, if
you are a Fairy, then could you tell me what a Fairy is, taxonomically
speaking, and why you’re the only one I’ve seen?” September was glad for
her pronunciation of taxonomically, which she had had as a spelling word
not terribly far back.

    “Scientifick’ly speaking, a Fairy, what I am, is not much different’n a
human. Your lot evolved from monkeys. We evolved…well, it’s not talked
on in polite circles, but there never was a polite circle with a human in it.
Fairies started out as frogs. Amphibianderous, right? Well, being frogs was
no kind of fun, so we went about and stole better bits--wings from
dragonflies and faces from people and hearts from birds and horns from
various goats and antelope-ish things and souls from ifrits and tails from
cows and we evolved, over a million million minutes, just like you.”

    “I…I don’t think that’s how evolution works…” said September softly.

    “Oh? Your name Charlie Darwin all sudden-true?”

    “No, it’s just--”

    “It’s Survival of Them Who’s Best at Nicking Things, girl!

    “I mean to say, humans didn’t evolve like that--”

    “That’s your trouble, then. Don’t you go striping my facts with your
daft babbling. I say: let them as wants to evolve do it, and soak the rest. As
for why we’re not exactly thick on the ground, that’s none of yours and I’ll
thank you not to pry into family business.” The ferryman fished a corncob
pipe out of his pocket and snapped his fingers. Smoke began to trail out of
the basket, smelling mostly like a wet cornfield. “Course, if you want to
keep evolving your own self, I’d advise you get stowing away, down
below.”

    “What? Why?”

    “I’m not supposed to say. Whole point is your’n don’t know what day
the tithe comes calling.” The ferryman winked, his eyes twinkling with a
sudden, dim glee, rather more like September expected from a Fairy. “Now,
look there,” he grinned. “I’ve gone and spilt it.”

    September might well have run, but she cold not abandon her scaley
red friend, and despite being quite able to use the word taxonomically in a
sentence, was somewhat fuzzy on the meaning of tithe. Thus it was that
September was caught with her mouth hanging open when the ferry ground
splashily to a halt in the middle of the roaring river.

    “Told you, but ears like a cow, you’ve got,” sighed the ferryman, and
stuck his pole to meet the six tall men climbing six ropes, pirate-like, over
the top of the deck.

    Each of the men stood naked but for silver gauntlets and greaves, and
had black, regal horses’s heads where their boys’ heads ought to have been.
The leader, a big brass ring in his silky nose as if he were a bull, called out
in a deep, echoing voice:

    “Charlie Crunchcrab, the Glashtyn come to claim our tithe by Law and
Right of Fair Trade!”
     “I hear ya, old nag,” grumbled the ferryman. “Not so dense as all that.
Got the summons this morning and everything. Needn’t be so formal.”

     The Fairy folk gathered on the top deck quailed and clung together in
silent terror. They stared fixedly at the floor, trying desperately not to look
the horse-men in the eye. September looked across the throng at Ell, who
shook his great head and tried to hunker down and become, improbably,
invisible.

     “Bring the children up!” bellowed the horse-man.

     Rough hands grabbed September’s arms and dragged her, along with
dozens of other small ones, to stand before the Glashtyn, whose eyes
flashed blue and green fire. September looked down and saw the little
Pooka girl beside her, trembling, her jackal-ears kept appearing and
disappearing nervously. September took the child’s hand and squeezed it
comfortingly.

     “Not me,” the girl whispered. “Please let it not be me.”

     The Glashtyn walked down the line, staring each of the children in the
eye. The leader glared hard at September, and yanked her chin upward to
check her teeth. But finally, he passed her by. The horse-heads conferred.

     “That one!” cried the leader, and a ripple of relief passed through the
crowd. For a moment, September’s breath stopped, sure he was pointing
directly at her.

     But it was not her.
    The little Pooka girl screamed in utter, animal terror. She shivered into
a jackal and clambered around September’s legs, clawed up her back and
onto her shoulders, wrapping her tail around her throat.

    “No! No!” The Pooka wept, shrieking and clinging to September.

    “What’s happening?” she choked, stumbling under the weight of the
panicked jackal-girl.

    “She’s the tithe, and nothing to be done,” said the ferryman Charlie
Crunchcrab. “Might as well be grown-up and dignified about it. The ferry
pulls on through Glashtyn territory. They have a right to their fare, too. No
one knows what day it will come, or who they will choose, but, well, you
all have to get to the City, one way or any way, is-true?”

    “No! Not me! I don’t want to go! Mama, please! Where’s my mama?”

    But September could see her mother, near one of the chaises, a long
black jackal with golden ears, lying on her side, paws over her face in grief.

    “That’s the worst thing I’ve ever heard!” The girl clung to September.

    “That’s evolution, love. Take as taking can.”

    “What are they going to do to her?”

    “None of your business,” snapped the Glashtyn leader.

    The Pooka wailed: “They’ll eat me! And drown me! And lash me to
the ferry and make me pull it back and forth under the river!”
     “It’s good enough for us,” growled one of the other Glashtyn.
September saw for the first time that each of them clutched reigns and ugly,
cruel bits in their fists.

     “Please, please, please,” sobbed the child. She shivered back and forth
from girl to jackal to girl with alarming speed, the whites of her eyes
showing. September reached up to pet her and pried her slowly loose, the
claws from her hair, the tail from her throat. She cradled the jackal pup,
awkwardly, for she was not a very little creature. Her snout flashed into a
mouth and back into a muzzle as she wept.

     “Isn’t there anything else you’d take?” September said wretchedly.
“Does it have to be a child?”

     “There must be blood,” answered the Glashtyn quietly. “Do you offer
yourself as replacement? That is certainly traditional.”

     To her credit, September considered this for a moment. She was a
strong swimmer, and would likely not drown, and they hadn’t said, exactly,
that they meant to eat anyone. Being only Somewhat Heartless she could
not cradle a trembling child in her arms and not feel sorry for it and want to
keep it from being tossed overboard. But she did not want to be a tithe, and
she did not want to die, even a little bit, she did not even want to brush
shoulders with the smallest chance of it.

     “No,” she whispered. “I can’t. Isn’t there anything else? I have
rubies…”

     The horse-man snorted. “Dead rocks.”
     “I have a jacket and a shoe.”

     They stared at her.

     “Well, I haven’t anything else! But I can’t let you have her, she’s just a
kid, poor thing! How can you frighten her like this?”

     The Glashtyn’s stare bored into her. The blue fire in his eyes was
calculating.

     “You have a voice,” he said slowly, “and a shadow. Choose one, and I
will take it instead of the skin-shrugger.”

     You might think that is no kind of choice. But September was
suspicious. No bargain in Fairyland could be that easy. And yet--she could
not lose her voice, she could not! How would she talk to Ell? How would
she sing? How would she explain to her mother where she had gone? And
she could not let the girl whose arms were clutched even now around her
neck go down into the dark river. Even if they did not drown her and eat
her, the girl didn’t want to go, and September could get very cross about
that sort of thing.

     “My shadow,” she said. “Take it. Though it hasn’t any blood, you
know.”

     She set the Pooka down and the child bolted to her mother, shivering
fully into a pup midway across the ferry deck. The two jackals licked each
other’s faces and whined. The Glashtyn held out his hand to Charlie
Crunchcrab. The Fairy unbuckled an ugly, rusted, serrated knife from his
belt and passed it over.

     September had time to think: oh, this will hurt before the Glashtyn
seized her, spun her around, and sawed the knife back and forth along her
spine. She felt cold and faint. The knife made noises like shredding silk and
grinding bone. She thought she might topple over, the pain was so terrible,
running up and down her back. Still, she refused to cry. Finally, there was a
sickening crack, and the Glashtyn pulled away with a scrap of something in
his hand. A single drop of September’s blood dripped from the knife to the
bleached wood of the deck.

     The Glashtyn set the scrap of something down before him. It pooled
darkly, shining a little, and then stood up in the shape of a girl just
September’s height, with just September’s eyes and hair, all of black smoke
and shadow. Slowly, the shadow-September smiled and pirouetted on one
foot. It was not a gentle smile, or a kind one. The shadow extended her
hand to the Glashtyn, who took it, smiling himself.

     “We shall take her below and love her put her at the head of our
parades,” he said. “For she was not taken, but given, and thus our only true
possession.”

     The shadow curtsied. To September, the curtsey seemed somewhat
vicious, if a curtsey could be vicious. September was unsure that she had
done the right thing now--surely she would miss her shadow, and surely the
Glashtyn meant to make mischief with it, of some sort or another. But it
was too late--the Glashtyn leapt over board as one, with the shadow-
September riding on the leader’s shoulders. The Fairy throng stared at her,
amazed. No one would speak to her. A-through-L finally strode across the
deck to gather her up. He smelled so good and familiar, and his skin was so
warm. She hugged his knee.

     “Did I do the right thing, Charlie?” September asked the ferryman
softly.

     He shook his mad grey head. “Right or blight, done is dusted.”

     September looked across the water at the gleaming city rising up, all
towers and shine. Then, she looked down into the Barleybroom.

     Six dark horse heads glided through the water at the head of the ferry,
bits clamped in their teeth. Over their backs, a shadow girl leapt and
danced, her ghostly laughter all but eaten up by the waves.




                                      #
OceanofPDF.com
Interlude: The Key and Its Travels

    In Which We Turn Our Attention to a Long-Forgotten and Much-
Suffering Jeweled Key.




    Being careful and clever readers, you must now wonder if your
woolgathering narrator has completely forgotten the jeweled key that so
loyally followed September into Fairyland. Not so! But a key’s adventuring
is of necessity a quieter thing than a girl’s, more singleminded, and also
more fraught with loneliness.

    For the key slipped between Latitude and Longitude, and tumbled
briefly--oh so briefly!--through the starry dark behind the screen of the
world. It landed unceremoniously on the shimmering jacket of a hobgoblin
in transit from Broceliande to Atlantis. The Key blended into the other
glittery bits of folly which bedecked the jacket and went unquestioned by
Betsy Basilstalk or Rupert the Gargoyle.

    Good-naturedly illiterate, the Key had no wish to visit the blue crystal
universities of Atlantis, and unhooked its clasp just in time to tumble
through the rooty, moldy, wormy passage to Fairyland. It caught an updraft
of sea-air and soared over the fleecy clouds, playing tag with the blue-
necked gillybirds.

    It passed over the witches and narrowly avoided a sucking vortex of
the events of next week that threatened to pull it down into the cauldron.

    It flew over the field full of little red flowers, but no Wyverary, or even
a Wyvern, appeared to accompany it or explain how anything worked or
was in the days before today.

    The Key, too, found the House Without Warning, long after a nicely
scrubbed September had passed through. Under Lye’s gentle eye, the Key
primly dropped into a tiny tub and soaked until it gleamed.

    The Key missed the ferry September rode into Pandemonium and was
forced to sleep on the grassy shore, where it was picked up by a delighted
banshee child. The girl squealed piercingly and pinned the Key to her little
green-gold breast. Her mother admonished her not to pick up strange
treasures which were surely not hers, but no one can listen to a banshee
shriek in indignation for long without giving in. So it was that the Key
boarded the ferry and passed into Pandemonium, three days after September
had left the city behind.

    The Key cursed its slowness. It wept an orange tear, slightly rusted.




    The Key remembered being part of a green smoking jacket. It
remembered wanting to please. It remembered, a little, being born out of a
lapel, the sudden rush of air over facets and gold. It recalled with sorrow
being torn from its mother, the jacket, and the taste of a young girl’s blood
under its needle. It shuddered at the memory of her blood, at night.

    What the Key knew was that it was connected to September, that the
purpose of its whole being was to be with her, just to rest near her skin. The
Key had been created to make her smile. It could not stop wanting to make
her smile, any more than you can stop walking on two legs or start
breathing with your liver instead of your lungs. What if September needed
the Key? What if the world became dark and frightening and it was not
there to comfort her? The Key knew it must fly faster.

    It was only that the girl kept running, so far, and so fast, almost as if
she didn’t know that the Key was trying as hard as it could to keep up.




                                       #




                              OceanofPDF.com
Chapter VII: Fairy Reels

    In Which September Enters Pandemonium At Last and Is Discovered
by the Marquess, While A-Through-L Enjoys a Lemon Ice.




    “Go on,” said the Wyverary, nudging the girl in the orange dress with
his great red nose. “Ask.”

    September squinted dubiously. The brass face before her did not move.

    In fact, it was a brass face hoisted up on a tower of tangled brass hands
that seemed to be frozen in the acts of pleading, praying, beseeching,
orating, pointing, prodding. They wound around each other until five of
them fanned out in a kind of finger-fringed flower that held the face aloft.
The burnished face had swollen, puffy cheeks, a pursed mouth, and eyes
squeezed tightly shut. Its ears flared enormous, larger than its head. Behind
the post rose a huge, bustling, and walled city. The sounds from within
rumbled indistinctly, as bustle will do. The wall did not look terribly sturdy-
-it was patchwork, motley-colored, a dozen kinds of brocade and stiff silk
and satin and broadcloth, all sewn together with gnarled, ropy yarn the
color of squash, thicker than tree trunks. They stood at a gate of goat-hide.
The Switchpoint, for that’s what Ell called it, made a kissing face at them.
All around them well-kept lawns wound down to the lapping Barleybroom,
full of gentle little paths and sedate violets nodding pleasantly. A sundial
spun its shadow slowly around cluster of yellow peonies. Not at all what
you might expect from a place called Pandemonium, really, especially the
bird baths and commemorative benches. It looked much more like Hanscom
Park in Omaha than the outskirts of a Fairy City.

     The Switchpoint still pursed its lips at them. A sparrow landed on one
of its over sized ears and flew away again, as though the brass burned its
feet. Ell insisted that this was the way in.

     “What shall I ask?” said September, shuffling her feet.

     “Well, where do you want to go?” Ell stretched his long neck,
uncoiling it and yawning, then coiling it up again.

     “I expect to wherever the Marquess lives.”

     “That’s the Briary.”

     “But then…thieves work at night, mostly, and I ought to start acting
like a thief, if I mean to steal something. So we ought to wait, until
nightfall, you know. It’s easier to be sneaky in the dark.”

     “September, Queen Among Thieves, you will never get into
Pandemonium this way. You must have a Purpose. You must have Business
Here. Loiterers, Lackadaisicals, and other Menaces might do well in other
cities, but they are allergic to Pandemonium, and it is allergic to them. If
you do not have Business Here, you must at least pretend you do with a
very firm expression, or else learn to eat violets and converse with
sundials.”

     “We could go to the Municipal Library, see your…grandfather.”
September was still deeply unsure about Ell’s theory on his parentage.

     A-Through-L blushed, going all orange in the face. “I…I’m not
ready!” he quailed suddenly. “I haven’t had a brush-up on my studies! I
haven’t had my horns waxed or my credentials calligraphed or anything!
Tomorrow, we can go tomorrow, or maybe next week!”

     “Oh, Ell, don’t worry,” September sighed. “I think you look fine as you
are! And you’re quite the smartest beast I’ve ever known.”

     “But how many beasts have you known?”

     “Well, there’s you…and the Leopard, and the wairwulf. I’m only
eleven! I think three is a very respectable number.”

     “Not what you’d call a statistical sampling, though. But it’s no matter,
today we ride on the rails of your quest, not mine. I’m not ready. I’m just
not.” A-Through-L’s eyes turned pleading. Tears welled up, bright
turquoise, glittering.

     “Oh! It’s all right, Ell! Don’t cry!” September stroked his leathery
knee. She turned to the Switchpoint and took a deep breath, speaking as
loudly and sternly as she could.

     “Listen, Mr. Brass-Ears! I should like to find a place that is cool and
shady, somewhat near the Briary, but not too near, where we can rest and
laugh and see something wonderful of Pandemonium while we wait for the
sun to set.”

     “And lemon ices,” whispered Ell.

     “And where they serve lemon ices,” finished September firmly.

     The Switchpoint exhaled with a long, high whistle, its cheeks deflating
like spent balloons. Its eyes opened and its ears fluttered. All the hands of
the post flexed, made fists, and relaxed again.

     “Papers,” the Switchpoint said in a faint, airy voice. Its eyes were hard
brass balls, glinting with judgment.

     September fished the little green book Betsy Basilstalk had given her
out of the inner pocket of the smoking jacket. The jacket was deeply
pleased to have kept it safe for her. She held it up so the cherubic little face
could examine it. It clucked imperiously.

     “Ravished, eh? Haven’t seen one of you in awhile.” The Switchpoint
looked dubiously at A-Through-L, who scratched at the grass with one
enormous claw.

     “He’s my…companion. My wyvern,” said September hurriedly. She
hoped he would not be too offended at being called hers.

     “Do you have a Deed for him?”

     The Wyverary drew himself up to his full height, which was
considerable. “True servitude,” he said gently, “can only be voluntary.
Surely you know that, surely you once chose to stand here and frown at
those who wish only to enter the city. Surely you once did something else,
sold gloves or frightened children at festivals, and chose this instead.”

     The Switchpoint squinted up at him. “Were a soldier, we were,” it
grumbled.

     The great goat hair gate drew back like a theatre curtain. Four of the
hands at the base of the Switchpoint post began to work furiously, so fast
the fingers blurred so that September could not even see them moving.
Slowly, a deep scarlet scrap began to spread out from the post, weaving
itself as it went, a little brass thumb sliding back and forth like a shuttle. It
flowed on, raw, shimmering silk, under September’s shadowless feet and
through the gate, stopping there, as if to beckon them onward.

     September took a step forward. The hands blurred into industry again,
and the scarlet path wove swiftly on, into Pandemonium.

     “It’s all right,” said Ell confidentially as they passed through the gate.
“I know you didn’t mean it, about my being yours.” The great beast flicked
his red tail. “But I can be. And you can be mine! And what lovely games
we shall have!”




     “Isn’t it wonderful?” sighed A-Through-L happily as September gaped.
“Queen Mallow built it this way, years and years ago.”
    Pandemonium spread out around her a city of cloth. Bright storefronts
ran ahead of them, built with violet crinoline and crimson organdy. Towers
wound up in wobbly twists of stiff, shining brocade. Memorial statues wore
felt helmets over bombazine faces. High, thin, fuzzy houses puffed out
angora doors; fancy taffeta offices glimmered under the gaze of black lace
gargoyles. Even the broad avenue they stood on was a mass of ropy,
pumpkin-colored grosgrain. And there! That crooked, creased, ancient
leather obelisk must be Groangyre Tower! The warm wind filled a coppery
satin balloon at the tip-top of the tower and blew it up into a fine cupola.

    The woven scarlet path at their feet waited patiently, indulging their
country gawking.

    “She couldn’t have done it all by herself!” gasped September.

    A-Through-L shrugged. “Fierce was her needle, and she wore it like a
sword. Wielded it, too! Brandished, even! Woven things are so warm, she
said, so kind and home-like. But all that was so terribly long ago. The
Marquess would like to change it, of course, turn it all to stone tied up in
brambles, but all the brick-wights long ago learned to spin thread and knit
alleyways, and even Marquesses cannot have their way in all things.”

    A little sound rustled up from the patient path, something like a cough,
if fabric that wove itself could cough. In fact, September noticed, a great
number of linen paths wound out in front of folk as they hurried past, all of
different colors, cobalt and ochre and silver and rose, busily weaving
through side streets and thoroughfares, dodging carriage-traffic, buskers
squeezing accordions with four arms, barkers advertising roasted melons
and fresh fennel-bouquets for the discerning lover. Pedestrians, hoofed and
web-footed and eight-legged and more, confidently ran after their paths.
And on each burlap street-corner, a smaller version of their own
Switchpoint worked busily away.

    Their little red path grew even redder as September and Ell
embarrassed it by standing still.

    September laughed and ran ahead, grinning into the Pandemonium sun.
The path leapt up and wove swiftly on, barely missing a lavender crepe
streetlight and barreling right through a pair of imps haggling over a bar of
green algae. A-through-L thundered after her, squashing the linen as he
bounded down the street (which possessed the name of Onionbore) while
all and sundry hurried to get out of his way.

    The scarlet path led them more or less north-ish, and though September
loved the chase and the smell of broiling maple-blossoms and lime-liquor
brewing, she could not help but notice that every alley and avenue they
sped through seemed to point directly at a small, unassuming building
covered in wide, fluttering golden flowers--not silk flowers, but real ones,
that covered walls and fences of green briars and black thorns. The only
citadel in Pandemonium that grew and lived and was not sewn. Something
about it glowed strange and baleful. September did not like to look at it. Ell
could not help looking. But mercifully the scarlet path stopped short and
began unraveling itself backward, the way they had come, neatly balling up
its excess thread as it went.
    A rose-colored jacquard building leaned over them, its walls embossed
with fine flowers and paisleys and curlicues. A great sign arched over the
doorway. In flashing green lights it read:




    THE SILVER SHUTTLE

    NICKELODEON




    One of the green bulbs guttered a little.

    “Are those electric lights?” said September.

    “Of course,” said Ell softly, as if in awe of the flickering glow.
“Fairyland is a Scientifick place.”

    “I suppose the Marquess did that, too.”

    “No, in fact, she abhors electricity. The Inventors’ Guild did it. A
terrible racket went up for days out of Groangyre. The lightning-sylphs
were complicit, somehow. They made a mysterious sort of bargain with the
glass-ghouls and voila--electricks! Modernity is certainly a fascinating
thing. The Marquess said it was wicked, but if we wanted to engage in such
un-Fairy-like behaviors, it was our funeral. This is a brave place,
September. In the shadow of the Briary, it defies her.” Ell peered into the
cool, shadowy lobby, rich with velvet and plush and brass banisters. “And
they serve lemon ices.”
     September chipped off another pair of her sceptre’s rubies to gain
admission to a film called The Ifrit and the Zeppelin. She passed them over
to a friendly young dryad in a red uniform and a smart bell-hop’s cap.
September knew she was a dryad because her hair was all of shiny green
needles like a pine tree, sticking out in bushily under her cap. Also because
dryad begins with D, and Ell greeted her by praising the distant forest. The
dryad's eyes shone silver. She had very plump cheeks and smiled both when
September asked for tickets and when she paid her rubies.

     Shyly, September said: “If you are a dryad, where is your tree? Are you
terribly unhappy here, so far from the forest?”

     The ticket-dryad laughed, and the sound of it was a little like rain
falling on leaves. “Didn’t you know, little love? Film is made with camphor,
which is a tree. In the cinnamon family, to be exact, which is large and
boisterous and gossipy. I run the projector, and my trees run through my
fingers all day long! Just because a thing is transparent and silvery and
comes in big reels doesn’t mean it’s not a tree.”




     Thankfully, the theatre was generous and the ceiling was high, soaring
up like the inside of a cathedral. Ell settled comfortably in the rear row and
licked his lemon ice daintily. The lights lowered. September leaned
forward, munching popped pomegranate seeds from a little striped box. It’s
dryad food, really, she thought. I shall certainly be all right.
    At home, she loved the movies. She loved sitting in the dark, waiting
for something wonderful to begin. Especially the tragic and frightening
movies, where ladies fainted dead away and monsters roared up out of the
dark. Like in that cartoon her mother had taken her to see when she was
very small, where the dark-haired princess ran away into the terrible forest
and the owls flew at her and pecked at her hands. That was wonderful--
because the world was suddenly alive, and excited, and wanted things just
the way September herself sometimes wanted things. Even if the world
seemed mainly to not want a princess bothering it. September had not liked
the princess so much, either, as she had a high, breathy voice she found
deeply annoying. But the owls, and the mines, and the flashing eyes in the
wood. That she liked. And now she was in the wood, really and truly, with
the flashing eyes all around her. What could Fairy movies possibly be like?

    “The Associated Pressed Fairy Moveable Gazette Proudly Presents:
News from Around Fairyland!” announced a pleasant female voice as the
screen flickered into life. Oh, geez, thought September. A newsreel. This is
what happens when grown-ups run the movies. Can we not skip straight to
a dark-haired princess being beset by things?

    “The wedding of Ghiyath the Jann and Rabab the Marid was celebrated
with much pomp on the magnetized Arctic shores Tuesday,” continued the
smooth, sweet announcer. “Witches present brewed a bouilliabaise of a long
and interesting marriage, five children, (one a mermaid), a friendly sort of
unfaithfulness for all involved, and an early death for Ghiyath, followed by
an extended and scandalous widowhood for Rabab.”
    A huge man with golden skin like desert sand embraced a woman
passionately, one flaming hand on her foaming hair, one arm around her
sea-slick waist. She wore a dress of anenomes, opening and closing. A few
similarly-wet folk reclined on clouds, applauding, polite and bored. The
scene was in black and white, and September slumped back in her chair,
impatient for the Ifrit and her zeppelin.

    “An exhibit of artifacts from the moon opens Sunday at the Municipal
Museum. Scientists have discovered the moon is in fact made of pearl, and
are even now investigating the method by which it is attached to the
firmament, and what benefit lunar research might reveal for Fairies like
you.”

    A proud-looking spriggan with a thin, curved nose demonstrated how a
piece of moon-rock could be dissolved in a mysterious solution. He
dropped the stone into a crystal beaker with a three-fingered claw and drank
down the draught completely. The scene cut away before any effect might
be seen.

    “The Changeling Recital at Dandydown Hall went off splendidly last
week, featuring an orchestra of violins, oboes, one piano, a nickelstave, two
tubas, a lorelei, and a full grumellphone section. The children played Agnes
Buttercream’s famous Elegy for Reindeer and Roc’s Egg, in D Minor. The
conductor unwisely chose a rousing encore of Ode to Queen Mallow’s
Third Fingernail, however, and riot police were called to the scene.”

    A host of children in prim black clothing played their instruments
furiously on a stage shaped like a huge oak leaf. They all wore identical
shoes, which seemed painfully small and tight on their little feet: mary janes
very much like hers. A little piece of sad, gentle music played, sashaying
into something brighter and livelier, before two unhappy-looking kobolds
lifted the conductor unceremoniously off of the. The goblins seemed far too
strong for their sleight height.

     “The performance culminated in the righteous punishment of several
Greenlisted musicians, who certainly deserved whatever they got.”

     The same kobolds--or near cousins--hauled several terrified-looking
Satyrs onto the flickering silver stage and made them stomp their pan-pipes
underfoot. A man in a top hat and mustache brandished a whip menacingly
before the scene went dark.

     “And finally, our beloved Marquess has concluded a treaty with the
Island-Country of Buyan, bringing prosperity and order to both. We here at
the AP extend our praise and adulation to the Lovely Monarch.”

     Onscreen, a young girl vigorously shook hands with a large bear. She
was tall--but she could not have been a day older than September herself.
She wore an ornate suit made for her small frame, an embroidered jacket
over a fringed bustle. At her neck was a thin dark tie, like September’s
father once wore. The girl’s hair was thick and silver in the flickering film,
falling to her shoulders in great sausage curls. Most of all, however,
September noticed her hat. It was black--or some color which seemed black
on the old-fashioned film. It looked a bit like a cake that had fallen over to
one side under the weight of peacock and pheasant feathers and chains of
jewels that cascaded down from a silk rosette on its flat top. Ribbons, bows,
and satin ropes made delicate tiers like icing on the body, and the brim was
so crisp and perfect it seemed deathly sharp.

    The bear wrinkled his muzzle. He did not look pleased.

    September trembled a little. The Marquess seemed so awfully real. She
smiled broadly at the bear and laughed silently as the announcer nattered on
about the treaty.

    And suddenly, without warning, the Marquess onscreen turned toward
the camera, her hand still clutched in the bear’s paw. She cocked her head to
one side like a curious bird. She blinked and leaned forward, looking
directly out into the theatre--at September.

    “You,” said the Marquess in the announcer’s voice. The other patrons
twisted to look at September, who froze in terror. “It’s you.”

    Ell moved his claw around September’s seat protectively.

    “September,” said the movie-Marquess slowly, as if pulling each letter
from a stubborn cabinet. “You shouldn’t be sitting in a theatre on such a
lovely day. Why don’t you go out and play?”

    “I…”

    “Hush. Listening is tiresome for me. September, if you do not come to
the Briary right this very instant I shall become cross with you. I am a very
pleasant Marquess, if you are tractable and sweet.”
    September could not move. Her hand clutched the bag of pomegranate
seeds so tightly they began to spill out of the top. She felt as though she had
been caught out doing something awful and black. But she hadn’t done
anything! Not yet! How could the Marquess know her? Where could she
hide?

    “Right now,” hissed the Marquess, “you wicked little thief.” She
beckoned horribly with her ringed finger. The screen crackled and flickered.
Silver sparks flew for a moment, and then the Marquess’s face disappeared
in a little burnt ring and the theatre went suddenly dark.



                                       #




                              OceanofPDF.com
Chapter VIII: An Audience with the
Marquess

     In Which September Meets the Marquess At Last, Argues Several
Valid Points But Is Pressed Into Royal Service Anyway, Being Consoled
Only By the Acquisition of a Spoon and a New Pair of Shoes.




     Somewhere, under all those brambles, there was probably a building.

     A palace, even. Certainly September could make out towers, a
portcullis, even a moat of floating golden flowers. Not golden in the darling
little way folk in our world call buttercups or certain girls’ hair golden:
these flowers were genuinely gold, burnished, glowing, deep. Yet they were
soft; pleasant winds crinkled the petals as they drifted along on a lazy
current, spinning and colliding gently. But the briars tangled up everything
else, great vines thicker around than September whose thorns were awfully
sharp and angry looking. They braided each other, ran up and down the
walls, snarled in great knots. Here and there were clutches of pale gold
berries, their skin so thin September could see the juice sloshing inside. But
neither she nor the Wyverary could glimpse even an inch of masonry. It was
as though the Briary had just grown that way, and had never been any
different.
     No guards flanked the door--if it was a door. Large flowers bloomed
aggressively through an arch in the brambles in a sort of door-like fashion.
Their centers were clotted with glistening pollen. September reached out
her hand to touch one--A-Through-L cried out a wordless warning! But the
flower simply soaked her hand in pollen and closed its petals over her
fingers, searching and suckling with its silken blossom. Satisfied, it
wrinkled away and aside to allow September to duck into a hall hung with
dim, sun-dappled shadows.

     It drew closed again sharply, keeping the Wyverary outside. A-
Through-L bellowed, and the bellowing of any Wyvern is terrible to hear.
He struck the flower; it remained, tough and unyielding as bronze. The
brambles writhed a little, as if in silent, viney laughter.




     September walked through the grand hall, trying not to make noise on
the beautiful polished floor. A giant, heart-shaped double staircase ran up to
a bank of windows. There was a neat rack on which to place one’s shoes
and umbrellas. A kind of light drifted in between the bramble-vines, falling
on a grandiosely-framed painting of a tall, lovely woman with long golden
hair tied back in a velvet bow. Her hand rested on a leopard’s head, and in
her other she held a simple wooden hunter’s bow. She wore an ivory crown
and a smile so wide and kind September felt she could love that lady all the
days of her life and never feel cheated, even if she never looked twice at
such a poor, shabby soul as September. Even in the painting, she seemed to
glow. That is what a grown-up looks like, thought September. Not like the
grown-ups in my world who look sad and disappointed and grimy with
work and bored with everything. Like her. What do the storybooks say?

    In the fullness of her strength.

    “Did you come all the way here with only one shoe?” came a sweet,
wondering voice.

    September whirled away from the painting. In the center of the heart-
shaped staircase sat a little girl, holding her chin in her hands. She had thick
cherry-purple hair that hung in old-fashioned sausage-curls to her
shoulders, and that magnificent, terrible hat poised on her head, like a cake
tipping to one side. The hat was black, September could see now as she
could not when this child shook hands with a bear onscreen. The feathers
shone blue and green and red and cream-colored. The jewels glittered dark
and violet. Next to her, a huge panther purred languidly and watched
September out of one green eye.

    “That must have been just awfully painful,” the child marveled. “How
brave of you!”

    The Marquess ran one hand luxuriously along the panther’s spine,
winding her fingers in his fur--and drew up a pair of exquisite black shoes,
like September’s, if September’s shoe had grown up, gone to a great many
balls and theatrical to-dos, and found a dashing mate. They had little heels
and black crystal lilies on the toes, with bits of ribbon looping and whorling
all around, speckled with garnets and tiny black pearls. She held them out to
September, whose bare foot, truthfully, ached and throbbed with cold and
blisters. She wanted to take them, she did, but taking gifts from wicked
Queens, even if they are called Marquesses, even if they are very pretty
children not big enough to hurt anyone, is a dangerous business, and
September knew it.

    She shook her head, with much sadness. The shoes were so beautiful.

    “I am only trying to help you, child,” said the little girl. She set the
shoes gently on the gleaming floor and ran her hand along the cat’s spine
again. This time, the Marquess drew up a silver plate piled high with wet
red cherries, a wedge of black cake crusted with sugar, swollen raspberries
and strawberries, several lumps of dark, dusty chocolate, and a tall goblet of
steaming hot cider.

    “You must be so hungry. You’ve come so far!”

    September swallowed. Her throat was dry, her stomach empty. But this
was certainly Fairy food. The worst kind, the kind that never let you go, if
you even taste it once. “Is that Queen Mallow?” she said instead, nodding
toward the portrait and forcing her voice to be friendly.

    The Marquess looked up at the great painting and scowled. Her curls
shivered and went deep blue, the color of the sea. She sighed and snapped
her fingers. The rich plate disappeared.

    “You would think that new management would have the right to
redecorate. But some magic never bends, not even if you tear at it with your
own teeth. No matter how I tear, the portrait stays. She was never that
beautiful, though. The painter must have been a loyalist.” The Marquess
turned away from Queen Mallow’s sweet gaze and focused on September
again. She smiled. “But she is dead, my child. I promise you that. Dead as
autumn and last year’s apple jam. We haven’t come all this way to dish
gossip about ancient history. How have you been enjoying Fairyland,
September?”

     “How do you know my name?”

     “You filed papers, of course. You have a visa. What in the world do
you think all that is for, if not to make certain that I know everything?”

     September didn’t say anything.

     “Well, I do hope everyone has been nice to you, and hospitable in
every way they can think of. It’s important to me, September, that you’re
treated well.”

     “Oh, yes! Everyone has been terribly helpful and kind--except the
Glashtyn, I suppose. I had heard that fairies were nasty and tricky and cruel,
but they’re not, not really.”

     “Oh?” said the Marquess with arch amusement. She stroked the
panther with her small hands, covered in jeweled rings. “But they are, truly,
September. Just the worst sort of folk. You’d never believe how wicked!
They’re nice because I make them nice. Because I punish them if they are
not nice. Because I put them on the Greenlist if they are not nice. Before I
came, Fairyland was a dangerous place, full of brownies spoiling milk and
giants stomping on whomever they pleased and trolls telling awful, punning
riddles. I fixed all that, September. Do you have any idea how difficult it
was to invent bureaucracy in a world that didn’t even know what a ledger
was? To earn their submission, even to the point of having their wings
locked down? But I did it. I fixed it for children like you, so that you could
be safe here and have lovely adventures with no one troubling you and
trying to steal your soul away. I do hope you didn’t think you had charmed
them all with your sparkling personality, child.”

    “Why do you keep calling me a child? You’re no older than I am.”

    “Really, September. You’re going to have to be a bit more discerning
than that if you expect to get along here. I suppose I shouldn’t expect any
better from a Midwesterner. They teach you such frightful things about the
world.” The Marquess paused. The tips of her hair grew silver and shining.
“Do you like my Panther? He is called Iago. I love him very much, and he
loves me. I used to have a Leopard, but she ran off some time ago. Could
not change with the times, I suppose.” The Marquess nodded toward the
portrait of Queen Mallow, whose hand still rested on a Leopard’s head.
“That sort of thing is so tragic, don’t you think? I do so prize adaptability.”
The Panther Iago growled at the mention of his predecessor.

    Could she mean my Leopard? Thought September. The Leopard of
Little Breezes? She did not like to think of the Marquess riding her
Leopard, even for a little while.

    “Cats are temperamental,” offered September softly. “I have heard you
have lions, too.”
     “Too true!” cried the Marquess, her hair wholly silver now, gleaming
like true metal. “On both counts! Lions sleep a great deal, for it is from their
dreams that their strength chiefly comes. They are closeted in their
chambers, snoozing away on lacy coverlets. Now, I believe you wanted to
steal a Spoon from me?”

     September bit the inside of her lip. This was not precisely how she had
thought her adventure would go. How could she be brave for the sake of the
witch Goodbye if she was found out before she could even try?

     “Don’t be ashamed, my love. I would not be a very good Marquess if I
could not tell when troublesome little Ravished children are incoming with
poor intentions towards me and my belongings. After all, the Ravished are
always trouble. Any ruler of Fairyland must learn to watch out for them
particularly, as they have a nasty habit of dethroning one, and undoing
decades of hard work.”

     “But…Miss Marquess. The Spoon is not one of your belongings. You
took it from the witch Goodbye. That’s stealing. So it’s not really very
wicked of me at all to want to steal it back--stealing things back is hardly
stealing at all.”

     The Marquess cocked her head to one side and smiled. Somehow her
smile was worse than her frown. The Panther licked his black paws
nonchalantly. “Is that what she told you? That I stole it? What a dreadful
misunderstanding! I shall have her to tea immediately to apologize. You
must appreciate my position, September, I was under the impression that all
things in my realm belong to me, and Goodbye was under the impression
that Good Queen Mallow would arrive at any moment to save her. You can
see how things got terribly confused!”

    “Where…” September cleared her throat. He hands shook. “Where I
come from, if a person has a Spoon, no one can come and take it just
because they’re the governor or something.”

    “I think that’s very naive of you, September.” The Marquess put her
finger on her delicate chin as if an extraordinary idea had just occurred to
her. “Tell me, what does your father do?”

    September felt her face flush. “Well, he was a teacher. But now he’s a
soldier.”

    “Oh! Iago, did you hear that? You mean to say that one day the
governor or something came and took your father even though you were
quite sure he was yours and yours alone? Well, that is certainly different. A
Father is nowhere near so valuable as a Spoon! I can see why you prefer
your sensible, logical world.”

    “Well, they didn’t kill anyone in the process!”

    “No, September. They wait until little girls like you are out of sight
first. War must always be done out of sight, or it shocks people and they
stop immediately.” The Marquess’s hair slowly deepened to the color of
blood.

    September squeezed back tears. “Why did you kill Goodbye and
Hello’s brothers?” she cried wretchedly.
    “Because, child. They were not nice. They defied me. But I do not
wish to talk about them, or anyone else dead and therefore not useful. We
were speaking of your parents. I do wish children could pay attention!” Her
voice got very hard all of the sudden, no longer bright and full of tea-time
conversation, but keen and deadly interested. “What about your mother,
September?”

    “She…she builds engines.” September did not think she ought to
mention airplanes in Fairyland--visions of fleets of bombers belonging to
the Marquess flooded her mind.

    The Marquess stood suddenly. She was wearing a short blackberry-
colored dress with violet stockings, all lace and stiff black petticoats. She
rushed down the stairs to stare September directly in the eye--they were
precisely the same height. The Marquess’s blue eyes were full of interest.
The Panther slowly descended the stairs behind her, unconcerned.

    “What if I told you that I would give you the Spoon? That thievery
need never be mentioned between us? You can take it back to Goodbye and
her silly sister or use it to stir soups of your own, whatever you like.” The
Marquess was very close, as close as kissing. She smelled like beautiful,
dying flowers. “I can be nice, September,” she whispered. “It is only right
that I behave as I require my people to behave. I can help you and pet you
and give you lovely presents. I can be a faithful guide.”

    September felt much as she had when Goodbye had tried to convince
her to be a witch. But there was no glamour. The Marquess was not a witch.
It was only that she was so terribly strong, and so terrible close. “But not for
nothing,” September whispered. “Never for nothing.”

    “Never for nothing.” The Marquess wavered back and forth like a
snake charmer. “But it is such a little thing, and such fun to get, that I’m
sure you will leap at the chance. You want to have fun, don’t you? And
marvelous adventures? That’s why you came to Fairyland, isn’t it? To have
adventures?”

    “Yes…”

    “Well! What is the use of ruling Fairyland if one cannot make little
children happy? There is a place, September, oh, very far from
Pandemonium. A place where it is always autumn, where there is always
cider and pumpkin pie, where leaves are always orange and fresh-cut wood
is always burning and it is always, just always Halloween. Doesn’t that
sound splendid, September?”

    “Yes…”

    “And in that place is a thing I need, closed up in a glass casket in the
heart of the Worsted Wood.”

    “But the Green Wind said the Worsted Wood was forbidden--”

    “Government has its little privileges.”

    “He said it was dangerous--”
     “Posh! What does he know? He is not allowed here. And never will be,
whatever he told you. The Worsted Wood is just wood. No more or less
dangerous than any other wood. If there are ravening beasts, well, they have
every right to live and eat, don’t they? If there are spells, they have a right
to weave. All you must do is go there and eat candy and have a wonderful
time with the spriggans, and jump in leaf piles and dance in the moonlight--
and before you leave, with a full belly and the first whisper of snow
blowing through your hair, open the casket and bring me whatever it is you
find there. Even if it is ridiculous, even if it seems useless and small. That
isn’t so much to ask, is it? In exchange for a Spoon that tells the future?”

     “What…what is in the casket?”

     “That’s none of your worry, beautiful child. Your pretty head needn’t
trouble itself with that.”

     September bit the inside of her cheek, but the Marquess was so close.
She tried to think of the Green Wind, of his pleasant green smell and the
clouds whisking by as they flew over Westerly. She felt calmer--a little
calmer. Not terribly much calmer.

     “Why can’t you get it yourself? You can go anywhere…”

     The Marquess rolled her bright blue eyes. “If you must know, it’s a
cranky casket, and if I were to go…well, let us say it would not give me the
same gift it would give you, who are innocent and sweet and gentle of
spirit.”

     “I’m not…I’m ill-tempered and irascible…”
    “Now, who told you that?” The Marquess caressed September’s face
softly. Her hand was hot, like fire. September flinched beneath her blazing
touch. “How rude of them. You are quite the sweetest child I’ve ever met.”

    “I can’t, I just can’t do what you want unless I know what it is.
Everyone is afraid of you and when folk are afraid of a person it usually
means the person is cruel in some way, and I think you are cruel, Miss
Marquess, but please don’t punish me for saying it. I think you know you’re
cruel. I think you like being cruel. I think calling you cruel is the same as
calling someone else kind. And I don’t want to run errands for someone
cruel.”

    “I will never be cruel to you, September. You remind me so much of
myself.”

    “I don't know why you would say something like that when you are a
Marquess and I am a nobody, and no one anywhere is afraid of me,”
September said, and really, it was quite brave of her. “Still, I can’t.”
September blinked several times, trying to clear her head. In her pocket, she
clutched the glass ball the Green Wind had given her. “Unless you tell me
the truth,” she said as firmly as she could. “And give me the Spoon now,
not later, when I’ve returned.”

    The Marquess looked at September appraisingly. Her blood-colored
hair was slowly lightening to a gentle pink, like candy floss.

    “How strong you are, child. You must have eaten your spinach and
brussel sprouts all up and drunk all your milk, once upon a time. Now, let
us think! What would a beautiful monarch send you for? Oh, I know! The
glass casket contains a magical sword. It is so powerful that it doesn’t have
a name. It is no spoiled, painted dilettante like Excalibur or Durendal.
Naming a sword like this one would only cheapen it and make it tawdry.
But the casket is also old, and also opinionated, and were I to stand in the
forest and cut its fastenings…well. It would not give me the true sword.”

    “But you would use it…to kill more witches’ brothers, I think…”

    “September, I swear to you, here and now, in the presence of Iago,
Queen Mallow, and your single, solitary shoe, that I will never use that
sword to harm a soul. Little unpleasantries are necessary, when one rules
wicked, trickstery folk. But I would not soil such a sword by using it for
simple, everyday murdering. I intend something much grander.”

    September wanted to ask. She burned to ask.

    “Ah, but that I will not tell you, little one. You are not ready to know.
And loose lips sink glorious new worlds. Fairyland is still so beautiful for
you. You would not believe me if I told you how sour it can go. Suffice it to
say that I shall find the source of this sourness, and with the blade of the
sword you bring me I will cut it out. Will you get it for me? Will you take
Goodbye’s Spoon and go to the Autumn Provinces in my name?”

    September thought of the poor, angry, lost witches, peering into their
cauldron while the sea pounded away. She thought of the wairwulf, and his
kindness to her. She thought of her Wyverary, and his chafed, locked wings.
     “No,” she squeaked. Blood beat against her brow. She felt dizzy. “I will
do nothing in your name.”

     The Marquess shrugged. She bent and kissed the Panther’s ears. “Well,
then I shall have your deluded, ridiculous cut-rate dragon rendered into glue
and perfume.”

     “No!”

     Iago growled softly. The Marquess seized September’s hand and
crushed her fingers in her burning grip. “I think that’s just about enough nos
out of you young lady,” she hissed. “Who do you think you’re talking to?
Some country witch? I do not ask favors. I do not beg indulgences from
spoiled brats. Only occasionally do I make bargains. I offered you a good
one, a fair one! If you do not want to play fair, you cannot expect me to.
Iago, go and fetch the Wyvern.”

     “No! Please don’t! I’ll go! I’ll go. Just so long as you promise it’s not
for hurting anyone.”

     The Marquess’s hair flushed with pleasure, turning a deep pumpkiny
orange, just September’s favorite shade. She pressed September’s hand to
her lips--but still she squeezed it, painfully. “I just knew we would be
friends!” she crooned. “Now that you’ve stopped being stubborn, let’s get
that bedraggled old shoe off of you!”

     Numbly, automatically, September let the Marquess toss away her
loyal, honest mary-jane and slipped the black, be-ribboned shoes onto her
feet. They fit perfectly. Of course they fit perfectly.
    Patting her arm, the Marquess led her to the door of the Briary.
September suddenly realized that she had seen nothing at all of the house,
knew nothing of the Marquess’s powers, knew little more than when she
had arrived. She had been handled, and with ease.

    “Still,” she whispered, her one small defiance. “I’ll take the Spoon
now.”

    “Of course. I can be so reasonable, when I am obeyed.” The Marquess
stroked Iago again. The Panther arched his back, relishing her hand. She
drew up a long wooden spoon, much stained, its handle wrapped in leather.
September took it and stuck it through the sash of the green smoking jacket.

    The Marquess stood on her toes and kissed September’s forehead. Her
lips alone were cold. When she pulled away, her hair was a deep, dark
green.

    “Iago will show you out. When we meet again, things between us will
have progressed very far, I think.”

    Iago took September’s mashed hand gently in his mouth and tugged
her toward the flower-door.

    “Safe travels, September,” called the Marquess brightly. She smiled
again, from the bottom of the heart-shaped stair, the sweetest smile
September had ever seen on a child. “And if you do not bring my sword in
seven nights’ time, I shall have that Spoon back, and your head on a thorn
in my garden.”
      #




OceanofPDF.com
Chapter IX: Saturday’s Story

    In Which A Wyverary Makes a Sacrifice While September Engages in
Wanton Destruction of Lobster Cages and Meets a New Friend.




    Dazed, trembling, September stumbled out of the Briary, led by the
jaws of the Panther. The flower door rustled behind her. A-Through-L was
gone--he hadn’t waited for her. Of course he hadn’t waited. He had known
she was weak, that she would give in as soon as the Marquess behaved
kindly towards her. He had known her for a rotten, cowardly child. She
cursed herself, that she was not braver, not more clever. What is a child
brought to Fairyland for if not to thwart wicked rulers? Ell had known she
wasn’t good enough. September yanked her hand from the cat’s mouth and
knelt in the grass, staring through growing tears.

    “Good grief,” sighed Iago. “You oughtn’t waste time feeling sorry for
yourself.”

    “I should have said no. A braver girl would have said no. An ill-
tempered one.”

    “Temperament, you’ll find, is highly dependent on time of day,
weather, frequency of naps, and whether one has had enough to eat. The
Marquess gets what she wants, little girl. There’s no shame in being unable
to defy her.” The Panther sniffed and scratched at his nose with a black paw.
“And precious little satisfaction in denying her, well do I know.”

     “Oh, ho! September!” called a deep, familiar, rolling voice. September
leapt up and ran towards it, wheeling around the bramble-wall of the Briary
with Iago close behind. The Wyverary stood by the moat-bank in a kind of
pen, his tail waving back and forth like a dog who has found a stash of
bones. A high fence of kimono-silk posts came up to his knee. A-Through-
L waved with one foot, and then bent to peer into a cage.

     The cage was wooden, shabby--a lobster cage, September recognized.
The kind lobstermen from far east where Aunt Margaret lived used to drag
the creatures off the sea floor. A great many of them lay about, empty, some
shattered and broken. Only in one of them, a boy crouched, shivering, his
eyes downcast. A boy with dark blue skin, and black swirling patterns on
his back, curling like waves. He looked up at her, his face drawn and thin,
greasy hair tied up in a knot on the top of his head. His eyes were huge, and
black, and full of tears.

     “Don’t let me out,” he whispered. “I know you’ll want to. All good
souls want to. But she’ll never forgive you.”




     Oh, September. Such lonely, lost things you find on your way. It would
be easier, if you were the only one lost. But lost children always find each
other, in the dark, in the cold. It is as though they are magnetized, and can
only attract their like. How I would like to lead you to brave, stalwart
friends who would protect you and play games with dice and teach you
delightful songs that have no sad endings. If you would only leave cages
locked and turn away from unloved Wyverns, you could stay Heartless. But
you are stubborn, and do not listen to your elders.




     September fell to her knees before the lobster cage. “Oh! But you must
be miserable in there!”

     “I am,” answered the blue child, “but you mustn’t let me out. I belong
to her.”

     “Too right he does,” warned the panther Iago, batting at a little cotton
beetle skittering through the dusty pen. “I wouldn’t even consider it, if I
were you. But then if I were you, I would not be me, and if I were not me, I
would not be able to advise you, and if I were unable to advise you, you’d
do as you like, so you might as well do as you like and have done with it.”

     “Well,” September said slowly, burning to defy the Marquess in
something, anything, and make up for her weakness in the Briary. “This
Spoon belonged to her too, until a few minutes ago.”

     “I’m different. I’m a Marid.”

     September looked blank. The boy sighed, his tattooed shoulders
slumping as if he always suspected the world would be a disappointment.

     “Do you know what djinni are?” sighed Iago dramatically, as if he
could not begin to hear her ignorance.
    September shook her head.

    “Like genies,” piped up the Wyverary, delighted that he could be
helpful, as djinni began with D. “They grant wishes. And wreck things, but
mostly grant wishes.”

    “Well, he’s like a djinn, which is like a…genie, like he said.”

    “Only I’m not,” said the boy. “I’m a Marid. Djinni are born in the air.
They live in the air. They die in the air. They eat cloud-cakes and storm-
roasts and drink lightning-beer. Marids live in the sea. They’re born in the
sea. They die in the sea. Inside them, the sea is always roaring. Always at
high tide. Inside me. And yes, we grant wishes. And so the Marquess loves
us. She has her own burly magic, angry and old. But in the end she knows
she is safe, even if her magic should fail, for she has her Marids. We can be
made to parcel out her will in wishes.”

    “Why don’t you just wish your way out of the cage?” asked September,
very sensibly.

    “It doesn’t work like that. I can only grant wishes if I am defeated in
battle, if I am hurt nearly to death. I cannot change the rules. When she
needs one of us, she beckons. She gives us wooden swords; she is at least
sporting.”

    “Oh, that’s ghastly,” breathed September.

    “She sends the black cat after us, to the far north where we live. He
pounced on my mother Rabab and held her still while her fishermen closed
me up in a cage. I was small. I could not help her. I wished as hard as I
could, but I cannot wrestle myself. I owned a scimitar of frozen salt, and I
slashed at the cat with it, but he seized it in his jaws and splintered it, and I
shall never see it again, or my mother, or my sisters, or my beautiful, lonely
sea, which is so far off I cannot even hear her breathing.”

     Iago licked his paw and looked mildly at September. Go on, little
human, his gaze seemed to say, tell me I am wicked.

     “But I’ve heard of Rabab!” said September suddenly. “I saw her on the
newsreel! But she’s so young! She’s just been married!”

     The boy fidgeted. “Marids…are not like others. Our lives are deep, like
the sea. We flow in all directions. Everything happens at once, all on top of
each other, from the seafloor to the surface. My mother knew it was time to
marry because her children had begun to appear, wandering about, grinning
at the moon. It’s complicated. A Marid might meet her son when she is only
eleven and he is twenty-four, and spend years searching the deeps for the
mate who looks like him, the right mate, the one who was always already
her mate. My mother found Ghiyath because he had my eyes.”

     “That sounds confusing.”

     “Only if you’re not a Marid. I knew Rabab as soon as I saw her. She
had my nose and her hair was just the same shade of black as mine. She was
walking on the shore; a cloud of mist followed her like a dog. I brought her
a flower, a dune-daisy. I held it out to her, and we stared at each other for a
long time. She said: ‘Is it time, then?’ I said: ‘Now, we shall play hide and
seek.’ And I ran off down the strand. She still has to have me, of course. It’s
like a current, we have to go where where we’re going. There are a great
number of us, since we are all forever growing up together and also already
grown. As many as sparkles in the sea. We are solitary, though. So as to
avoid awkward social situations. But it does mean the Marquess can wrestle
us and still have us whole and healthy. We are her cake, and her having it. I
think my older self is already dead.”

    “Does that mean you’ll never have children or a mate then, if the older
you is gone?”

    “No, I shall be him presently. I need only wait.”

    “You poor thing, how terribly strange your life is! What is your name?”

    “Saturday,” the boy said. “And it is only strange to you.”

    “Even so…my name is September. And I am not going to let you stay
in there, Saturday. Not today, not after everything.”

    Now, September might have left well enough alone if she did not feel
so terribly guilty about accepting employment with the Marquess. If she
were not already thinking of some way to tell the Wyverary, while not
looking at his blistered skin under his chain, that they had to go and get a
sword for the tyrant. If she did not want to leave some bit of mischief in her
wake. She took a step back, drew the Spoon out of her sash, and with a
great swing that nearly whacked into Ell’s kneecap behind her, brought the
Spoon crashing down on the cage’s lock. Splinters flew in a most satisfying
fashion.
     Saturday crouched back, like an hound certain the dogcatcher is just
around the corner. September reached out her hand. The blue boy hesitated.

     “Will you beat me, if I say no?” he whispered fearfully.

     September thought she might cry. “Oh…oh dear. Not all the world is
like that. Well. I am not like that.”

     The boy took her hand, after all. It was heavier than she expected, as
though he were made of sea-stone. September was struck by how dark his
eyes were, how wide in his thin face. It was like looking into the darkest
possible sea, with strange fishes at the bottom of it. He stared at her, silent,
wild.

     “I suppose you fancy yourself brave now, hm? A knight?” Iago
growled.

     “Saturday,” said September, ignoring the Panther. She held the Marid
gently around the shoulders. “Do you think, if I wanted to, could I wish us
all away from here and someplace with a warm fire and cider for you and
food for all of us and safe harbor and just everything?”

     “I told you--”

     “No, I know, but we could just pretend to wrestle. And you could give
in. That would be all right, wouldn’t it?”

     Saturday straightened a little. He was taller than September, but not by
much. The looping black patterns in his skin made whirlpools on his skinny
chest. He wore some sort of sealskin trousers, torn at the knees, worn at the
cuffs. “I cannot cheat. I cannot pretend. And even now I am strong. I must
be made to submit. Like the sea my grandmother, I cannot be changed--I
can only be mastered.” His shoulders slumped. “But I would rather be
gentle. And loved. And never wish for anything, ever.”

     “Oh…I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to offend you.”

     “I’m not offended. I’m sorry for you. You will be punished for freeing
me. The cat will eat you, probably. Or me. Or both of us. He’s very hungry,
most of the time.”

     “He cannot eat Ell. Ell will whack him if he tries, I am sure. And
possibly roast him. Come with us, Saturday, come away from
Pandemonium. Into the forest, into the wild places where she does not want
to go. I am not very tall, but I have a Spoon, and a sceptre, and I will protect
you if I can.”

     The Panther Iago regarded them in a vaguely bored way.

     “But I hoped you’d stay to luncheon,” he purred. “I would have laid
my head on your lap.”

     “Thank you kindly, but I don't think I'd like that,” said September
brightly.

     “You’re stealing her Marid,” the cat said tonelessly. “Do you want one
of her cannons, too? They’re about the same: stupid, dangerous, and
useful.”

     “He doesn’t belong to her!”
     “Well, he certainly does.” Iago grinned. His pink tongue flopped out
between sharp teeth. “But I won’t tell. Iago won’t, no.”

     “Why wouldn’t you? She’s your mistress!”

     “Because I’m a cat. A big one, the Panther of Rough Storms, in fact.
But still a cat. If there’s a saucer of milk to spill, I’d rather spill it than let it
lie. If my mistress grows absent-minded and leaves a ball of yarn about, I’ll
bat it between my paws, and unravel it. Because it’s fun. Because it’s what
cats do best.” He tried to smile, but his teeth got in the way. “If I have a
mind, I could even help. After all, it would be much more efficient…more
modern…if you could fly to your destination instead of walking all that
way. Being a Lieutenant has its small pleasures. Very small, sometimes. I
could grant special dispensation to your Wyvern and remove his chains.
Temporarily, of course. She would approve of that.”

     A-Through-L slowly sat back on his haunches, sending up a cloud of
dust.

     “I could fly? Really fly? Like when I was small?”

     Iago rolled his eyes. “Yes, like when you were small. Like when you
were a wee lizard with nary a care in the world, licking your eyeballs and
sucking crows’ eggs. Just like life was in that distant Eden of your scaley,
wormy youth. How wonderful it will be, I’m sure. Shall I remove them for
you?”

     Ell looked down at his chains. With his claws he lifted them in awe and
let them fall against his hide. Several times he opened his mouth to speak,
but was overcome. Once, and only once, he allowed himself to look up into
the forbidden sky. And at last, he shook his great head. The sun glinted on
his horns. “I…I can’t,” he said wretchedly. “Not while my sister M-
Through-S can’t fly. Not while my brother T-Through-Z can’t. Not while
my mother wanders on foot. The Marquess is splendid--oh, she is so
splendid! If she should appear right this second I would abase myself in
gratitude. But I cannot take her beneficence. I cannot bargain for my own
joy alone--no one else gets to fly. Why should I? I am not special, or
worthy. If she should appear right this very second, I would beg her: let
your magnanimousness find some other soul who longs to fly and unlock
her chains. I will walk wherever it is I wish to go. I will walk to my
grandfather the Municipal Library, and he will praise me for my
unselfishness. I have walked my whole life. More will not hurt me.”

     September’s eyes filled with tears. Why did I not just say no? She
thought wretchedly. But her own voice answered her back: to save him, so
that he could say no if he liked. Glue cannot say yes or no. I did the right
thing, I did.

     Iago shrugged his furry shoulders. “As you like. Saves me the work of
picking the lock with my incisor.”

     His almond-shaped eyes fixed suddenly on Saturday and narrowed.
The Panther padded over to Saturday and sniffed at him. With slinky
deliberateness, he licked the boy’s face. “Keep in touch, blueberry-boy. And
if you should see my sister again, September, lick her cheek for me.”
    Iago strode away, tail held high. The three of them, Ell, September, and
Saturday, leaning on September for strength, tried to look as though they
belonged and were not doing a thing wrong as they walked quickly to the
gate of the Briary, never looking back, not once.




    “September,” said the Wyverary wonderingly when the brambles and
golden flowers and babbling moat were behind them at last, “where did you
get those shoes?”




                                      #




                             OceanofPDF.com
Chapter X: The Great Velocipede
Migration

    In Which September, the Wyverary, and Saturday Leave Pandemonium
and Make Their Way Across Fairyland By Means of Several Large
Bicycles.




    “Well,” said A-Through-L, sniffing hugely through his scarlet nostrils,
“We had better be on our way. Autumn begins with A, you know. The
Provinces are very far away.”

    September stopped in a shadowy alley. On one side of the street rose
the toasty brown woolen wall of a bakery, on the other the gold lamé of a
bank. A Switchpoint on the corner readied its hands, flexing and cracking
its hundred bronze fingers.

    “Ell, aren’t you ashamed of me?” cried September miserably. “Aren’t
you going to tell me I’m awful?”

    The Wyverary scrunched up his face uncomfortably and hurried on.
“Do you remember where I found you? By the sea? Well, the Autumn
Provinces are all the way over by the other sea, on the other side of
Fairyland. If I ran dead fast, stopping only to nap and drink, I might make it
in something like good time. But you wouldn’t. You’d fly right off, or break
your bones on my spine as I bounced you!”

     “Ell! I’m working for the Marquess! I didn’t even stand up to her a
little bit! I met the villain--surely it’s obvious she’s a villain--and I wasn’t
brave, I wasn’t!”

     Ell nuzzled her gently with his enormous head. “Well, no one expected
you to, love. She’s a Queen, and Queens have to be obeyed, and even the
very bravest aren’t brave at all when a Queen tells them they ought to do
something. When the lions came to put on my chains, I just sort of lay there
and cried. At least you stood on your feet, wee as they are. You said no
once--that’s more than I’ve ever done! And for me! To save me! A silly
half-library lizard. What kind of friend would I be if I scolded you for
saving me?” He made a little, weird, wild sound deep in his throat,
something like cluork. “When I am weak, when I am poorly, I cannot bear
to be scolded. But if it will make you feel loved, I will scold you right
proper, I will.”

     “And you broke my cage,” added Saturday. “You didn't have to.” His
voice was strange and slushing, as if a crashing wave had stood up and
asked after tea. “The Marquess likes it best when you don’t want to do as
she says, but you have to do it anyway. That’s like…a big bowl of soft
cream and jam to her.”

     “Besides, what’s the difference really, between fetching a Spoon for the
witch and fetching a sword for the Marquess? Not much, I’d say.”
    September thought about it. “I suppose it’s because I offered to get
Goodbye’s Spoon for her. I wanted to do it. To make her happy, and to do
something grand, so that, maybe, I could be a little grand, too. But the
Marquess demanded that I do it, and then she said she’d kill you if I didn’t,
and me if I didn’t do it fast enough. That’s not the same thing at all.”

    “It’s service, though, either way,” said Saturday softly.

    “It’s slavery, when you can’t say no,” said September, quite sure she
was right.

    “It’s still very far away,” insisted the Wyverary. “And we haven’t any
more time than we did a moment ago, indeed, a fair bit less.”

    “Why do you keep speaking as if you are coming, Ell? You’re here, in
Pandemonium! You ought to go to your Grandfather, and be happy, and
learned, and careful of your fiery breath!”

    “Don’t be silly, September. I am coming. How could I face my
Grandfather if he knew I had let a small one go off into dangerous places
alone?”

    “Not alone,” whispered Saturday.

    “How much more lovely would it be to enter the Library with laurels,
having accomplished a great deed involving a sword? My Grandfather must
have hundreds of books praising the deeds of such knights. And we shall all
be knights, all three of us! And not punished at all!”
     September looked dubiously at him. She neatly tucked her long dark
hair behind her ears.

     “Please, small friend. Now that I’m here, so close I can smell the glue
of his bindings, I am not sure, I am afraid he will not love me. I should feel
much better if I had a dashing story to tell him. I should feel much better if I
knew you were safe, and not crowning the topiaries in the Marquess’s
garden. I should feel much better if no one could call me a coward. I don’t
want to be a coward. It is not a nice thing to be.”

     September reached up and the Wyverary dropped his long, curved
snout into her hands. She kissed it gently.

     “I shall be ever so much more glad if you are with me, Ell.”

     Saturday looked away from them, to give them privacy. You could not
ask for a more polite Marid, even then, when he was so feral he could only
remember to breathe every third breath. Polite, and eager to be helpful.

     “You’re right, of course, the velocipedes are running,” he said meekly,
as though someone else had suggested it. He was still too shy to suggest
anything without wrapping it up tight, to keep it safe.

     “What a funny, old-fashioned word!” said September, placing her hand
on the hilt of the Spoon stuck into her belt. She felt stronger just holding
onto it.

     “I’m sure you know it means bicycle,” Saturday shifted from one foot
to another. September had not thought to find someone more unsure of the
world than she. “I didn’t mean to say you didn’t know.”

     “Oh!” cried Ell. “Bicycle! Yes, well, now we’re in my section of the
alphabet! It’s high summer, September! That means the running of the
bicycles, and that means Lickety-Split Transportation!”

     September looked uncertainly at her denuded sceptre, hanging sadly
from Ell’s bronze chain. “I don’t think I’ve anything like enough rubies left
to buy bicycles for both of us.”

     “Pish! We don’t buy, we catch! September, the bicycle herds, well, I
suppose they’re called voleries, not herds, right, Saturday? Voleries.
Anyhow, their migration path runs though the meadowflats just east of the
City, and if we are lucky, and have a bit of rope with us, we can hitch on
with them all the way to the Provinces. Or nearly all the way. It’s difficult,
they’re wild beasts, you know. And if I run just as hard as I can I shall be
able to keep up with you and no one’s bones need be smashed or jangled. It
goes without saying, I think, that it would be a bit ridiculous for me to ride
a highwheel, even a big, brawny bull. Let us go now, right away! I
shouldn’t want to miss it, we would feel much chagrined, and stuck.”

     “September,” pleaded Saturday, his blue eyes growing even wider and
darker. “I have to eat. If I don’t eat, I will fall, soon, and not ever get up.”

     “Oh, how rude of me!” September had forgotten her own hunger in all
the excitement, but now it was back, in force. And so, quite without
thinking about it, September spent the last of her chipped rubies at a public
house called The Toad and the Tabernacle, where the tables and chairs and
walls were a deep black widow’s weeds, and the milky yellow light from
the silken candelabra made Saturday’s skin just as black as the ceiling.

    “Salt,” whispered the boy regretfully. “I need salt, and stone.”

    “Is that what you eat?” September wrinkled her nose. Saturday
drooped in shame.

    “It’s what the sea eats. When I have been starved, no other food will
sustain me. When I am well I shall have goose-foot tarts and hawthorn
custard with you, I’m sure.”

    “I didn’t mean to hurt your feelings! Please, you mustn’t slump so!
Besides, I’m not certain I can eat anything here. It’s all sure to be Fairy food
and I think I’ve been reasonable enough about that so far, and safe, but
surely eating in a Fairy public house is right out.”

    A-Through-L’s lips quirked, as if he knew a bit about both Fairies and
Food, beginning as they both did with F. But he said nothing. September sat
politely and drank a glass of clear water which was not food in the least and
so obviously innocent. She tried to bargain with her stomach not to growl as
A-Through-L demolished three plates of radishes and a flagon of genuine
Morrowmoss well-water. Saturday gnawed a slab of blue sea-stone and
daintily licked a joint of salt. He offered some to her uncertainly, and she
demurred politely.

    “I have a delicate digestion,” she said. “I don’t think it would bear
much stone.”
    A platter of painted duck eggs, sweet, dense bread, and marshmallow-
fondue passed by on the shoulders of a waiter who might well have been a
dwarf. September drank her water vigorously, trying not to look at it. And
when all was done and swallowed and September still hungry but pleased
with herself for avoiding temptation, the last of the sceptre went into the
toll-chest of a much smaller, less splendid ferry. Without incident, its
paddlewheel splashed through the other side of the Barleybroom. It took the
three of them away from the soft, gleaming spires of Pandemonium and
deposited them on a grassy, empty shore.

    “It seems so sad to leave,” September remarked mournfully as she
stepped onto the muddy shore, “when we have only just arrived. How I
wish I could get to know Pandemonium a little better!”




    September tucked the green smoking jacket under the Wyverary’s
bronze chain, knotting the sleeves together. The jacket mourned, crying out
in silent, emerald-colored consternation. Alas, the ears of folk with legs and
noses and eyebrows are not made to hearken to the weeping of those with
inseams and buttonholes and lapels. Already September could hear a kind
of thunder in the distance. The Meadowflats stretched long and far around
them as they walked: even, well-tempered grass, without tree or welcoming
shade or the smallest white flower. If the grass were not so rich and green,
she would have called it desolate.

    “Remember, they are fast and tall and vicious! Many have perished or
at least been roundly dumped off and bruised in the attempt to travel by
wild bicycle.” A-Through-L fretted and stamped his great feet in the grass.
The thunder grew closer.

    September re-tied the green sash of the smoking jacket around the hilt
of the Spoon. No money had remained for proper adventuring equipment,
but she was her mother’s daughter, always and forever, and felt sure
whatever she set her hands to would work. Once, they had spent a whole
afternoon fixing Mr. Albert’s broken-up Model A so that September would
not have to walk every day to school, which was several miles away.
September would have been happy to watch her mother shoulder-deep in
engine grease, but her mother wasn’t like that. She made September learn
very well how a clutch worked, and what to tighten, and what to bend, and
in the end September had been so tired, but the car hummed and coughed
just like a car ought to. That was what September liked best, now that her
mother was not about and she had the freedom to think about her from time
to time. She liked best to learn things, and that her mother knew a great
number of them, and never said anything was too hard or too dirty, and had
never once told her that she would understand when she was older. On
account of all of this, September could make a very respectable knot in the
sash, and the sash, being part of the jacket, dutifully tightened itself even
further and prepared for what was sure to be great discomfort to come.
Saturday watched it all with vivid interest, but said nothing.

    A long, loud horn sounded, and several answering hoots honked into
the blazing day.

    “They’re coming!” shouted Ell excitedly, his wings wobbling under the
chains as he leapt up, his tongue lolling like a puppy’s. Really, he needn’t
have said anything. The velocipede volery sent up a choking cloud of dust,
and Saturday and September could see quite clearly that as soon as they
heard the horns the bicycles were nearly upon them, a great throng of old-
fashioned highwheels, the wheel in front enormous, the wheel behind tiny--
though tiny in this case meant somewhat larger than Saturday’s whole body.
Their seats, borne loftily into the sky, were battered velvet of various
motley, dappled shades, their tires spotted like hyenas, their spokes
glittering in the naked meadowflat sun.

    “Hold onto me, Saturday!” yelled September. He tucked his arms
around her waist, and again she was struck by how heavy he was, when he
seemed so small. The horns sqwonked again and as a great, soaring
highwheel came roaring by, September threw the Spoon as hard as she
could. It flew, far and true, and she clutched the end of the sash, which
extended much further than you might think, so eager was the sash to please
its mistress. The Spoon tangled in the spokes of the large wheel and up they
shot into the air, the turning of the wheel pulling them forward. Saturday
shut his eyes--but September did not. She laughed as she flew nearer and
nearer to the broad speckled orange-and-black seat. She reached out to
catch it and just caught her fingers in the copper springs beneath. Her knees
banged against the tire and burned against the spinning, bloody and painful-
-but still September scrambled up as best she could.

    “September! I can’t!” Saturday called after her, his blue face contorted
in fear and strain as he tried to hold onto her but slipped, more by each
minute, until he was only barely clutching her ankle. “I’ll fall!”
    September tried to raise her leg and pull him up, but she could not fight
the the jostling and honking of the velocipede as it angrily tried to dislodge
its would-be rider. She hooked her elbow around the musky-smelling seat
and reached down as far as she could, her fingers stretched to their limit, to
catch him up. It was not enough. He could not get hold, and he was so
terribly, awfully heavy. September cried out wordlessly as the highwheel
reared up, determined to dash her bones against the meadow.

    Saturday fell.

    He did not shriek. He just looked at September as she rushed upward,
away from him, his dark eyes terribly sad and sorry.

    September screamed for him, and the honking horns seemed to laugh
in wild victory--at least one child they could trample underfoot! But Ell
came thumping up behind them, his powerful legs knocking weaker,
younger velocipedes aside. He caught Saturday by the hair as he fell and
tossed the Marid up as though he weighed not a thing, bumping him at the
last with the tip of his nose so that September could catch his elbow and
haul him onto the speckled seat beside her.

    He clung to her, shaking a little. September could not make herself let
go of the long brass handlebars. Her grip tightened until she could hardly
feel her hands, but she bent her head and rubbed her cheek against
Saturday’s forehead, the way Ell had done with her when she was
frightened. He seemed to calm a little. Yet still, the noise and dust was
awful, all around them. Ell ran alongside, whooping and lolling and
laughing as little velocipedes took him for a bull and tried to roll up to ride
on his shoulders.

    “Excellent save, chickie-dear!” came a hollering voice over the
pounding bicycle herd. September looked around--and saw on a nearby
highwheel a handsome woman with lovely dark brown skin and wild curly
hair. She wore something like a leather bomber’s jacket, with a fleecy collar
and a hat with big, flopping earflaps. She had on big goggles to keep the
dust out of her eyes, and thick boots with dozens of buckles over the kind of
funny riding pants September had only seen in movies, the kind that bow
out on the sides and make one look like one has squirreled away
watermelons in one’s pockets. Behind her were two delightful things: a
little girl dressed just the same, and a pair of iridescent coppery-black wings
bound up in a thin chain.

    The woman deftly steered her velocipede in and out of the volery to
come up alongside them.

    “Calpurnia Farthing!” she hollered again over the din, “And that one’s
my ward, Penny!” The little girl waved cheerfully. She was much younger
than September, perhaps only four or five. Her blue-black hair stuck out in
tangled pigtails, and she wore a necklace of several bicycle chains which
left her neck quite greasy. She wore mary-janes like September’s old shoes,
but the girl’s were golden-- dirty and muddy, but golden all the same.

    “H…hello!” answered September, barely holding on.
       “You’ll get used to it! Gets to be pretty natural, after awhile, the
banging and bedlam! That’s quite a cow you’ve lashed there, she’s an alpha
and no joking! I’d have tried for one of the milking calves my first time.”

       “Beggars can’t be--”

       “Oh, yes, I’m just congratulating, you know! She’s a beaut!”

       “Erm, right now, you understand, Miss Farthing, it’s hard to carry on a
conversation…”

       “Oh, well, it would be, if you’re not accustomed!” Calpurnia Farthing
held out her hand. Penny spat a wad of beech-sap gum into it. Calpurnia
reached down and wedged the gunk into a broken spoke. Her highwheel
screeched, possibly in relief, possibly in indignation at her particular brand
of field medicine. “Well,” she yelled, “they do stop to drink at night!
They’ve a powerful thirst, you know. Takes hours to slurp their fill!”

       “Till then?” said September politely.

       “Ayup!” And Calpurnia veered off wildly, with Penny laughing all the
way.




       The campfire crackled and sparked, sending up smoke into a starry sky.
September had never seen so many stars, and Nebraska was never poor in
stars. There were so many unfamiliar constellations, spangled with milky
galaxies and the occasional wispy comet.
     “That’s the Lamp,” whispered Saturday, poking the fire with a long
stick. He seemed to be most comfortable whispering. “Up there, with the
loopy bit of stars in a circle--that’s the handle.”

     “Is not,” humphed Ell. “That’s the Wolf’s Egg.”

     “Wolves don’t lay eggs,” said Saturday, staring into the fire.

     September looked up in surprise--Saturday had never contradicted
anyone yet.

     “Well, there’s a story. I read it when I was a lizard. There’s a wolf, a
banshee, and a bird of prophecy, and they all make a bet--”

     “And the wolf says: ain’t what’s strong, but what’s patient.” Calpurnia
tossed a palm frond into the fire. Penny tossed a clump of grass.

     “No, he says: give me that egg or I’ll eat your mother,” huffed A-
Through-L.

     “Regional folkloric differences,” Calpurnia shrugged.

     The highwheel pilot opened her jacket and pulled out several long
strips of dark meat. She passed them around, along with a fancy oakwood
flask. Penny gnawed her jerky contentedly.

     “What…is it?” asked September dubiously.

     “What do you think? Dried tire. I share and share alike with fellow
velocipeders. Only fair; it’s a hard life. Don’t turn up your nose at it! It’s as
good as any other meat. A little gamey, sure, but they’re wild. Not all
fattened up like mutton. Go on, eat. And drink--that’s good axle grease in
there. Just as nice as yak blood.”

    Ell chomped his and swallowed it right quick. September chewed
slowly. This could hardly qualify as food at all, let alone Fairy food. But it
wasn’t awful, not nearly. And not rubbery in the least. It was as though
someone had found an extremely skinny, tough old turkey and burnt it
thoroughly in the oven. The flask smelled rich and salty, and when she
drank she came near to spitting it out--or throwing it up--for it was indeed
the closest thing to raw blood she had ever tasted. But she felt strength in
her afterward, sinewy and springy and warm. Saturday ventured a little tire
and a sip of grease, but could not stomach it. He nursed a bit of stone he had
dug up from the earth instead. Penny stuck out her tongue in disgust.

    “That’s not nice, love,” admonished Calpurnia. “Changelings, you
know? No manners at all.”

    “Is she? Really?”

    Penny picked at her golden shoes. All changelings must wear
identifying footwear, September remembered, as though from a hundred
years ago. “Didn’t like the ‘chestra,” Penny mumbled. “Can’t play nothin’.”

    “She’s right. I went to a recital and the poor thing was playing her
grummellphone upside-down. Fortunate-like, I keep my pockets full of
oilcan-candy in case I’m in need of bait. I offered her a handful and she
jumped right into my arms. Took to the velos much better--practically born
to it, you might say!”

    “But a changeling,” said September, “that’s when a Fairy takes a baby
and leaves a Fairy in the crib.”

    “It’s more like…a cultural exchange program,” Calpurnia said, ripping
off a chunk of tire in her teeth. Her eyes were wild and golden, and the
starlight was all caught up in her wings. September tried not to stare. “Well,
unless they leave a poppet. That’s just a bit of a joke. But usually, we swap
them out again when they grow up, and everyone’s the wiser for solid
communication between realms. It’s nice. Well, not nice, but fun. I’m not
having that for my Penny, though! Princess of the Highwheels, I’ll have her
up to be!”

    “I talk to the little velos,” whispered the child. “They say: Penny,
where’s your seat?”

    “I don’t approve of the changeling orchestra. It’s not pretty, it’s just a
zoo, really. For rich fairies who are in good with Miss Fancy-Curls herself
to peer at. Couldn’t bear that for such a sweet thing as Penny. Time was,
changelings were the toast of the town, fed with biscuits and new cream and
got to dance at the Thistleballs in the spring, dance until their shoes wore
through and then dance some more--”

    “That doesn’t sound quite nice either…” said September uncertainly.

    “Well, it’s a certain sight better than being strapped to a
grummellphone until your spine grows W-shaped!”
     “Grum’phone sounds like a cow chucking, anyway,” Penny groused.

     “That’s right, chickie-love. And you never have to play one again.
Anyway, I don’t approve of chamber music in general. It’s stuck-up on
itself. Much prefer the velo horns.”

     “What was her name before?” asked September.

     “That’s private, no one needs to know that but her.”

     “Molly!” piped Penny. “I was a Molly! And I had a Sarah and a
Donald, and they were a sister and a brother. And I had a velo of my own!
Only it wasn’t wild, and it didn’t talk. It was pink, and it had a little bell,
and three wheels instead of two. But I didn’t have a Calpurnia, so I must
have been sad. I don’t remember, really.”

     They were all silent for awhile, staring into the fire as those not
possessing tires and spokes have done since the dawn of the world. The
Wyverary drifted helplessly to sleep, sitting up. He snored lightly. It
sounded like pages turning. Calpurnia scratched under her hat.

     “Where are you lot off to, then? You’ll pardon, you don’t seem like the
lifestyle type. Short-term transport, am I right?”

     “The Autumn Provinces,” answered Saturday, his voice echoing low
among the snorting, snuffling highwheels as they teemed around their
watering hole and spun their spokes in antique mating dances.

     September found she did not want to say why they were going. She
wrapped the sash of the smoking jacket around her recovered Spoon
delicately. Calpurnia whistled.

     “Ayup, that’s a respectable haul! We ought to make that in a week or
two. Hope you brought comestibles of your own!”

     “A week or two!” cried September. “But that’s not fast enough! We
need to get there and back in seven days.”

     Penny laughed. “Can’t do it!” she giggled.

     But Calpurnia was thinking. She scratched her chin with three long
brown fingers, then licked them and held them up to the wind. “Aye but we
might…if you think you can handle your alpha. I don’t like to do it, but I’m
not so dense as to miss that you’re running hard, and that almost always
means there’s a beast behind you.”

     September nodded miserably.

     “Well, a velo is a lazy thing, in the end. They don’t like to go as fast as
they can go. It suits them just as well to roll along leisurely-like. This is the
Great Migration--they’re all homebound, to the spoke-nests, to mate and
die. Some of them feel the mating drive stronger than others. Some only
feel the dying drive. Makes them lag. But if you and I apply a bit of
encouragement, they’ll bear down on the road like it’s dinner. And by
encouragement I mean whipping of course and I know it’s not civilized and
I cringe to think of it but sometimes with steeds it’s all you can do.”

     “Don’t want to whip my velos,” Penny whimpered.

     “They forget, chickie. They’ll all forget.”
    “No they won’t! They’ll whisper: that Penny, she’s naughty and nasty!”

    “Penny, you don’t have to do a thing,” said Saturday gently, who knew
a thing or two about whipping.

    “But Saturday, we’ve so little time…”

    Saturday looked at September for a moment, his expression, as always,
unreadable. Then he leaned over and rubbed his cheek against her forehead
just as she had done to him. The Marid got up and walked away from the
fire, into the dark and the wavering grass and the volery of snorting,
spinning. velocipedes.

    “Is he yours, then?” Calpurnia asked, draining her wooden flask with
relish. She spat into her goggles and rubbed them clean with her fingers.

    “Mine? No, he’s his own. “

    Calpurnia grunted doubtfully and squinted at the dark.

    “Miss Farthing, may I ask you a question?”

    “How can a deny such a nicely-wrapped request?”

    “Are you helping us because you want to? Because you like us,
because you’re friendly and good-hearted? Or because the Marquess wants
you to be nice? Because she’ll Greenlist you if you don’t?”

    Calpurnia Farthing looked long and deep into September’s eyes. The
young girl felt as though she was naked again, in the bath-house. Her
golden gaze seemed heavy and hot.

    “What makes you think I’m not already Greenlisted, girl? Do you think
taking a changeling out of the orchestra comes at no price at all?” She
tugged on the flaps of her hat. “If it will make you feel better I can lead you
to a pit in the forest or steal your breath or whatever it is I might--and I’m
not admitting to anything--have done in my profligate youth. These days, I
have my highwheels and my girl to look after. Hardly time to go spoiling
the barley for beer. Maybe when I retire, I’ll go back to it. But if it pleases
the Marquess to think that her hoofing List is all that’s keeping me in my
place, then let her think it. Mainly, I’ll help you because lost little human
girls are a hobby of mine.” Penny snuggled up to Calpurnia and laid her
head on her lap. The Fairy-woman stroked the changeling’s matted hair.
September smiled. She liked them. She felt safe with them near.

    Out of the dark, Saturday returned amid much grinding and crushing
noises, leading two huge highwheels behind him. They rolled along
docilely, leaning in to nuzzle the other’s handlebars occasionally.

    “They’ll take us, as fast as they can, faster, even,” said Saturday firmly.
“They’re ready to go home, they don’t want to wait. They’ll leave right now
if we want, they’ve drunk their fill.”

    “Hey! Only I talk to them!” said Penny, hands on her little hips.

    Saturday shook his head and crouched next to her, his wild blue hair
catching the firelight and blazing orange. “There’s not a creature living that
doesn’t have wishes, Penny. And I can always hear wishing, even the very
quietest kind.” The Marid stood up. “No whipping,” he said softly, almost
embarrassed. “Not ever. Not even if the whipping would make them do
your will as fast as blinking. Especially if.”

    Calpurnia Farthing held out her hand. Saturday shook it, thought better,
and then kissed it in a very courtly way. “I said I didn’t like to. They’d have
forgiven me. Probably not you, but me, they would have loved again.”

    “I know.”

    “Let’s off, then. I’ll see you to the edge of the equinox. Leastaways I
can do, for such raw wheelers as you and yours.”




    Into the silver-spangled night, two great bicycles rolled silently,
bearing them all into the dark, so swift the moon never saw them go. A-
Through-L ran beside them, his tongue clamped between his teeth, willing
his legs to pump faster.

    “Calpurnia,” said September, when they had left the last ruddy light of
the campfire behind them, “I thought fairies danced in reels together, and
had big families.”

    “Ayup, we do.”

    “Then why are you alone? And Charlie Crunchcrab, too? Where has
everyone gone?”
     Calpurnia turned her face away. Her wings fluttered weakly under their
iron chain, and September could see where red hives had boiled up under
the metal. It’s the iron, she though, fairies are allergic.

     When Calpurnia Farthing, Queen of the Velocipedes, looked out across
the flats again, her face was streaked with silent, stubborn tears.



                                        #




                               OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XI: The Satrap of Autumn

    In Which September Finally Eats Fairy Food, Very Nearly
Matriculates, and Discovers the Nature of Autumn.




    I suppose you think you know what autumn looks like. Even if you live
in the Los Angeles dreamed of by September’s schoolmates, you have
surely seen postcards and photographs of the kind of autumn I mean. The
trees go all red and blazing orange and gold, and wood-fires burn at night so
that everything smells of crisp branches. The world rolls about delightedly
in a heap of cider and candy and apples and pumpkins and cold stars rush
by through wispy, ragged clouds, past a moon like a bony knee. You have,
no doubt, experienced a Halloween or two.

    Autumn in Fairyland is all of that, of course. You would never feel
cheated by the colors of a Fairyland forest, or the morbidity of the Fairyland
moon. And the Halloween masks! Oh, how they glitter, how they curl, how
their beaks and jaws hook and barb! But to wander through autumn in
Fairyland is to look into a murky pool, seeing only a hazy reflection of the
Autumn Provinces’ eternal fall. And human autumn is but a cast-off
photograph of that reflecting pool, half-burnt and drifting through the space
between us and Fairyland.
    And so I may tell you that the leaves began to turn red as September
and her friends rushed through the suddenly-cold air on their snorting,
roaring highwheels, and you might believe me. But no red you have ever
seen could touch the crimson bleed of the trees in that place. No oak gone
gnarled and orange with October is half as bright as the boughs that bent
over September’s head, dropping their hard, sweet acorns into her spinning
spokes. But you must try as hard as you can. Squeeze your eyes closed, as
tight as you can, and think of all your favorite autumns, crisp and perfect,
all bound up together like a stack of cards. That is what it is like, the awful,
wonderful brightness of Fairy colors. Try to smell the hard, pale wood
sending up sharp, green smoke into the afternoon. To feel the mellow,
golden sun on your skin, more gentle and cozier and more golden than even
the light of your favorite reading nook at the close of the day.

    September’s orange dress seemed suddenly drab; the Wyverary’s
scarlet skin seemed a bit brown and dull. They could not compete--but they
laughed all the same, as leaves drifted slowly from trees and fell into their
hair. Penny balanced expertly on her highwheel seat and reached up to catch
them out of the air, whooping and giggling.

    “Ah, Penny, we’ll not go in, though,” sighed Calpurnia Farthing,
raising her goggles to drink in the colors of the forest ahead of them, its
shady paths, its mournful brown birds.

    “Oh, why not, Cal? They’re sure to have flapjacks! I’m hungry!”

    “We have to bring in the herd, love. The highwheels' home is off
further towards the sea, in the oil-tides and the nickel-pools. We’ll camp,
and I’ll sing you The Nobell Lay of the Unicycle and the One-Legged Gyrl-
-you like that one! The rest of the velos will catch up and we’ll take them
down to the water’s edge and I’ll let you have a puff of my pipe.”

    “Can’t we just stay one night?” Penny pleaded, pulling her pigtails in
earnestness.

    Calpurnia shuddered. “It’s best…not to go in if you don’t have doings
there. Autumn has a hungry heart--September is the beginning of death.”
The Fairy looked at the earnest girl in the orange dress and laughed shortly,
realizing what she had said. “Well. Pan forgive all puns. Be glad autumn is
brief, Penny, in our familiars. As for you, September, I feel a powerful urge
to tell you to be careful, but I think you’ve lead ears for such advice. Just
remember that autumn is also called fall, and some falling places are so
deep there’s no climbing out.”

    “Goodbye dragon!” chirped Penny, and A-Through-L, still panting
from his great exertion across the plains, three days’ running with barely a
break for napping, did not argue with her, but tolerated her smacking a kiss
on his toes. “Goodbye Saturday!”

    Calpurnia Farthing brusquely extended her hand to Saturday, but when
he moved to shake it, she grabbed it up and kissed his fingers like a lord
kissing a lady’s hand. She crouched down to look the boy in the eye.

    “I have a thing to tell you, Marid.”

    Saturday waited patiently.
    “We’re not kin, but fey to fey, you’ll hark?”

    He nodded. She leaned in, to whisper in his ear, so that September
could not hear.

    But we have special privileges. I shall tell you what Calpurnia Farthing
said:

    “The riddle of the Ravished,” she whispered, “is that they must always
go down into the black naked and lonesome. But they cannot come back up
into the light alone.”




    The light in the Autumn Provinces is always late afternoon light, the
golden, perfect kind that slants and sighs, that casts gentle shadows on the
earth.

    Of course, September had no shadow.

    But the shadows of the others walked long and thin through the forest
of bloody-bright trees. They were disturbed by their missing compatriot,
and pulled away from the place where September’s shadow was not.
Shadows have a kind of camaraderie. As folk become friends and have
adventures, so too do their shadows frolick and quaver in fear and emerge
triumphant from battles with enemies’ shadows, all unknown to us, who
think we are the movers of our tales. And so the shadow of the Wyverary
mourned the loss of his companion, and the shadow of the Marid caught its
black mood.
    And yet, none among them could keep from delight as many paths
opened up wide and even before them, a bed of crisp brown leaves blowing
up in little dervishes and settling again. A few mournful birds sang out. The
wind smelled of smoke, and baking bread, and apples. Saturday closed his
eyes and breathed through his mouth, like a cat, to take it all in. A-Through-
L fairly skipped.

    “Truly, Autumn is my season,” the scarlet beast chorted. “Spring and
Summer and Winter all begin with such late letters! But Autumn and Fall, I
have loved best, because they are best to love.”

    The three of them might have taken any path through the forest and
come upon little but toadstools and acorns. However, on account of the
tendencies of Fairy towns to get quite firmly in one’s way, they did not.
They found themselves striding into in the herald’s square of a place called
Mercurio before they could discuss whether it was nightingales or sparrows
who sang so prettily in the wood. That September’s shoes were dark and
crafty and most certainly knew their way around the world can have had
nothing to do with it, I am sure.

    I wonder if every city in Fairyland is made of some strange thing?
Thought September. For some made baker had built the town of Mercurio
from loaves of thick, moist bread shingled with sugar and mortared with
butter. Heavy eaves of brown crust shaded sweet little dinner-bun doors.
Many of the houses were small. September could reach up her hand and
tear off a piece of their roofs to eat, if she had had a mind. But many more
were enormous, towering up high, cakes piled upon cakes, baked dark and
fragrant, up past the tops of the trees. The cobbles of the square were
muffin-tops, and all the fountains gushed fresh, sweet milk. It was as
though the witch who built the gingerbread house in the story had a great
number of friends, and had decided to start up a collective.

    In the center of the square stood a statue of a lady September knew
well by now, patted together from cream-colored crumpets. Below her
benevolent gaze a long table groaned with food: apple dumplings and apple
tartlets and candied apples and apple chutney in big crystal bowls, huge
roasted geese glistening brown and gold, huge potatoes and turnips split and
steaming, rum cakes and blackberry pies, sheafs of toffee bundled together
like wheat, squash soup in tureens shaped like stars, golden pancakes, slabs
of gingerbread, piles of hazelnuts and walnuts, butter domes carved like
pine cones, a huge and broiled boar with a pear in his mouth and parsley in
his hoofs. And pumpkin, pumpkin everywhere: orange pumpkin soup
bubbling in hollowed-out gourds, pumpkin bread, pumpkin muffins, frothy
pumpkin milk, pumpkin trifles piled up with whipped cream, pumpkin-
stuffed quail, and pumpkin pies of every size, cooling on the clean
tablecloth.

    No one ate at the table, or guarded the feast. The Wyverary, the Marid,
and the human stared in naked hunger, having had nothing but tire-jerky
and axle-whiskey for days. Ell stepped forward, but hesitated.

    “Surely it belongs to someone,” he fretted.

    “Surely,” agreed Saturday.
    “I oughtn’t to have any, anyway,” said September mournfully. “A feast
out of nowhere and no one here who might have cooked it, or had it cooked
for them? That’s Fairy food, to be sure.”

    A little man stepped deftly out from behind the pig, as if he had been
there all along, though surely they had seen no feet under the table. His
nose curved down: long, skinny, hooked like a bird’s beak, the kind meant
for fishing beetles out of logs. A pair of square spectacles perched on it,
showing large, orange, red-rimmed eyes, as if tired from too much reading.
His rubbed his little hands together--they each had only three fingers, long
and hooked like his nose. His skin was all over deep, baked brown, like
good bread. Most odd of all, however, were his clothes--he wore a tweed
jacket with velvet elbow patched, a caramel-colored waistcoat, toast-brown
plaid trousers, and an ascot: an oak leaf fading from green to brown, full of
wispy holes, pinned with an acorn button. Over all this, a white laboratory
jacket, gone yellow with age, draped over his hunched shoulders.

    “Of course it’s Fairy food,” he chuckled. “Where do you think you
are?”

    “Well,” September answered, “I’m not to eat Fairy food. I’ve been very
careful, and only eaten witch food, dragon food, dryad food, that sort of
thing.”

    The little man laughed so loudly a few folk like him poked their heads
out of the bread-house windows in curiosity. He held his small paunch and
kept giggling.
     “Oh, you were being serious!” He tried to look solemn. “This is
Fairyland, girl! There is no dragon food or witch food or dryad food. There
is only Fairy food--it’s all Fairy food. This is Fairy earth that bears it, Fairy
hands that carve it and cook it and serve it. I daresay you have quite the
belly full of the stuff. If there’s damage to be got from it, I promise it’s quite
done by now.”

     September’s mouth dropped open. Her eyes filled up with tears, and
now, finally, they spilled over and dropped onto the muffin-stone square.
Saturday put his hand on her arm, but did not know what to do to comfort
her beyond that. This may seem like a silly thing to cry over, but September
had suffered so very much in such a very short time, and she was so certain
that she had been circumspect with regards to food. She had been careful!
Even if the Marquess was frightening and Saturday so dear and broken and
Ell so devoted--at least, she had thought, she had not eaten Fairy food! At
least she had managed better than most little girls in stories who are
repeatedly told not to eat the food and do it anyway, being extravagantly
silly and stupid!

     “What will happen to me?” she wept.

     A-Through-L waved his tail in distress. “We can’t say, September.
We’re not Ravished.”

     “But look on the bright side!” cried the little man. “Eat your fill and
have no fear of it now. Fairy food is the best kind--or else no one would
have to warn children off it. I think it’s very dear of you to have tried to be
so…abstinent! My name is Doctor Fallow, and I am the Satrap of Autumn.
We had word that guests were careening our way. ” He bowed at the waist,
and caught his jacket in the act of slipping off. “This is a wedding feast for
my graduate assistants, and you are most invited.”

    September bowed as well. “These are my friends A-Through-L, who is
a wyvern and not a dragon, and Saturday. My name is September.”

    Doctor Fallow beamed. “What an excellent name,” he breathed.

    A great, jubilant noise rose up from the southern end of the village, and
it became clear in a moment why they had found the square so empty.
Everyone who was anyone had been at the party. A throng of creatures like
Doctor Fallow, with long skinny noses and dear little clothes came dancing
in with crowns of leaves in their hair--for the leaves of the Autumn
Provinces are brighter than any flower. Many wore glittery masks in black
and gold and red and silver. Some played delicate twig pipes, some sang
rude songs that greatly featured the words swelling, growing, and stretching
in complicated puns.

    “I…I think they must be spriggans,” said Ell, embarrassed. Naturally,
he could offer no further illumination on anything that so rudely insisted on
beginning with S.

    At the head of the host came a pair of spriggans, looking at each other
under the lashes of their eyes, blushing, smiling, laughing. One, a young
man, was red from the tips of his hair to the tips of his feet, his skin glowing
like an apple, his evening suit crimson from cuff to cufflink. The other, a
young girl, was golden from lash to leg, her hair just the exact color of a
yellow leaf, her gown butter-bright.

     “The red fellow is Rubedo,” Doctor Fallow said jovially, “he
specializes in the Gross Matter, quite a promising lad, a bit iffy on the
mathematics, of course. The doe is Citrinitas, my star pupil. She’s at work
on the highest alchemical mysteries, all of which must be solved, like a
detective solves a dastardly crime. I’m so pleased for them both I could
sprout!” He drew a faded orange kerchief from his pocket and dabbed at his
eyes.

     “Please,” called Citrinitas, her voice ringing out bright and clear as
sunlight through the deepening evening, “Eat! We shall all have bad luck if
a single soul goes hungry!”

     Ell trodded up to the table, happy as anything. “I don’t suppose you’ve
any radishes, hm?” he asked--and no sooner than he had, a little spriggan-
lad held up a plate of shining red radishes, so bright they must have been
polished. Saturday inched toward the table, looking apologetically back at
September.

     “Well,” she said, “if the damage is already done…it certainly does look
delicious. And I have a weakness for pumpkin.” Her mother often liked to
say she had a weakness for things: for hot cocoa, for exciting novels, for
mechanics’ magazines, for her father. September felt it quite a grown-up
thing to say.
    Let it be said that no other child has ever eaten as September did that
night. She tasted some of everything--some more than others, for Fairy food
is a most adventurous cuisine, complex and daring. She even sipped the
hazelnut-beer and slurped at the cauliflower ice cream. Together, she and
Saturday took on the challenge of a Gagana’s Egg, which was not really an
egg at all, he explained, but a sugar-glazed shell of many colors containing
a whole meal. Saturday deftly placed eight bone cups around a massive
copper-rose globe. Saturday pierced the egg with an icepick (thoughtfully
provided) in eight places, and let steaming liquid spill into the little cups in
eight different colors. September delighted in each one, the violet brew that
tasted of roasted chestnuts and honey, the bloody red one that tasted like fig
pastry, the creamy pink one a kind of limey rosewater treacle. Saturday
drank, too, always after her. His stomach was still weary from starving, and
would have preferred a nice saltlick and a lump of schist, but for her he
would eat any sugar, drink any red draught. When September finished the
cups, Saturday showed her how to pierce the top hemisphere of the egg four
more times so that the top of the shell could be lifted away whole and filled
with water to steep into a sort of gooseberry-tasting tea. Inside the egg, a
golden broiled bird nestled next to oil-soaked bread, brandied clams, and
several fiery, spicy fruits September could not name, but which quite took
her breath away.

    Indeed, by the end of the feast she was only sorry to have waited so
long to gorge herself on Fairy food.

    Doctor Fallow belched loudly.
    “Have you strength in you still to see my offices? I think you’d find
them most interesting.” The spriggan’s eyes flashed like a wolf’s in the
candlelight, for it was now quite dark. The stars of autumn wheeled
overhead, hard and bright and cold. A lonely wind began to pick up outside
the warm, ruddy village. “Rubedo and Citrinitas must come along, too, of
course.”

    “But it’s their wedding night!” protested September. “Surely they
would like to retire with milk and a nice book!”

    Ell snorted. Bits of radish remained in his whiskers. In the firelight his
eyes seemed crinkly and soft. September remembered what he said, that
they belonged to each other. She rather liked to think that. She felt it was a
thing she might take out and look at when all was dark and cold, and it
might warm her.

    Doctor Fallow waved his hand. “Rubbish. Every night is their
wedding. Every night is their feast. Tomorrow, too, they will be married
with just as much pomp and song, and we will eat just as well, and then go
to my offices, for work must be done even on wedding nights. And then we
will do it all over again. How wonderful is ritual, what a comfort, in dark
times!”

    September remembered what the Marquess said: A place where it is
always autumn, where there is always cider and pumpkin pie, where leaves
are always orange and fresh-cut wood is always burning and it is always,
just always Halloween. So many of the spriggans wore masks, and danced
wildly, and leaped out from the shadows to spook one another.
     “You may as well come along, September. You were expected, and the
expected ought to do what they’re told. It’s only manners.”

     “But the casket in the wood…I don’t have much time…it took so long
to get here!”

     “All that tomorrow, my dear! You can’t worry on a full stomach!”

     The whole colorful throng of them, Rubedo and Citrinitas arm in arm,
A-Through-L prickly and guarded, Saturday walking silently just behind
September, his eyes huge and wary, September herself, and Doctor Fallow
leading the way, crossed the square to one of the largest buildings. Thready
clouds hid its roof, up above the crowns of the trees. It seemed far too big
for the little folk.

     Doctor Fallow waggled his bushy eyebrows, winked twice, pinched his
long nose, puffed out his cheeks and spun around on one foot. Rubedo and
Citrinitas did the same--and all three of them sprouted up like nothing
you’ve seen: swelled, grew, stretched, until they were taller than A-
Through-L, and of a perfect size to enter the huge building.

     “I…don’t think I’m of a girth to walk comfortably in there,” sighed Ell.
“though I’m certainly of a height. I shall wait outside. If anything proves
wonderful there, do yell out the window.” He settled down, heavy with
radishes, to nap in the courtyard of Doctor Fallow’s office.
    As they passed through doors and down hallways, the spriggans
swelled up and shrunk down to fit each passage. September and Saturday
sometimes had to crawl on their bellies, and sometimes could not even see
the top of the doorframes above them, and had to scale the staircases like
mountain climbers. The building could only be comfortable to a spriggan.
Finally, the spriggans settled into something smaller than they had been
when they entered, but taller than they had been at the feast, and opened the
door to a great laboratory full of bubbling things.

    “The heart of our university,” said Doctor Fallow expansively. “Only
broadly speaking a university, of course.”

    “We don’t have classes, really,” said Rubedo.

    “Or exams,” said Citrinitas.

    “And we’re the only students,” they said together.

    “But no work is more important than ours.”

    “You’re…alchemists, right?” said September shyly. The practice of
alchemy is forbidden to all except young ladies born on Tuesdays--and
spriggans, who were exempt from everything, if the Green Wind was to be
believed.

    “Exact as an equation!” crowed Doctor Fallow.

    “Then I should tell you, I was born on a Tuesday.”
    “How marvelous!” exclaimed Citrinitas. “I am so weary of running all
the student committees myself.”

    “And what use I could make of an assistant! The volume of papers is
monstrous,” said Rubedo ruefully, glaring at his wife.

    “Now, now, let’s not be hasty,” said Doctor Fallow, raising his hands
for silence. “The young lady can have no more than the most rudimentary
understanding of the Noble Science. Perhaps she would rather be a rutabaga
farmer. I hear the market is very good this year.”

    “It’s…turning lead to gold, right?” said September.

    All three spriggans laughed uproariously. Saturday flinched--he did not
like people laughing at September.

    “Oh, we solved that long ago!” chuckled Rubedo. “I believe that was
Greengallows, Henrik Greengallows? Is that right, my love? Ancient
history has never been my subject. A famous case study even reported a
method for turning straw into gold! The young lady who discovered it
wrote a really rather thin paper--but she toured the lecture circuit for years!
Her firstborn refined it, so that she could make straw from gold, and solve
the terrible problem of housing for destitute brownies.”

    “Hedwig Greengallows, my dear,” mused Citrinitas. “Henrik was just
her mercurer. Men are so awfully fond of attributing women’s work to their
brothers! But September, you have no idea how freed we all felt by
Hedwig’s breakthrough. It is tedious to spend centuries on one problem.
Now, we have several departments. Rubedo labors at the task of turning
gold to bread, so that we may eat our abundance, while I am writing my
dissertation on the Elixir Mortis--the Elixir of Death.”

    “It seems to me,” said Saturday shyly, “that the country of Autumn is a
strange place to conduct experiments. Nothing here changes, yet alchemy is
the science of change.”

    “What a well-spoken boy!” exclaimed Doctor Fallow. “But truly, the
Autumn Provinces provide the most ideal situation for our program.
Autumn is the very soul of metamorphosis, a time when the world is poised
at the door of winter--which is the door of Death--but has not yet fallen. It is
a world of contradictions: a time of harvest and plenty, but also of cold and
hardship. Here we dwell in the midst of life, but we know most keenly that
all things must pass away and shrivel. Autumn turns the world from one
thing into another. The year is seasoned and wise, but not yet decrepit or
senile. If you wrote a letter of requisition you could ask for no better place
to practice alchemy.”

    “What is the Elixir of Death?” asked September, running her fingers
along several strange instruments: a scalpel with a bit of mercury clinging
to it, scissors with a great mass of golden hair caught in the shears, a jar full
of thick liquid that shifted back and forth from yellow to red.

    Citrinitas brightened, if that was possible. She clutched her three-
fingered hands to her breast. “Oh, nothing could be more fascinating! The
Elixir of Life, as you will certainly know, is produced via the Chymical
Wedding, a most secret process. The resulting stuff makes one immortal.
The Elixir of Death, more rare by far, returns the dead to life. I expect
you’ve heard the tale of the boy and the wolf? No? Well, it was terrible, the
boy’s brothers betrayed him and cut him all up, but his friend the wolf got
himself a vial of the water of Death and fixed him right up. It’s quite a
famous story. Death herself produces the Elixir, when she is moved to
weep--not a frequent occurrence, I assure you! I am trying to synthesize it
from less…esoteric ingredients.”

     “And the casket in the Worsted Wood? Where does that fit in to all
these strange studies?” said September shrewdly.

     “Well,” said Rubedo uncertainly. “The Worsted Wood lies at the heart
of the Autumn country. None of us go in. The geese here, they migrate each
evening, and one of them said a girl was on her way who would want to
enter the wood, and we felt sorry for her.”

     “You are certainly welcome to, though none of us can truly recommend
it,” rushed Doctor Fallow. “We confess--we made the casket. One of my
undergraduate projects, I’m afraid! Quite a long time ago. you’re the first to
show any interest in it since, oh, since Queen Mallow claimed her sword
here, I expect.”

     September started. “It’s Queen Mallow’s sword?”

     “No, no, I didn’t say that, did I, girl? I said she claimed it. You can’t
claim something that’s already yours, if it’s yours it’s yours, eh? The casket
is really quite clever. I received first marks for it. How shall I explain? It is
both empty and full, until one opens it. For when a box is shut, you cannot
tell what it might contain, so you might as well say it contains everything,
because, really, it could contain anything, see? But when you open it, you
affect what is inside. Observing something changes it, that’s a law, nothing
to be done. Oh, you’ll see in the morning! How splendid you will find it!”

    “But September,” said Citrinitas sadly, “these sorts of things, well…
they’re always guarded, aren’t they? It might be best to enroll with us now
and worry about the casket when you’ve progressed in your studies a bit.”

    “I can’t! I haven’t time, I must open the casket tomorrow, or I shan’t
have time to get back before the Marquess has my head!”

    “September,” whispered Saturday.

    “Perhaps you’d like to decide on your class schedule now, then? I have
room in my morning Hermetics lecture, and I expect Citrinitas will be
happy to get you up to speed in Elemental Affinities.”

    “September!” Saturday said, more loudly, but the spriggans were
exclaiming and pulling at her, and she could not hear him.

    “We’ve even a free space on the squash team! How fortunate!” cried
Rubedo, clapping his ruddy hands.

    “September!” wailed Saturday, tugging at her sleeve. Finally, she
turned to him, flustered by all the yelling.

    “What?” she said, shaken.

    “Your hair is turning red,” Saturday said softly, embarrassed to have all
the attention suddenly on him.
    September looked down at her long, dark hair. One curl had indeed
turned blazing scarlet, terribly bright against the rest of her. She touched it,
amazed, and as her fingers brushed the red lock, it broke off and drifted off
on an unseen wind, for all the world like an autumn leaf wafting away.




                                        #




                               OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XII: Thy Mother’s Sword

    In Which September Enters the Worsted Wood, Loses All Her Hair,
Meets Her Death and Sings It to Sleep.




    “It’s because I ate the food,” sniffed September miserably, hiding her
face in the Wyverary’s chest. A-Through-L lay on the leafy ground like a
Sphinx, nuzzling her hair with his nose. He stopped that right quick, though
as more of it broke off and sailed away into the night.

    “Don’t be silly,” he said. “We ate it too!”

    “What’s happening to me?” September wept.

    Her hair shone, bright red, curling up at the edges in pretty shapes. She
had already lost much of it. The spriggans looked discomfited, but tried to
be cheery.

    “I think it’s rather nice!” chirped Doctor Fallow. “An improvement, I
declare!”

    “You do match me, now,” said Ell, trying to be helpful and optimistic.

    September rolled back the sleeve of the green smoking jacket, which
was terribly chagrined and tried to keep covering her, to protect her, but in
the end, she wrestled the sleeve up to her elbow and waved her hand for the
Doctor to see. The skin, once the same warm brown as her father’s, had
gone hoary and rough, tinged with grey and green, like bark.

    “Is this an improvement?” she cried.

    “Well, this sort of thing happens. We must be adaptable. Autumn is the
kingdom where everything changes. When you leave, it’ll be alright,
probably. If you haven’t put down roots yet.”

    “Still, about my syllabus…” insisted Rubedo. Citrinitas elbowed him
roughly.

    September rubbed her eyes with the heels of her hands--which had
begun to grow a healthy bit of silver moss. “Fine,” she said shortly. “Fine. I
shall go now, then, to the wood, and get this awful business over with
before I turn into an elm.”

    “I think you’re a bit more birch-y,” said Doctor Fallow
contemplatively.

    “Not helping!” snapped Ell. “You could help, if you had some
medicine for her in all your weird, ugly tower.”

    “Medicine’s not our business,” said Citrinitas helplessly. “And
besides…change is the blessing of Autumn. She should feel lucky.”

    Ell, as September had never seen him do before, spat a lick of fire at
her. Not enough to scorch, but enough to singe her hair. Citrinitas yelped
and leapt back, batting at her curls. The Wyverary curled closer around
September.

    “Well, you can’t go with her, so you might as well stop smothering,”
huffed Doctor Fallow. “This is strictly a lone-knight situation.”

    “Then she isn’t going! I shan’t let her go anywhere without something
large and fire-breathing and double-smart behind her! Since I don’t see a
flaming burp between the three of you, I suggest you leave us alone!”

    “Ell, if that’s how it’s done, you can’t bellow it into doing it
differently,” sighed September. She stood up and disentangled herself from
her friend. Blazing curls of her hair fluttered to the ground.

    “I can try!” Ell insisted.

    “No, I shall go alone. I always thought I would be going alone. I shall
be back presently, I promise. Say you’ll wait for me, you and Saturday, that
you won’t go anywhere without me, that when I come out of that wood I
shall see a red face and a blue one smiling!”

    Ell’s eyes filled with panicked turquoise tears. He promised, his wings
jangling his chains fretfully.

    Saturday did not say anything. He bent and tore the cuff from one leg
of his trousers. The cuff was blue and ragged and not a bit muddy with
velocipede-grease. The Marid tied it around September’s arm. His fingers
trembled a bit. The green jacket introduced itself politely, but coolly, to the
cuff. Just so long as the cuff knew who came first.
     “What is this?” said September, confused.

     “It’s…a favor,” answered Saturday. “My favor. In battle…knights
oughtn’t be without one.”

     September reached up to touch his face, gently, to thank him. Her
fingers grazed his cheek. They had shriveled into thin, bare, dry branches,
bundled together at the wrist.




     As September walked through the starry, misty night, trying not to look
at her ruined hand, she realized that she had not traveled alone in days. She
missed Ell immediately, who would tell her all sorts of things to keep her
from being afraid, and Saturday, who would be quiet and steadfast and dear
at her side.

     She shivered, and whispered to herself to keep from shivering:
“Bathtub, Bathysphere, Barometer, Bear, Bliss, Bandit…”

     Gradually, the trees turned from wood and leaf to something altogether
stranger: tall black distaffs wound around with fuzzy silk and wool and
fleeces September could not name. They were all colored as autumn woods
are colored, red and gold and brown and pale white. They crowded close
together, fat and full, shaped more or less like pine trees. She could just see
the sharp distaff jutting out of the wispy top of one great red beast of a tree.
This must be where they get the stuff to build Pandemonium! September
thought suddenly. Instead of cutting down a forest, they weave it!
     The moon peeked out of the clouds, too shy to show herself fully.
September came, by and by, to a little clearing where several parchment-
colored distaffs had left their fibers all over the forest floor like pine
needles. In the corner of the clearing sat a lady. September brought her hand
to her mouth, so surprised and shaken was she, forgetting that her fingers
were only branches now.

     The lady sat on a throne of mushrooms. Chanterelles and portobellos
and oysters and wild crimson forest mushrooms piled up high around her,
fanning out around her head--for the lady too was primarily made of
mushrooms, lovely cream-yellow ones opening up like a dress-collar
around her brown face, lacy bits of fungus trailing from her every finger
and toe. She looked off into the distance, her pale eyes a pair of tiny button
mushrooms.

     “Good evening, my lady,” said September, curtseying as best she knew
how.

     The mushroom queen said nothing. Her expression did not change.

     “I have come for the casket in the wood.”

     A little wind picked up, ruffling the shitakes at the lady’s feet.

     “I do hope I’ve not offended, it’s only that I haven’t much time and I
seem to be coming all over tree.”

     The lady’s jaw sagged open. Bits of dirt fell out.
    “Don’t mind her,” came a tiny, breathy voice behind her. September
whirled.

    A tiny brown creature stood at her feet, barely a finger high. She was
brown all over, the color of a nut-husk. Only her lips were red. Her hair was
long, covering most of her body like bark. She seemed very young. She
wore a smart acorn cap.

    “She’s just for show,” breathed the wee thing.

    “Who are you?”

    “I am Death,” said the creature. “I thought that was obvious.”

    “But you’re so small!”

    “Only because you are small. You are young and far from your Death,
September, so I seem as anything would seem if you saw it from a long way
off--very small, very harmless. But I am always closer than I appear. As you
grow I shall grow with you, until at the end, I shall loom huge and dark
over your bed, and you will shut your eyes so as not to see me.”

    “Then who is she?”

    “She is…” Death turned her head, considering. “She is like a party
dress I wear when I want to impress visiting dignitaries. Like your friend
Betsy, I too am a Terrible Engine. I too have occasional need of awe. But
between us, I think, there is no need of finery.”

    “But if we are so far apart, why are you here?”
     “Because Autumn is the beginning of my country. And because there is
a small chance that you may die sooner than I anticipated, that I shall need
to grow very fast very soon.”

     Death looked meaningfully at September’s hand. Within the green
jacket, her arm had now shrunk into one long, knobbed branch from
shoulder to fingertip.

     “Is that why the Worsted Wood is forbidden? Because Death lives
here?”

     “And also hamadryads. They are very boring to listen to.”

     “Then the Marquess sent me here to die.”

     “I do not make such judgments, child. I only take what is offered me,
in the dark, in the forest.”

     September crumpled to the ground. She stared at the winter branches of
her hand. A great orange tuft of her hair flew off--she was nearly bald now,
only a few wisps of curls clinging to her head. She sniffed and cried--or
tried to cry, but her eyes were dry as old seeds, and she could not.

     “Death, I don’t know what to do.”

     Death climbed up into her lap, sitting primly on her knee, which had
already begun to darken and wither.

     “It’s very brave of you to admit that. Most knightly folk I happen by
bluster and force me to play chess with them. I don’t even like chess! For
strategy Wrackglummer and even Go are much superior. And it’s the wrong
metaphor entirely. Death is not a checkmate…it is more like a carnival
trick. You cannot win, no matter how you move your Queen.”

    “I've only ever played chess with my mother. I wouldn't feel right,
playing with you.”

    “I cheat, anyway. When their backs are turned, I move the pieces.”

    Slowly, a hole opened up in September’s cheek, just a tiny one. She
rubbed at it absently, and it widened. She felt it widening, stretching, and
was so terribly afraid. She trembled, and her toes felt awfully cold in the
mushroomy mud. Beneath her skin, twigs and leaves had begun to show.
Death frowned.

    “September, if you do not pay attention you will never get out of this
wood! You are closer than you think, human girl. I guard the casket.”
Death’s tiny eyes wrinkled kindly. “All caskets are within my power, of
course they are.” September yawned. She didn’t mean to. She couldn’t help
it. A twig in her cheek popped, turning to dust. “Are you sleepy? That’s to
be expected. In Autumn, trees sleep like bears. The whole world pulls on its
nightclothes and snuggles in to sleep through all of winter. Except for me. I
never sleep.”

    Death climbed up onto her knee, looking up at her with hard acorny
eyes. September tried very hard to listen to her Death, instead of to the
sound of her slowly opening cheek. “I have terrible nightmares, you know.
Every night when I come home from a long day’s dying, I take off my skin
and lay it nicely on my armoire. I take off my bones and hang them up on
the hatstand. I set my scythe to washing on the old stove. I eat a nice supper
of mouse-and-myrrh soup. Some nights I drink off a nice red wine. White
does not agree with me. I lay myself down on a bed of lilies and still, I
cannot sleep.”

       September did not want to know. The moon moved silently overhead,
making gape-faces at them.

       “I cannot sleep because I have nightmares. I dream all the things the
dead wish they had done differently. It is dreadful! Do all creatures dream
so?”

       “I don’t think so…I dream sometimes that my father has come home,
or that I have done well on my math exams, or that my mother’s hair is all
made of candy canes and we live on a river of cocoa on a marshmallow
island. My mother sings me to sleep and only once in awhile do I dream of
awful things.”

       “Perhaps it is because I have no one to sing me to sleep. I am so tired.
All the world earns its sleep but me.”

       September felt sure that she was meant to do something. That, like
Latitude and Longitude, the Worsted Wood was a kind of puzzle, and if she
only knew how the pieces were shaped, she could manage the whole thing
handily. Lost in thought and terror at her own nightmares, September’s
Death curled, small and feral, on her knee, her cloak of barkish hair
wrapping her like a blanket. With her good hand--a relative thing, really,
since it was blackened and rough as a hawthorn branch already, and
showing sap under the fingernails, September gathered up her Death and
laid it in the crook of her arms. She did not quite know what to do.
September had never had a brother or a sister to rock to sleep. She could
only remember how her mother had sung to her. She felt as though she was
in a dream. But she brushed Death’s hair gently from her face and sang
from memory, softly, hoarsely, for her throat had gone rough and dry:




    Go to sleep, little skylark,

    Fly up to the moon

    In a biplane of paper and ink

    Your wings creak and croon,

    borne aloft by balloons

    And your engine is singing for you.

    Go to sleep, little skylark, do.




    Go to sleep, little skylark,

    Fly up past the stars

    In a biplane of sunshine and ice
    Past comets and cars, past Neptune and Mars

    Still your engine is singing for you.

    Go to sleep, little skylark, do.




    Go to sleep, little skylark

    Drift down through the night

    In your biplane of silver and sighs

    Slip under the light,

    come down from the heights

    For your mother is singing for you.

    Go to sleep, little skylark, do.




    September reached the end of the song and began again, for Death’s
eyes were sliding just the littlest bit closed. Her mother had sung that song,
not since she was small, but since her father had left. When she sang it, she
curled September in her arms just as September now curled Death, and sang
it close to her ear so her long black hair fell over September’s brow, just as
the remains of September’s hair now fell on Death’s brow. She remembered
her mother’s smell, the comfort of it, even though she mainly smelled of
diesel oil. She loved that smell. Had learned to love it, and settle into it like
a blanket. When September got to the part about Neptune and Mars again,
Death relaxed in her arms, her bark-brown hair falling delicately over
September’s elbow. She kept singing, though it hurt her, her throat was so
shriveled and sore. And as she sang, an extraordinary thing happened:

     Death grew.

     Death stretched and lengthened and got heavier and heavier. Her hair
curled and spread, and her arms grew to the size of September’s own arms,
and her legs grew to the size of September’s own legs, and in no time at all,
Death was the size of a real child, and September held her still in her arms,
slumped, sleeping, still.

     Oh no! thought September. What have I done? If my Death has grown
so big surely I am doomed!

     But Death moaned in her sleep, and September saw, glinting in her
mouth, something bright and hard. Death opened her mouth, yawning in her
sleep. Be bold, September told herself. An irascible child should be bold.
Gently, she put her blackened, sappy fingers into Death’s mouth.

     “No!” cried Death dreaming. September snatched her hand back. “She
loved you all those years, it was only that you couldn’t see it!”

     September tried again, just grazing the thing with her fingertips.

     “No!” cried Death dreaming. September snapped back. “If you had
gone right instead of left you would have met an old man in overalls, and he
would have taught you blacksmithing!”

    September tried one more time, sneaking her fingers past Death’s teeth.

    “No!” cried Death dreaming. September recoiled. “If you had only
given your son pencils instead of swords!”

    September stopped. She felt hot all over, and the hole in her cheek
itched, as though there were leaves crinkling in at its edges. She breathed
deeply. September smoothed Death’s hair with her ruined hand, which was
sprouting new branches even now. She bent and kissed Death’s burning
brow. And then she began to sing again, softly:

    “Go to sleep, little skylark…” She caught the edge of the thing.

    “Fly up to the moon…” It was slippery and sharp, like glass.

    “In a biplane of paper and ink…” September pulled. Death groaned.
Birds flew up from the night forest, spooked.

    “Your wings creak and croon, borne up by balloons…” There was a
terrible creaking, crooning sound as the thing in Death’s throat came free.
Death’s mouth opened horribly wide, bending back and back and back and
her whole body folded strangely back around itself as the thing emerged, so
that just as September pulled it out entirely, Death vanished with a little
sound like the snapping of a twig.

    “And your engine is singing for you,” September finished quietly,
almost whispering. In her arms she cradled a smoky glass casket, just the
size of a child. It was hung with red silk ropes and bells and on its face was
a little gold plaque. It read:




     Will hilt to hand yet be restored?

     Take me up, thy mother’s sword.




     September ran her hands over it. She did not understand. But given a
magical box, no child will leave it shut. She fumbled with the knots and
rang the bells a great many times with her twiggy hands, but finally, under
all that blood-colored silk was a little glass latch. September wedged her
woody thumb underneath it and all the forest echoed as it popped free. One
by one, the mushrooms that made up the Lady’s face began to peel off and
float away, until September was surrounded by a gentle whirlwind of
delicate, lacy mushrooms and the last curls of her own hair, gone red as
knots. She lifted the casket lid.

     Inside was a long, sturdy wrench.




                                          #
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XIII: Autumn Is the
Kingdom Where Everything Changes

     In Which Our Heroine Succumbs to Autumn, Saturday and the
Wyverary are Abducted, and Saturday Has a Rather Odd Dream.




     September ran.

     The sky behind her had gone an icy lemony-cream color, pushing the
deep blue night aside. Dew and frost sparkled on the Worsted Wood,
clinging to the silken puffs like stitched diamonds. Her breath fogged.
Leaves crushed and rustled beneath her feet. She ran so fast, so terribly fast-
-but she feared not fast enough. With every step she could feel her legs
getting skinnier and harder, like the trunks of saplings. With every step she
thought they might break. In the Marquess’s shoes, her toes rasped and
cracked. She had no hair left, and though she could not see it she knew her
skull was turning into a thatch of bare, autumnal branches. Like Death’s
skull. She had so little time.




     When they are in a great hurry, little girls rarely look behind them.
Especially those who are even a little Heartless, though we may be quite
certain by now that September’s Heart had grown heavier than she expected
when she climbed out of her window that long ago morning. Because she
did not look behind, September did not see the smoky-glass casket close
itself primly up again. She did not see it bend in half until it cracked, and
Death hop up again, quite well, quite awake, and quite small once more.
She certainly did not see Death stand on her tiptoes and blow a kiss after
her, a kiss that rushed through all the frosted leaves of the autumnal forest,
but could not quite catch a child running as fast as she could. As all mothers
know, children travel faster than kisses. The speed of kisses is, in fact, what
Doctor Fallow would call a cosmic constant. The speed of children has no
limits.




     Up ahead of her September could see Mercurio, the spriggans’ village,
nestled in the flaming orange trees, loaf-chimneys smoking cozily, the smell
of breakfast, pumpkin flapjacks and chestnut tea floating over the forest to
her shriveled nose. September tried to call out. Red leaves burst from her
mouth in a scarlet puff, and drifted away. She gasped, something between a
sob and an exhausted wracking cough. I’ve lost my voice after all, she
thought. She clutched the wrench to her chest, hooking it through her
twiggy elbow, which had grown soft sticky buds, like rosehips. The wrench
gleamed in the dawn, burnished copper, its head shaped and carved into a
graceful hand, ready to clutch a bolt in its grip. Everything shimmered with
morning wetness.

     A-Through-L yawned in the town square, his huge neck shining as he
stretched it up and out. As September burst into the square she saw the
Wyverary playing some kind of checkers with Saturday, using raisiny
cupcakes for pieces. Doctor Fallow sat back in a rich, padded chair,
smoking a churchwarden pipe with satisfaction. They looked up joyfully to
greet her. She tried to smile and open up her arms to hug them. But
September could not fault them for the shock and dismay on their faces as
they saw her ruined body stumble onto the bread-bricks. She wondered if
she still had her eyes left. If they were still brown and warm, or dried up
seed pods. September could hardly breathe. Branches poked and stabbed at
her as she gasped after her breath. The green smoking jacket despaired. If it
had hands it would have wrung them, if a mouth, it would have wept. It
cinched itself closer to her waist--only a cluster of maple branches, now--
trying to stay close to her.

     “September!” cried A-Through-L. Saturday leapt to his feet, upsetting
the cupcake-checkers.

     Saturday gasped: “Oh, no, no…are you all right?”

     September sank to her knees, shaking her head. Saturday put his thin
blue arms around her. He was not sure it was allowed, but he could not bear
not to. He held her, gingerly, much as she had held Death. Saturday had
never had anyone to cradle and protect before, either.

     Saturday, September tried to say. I understand now. Red leaves puffed
from her mouth. Branches ground on branches in her throat, but no words
came. Rubedo and Citrinitas peeked out of one of the low, round houses,
clucking piteously. Rubedo stroked his wan crimson face. Citrinitas
nervously tied knots in her golden hair. But Doctor Fallow kept smoking his
pipe, smacking his lips and blowing rings.

    Ell! The Marquess needed me! Because of my mother! Golden leaves
dribbled onto the square. Saturday stroked her brow, and September had a
moment, only a moment, to be amazed that he did not think her ugly, that
he was not afraid to touch her.

    Because she fixes engines, Ell. So this is her sword. Do you
understand? If it had been anyone else, it would have been something else.
Like, for you it might have been a book. For Saturday, a raincloud. If only I
knew what she needed a magic wrench for! I am sure if we think hard on it,
all three of us, we shall be able to figure it out. A torrent of orange leaves
vomited up from her dry brown mouth. September laughed. More leaves
flew. She was probably the only girl in all of Fairyland who could have
pulled a wrench, of all the ridiculous things, out of that casket. Whose
mother here could have wielded such a weapon? The Wyverary and the
Marid exchanged miserable looks.

    “We must get her out,” Citrinitas said. “How could this have happened
so fast?”

    “Does it happen often?” snapped Saturday, quite beside himself. A-
Through-L’s eyes rimmed slowly with turquoise tears. One fell with a plop
onto September’s poor bald head.

    “Well, no…but then, we don’t have many human visitors…” Rubedo
swallowed wretchedly.
    “Autumn,” said Doctor Fallow, the Satrap, the Department Head,
“changes everything. If she could only relax, she could be happy. She might
even bear fruit, given a few years’ careful pruning. One must accept the
way of the world, for it will always have its way, one way or another.”

    “But everything doesn’t change,” said A-Through-L. “They have their
wedding, every night, just the same. Because every day is harvest and
feasting! I may not know Winter or Spring or Summer, but I know my
Autumn, I know my Fall, that’s A and that’s F, Doctor Fallow! September
is the only thing changing here! Winter never comes. It will never snow.
The leaves never die and fall off, they stay red and golden forever. Why not
her? Why must she wither all up? What have you done? We only have a
few days left to get back to the Marquess…”

    Saturday was shaking his head back and forth like a little bull. His face
darkened, as though clouds moved beneath his skin. “Did the Marquess tell
you to do this to her?” he said coldly.

    “Oh, no!” cried Citrinitas. “No, it’s only that she’s Ravished and
human and it’s all so unpredictable, the chymical processes that occur in
Autumn…”

    “But she probably knew,” mumbled Rubedo. “She could have guessed,
what might happen. She could have hoped.”

    Doctor Fallow smoked his pipe and sat back, his expression
unreadable.
    A terrible sound broke through the morning, like a tuba being crushed
with iron hammers. The sound shook Doctor Fallow from his chair.
Saturday laughed cruelly at him, but his laughter caught itself and crawled
away as the sound grew only louder. September found she could not get up,
her knees had locked into sapling-trunks. They no longer moved at all.
Rubedo and Citrinitas shrieked together and dashed into their house, bolting
the door. The three of them were left alone, clinging to each other, Ell trying
to shelter the little ones with his bound wings, when the lions came.

    They pounced with a horrible silence, their paws landing softly. There
were two of them, each nearly as big as the Wyverary. Their fur shone deep
blue, deeper than Saturday’s skin, the color of the loneliest winter night, and
all in their manes and tails silver stars shone, burned. They roared together,
and the terrible tuba-sound blared once more. Saturday screamed, and if she
could have put out an arm to comfort him, September would have. But it all
happened faster than she could understand. One lion snatched up Saturday
in his jaws. Drops of Marid blood, the color of seawater, spilled onto the
square. But he did not scream when the lion’s teeth cut him. The boy only
closed his eyes and reached out for September, imploring, even though he
knew it to be useless. The second lion slashed Ell’s face with his claws,
leaving a long gash in his red scales. There must have been a treacley-dark
poison in those claws, for the great red Wyverary tottered and fell with a
crash down to the forest floor in a deep sleep. The starry lion grabbed Ell by
the scruff and began dragging him away. Neither of them paid the slightest
bit of attention to September.
       No! cried September. But only leaves fell out of her mouth, and she
could not move. No!

       But even if she could have spoken loud and true, it would have been no
help. The lions’ eyes were shut. The Marquess’s lions slept, and dreamed,
even as they did their work, and carried off their prizes into the bright, clear
day.

       September screamed without a sound and cried bitterly and beat her
twig-hands against the ground. Her heart ached as though a knife had
quietly slipped between her ribs. She looked up to the cheerful sun, as ever
unimpressed by little girls’ sorrows, and tears of amber maple-sap squeezed
out of her eyes.

       September finally fell backwards, quite out of herself, and the world
slid away, for a little while.




       September dreamed. She knew she was dreaming, but she could not
help it. She was quite well and whole and sitting at a very fine table with a
lace tablecloth draped over it. On the table lay several greasy, grimy iron
gears and a great number of mismatched nuts and bolts. September did not
know what they were for, but she felt certain that if she could fit them
together as they were meant to go, everything would suddenly become
clear.

       “Shall I serve?” said Saturday. He sat primly across from her, dressed
in a fine Sunday suit, with a high collar and cufflinks. His hair was neatly
combed, his face scrubbed clean. The Marid took up one of the gears and
scraped it with a butter knife. He handed it back to her.

    “It’s getting very late, November,” said a young man. He sat very near
to her and held her hand. September felt certain she had never seen him
before. He had dark red hair and oddly golden skin. His eyes were big and
blue. They swam with turquoise tears.

    “My name is September…” she said softly. Her voice was weak, as it
often is in dreams.

    “Of course, October,” said the young man. “You must speak twice as
loudly just to be heard in the land of dreams. It is something to do with
physicks. But then, what isn’t? Dreams begin with D, and therefore I can
help you. To be heard.”

    “Ell? Where is your tail? Your wings?”

    “It is mating season,” the Wyverary said, straightening his lapels. “We
must all look our best, January.”

    “She wouldn’t know a thing about that,” said Saturday reproachfully.
September saw suddenly that he had a cat in his lap, purring. The cat’s fur
was blue, and in his bushy tail was a single, glowing star. “Such a lazy girl.
Lax in her studies. If only she’d kept up with her physicks homework, we’d
all be safe and sound and eating pound cake.”

    “I’m not lazy! I tried!”
     September looked down at the buttered gear in her hand. It was
smeared with Marid-blood, like seawater.

     “Mary, Mary, Morning Bell,” sang a third voice. September turned to
see a little girl sitting next to her, swinging her legs under her chair. The girl
looked terribly familiar, but September could not think where she could
have met her before. She had dull blondish hair bobbed short around her
chin, and her face was a bit muddy. She had on a farmer’s daughter kind of
dress, gray and dusty, with a yellowish lace at the hem. She rubbed at her
nose.

     “All praise and glory to the Marquess,” said Saturday reverentially,
passing a thick iron gear to the girl. The child accepted it and allowed him
to kiss her dusty hand.

     “Dances in her garden dell!” she sang. The blonde child giggled and
swung her legs harder.

     “Please, oh, please, start making sense!” cried September.

     “I always make perfect sense, December,” said Ell, smoothing pomade
into his hair. “You know that.”

     The dream-Saturday held up his hands. They were chained in ivory
manacles. “Did it mean me, do you think?” he said. “When it said you’d
lose your heart?”

     “But when the night comes rushing on,” sang the girl, laughing
uncontrollably. She took a bite out of her iron bolt. It crumbled like cake in
her mouth. “Down falls Mary, dead and gone!” The girl smiled. Her teeth
were full of black oil.

    And for a moment, just a moment, September saw them all: Saturday,
Ell, and the strange blonde girl, bound and bolted and chained in a dreary,
wet cell, sleeping, skeletal, dead.




                                      #
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XIV: In a Ship of Her Own
Making

    In Which September Leaves Autumn For Winter, Meets a Certain
Gentleman of Means, and Considers the Problem of Nautical Engineering.




    September woke to the sound of the snow falling. Hoarowls cried
overhead: Hoomaroo! Hoomaroo! The sun burned white and soft behind
long clouds. A cold, piney wind blew over her skin.

    She opened her eyes--and she had eyes! She had skin! She could even
shiver! September lay on a makeshift stretcher, a piece of piebald hide
stretched between long poles. Her hands--and she had hands!--were folded
neatly over her chest, and her hair flowed over her shoulders and down to
the sash of the exultant green smoking jacket, dark brown and familiar and
dry and clean. She was well again, and whole.

    And alone. It all came rushing back to her, the sleeping blue lions,
Saturday and A-Through-L, all of it. And the dream, too, still clinging to
her like old clothes.

    Mary, Mary, Morning Bell.
    In a panic, she reached for her sword--and felt the copper wrench
safely beside her on the piebald hide. The Spoon still rested snugly in her
sash. Saturday’s favor was gone, though, lost to the woods. September sat
up, her head heavy and sick. A wood spread out around her, long past
autumn, the trees black and stark, snow glittering on everything, softening
every edge to exquisite, perfect white. The green smoking jacket busily
puffed up to keep out the gently blowing snow.

    “You see? You’re quite well again. I promised you would be.”
Citrinitas sat a little ways away, as though afraid to come too near. The little
spriggan clutched her three-fingered hands together miserably. She
scratched her long yellow nose and pulled up a long yellow hood over her
head. She snapped her fingers and a little golden fire burned before her,
floating above the snow. Citrinitas sheepishly fished a marshmallow out of
her pocket and speared it on her thumbnail to roast.

    “Where are my friends?” September demanded, happy to find she had
her voice back, strong and loud, echoing in the empy wood.

    “I didn’t have to bring you out, you know. I could have left you there
and it would have been a good bit less trouble than dragging you out across
the Winter Treaty. So close to Spring! It doesn’t sit right with the stomach.
Rubedo didn’t even want to come. And he so longs to travel! Doctor Fallow
is a bit of a coward, he hid when the lions came. Eventually we’ll find him,
though. I think he’s angry with you--you might have at least matriculated
before turning all…tree-ish. And now I’ve missed our wedding, thank you
very much.”
    “You’ll have another tomorrow! And anyway if it’s so much bother,
why didn’t you just grow and cover the distance in three steps?”

    “Well,” Citrinitas blushed deep ochre. “I did. But that’s not the point.
The point is gratitude, and how you ought to have it.”

    September gritted her teeth. She liked the feeling of it--of having teeth.
“Where are my friends?” she repeated icily.

    “Oh, how should I know? We were only told to feed you up and send
you into the woods, no one tells us anything unless it’s ‘Mix up Life-in-a-
Flask for me, Citrinitas!’ ‘Bake me a Cake-of-Youth, Trinny!’ ‘Grade these
papers!’ ‘Watch that beaker!’ ‘A monograph on the nature of goblins’
riddles, Ci-ci!’ I swear to you, I am finished with post-doctoral work!”

    The golden spriggan struck her bony knee with her fist. As she spoke
her voice got higher and higher until it squeaked like a tea-kettle.

    “Anyway it’s no use interrogating me. I don’t know. But I’ve brought
you to the snow and the snow is the beginning and the end of everything,
everyone knows that. I’ve brought you to the snow and the Ministry, and
the clerk will…well, mainly he’ll say: Ffitthit at you. But I expect they’re in
the Lonely Gaol, you know, since that’s where the lions take people,
usually, and that’s far, oh so awfully far, and it won’t do you any good any
way. Parole was outlawed years ago. And the Gaol is guarded by the Very
Unpleasant Man and you’re just a little girl.”

    September’s face burned. She got up and marched over to Citrinitas
and crouched next to her. And maybe Lye’s bath, oh so terribly long ago
now, really had given her a red, frothy draught of courage, because
otherwise she could not imagine where she might have found the gall to
hiss at the miserable spriggan:

    “I am not just a little girl.” September straightened up, scowling at the
spriggan. “I can get bigger, just like you. Only…it just takes me a little
longer.” She turned on her heel, seized her copper wrench, and began to
walk over the crystal snow drifts to a little hut nestled between two great
yew trees, which could only be the Ministry, or at least, she hoped it was
the Ministry, because otherwise she would suddenly look very foolish. She
did not look back.

    “I’m sorry!” cried Citrinitas after her. “I am! Alchemy really is lovely,
once you get past the alchemists…”

    September ignored her, and walked up the hill, the snow swallowing up
the spriggan’s voice.




    September breathed relief. The Marquess’s lovely black shoes had
gotten soaked with snowmelt. A pleasant sign, freshly painted black and
red, rose up out of a snow drift:




                              OceanofPDF.com
The Marvelous Ministry of Mr. Map
(Yuletide Division)
             OceanofPDF.com
     The hut was covered in white furs and bits of holly, but the bits were
rather haphazard, as if someone meant to be festive but got bored and gave
up instead. The door was a sturdy thing with a compass rose stamped rudely
into the wood. September knocked politely.

     “Fftthit!” came the answer from within. It was an odd sound, like
someone spitting and coughing and growling and asking after one’s
relations all at once.

     “Excuse me! Citrinitas sent me! Please let me in, Sir Map!”

     The door cracked.

     “It’s mister, kitten. MISTER. Do you see an Order of the Green Kirtle
on my chest? Eh? A Crystal Cross? It’d be news to me. Call me by my
proper name, good grief and all gallows!”

     An old man peered down at her, the bags under his eyes wrinkled like
old paper, his hair and long, corkscrewed mustache not even white, but the
color of old, stained parchment. His skin was lined and brown, and his
neatly brushed hair curled in a stately fashion, tied up in a black ribbon like
the old portraits of Presidents in September’s schoolbooks. He had a
pleasant, jolly belly and broad cheeks--and fat, furry wolf’s ears with a
great deal of grey fur in them. He wore a bright blue suit with the cuffs
rolled up over impressive forearms, so bright it startled in the midst of the
white wood. His forearms were covered in sailors’ tattoos. For a moment,
the two of them just stared at one another, waiting for the other to speak
first.

         “You suit…its lovely…” murmured September, suddenly shy.

         Mr. Map shrugged. “Well,” he said, as though it were perfectly logical.
“World’s mostly water. Why pretend it’s not?”

         September leaned in close, rather closer than is courteous. She saw that
his suit was a map, with little lines and bits of writing on it. The buttons of
his blazer were green islands, and his cufflinks, and his belt buckle was an
enormous, sparkling gem, the biggest island of all. September recognized
the shape. She had seen it, oh, so briefly, as she fell from the customs office
in the sky. That’s Fairyland, she thought.

         Mr. Map left the doorway and went back to his work. September
followed. A great easel dominated the little room, on which Mr. Map had
been busy painting a sea serpent in a wild ocean bordering a small island
chain. Maps covered and cluttered every surface of the hut, topographical
maps, geological maps, submarine maps, population density maps, artistic
maps and scribbled-over wartime maps. The maps left room for only a
single chair, an easel, and a table groaning with paints and pens. September
shut the door gently behind her. It latched, and somewhere deep in the
wood, a lock spun.

         “Excuse me, Mr. Map, but the lady alchemist said you’d know where
to find my friends?”
     “Now why would I know that?” Mr. Map licked his pen--his tongue
was all black with ink, and the pen’s bristles filled up with it. He returned to
his map. “Seems to me a friend knows best where friends are.”

     “They…were taken. By two lions, the Marquess’s lions. She said their
strength came from sleeping, but I didn’t understand…I guess I understand
now.”

     “Do you know where I learned my Art?” Mr. Map said nonchalantly,
sipping a hot brandy which seemed to materialize in his hand. September
could swear she had not seen him pick up a snifter from his side-table.
“Fftthiiit!” sighed Mr. Map slowly, smacking his lips. “I promise, I waste
nothing in asking. Like a ship, I always come round again to where I
started.”

     “No, Mister. I don’t know.”

     “In prison, my kit, my cub! Where one learns anything worth knowing.
In prison there is nothing but time, time, time. Time goes on just positively
forever. You could master Wrackglummer, or learn Sanskrit, or memorize
every poem ever written about ravens (there are exactly seven thousand
ninety four at current count, but a no-talent rat down in the city keeps
spoiling my count) and still you’d have so much time on your hands you’d
be bored sleepless.”

     “Why were you in prison?”

     Mr. Map sipped his brandy again. He shut his eyes and shook his
glossy curls. He offered it to September, who, having given up all pretense
of carefulness, took a big gulp. It tasted like burnt walnuts and hot sugar
and she coughed.

    “That’s what happens to the old guard, my pup. You can always count
on it. We who serve, we who make the world run. When the world changes,
it stashes us away where we can’t make it run the other way again.”

    Mr. Map opened his eyes. He smiled sadly. “Which is to say I once
stood at the side of Queen Mallow, and loved her.”

    “You were a soldier?”

    “I didn’t say that. I said I stood at her side.” Mr. Map blushed. It
looked like ink spreading under his skin. His wolfy ears flicked back and
forth in embarrassment. “You’re young, little fawn, but surely you catch my
meaning. Once, you might have called me Sir and no one would have
corrected you.”

    “Oh!” breathed September.

    “Fftthit!” spat Mr. Map. “All done now, and gone, gone to old songs
and older wine. History. She’s just another in a list of Queens to be
memorized, now.”

    “My friend the Wyverar--the Wyvern said some people think she’s still
alive, down in the cellars, or wherever the Marquess keeps folk…”

    Mr. Map glanced at her, and his eyes drooped sadly. He tried a smile,
but it did not quite work out.
    “I met a lady in prison,” he went on, as though September hadn’t
spoken. “A Järlhopp. They keep their memories in a necklace, and wear it
always and forever. Since her memory is so safe, she never forgets anything
she’s seen, and the Järlhopp--her name was Leef, and how furry and sleek
were her long ears!--Leef taught me to copy out my own memory onto
parchment, to paint a perfect path…a path back to the things I loved, the
things I knew when I was young. That’s what a map is, you know. Just a
memory. Just a wish to go back home, someday, somehow. Leef kept hers
in that jewel at her throat, I kept mine on paper, endless paper, endless time,
until the Marquess had need of me, until she sent me away to the wilds of
the Winter Treaty, where nothing happens, where I cannot possibly cause
trouble, where no one lives. And where there are no kind Järlhoppes to
comfort me, or folk who might need maps to find their way.”

    September looked at her feet. At the elegant, glittering shoes. The
brandy warmed her all over. “I…I need to find my way,” she said.

    “I know, little cub. And I’m telling you your way. The way to the
bottom of the world, to the Lonely Gaol where the lions take all the souls
the Marquess hates.” Mr. Map leaned forward, licked his pen until it was
full of ink, and wedged a jeweler’s glass into his eye so that he could brush
in tiny details of the little island map. “You see, September, Fairyland is an
island, and the sea that borders it only flows one way. It has always been so,
and must always be. The sea cannot be changed in its course. If the Gaol
were but offshore from us here in this land, you could not get there by
sailing straight. The current does not move that way. You can only reach it
by circumnavigating Fairyland entire, and that is not a small task.”
    “You know my name.”

    “I know quite a number of things, you’ll find.”

    “But surely there is some place from which it is a short distance! If one
could only get on the right side of it.”

    “Surely. But I will not take you there.”

    “Whyever not?”

    Mr. Map looked grieved again.

    “Fftthit,” he said softly. “We all have our masters.”

    September clenched her fists. She could not bear to think of her friends
in a wet, dreary prison. “It’s not fair! I could have gotten her this wretched
thing in seven days! She didn’t even give me a chance!”

    “September, my calf, my chick, seven days were never seven. They
were three, or eight, or one, or whatever she wished them to be. If she wants
you at the Lonely Gaol, she has a reason, and you could never have gone
anywhere else. And I suspect,” he looked at the copper wrench, twisting his
mustache in one great hand, “that she has devised some work for you to do
there, with your fell blade. Hello, old friend,” he greeted it, “how strange
for us to meet again, like this, with the snow blowing so outside.”

    “You know my…my wrench?”
    “Of course I know it. It was not a wrench when we were last
acquainted, but one’s friends may change clothes and still one knows
them.”

    “Why does she need me to go all the way to her horrid old Gaol? I had
the sword! The lions could have taken it and left us alone!”

    “September, these things have their rhythms, their ways. Once the
sword is taken up, none but the hand that won it can brandish it true. She
cannot touch the sword, not for all the power in both her hands. But you
can. And both your hands called it forth, gave it shape, gave it life.”

    “I’m really very tired, Mr. Map. Ever so much more tired than I
thought I could be.”

    Mr. Map signed his parchment with a flourish.

    “Fftthit, sweet kitten. So it always goes.”

    September turned to go. Her feet felt heavy. She turned the knob of the
great door and listened to the lock whirr in the wood. When she opened it,
no winter wood glittered outside, but a long shore and a bright sea.
Gillybirds cried over head, wrestling over bits of fish. The tide flowed out
foamily from a silver beach, the very opposite from the one she had arrived
on. Here the sand was all manner of silver coins and crowns and sceptres
and bars, filigreed diadems and long necklaces set with pearls and
chandeliers glittering with glass. The violet-green sea--The Perverse and
Perilous Sea, she reminded herself--beat huge waves against the strand.
    “What is a map,” said Mr. Map, “but a thing that gets you where you’re
going?”

    “The sword,” September whispered, her eyes all full of the sea. “Who
had it before me?”

    “I think you know. My Lady Mallow kept it.”

    “And what was it, when she had it?”

    Mr. Map cocked his head to one side. He drank off the last of his hot
brandy.

    “A needle,” he said softly.

    September stepped out of the hut and onto the silver beach.




    September could see the current Mr. Map meant. It flowed just
offshore, a deeper violet amidst the violet waves, fast and cold and deep.
She could see it--but she was still only September, and she could not swim
all the way around Fairyland. The empty beach stretched far and long, and
nowhere hulked a broken ship or raft for her to climb aboard. She had come
so far, and for lack of a boat her friends suffered in who knew what dark
place. And Saturday, especially, had such a horror of being closed up and
trapped. And Ell! Sweet, enormous Ell! At least Gaol begins with G--or J,
she was not exactly sure. What awful cell could they devise to contain her
beast?
    She could not leave them there to wait for the Marquess to get angry
enough to deal with them. She did not think they would get cozy
government posts in the winter wilds. She would simply have to think, and
think quickly.

    September began to walk through the jeweled, silver beach, searching
desperately for real wood, something that might float. But, she thought
suddenly, it was all wood, once, on the other beach! Wood and flowers and
chestnuts and acorns! It’s not really silver or gold at all! The wairwulf said
it was Fairy gold! Like in stories, when you wake up after selling your soul
for a chest of pearls and it’s all full of mud and sticks! September scrabbled
in the flotsam and drew up a huge silver rod tipped in sapphire, something
like her old long-spent sceptre, if it had been made of a giant’s hand. She
tugged it down to the shoreline and tossed it onto the waves experimentally.

    It floated, bobbing happily in the surf.

    September yelped in victory and set about hauling several of the log-
sized sceptres together and lining them up, side by side. By the time she had
finished, the sun was very high, and she was all sweat from scalp to sole.
But how shall I ever lash it together? She despaired. There was no silver
rope or filigree wire to be had on all the beach. The distant dune grasses
were short and sharp and furry, and would never do. Oh, but I’ve just gotten
it back, September thought. Surely I could use something else. As if to
answer her, September’s hand fell upon the handles of a pair of silver
scissors.

    Well. If that’s the way of it, that’s the way of it.
    She held out the length of her hair, heavy and thick and not red at all,
not falling away bit by bit. She did not want to sniffle--what was a little
hair? She had already lost it once, after all. But that was magic, which could
be undone, and this was scissors, which could not. And so, as the scissors
sliced smoothly through her hair, she cried a little. Just a tear or two, rolling
slowly down her cheek. Somehow, she had thought it would hurt, even
though that was silly. She wiped her face clean. September braided her hair
into many thin, strong ropes, and knotted the sceptres together into a very
serviceable raft. She wedged the witch’s Spoon into the center of it as a
makeshift mast.

    “Now, I really am terribly sorry, Smoking Jacket. You’ve been a loyal
friend to me, but I’m afraid you’ll get quite wet, and I must ask you to
excuse my using you so.” September sadly secured the mast with the long
green sash, and stuffed the jacket into a gap where seawater might come in.
The jacket did not mind. It had been wet before. And it liked very much
being asked pardon.

    Finally, it was all finished. September was quite proud of herself, and
we may be proud of her too, for certainly I have never made a boat so
quickly, and I daresay only one or two of you have pulled the trick. All she
lacked was a sail. September thought for a good while, considering what
Lye, the soap-golem, had said: even if you’ve taken off every stitch of
clothing, you still have your secrets, your history, your true name. It’s hard
to be really naked. You have to work hard at it. Just getting into a bath isn’t
being naked, not really. It’s just showing skin. And foxes and bears have
skin too, so I shan’t be ashamed if they’re not.
    “Well, I shan’t be! My dress; my sail!” cried September aloud, and
wriggled out of her orange dress. She tied the sleeves to the top of the mast
and the tips of the skirt to the bottom. The wind puffed it out obligingly.
She took off the Marquess’s dreadful shoes and wedged them between the
sceptres. There she stood, her newly-shorn hair flying in every direction,
naked and fierce, with the tide coming in. She shoved the raft out to sea and
leapt on, nearly tipping the thing over, clutching her wrench and using it as
a rudder to steer her way. She would not have known to call it a rudder,
really, but she needed something to push on and direct herself, and the
wrench was all she had left. The wind caught her little orange sail and the
current caught the little ship, and soon enough she was sweeping along the
shoreline in a whipping breeze. Her skin pricked and she shivered, but she
would bear it. With clenched teeth and goosebumps.

    I did it! I figured it out myself, with no Fairy or spriggan or even a
Wyverary to tell me how! Of course she would have preferred to have a
Wyverary to show her, to be a great red ship for her to whoop and ride
upon. But he was not here, and she was hoisted on the bursting, splashing
waves by a ship of her own making, her hair, her Spoon, her dress, and her
loyal jacket, who rejoiced, quietly, with her as the Gillybirds shrieked and
sang.




    The moon rose slim and horned that night. All the stars flashed and
wiggled in the sky, so many constellations September could not name. One
looked a bit like a book, and she named it: Ell’s Father. Another looked
something like a spotted cat with big glowing red stars for eyes. She named
that one: My Leopard. Still another looked like a rainstorm, and as she
watched falling stars twinkled through it, like real rain.

     “And that’s Saturday’s Home,” September whispered to herself.

     The night wind blew warm and she stretched out beneath the orange
sail, watching the distant, shadowy shore slowly slip by. She had not really
considered the problem of food--silly girl, after all the trouble over it! And
in the dark, she loosened seven or eight strands of hair from the raft and tied
them to the wrench, hoping to catch a fish for her supper. Even September
did not quite think this was going to work. She had some idea about fishing,
since her mother and grandfather had taken her to catch minnows in the
pond one summer or another. But they always cast for her, and baited the
hook--ah, a hook. That was a bother. And no bait, either. Still, she had little
enough choice, and sunk the length of hair into the lapping sea.

     Despite everything, despite being terribly afraid for her friends and not
having the first idea how far the Gaol might be, September had to admit that
sailing at night, by one’s lonesome, was so awfully pleasant she could
hardly bear it. That stirring which had fluttered in her on first glimpsing the
sea--that stirring landlocked children know so well--moved in her now, with
the golden stars over head, and the green fireflies glinting on the wooded
shore. She carefully unfolded the stirring that she had so tightly packed
away. It billowed out like a sail, and she laughed, despite herself, despite
hunger and hard things ahead.

     Somewhere towards dawn, September fell asleep, her wrench curled
tightly against her, her hair still trailing in the surf, catching no fish at all.
      #




OceanofPDF.com
Interlude

    In Which We Return to the Jeweled Key and Its Progress




    Now, what, you have every right to ask, has happened to our erstwhile
friend the jeweled Key, all this while, as such awful and marvelous events
have befallen September?

    I shall tell you. I live to please.

    The Key finally entered Pandemonium and immediately knew the city
to be beautiful, rich, delicious--and empty of a little girl named September.
It drooped despondently and peeked through organdy alleys--abandoned,
but not hopeless. It did not follow her scent, but her memory, which left a
curling green trail visible only to lonely animated objects and a certain
opthamologist’s patients, which doctor it would be poor form to mention
here. Finally, the wreckage of Saturday’s lobster cage informed the Key in a
breathy, splintered voice that the whole troupe had left for the Autumn
Provinces some time back. The Key’s little jeweled breast swelled with
renewed purpose, and it flew out over the Barleybroom and across the
Meadowflats as fast as it could, a little blur of orange in the air, no more
than a marigold petal.
     It saw the dust-cloud of the velocipedes running, but could not catch
them. The Key wheezed and cried sorrow to the heavens, but Keys have a
certain upper speed limit, and even in love our gentle-hearted brooch could
not exceed it. Calpurnia Farthing glimpsed the rushing Key on her return
from the borders of Autumn, and thought it curious. Penny squealed and
begged to catch and keep it, but Calpurnia would not allow it, pets being a
nuisance to traveling folk. She squinted through her goggles and thought to
herself: that is a Key. Where there is a Key, there is yet hope.

     The Key entered the Autumn Provinces far too late, but followed the
trail of September’s memory into the Worsted Wood. There, it met with the
Death of Keys, which is a thing I may not describe to you. It is true that
novelists are shameless and obey no decent law, and they are not to be
trusted on any account, but some Mysteries even they must honor.

     Much shaken, the Key returned to see the ruined September, her
wracked body all branches and leaves and buds, being carried by Citrinitas
in three long strides so far from itself that the Key fell to the forest floor and
did not move for a long while.

     But move, at last, it did. What if September came upon a lock and was
lost without her Key? What if she were imprisoned? What if she were
lonely, with all her friends snatched away? No. The Key would not abandon
her. It set out, after her curling, spiraling green trail, all the way to the hut of
Mr. Map, who gave it a cup of fortifying tea and showed it the way to the
sea, placing a gentle kiss upon the Key’s clasp before it went.
    The Key blushed and set out over the Perverse and Perilous Sea, full of
purpose, sure that soon--oh, so very soon!--September would be near.



                                    #




                            OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XV: The Island of the Nasnas

     In Which September Runs Aground, Learns of the Vulnerabilities of
Folklore, and Is Half-Tempted




     It was not so much that September came upon an island as that she had
a bit of an accident with an island. She cannot be entirely blamed. The
current ran right into the little isle, and even if she had been awake and at
the tiller she might not have been able to avoid it. As things stood,
September awoke with her ship tangled in a bramble of lilies and seagrass,
of spiky cream-colored flowers she could not name. It was not the collision
that had woken her, but all the perfume of that thin beach, drifting out with
the tide. Her mouth was thick and dry, her belly empty, and the sun beat at
her head. The violet salt of the sea caked her arms and cheeks. She looked,
in fact, entirely a mess.

     If there are folk here, I ought to make myself fit for company,
September thought, and set about taking down her sail, which was by now
quite sodden with seawater and not at all nice to wear. She shook out her
green smoking jacket and tied it on, and lastly, with much frowning, slid the
Marquess’s shoes back on her feet, though she did not like to. But roses
have thorns and girls have feet, and the two do not get along. September
still felt wet and sore, but she thought she might be more or less
respectable-looking. She bent in the flowery shore and searched for berries,
any sort that might make a breakfast. She found a few round hard pinkish
things that tasted a bit of salt and grapefruit rind. Can’t ask them all to taste
of blueberry cream, and be knocked off a tree by a Wyverary for me, she
thought, and with the thought of Ell, slumped.

     “I’m alone again,” she whispered. “just me, and the sea, and not much
of anything else. Oh, how I wish my friends were here! I am coming, I
promise, it’s only that I must eat something, and drink fresh water, or I shall
not make it round the horn of Fairyland at all.”

     “N’ whol al,” said a quiet voice. September started and looked round.

     A lady stood uncertainly by, looking as if she might run at any
moment--if indeed she could run, for the lady was truly only half a lady.
She was cleanly cut in half lengthwise, having only one eye, one ear, half a
mouth, half a nose. It did not seem to trouble her any. Her clothes had been
made to fit her shape, lavender silk trousers with only one leg, a pale blue
doublet--or singlet--with only one padded sleeve. Half a head of hair
tumbled down her side, colored like night.

     “What?” said September. The one-legged woman flushed and hopped
backward a little, ducking her half-face into a high yellow collar. “Oh, I
don’t mean to be rude, I didn’t understand you, is all!”

     “Ot ly one,” tried the lady again, and then leapt away on her one leg,
bounding up the beach and over a tangled heath that led into the center of
the island. She hopped gracefully, as if it were the most natural way of
moving invented. Little black flowers wavered in her wake.

     Now, September knew she ought to stay straight on course, and never
turn aside until she reached the Lonely Gaol. But one cannot simply say
mysterious things and then run off! That’s practically begging to be
followed. September’s feet were already scrambling up through the heath
before her mind could worry about her little ship or what terrible clock
might be ticking towards a miserable prison at the bottom of the world. She
was off and running, calling after the half-lady, so thirsty she thought her
throat might catch on fire. We must simply count ourselves lucky that she
remembered her wrench, and did not leave it to be carried off by some
enterprising turtle.

     The island was not great or broad, and September might well have
caught the lady, but that both of them ran right into the center of a village
before a victor could be declared in their race. September understood
immediately that the strange creature was home--all the houses were cut
neatly in half. Arranged in a gentle half-circle, each sweet, small green-
grass house had half windows and half doors and half roofs of coral tile,
each and everything precisely and deliberately built for half a soul. Half a
great edifice stood at one end of the long village green, with half-pillars and
half-stairs all of silver. The lady ran full tilt towards a young man, tall and
half-formed just as she was. His trousers, too, were silk and purple, his
collar yellow and high. The two joined--smack!--at the seam, and she
turned to face September. A glowing line ran down their bodies where the
join had been made.
       “Not wholly alone,” said the creature, in a voice neither male nor
female. “That’s what we said. You are not wholly alone.”

       “Oh!” said September simply, and sat down on the smooth green. Now
that she had run all that way, was quite beside herself with tiredness and
strangeness. If only she could get a drink of water! She would not mind half
a glass…

       “When I am myself, I cannot speak as you would understand me. I can
only say half my words. I need my twin to speak to outsiders--not that you
are an outsider!”

       “I rather think I am!”

       “All things being equal,” the half-lady continued in her same soft
voice, “outsiders are to keep to the outside. But we can see you are one of
us.”

       “One of…who?”

       “The Nasnas. The half-a-whole, whom the gods saw fit to bisect. I am
Nor. My brother is Neither.” The two of them bowed in perfect unison, the
glowing line between them intact.

       “My name is September, but I’m not a…a Nasnas.”

       “And yet you’ve been cut in half.”

       “But I haven’t!” September clutched at her chest, to be sure.
     “You have no shadow,” said Neither/Nor, wandering away up towards
the great silver half-palace. “Half of you is gone,” she called over her
shoulder.

     September scrambled after her.

     “It’s no bother to me not to have a shadow,” she panted, trying to keep
up with the hopping Neither/Nor as she bounded over a tangled heath. “But
it must be terribly difficult to live without a left part!”

     “All Nasnas are twins. I have a left part. It is only that he is not
attached to me. Much as your shadow is not attached to you, but off and
having its own adventures, singing its own shadow-songs, eating feasts of
shade and gloam. It’s still your shadow, even if you are not bound to it. And
perhaps it is a bother to it, to be separated from you. One must always be
considerate of one’s other half.”

     Nor shuddered and the glowing seam between her and her brother went
dim. She leapt away from him and caught the hand of a passing girl,
spinning her like a dance partner. “Not!” she cried. “It’s been too long!”
The two leapt up and joined as Nor and her brother had done. A new Nor
turned towards September, almost a normal woman, but for the seam in her
face. Her voice was different, too, higher, more musical.

     “Of course, one may have a number of other halves,” Nor grinned. “We
have always felt sorry for those who are forced to be only one person,
forever and ever until they die. My brother and I are Neither/Nor, my sister
and I are Not/Nor, and on and on the combinations go, sharing dreams and
labor and life. We are halves, but we make an infinite whole.”

     “I’m…not like that,” whispered September. She could not say why
they frightened her, but the Nasnas lady and her many siblings made her
feel more unsure and unsettled than even Death had. “Why are you like
that?”

     “Why do you have two legs? Why is your hair brown?”

     September remembered Charlie Crunchcrab. “Evolution, I guess.”

     “Well, we guess, too.”

     “But don’t you have stories? About yourself. About why the world is
the way it is.”

     “You mean folklore?”

     September shrugged uncertainly.

     Not/Nor scratched her chin. “I think we had a folklore, once. I seem to
remember. We locked it up in a vault to keep it safe. Or a library. Terribly
similar. But bandits, you know. Bandits, bandits, always about! Wearing
masks and carrying sacks. I’m afraid there was a break-in. They left a few
crumbs--bandits are slovenly. I think I recall something about Cosmic
Scissors, and Entropy, and Where Love Comes From. But no one
remembers more, and the police don’t visit the hinterlands much.”

     “I’m sorry for your loss.”
     “And I for yours! I was born half, but to lose yourself in the prime of
life! What a trauma!”

     “Honestly, I hadn’t really thought about it much. It hurt while the
Glashtyn cut it away, but I’m not sick or anything.”

     “What do you suppose your shadow is doing without you? She might
be ill with pining!”

     September thought back to her shadow’s vicious smile, dancing on the
shoulders of the horse-headed Glashtyn. “I don’t think so,” she said, and for
the first time felt it had been a bit shabby of her to have cast of her shadow
so quickly, and not to have written to it, or asked after it at all.

     “I have to go to work now, little girl. Not’s shift is already done, and
I’m keeping her from nap and roast fish.”

     “What sort of shift do you have?” said September curiously. “And
mightn’t there be some water there?” She knew about shifts, of course,
because her mother had them. Shifts were the suns and moons of her old
world, dividing everything into times when her mother was there, and times
when she was not.

     “I work at the shoe factory, girl! We all do, it’s what we do. Why,
before the Marquess came, we just lay about on beaches and ate mangoes
and drank coconut milk and knew nothing about industry whatever! How
gladsome we are now, that she has shown us our laziness! Now we know
the satisfaction of a full day’s labor, of punchcards and taxable income.”
    September bit her lip. She wondered if the Marquess had happened by
around the time their folklore had been stolen. “I like mangoes,” she said
glumly.

    “We make the changelings’ shoes,” continued Not/Nor, striding
towards the silver half-palace that September now understood was a factory.

    “That’s all? No shoes for anyone else?”

    “Well, there are rather a lot of changelings. Bandits, again. Always
about. Besides, it’s quite hard, to make the sorts of shoes changelings
wear.”

    September waited. She long ago learned that if she waited and blinked
and behaved like a pupil, eventually someone would lecture her on
something.

    “It’s why we’re best suited, you know. Being this far southerly. It’s all
magnetized, see. If we didn’t make the shoes, why, changelings would just
float away back to their own world, and where would that leave all the
honest folk who stole them fair and square?”

    “I haven’t floated away.”

    “You’re not a changeling! There’s no poppet or goblin in your bed,
taking your place at supper. There’s more than one way between your world
and ours. There’s the changeling road, and there’s Ravishing, and there’s
those that Stumble, through a gap in the hedgerows or a mushroom ring or a
tornado or wardrobe full of winter coats. It’s all dangerous, but changelings
are terrible hard to keep track of. Someone’s always trying to capture them
back or pull them off their horses during dress parade. The shoes, though,
the shoes keep them here. Otherwise they’d just…fwoop! Like balloons. I
make right-hand shoes. With iron in the soles. Iron won’t go through, see.
Fairyland’s allergic. So am I, of course, but I take my pills like the
Marquess taught us.”

    “What about the Ravished? How do they get home?” September
realized that she was considering how to get home, for the first time.

    Nor grinned. She had sharp, wolfish teeth. “Can’t say, can I? Or won’t
say, won’t I? But it’s better to Stumble, really, if you’ve a heart set on
home.”

    At the factory door, Nor gathered up a great deal of leather into the
crook of her arm. She pointed with her eyebrows at a communal well just
outside the gate. September fell upon a copper ladle and drank deep. As she
slurped, the Nasnas scratched her chin again. “I might could make you a
pair that works the other way,” she said finally. “Reverse engineering, and
all? A pair that would take you home.”

    “Really? You could do that?”

    “Shoes are funny beasts. You think they’re just clothes, but really,
they’re alive. They want things. Fancy ones with gems want to go to balls,
big boots want to go to work, slippers want to dance. Or sleep. Shoes make
the path you’re on. Change your shoes, change the path.” Nor looked
meaningfully at the Marquess’s dandied black shoes. September wished
she’d gone barefoot. “Changeling shoes want to stay here. I wager I can
make a pair who want to go to the place you come from. Bit of old mud on
the heel, bit of devil’s salt in the buckle, bit of growing up hammered in.
You’ll wake up, like it was a dream. It will have been a dream. No worries,
no faults, no blame. Off to school with you and your peanut butter
sandwich, too!”

    September squeezed back tears. She suddenly missed her mother, and
she’d lost her shadow and her hair and salt creaked in her elbows and she
was so awfully tired, and really, she hadn’t counted on adventures being so
exhausting. She was hungry, still, and she missed her Wyverary so! And
how could she know how much farther there was to go? September still did
not think herself terribly brave, and she trembled when she thought of the
thirst of the sea, and the possibility--even probability--of sharks and other
terrible things. When the stars were out and the night warm and Mr. Map's
brandy had been hot in her belly, it had been alright, even wonderful. But
now her knees hurt, and her fingers, and she was lonely. September
shivered in her wet, salt-crusted dress. And she hated her cursed shoes,
hated them wholly and utterly.

    “I can’t,” she squeaked finally. “I can’t. My friends are not dreams.
They need me.” And she remembered the awful dream, and little Saturday,
chained up again, on the floor of that dark cell. “Who else will come for
them, if I don’t?”

    “What a dear heart you have, girl,” said Nor. “Of course, that’s how
she’ll catch you, in the end.”
    “How did you--”

    “I know shoes, little one. And I know those shoes.” The Nasnas
shrugged helplessly. “I can’t be late to work, you know. Other beasts in the
world have troubles.”

    Nor slid her finger into the glowing seam between them and the two
popped apart. Not bowed to her sister and bounded away. Nor punched her
card in the machine near the silver door of the factory.

    September let the half-lady go. She walked back over the heath with
the little black flowers waving. Down at the beach, she wriggled out of her
dress again and strung up her sail. She pushed off with her wrench into the
current and watched the island dwindle.

    “I’m not one of them,” she said to herself. “No matter what they say. I
don’t work at some awful old factory, and my shadow isn’t half myself.”

    But she thought of Ell and Saturday, lost at the bottom of the world,
bound up in the dark. And some part of her hurt, a part which had been
joined to them as if along a glowing seam.




                                      #
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XVI: Until We Stop

    In Which September Feeds Herself, By Gruesome Means




    “I shall catch a fish, just see how I do!” cried September to no one but
the moon. The moon, for his part, smiled behind one white hand and tried to
look very serious.

    But September had been thinking about the problem of a hook, and
when she had her lock of hair tied up to the wrench again, she suddenly
seized the hilt of the wrench and brought it banging down on the curlicued
head of one of the silver sceptres. The wrench, eager for something to do,
quite crushed the wand’s head, and bits of metal flew over the deck of the
raft. September picked out a likely shard and knotted it into her long,
braided strands of hair.

    “Now for bait,” she said, “which I’ve none of at all.”

    September suddenly cursed herself, that she had not thought to save a
few berries from the beach.

    “No points for ought to have,” she sighed.

    September pushed the makeshift hook into the pad of her thumb until
she could not help but yelp in pain. Blood welled up, and she rubbed the
hook in it, all over, until it shone red. Her eyes watered, but she did not cry.
The sound of her stomach was louder than the pain of her thumb. Slowly,
she sunk the bloody hook into the water, and waited.

    Fishing, as many of you know, is a very tedious activity. Fish are
stubborn and do not like to be killed and eaten. One has to stay very still, so
still one almost falls asleep, and even then no fish might come. Even the
moon busied itself elsewhere, watching a pine forest full of martens and
harpies chase each other round in circles. The stars moved overhead, racing
on their long silver track, and still September sat, her line in the water,
patient as death.

    Finally, the line went taut and tugged beneath the mild waves.
September leapt up. “What have I caught?” she cried with excitement.
“What will it be? Why, this is like Christmas, when you’ve no idea what
might be in the packages!”

    September hauled hard on the wrench, and fell backwards as her prize
flew up onto the deck. It was pink, the very color of a pink crayon, and its
eyes bulged huge and emerald. It gaped pitifully, suddenly forced to
contend with air instead of water. September felt sorry for it, all in a rush.

    “I know you don’t want to be eaten,” she said wretchedly. “And I don’t
want to eat you! But it’s been two days now and I must have something!”

    The fish gaped.

    “If only you were a magic fish, you could grant a wish, and I could
have more of the lovely spriggans’ feast, or Ell’s radishes.”
    The fish sucked at the air but found no sea to breathe there.

    “I am so sorry,” she whispered finally. “I don’t want to chew up
another creature just to keep on for another day! You’re alive. But I’m alive,
too! Alive doesn’t much care about anything but staying that way. Just like
you meant to eat my blood, and that’s why you were caught. I suppose I
ought to stop talking. I don’t think you are a magic fish.”

    September did not know anything about killing fish, really. Her mother
and grandfather usually did that part. But she could think logically enough.
She brought the hilt of the wrench down hard on the pink fish’s head. She
shut her eyes at the last moment, though, and missed. Twice more and she
had it, though she quite wished she hadn’t. However, September knew that
was not the worst part. You couldn’t just bite into a fish. The guts had to
come out. Wincing, not wanting to watch what her hands were doing,
September took up the hook and brought it down on the fish’s soft pink
belly. The skin was tougher than she thought, and she had to saw at it. Her
hands got quite soaked in blood, which looked black in the moonlight.
Finally, she got the belly open and reached inside, where it was warm and
slimy and she was crying by then, big, hot tears rolling down her face and
into the ruined fish. With one pull she hauled the fish’s organ-parts out and
threw them overboard, sobbing on her knees over her supper.

    You mustn’t think poorly of her for crying. Up until that moment, fish
had mainly come into her life cooked filleted and salted with lemon juice on
top. It is a hard thing, to be starving and alone with no one to show you how
to do it right. She got such sprays of blood on her face, and on her knees.
     September had no way to cook it. The sodden smoking jacket wanted
to make fire for her, but that was beyond its power. The moon wished her a
hearth, but had to content himself with watching the young girl, kneeling on
her raft as the sea rushed by around her as she pulled raw fish from the bone
in strips. September ate slowly, deliberately. Some instinct told her that she
had to have the blood, too, for at sea water is so scarce. It took her until
morning to eat the fish. She wept all the while, a terrible circuit, all the
water she drank from the fish pouring out again.




     Just before dawn, September spied the shark’s fin. Something deep in
the ancestral memories of humans quakes in sight of a shark fin, even if that
human grew up in Omaha and never saw a shark in all her days. It rose dark
and sharp in the pearly gloaming just before the sun peeked up. The fin
made a long, lazy circle around September’s raft. The wind was utterly
calm. September’s dress hung slack on the Spoon-mast. Little ripples
glinted in the water, and the current moved her along, but it had been slow
going for several hours, and September had not slept. But now she was
awake, and the stars were winking out one by one, and in the distance the
unmistakable triangle of a shark’s head circled slowly, unconcerned.

     This sort of thing happens in pirate stories, September remembered. As
soon as someone goes overboard, voila! Sharks. But I am not a pirate. But
then, pirates are often eaten by sharks. So perhaps I shall not have a pirate’s
luck with them, if I do not have a cutlass or a feathered hat?
     It circled closer, and September could see its shadow in the water. It
did not seem huge, but certainly big enough. Perhaps it was a baby, and
would leave her alone.

     It circled closer. September scrunched up into the center of the raft, as
far as she could get from water on all sides, which was not very far at all.
Finally, it circled so close to the raft that it jostled the sceptres, and
September cried out fearfully. She held the wrench ready to whack the
shark as hard as she might, her knuckles white on the handle. If they all
want to call it a sword, she thought, I’ll use it as one! She was quite wild
with terror.

     “Please,” she whispered. “Don’t eat me. I’m sorry I ate the fish.”

     The shark swam lazily around the raft. It rolled up a little, showing its
black belly--for the shark was all black, with a few wild golden stripes
running down the side, and its eyes were golden, too, rolling up out of the
water to stare mercilessly at September.

     “Why are you sorry?” it said softly, its voice rasping and rough. “I eat
fish. That’s what fish are for.”

     “I daresay you think that’s what little girls are for, too.”

     The shark blinked. “Some of them.”

     “And who eats you?”

     “Bigger fish.”
     The shark kept swimming around the raft, rolling up towards the
breaking surf to speak.

     “Are you going to eat me?”

     “You ought to stop talking about eating. It’s making me hungry.”

     September shut her mouth with a little snap. “You’re making me dizzy,
with all your swimming in circles,” she whispered.

     “I can’t stop,” the shark rasped. “If I stop I shall sink and die. That’s
the way I’m made. I have to keep going, always, and even when I get where
I’m going I’ll have to keep on. That’s living.”

     “Is it?”

     “If you’re a shark.”

     September rubbed at the blood on her knee. “Am I a shark?” she said
faintly.

     “You don’t look like one, but I’m not a scientist.”

     “Am I dreaming? This feels like a dream.”

     “I don’t think so. I could bite you, to see if it hurts.”

     “No, thank you.” September looked out at the flat gray water, all severe
and stark in the sunrise. “I have to keep going,” she whispered.

     “Yes.”
    “I have to keep going, so that I can keep going after that, forever and
ever.”

    “Not forever.”

    “Why haven’t you eaten me, shark? I ate the fish, I ought to be eaten.”

    “It doesn’t work like that.”

    “But you’re a shark. Eating is what you do.”

    “No. I swim. I roar. I race. I sleep. I dream. I know what Fairyland
looks like from underneath, all her dark places. And I have a daughter. Who
might have died, but for a girl in an orange dress who traded away her
shadow. A shadow who might have known not to mourn over fish.”

    September stared. “The Pooka girl?”

    The shark rolled over entirely in the water, her huge fins rearing up out
of the waves and slicing down again.

    “We all just keep moving, September. We keep moving until we stop.”

    The shark broke off and plowed through a sudden, heavy swell that
soaked September in its crashing. Just as she dove under the surf,
September could see the great black tail shiver into legs, disappearing
beneath the violet sea.



                                       #
OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XVII: One Hundred Years
Old

    In Which September Discovers a Great Amount of Old Furniture and
Finds Herself in a Very Dark Place, With Only a Little Light




    This time, September saw the island coming. It glimmered on the edge
of the horizon, fitfully green and golden. In the evening of her fifth day at
sea, September steered her raft towards it. She longed to feel land beneath
her again, to drink real water, to eat bread. She fell gratefully onto warm
sand, rolling in it like a puppy, for pleasure. She found several coconuts
strewn over the beach and cracked one in a single blow against a stone.

    The sea makes a girl strong, you know.

    Slurping the watery milk and crunching the meat of it, September
dismantled her raft and dressed, making sure to tie the sash of the smoking
jacket tight around her waist. She began to walk inland in hopes of better
food. Surely she was near the Lonely Gaol by now. Surely she could spare a
moment for lunch, if it meant not having to go through the dreadful ordeal
of fishing again.
    But there was no village in the interior of that grassy little island. No
sweet houses, their chimneys smoking away. No herald’s square, no ringing
churchbell. All she found was junk.

    The beach-sand gave way to long, whispering sea-grass, and in that
long meadow lay a tremendous number of odd things, as though it were a
garbage-yard. Old sandals, tea kettles, broken umbrellas, clay jars, torn silk
screens, cowboy’s spurs, smashed clocks, lanterns, rosaries, rusted swords.

    “Hello?” September called. The wind answered, buffeting the grass,
but no one else.

    “What a lonely place! I believe someone has forgotten to clean up after
himself…for a good while, I suppose. Ah, well, perhaps I shall find a new
pair of shoes…”

    “I think not!”

    September jumped half out of her skin, quite ready to run back to her
raft and never make eyes at an island again. But her curiosity defeated her
good sense. She peered over the grass to see who the voice might belong to.
All she could see was an old pair of straw sandals with a bit of leather
wrapped around the sole.

    As she tiptoed over to get a better look, two old yellow eyes opened in
the heels of the shoes.

    “Who said you could have me? Not me and I say whose feet I have to
smush up against all day, I should rightly think!”
        “I…I beg your pardon! I didn’t know you were alive!”

        “Well that’s folk with feet for you. Always thinking of themselves.”

        Some of the other bits of junk crept closer to September: the swords
unfolded long steely arms and the jars sprouted thick, muscled feet. The silk
screens accordioned their way to her, the tea kettles turned their spouts
toward the earth and spat steam until they popped upward. A great orange
lantern floated on the wind, glowing slightly, and from beneath it a green
tassel hung, fluttering. A great clatter sounded as the garbage gathered
around.

        “Mr. Shoes…”

        “My name is Hannibal, if you don’t mind.”

        “Hannibal…I have read a great many books, and I have met spriggans
and pooka and even a Wyverary, but I cannot begin to imagine what you
are!”

        “WHO!” bellowed the shoes, hopping upright, straps flapping in
indignation. “'What' is an indirect dative reserved for things. I am alive! I
am a WHO. Or a whom, if you must. And we are Tsukumogami.”

        September smiled uncertainly. The word meant no more to her than
Mr. Map’s Fftthit. A pair of spurs whirred and clicked on spindly spidery
legs.

        “We’re a hundred years old,” they said, as though that explained it all.
    The great orange lantern, which September could not help comparing
to a pumpkin, flashed briefly for attention. Slowly, gracefully, golden, fiery
letters began to write themselves on the papery surface of the lamp:




    You use the things in your house

    and think nothing of them. It leaves us bitter.




    September put her hands on her hips. “I’m sorry! I didn’t know! If a
couch just sits there, looking like a couch, I can’t be expected to know it
isn’t one.”




    That’s the trouble.

    But when a household object turns one hundred years old,

    it wakes up. It becomes alive. It gets a name and griefs and ambitions
and unhappy love affairs. It is not always a good bargain. Sometimes we
cannot forget the sorrows and joys of the house we lived in. Sometimes we
cannot remember them.

    Tsukumogami are one hundred years old. They are awake.
    “All my house…just sleeping until their birthdays?” September bit her
lip, and looked out on the lonely grass. “That’s strange and sad. I often lose
things, and break them, long before they turn one hundred. But…why
haven’t you any houses of your own? Or a village?”




    We spent a century closed up in four walls and a roof.

    We are claustrophobic.

    We prefer the sun and the wind and the sea,

    though it bites some of us,

    who are made of metal, and tears papery hearts.




    “How old are you?” snorted Hannibal, the pair of straw sandals.

    “I’m eleven, sir.”

    A great consternation went up: kettles shrieked, swords rattled, shoes
stomped.

    “Well, that’s no good at all!” Hannibal yelled. “Never trust anyone
under one hundred!” The throng of Tsukumogami rustled agreement. “I’m
afraid you’ll have to leave. Folk under one hundred can’t be borne--they’re
not mature enough. Not seasoned. They haven’t seen grandchildren come
and go, or been left to gather dust in the winter while their family swans off
to the sea for holiday! They’re unpredictable! They could go off at any
second! All caught up in walking around and doing things!”

     “Eleven!” sniffed the spurs. “Why, that’s barely fifty!”

     “It’s not fifty at all,” snapped a silk screen. “It’s not even twenty. She
might be a revolutionary! Young people go in for that sort of thing.”

     The orange lantern flashed:




     If she were a revolutionary I think she would have a rifle…




     No one paid the lantern any attention.

     “I certainly don’t want to be a bother,” demurred September. ”I'll go, I
will. Only, I wonder if you might have something I could eat? It is a harsh
life, at sea.”

     “No!” snapped Hannibal, snapping his straps. “Get out! Young cretin!”

     September knew when she was not wanted. At least, when someone
hollered at her to get out, she could guess as much. But she was wounded--
so many folk had been so kind to her in Fairyland. Her face burned with
shame in the face of the cast-off furniture. But then, perhaps in the
hinterlands, in the wild islands, the Marquess had not yet had a chance to
force niceness upon them. She turned to go--and oh, she oughtn’t to have
turned her back on them! But perhaps it was not her fault. Perhaps it was
the sudden, trouble-making breeze that came along and drew aside the tall
grass, just far enough that the flash of September’s black shoes shone
through the blades.

    Several broken bells clanged an alarm, and Hannibal stomped after her
like a muskox. He tackled her, the soft smack of straw sandals slapped her
back and knocked her forward.

    “Shoes!” he crowed from atop September’s body. “Black shoes, ahoy!”

    “Get off me!” yelled September, struggling under the sandals and
trying to grab at them.

    “Told you, told you! Even ninety-niners are suspect. Eleven? Why,
that’s as good as saying: wicked and up to no good!”

    “I’m not up to no good! I’m trying to rescue my friends!”

    “Don’t care, don’t care!” howled the sandals. “Grab her, Swords! Don’t
be too careful with your blades, either! Down the well she goes!”

    Cold, sharp hands grabbed her arms. Kettle steam scalded her feet until
she screamed, scrambling to get up. The Swords’ grip cut into her arms.
They hauled her over the grass while Hannibal giggled and sang along with
his compatriots.

    “She’ll reward us, you’ll see!” he assured them. “We’ll have our own
young kettles for tea, and not have to brew up the earl grey in Mildred
anymore!
    “She?” cried September. “Who told you to do this? Was it the
Marquess?”

    “We don’t share state secrets with youngsters!”

    The throng stopped suddenly short as a black hole opened up in the
earth. It was lined in stone, all the way down. September could not see its
bottom, but she thought she could hear the sea down there, splashing darkly.

    “No!” she wept, trying to tear away from that terrible darkness. The
Swords cut deeper, and pain flooded her vision. Her skin was slippery with
blood.

    The orange lantern bobbed in front of her, just over the pit. The lovely
handwriting flowed over its face.




    The Marquess said to look for a girl

    wearing beautiful black shoes. I’m sorry.




    “And do what?” shrieked September.




    Kill her.
    The Swords threw September down into the black.

    She fell a long way.




    At first, September was not sure she was awake. She saw no difference,
whether she opened her eyes or no. Slowly, she felt the cold wetness of
sitting in several inches of seawater. Her bleeding, she thought, had
stopped, at least mostly stopped. But she could not move her arms, and she
suspected her leg was broken. It surely was not supposed to bend that way
beneath her. The cold water numbed her all over, and softly, quietly,
September cried in the dark.

    “I want to go home,” she said shakily to the dark. And she meant it, for
the first time. Not as the lie which got her into Fairyland, but the real and
honest truth. Her lips trembled. Her teeth chattered. “It’s all so scary here,
Mom,” she whispered. “I miss you.”

    September put her cheek to the cold stone wall. It was fuzzy and wet
with slime. She tried to think of Saturday, pressing his cheek against a dire
wall like this one, waiting for her, believing she would come for him and
smash his cage, as she had before. She tried to think of Ell’s warm bulk,
curled against her in the dark.

    “Help!” she yelled hoarsely. “Oh, help…”

    But no help came. September saw the day come pale and blue over the
rim of the well. It seemed very far away. But the thin sunlight gave some
courage. She tried to fill her mind with the scent of Lye’s golden bath,
fireplaces crackling and warm cinnamon and autumn leaves crunching
underfoot. She put all of her weight onto her good leg, and pushed up out of
the water--only her body buckled underneath her and she fell back down,
gasping for air.

    Some time later, a soft thing brushed her face. September could not tell
time at the bottom of the well, but it must have been night, because she
could not see what it was. Blindly, she reached out. Orange light flooded
the well. Sinking down to her came the lantern, beautiful and round as a
pumpkin. Its tassel hung down below it, and tied to the tassel was a huge
green fruit. September snatched at it and tore it open with her teeth, slurping
the pink juice and devouring the meat. She did not say thank you--she was
quite beyond manners. The lantern watched her eat. When she had done,
September panted with the exertion of eating, looking wildly about.

    Very slowly and gingerly, as though it was afraid to be caught out at
the deed, a slim hand rose up out of the top of the lantern. And then another.
The pale greenish hands clutched the lantern-sides and pulled up the orange
globe--so that two girl’s legs could stretch out beneath it. September waited,
but no head came.

    “Please help me get out,” whispered September.

    Golden writing spooled out across the surface of the lamp.

    I cannot.
They would tear me in half.




    But the orange lantern wrapped her arms around September, and her
legs too, and held the little girl in the dark, stroking her hair. If September
had looked up, she might have seen a gentle lullaby writing itself across the
Tsukumogami’s face.

    Go to sleep, little firefly Float down to the earth…




    But she did not look up, and very soon, September was asleep.




    When she woke, the lantern had gone. The seawater had risen slightly.
No day peeped through the top of the well. September screamed frustration,
kicking the wall with her good leg.

    “I shan’t make it to one hundred, you know!” she hollered up angrily.
“People don’t live that long with broken legs in the dark!”

    September screamed again, wordlessly. The cold seeped in, unmoved.
She shoved her hands in her apologetic smoking-jacket pockets to keep
warm--and what was there but the glass globe the Green Wind hand given
her? September seized it and threw it hard against the opposite wall in a fit
of rage and frustration. She felt a little better. Breaking things heals a great
many hurts. This is why children do it so often.

     The green leaf drifted down to the stagnant seawater and spun a bit on
the surface of it, like a camping compass.

     September felt something heavy and furred settle to rest on her lap.
The well filled with a deep, profound purring.

     “Oh…” choked September. “It can’t be. I must be dreaming. It just
can’t.”

     September stroked a huge head nestled against her. Even in the dark,
she knew it was spotted. She could feel whiskers prickling her arms.

     “How would you like to come away with me, September?” said a
familiar voice. The scent of green things filled the well: mint and grass and
rosemary and fresh water, frogs and leaves and hay. September threw up her
arms in the dark, knowing they would settle on broad shoulders. Her tears
wet the cheek of the Green Wind, and he chuckled in her embrace.

     “Oh, my little rolling hazelnut, where have you lost yourself?”

     “Green! Green! You came! It was all going so well, and then the
Marquess said she’d turn Ell to glue and I stole her Marid and we rode
bicycles and I tried so hard to be brave, and irascible, and ill-tempered, but
then they were gone, all of them, and I had to build a raft and I cut my hair
off and my shadow’s gone and I think my leg’s broken, and I’m so scared!
And I got a wrench! But I don’t know what I’m meant to do with it and in
the stories none of the heroes ever broke their legs and it’s all on account of
my shoes somehow, but that means the Marquess must have known, all
along, that I’d come here, and I just want to go home.”

    “Really? That’s all? I can take you home just now,” murmured the
Green Wind. “If that’s all you want. Nothing but a blink and we’re in
Omaha, no harm done, all well and ending well. There, there. No need of
crying.”

    September’s leg burned and her arms felt so heavy. “No, but…my
friends…they’re locked away and they need me…”

    “Well, it’s all a dream, no worries about that. I’m sure it’ll all work
itself out. Dreams have a way of doing that.”

    “Is it a dream?”

    “I don’t know, what do you think? It certainly seems like a dream. I
mean, talking leopards! My stars.”

    September squeezed her fists in the dark.

    “No,” she whispered. “It’s not. Or if it is I don’t care. They need me.”

    “Good girl,” chuffed the Green Wind. “When little ones say they want
to go home, they almost never mean it. They mean they are tired of this
particular game, and would like to start another.”

    “Yes, please, I would like to start another.”
    “That’s not a magic I have, love. You’re in this story. You must get out
on your own if you are to get out at all.”

    “But how does this story end?”

    The Green Wind shrugged. “I don’t know. It seems familiar to me so
far. A child whisked off to a foreign land beset by a wicked ruler, sent to
find a sword…”

    “Am I to save Fairyland then? Did you choose me to do that? Am I a
chosen one, like all those heroes whose legs were never broken?”

    The Green Wind stroked her hair. She could not see his face, but she
knew it was grave.

    “Of course not. No one is chosen. Not ever. Not in the real world. You
chose to climb out of your window and ride on a leopard. You chose to get a
witch’s Spoon back, and to make friends with a wyvern. You chose to trade
your shadow for a child’s life. You chose not to let the Marquess hurt your
friend--you chose to smash her cages! You chose to face your own Death,
not to balk at a great sea to cross and no ship to cross it in. And twice now
you have chosen not to go home when you might have, if only you
abandoned your friends. You are not the chosen one, September. Fairyland
did not choose you--you chose yourself. You could have had a lovely
holiday in Fairyland and never met the Marquess, never worried yourself
with local politics, had a romp with a few brownies and gone home with
enough memories for a lifetime’s worth of novels. But you didn’t. You
chose. You chose it all. Just like you chose your path on the beach: to lose
your heart is not a path for the faint and fainting.”

    “I cannot just choose to get out of a well, though.”

    The Green Wind laughed. “No, no you can’t. But, September, my
sparrow, my pigeon…I am still not allowed in Fairyland.”

    “But you’re here!”

    “Technically speaking, I am below Fairyland. It’s these little loopholes
that make cheating so pleasurable. I mean to say I can push you up--oh, any
Wind can with half a mind. But I can’t go with you. I can’t help you
anymore. Until the great doors swing open, I cannot enter.”

    The Green Wind bent his head and blew gently upon September’s
mangled leg. September grimaced--it was rather a horrid feeling, being
forcibly healed all at once, bones shoving together, muscles righting
themselves. She groaned as the Leopard of Little Breezes lifted her head
and licked roughly at the wounds on her arms until they vanished.

    But still, September clung to the Green Wind, her safety, her protector.
“I had to kill a fish,” she whispered finally, as though confessing a great sin.

    “I forgive you,” the Green Wind said softly, and dissolved in her arms
with one great final purr from the Leopard. In his place a whirlwind spun
and spat, catching September up and pushing her into the air, up and out of
the well.
     It was night and the stars were going about their shimmering business
in the sky. The Tsukumogami slept in their warm field. The last of the
Green Wind dissipated in a rustle of dry grass.

     “Goodbye,” said September quietly. “I wish you could stay.”




     September crept along the field as silently as she could. The Spoon-
mast of her little ship bobbed into view and she nearly whooped for joy, but
caught herself in time--for the orange lantern floated expectantly next to the
raft, her green tassel hanging still.

     “Please don’t cry out,” whispered September. “You brought me food, I
know you don’t think I’m wicked. Don’t give me away, please!”

     The orange lantern glowed warmly, beaming reassurance. Golden
writing looped and swooped over her face.




     Take me with you.




     “What? Why? Don’t you want to stay here? I’m only eleven, what am I
to you?”




     I’m only one hundred and eleven.
    I wish to see the world. I am brave. I am strong.

    They used to unpack me for festivals,

    and I kept the night at bay.

    When you get lost in dark places, I can show the way.

    And you must admit, getting lost is likely,

    and where one is lost, it is likely to be dark.




    “I’m afraid I’m not much of a tour guide. I’m going to rescue my
friends from the Lonely Gaol, and very terrible things will almost certainly
happen.”




    I will not disappoint you, I promise.

    My name is Gleam. Take me with you.

    I held you in the dark.

    I defied straw sandals to bring you sunfruit.

    I am worth something.

    One hundred and eleven years is worth something.
    September shrugged off her jacket and dress. She looked down at her
shoes, the beautiful, shining, glittering black shoes. Slowly, she took them
off, one by one and set them on the sand. September looked at them for a
long time, shining blackly on the beach. Finally she picked them up and
threw them, as hard and as far as she could, into the sea. They bobbed for a
moment, then sank.

    “There,” September said. “That’s better.” She smiled at the orange
lantern. “Oh, Gleam, do you know? I forgot to tell the Leopard that I met
her brother the Panther…”

    September pushed her raft into the bouncing waves. Gleam followed
quickly behind, lighting up the night like a tiny autumn moon.
      #




OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XVIII: The Lonely Gaol

    In Which September Arrives at Last At the Bottom of the World, But Is
Unexpectedly Expected.




    A ring of blue storms dance around the Lonely Gaol. They are on
social terms with one another--the storms hold cotillions in the spring, and
harvest dances in the fall. If one has the right wind speed and precipitation,
one can attend storm weddings, storm funerals, storm christenings. It is a
happy life for a storm. None think of travel, nor sailing the free ocean, nor
venturing into foreign lands of any sort. They do not know why they stay,
huddled up tight at the bottom of the world, only that they have always
lived there. These were their parents’ and grandparents’ stamping grounds,
too, all the way down to the single primordial storm that in days of old
covered the whole of the continent.

    But I am a sly and wicked narrator. If there is a secret to be plumbed
for your benefit, Dear Reader, I shall strap on a head-lamp and a pick-ax
and have at it.

    The current of Fairyland circles the Lonely Gaol. It sluices in through
holes in the base of the great towers and emerges on the other side, to begin
once more its long journey around the horn of Fairyland. This unstoppable
circulation kicks up storms the way you kick up dust when you run very
fast down a dirt road. It cannot be helped. Somewhere deep down there in
the roots of the Lonely Gaol lives a hoary old beast, something like a
dragon, something like a fish, something like a mountain rill. She is older
than the Gaol and the sluicing of the water--older, perhaps, than Fairyland.
When she breathes in, she sucks up crystal from the stones of the earth.
When she breathes out, she blows bubbles in the crystal, so that it swells up
in great lumps and heaps. The sea splashes and cools the glass, and it grows
and grows. Perhaps she is sleeping. Perhaps she is too big and too old to do
much but breathe. But this is how the Lonely Gaol, which was not always a
Gaol at all, grew out of the sea in the first place. If you squint just so, you
can see the red flares of her breath between the roaring waves, blinking on
and off like a dock-light.




     September could see it. She did not know what is was she saw. That is
the disadvantage of being a heroine, rather than a narrator. She knew only
that a red light glowed and went dark, glowed and went dark. In the
shrieking whirl of the storms, she clung to her copper wrench and steered
toward the light. Rain slashed at her face. Her skin had long ago gone numb
and half-blue. Everything ached from wrestling the raft to stay on course.
Gleam bobbed and floated up ahead, valiantly trying to show the way, but
the storm-air was so awfully dark and thick. Lightning turned the world
white--when she could see again, September looked up to see huge holes
tearing open in her orange dress. A whip of wind lashed out and finished
the job: the dress ripped along the sleeves and shot off into the dark. The
storm ate up September’s cry of despair, delighted at its mischief, as all
storms are.

    Gleam flashed several times up ahead, her orange paper soaked and
ragged.




                                       Look!




    At first September could not see what the lantern meant. Before her lay
only shadows within shadows. The red light sighed faithfully, off and on,
off and on. But one shadow grew greater and blacker than the others as she
strained to peer through the violet and violent clouds. It soared lumpish and
huge, towering up in gargantuan humps, boulders, misshapen domes. Pale
fires lit windows far up the sides of the towers. In flashes of lightning,
September could see that mold and moss and lichen covered the lower
domes, slurping upwards towards the peaks. But the high towers were all of
glass, and storms showed through, roiling and purple.

    A sickening crack shuddered through the raft--they had run aground. A
spear of glassy rock spurted through the silver sceptres, just barely missing
September’s leg. The rain hissed and fell, and for once September was glad
she had cut off her hair, for if she still had it she would surely be unable to
see a thing for all its flapping in her face. Shaking and tired, she pulled up
the sodden green smoking jacket from its place, wedged in between cracks
in the raft. Oh, how the jacket wanted to hug her and reassure her that a
little rain was not so terribly bad! Having no dress now, September pulled
the emerald jacket over her sore body. She untied the sash from the Spoon,
which had served so well and loyally as a mast, and knotted it tight round
her waist. The smoking jacket rushed to lengthen and broaden into a dress
for her, and tried its best to radiate warmth. September slung the Spoon and
the Wrench through the sash on either side of her hips, like a cowboy’s
guns.

    Gleam extended a long, pale green arm from the base of the lantern.
September took it, and began hauling herself up the slippery glass humps of
the Lonely Gaol.

    Far below, the creature who was neither a dragon, nor a fish, nor a
mountain rill, breathed in and out, in and out.




    “Gleam,” September whispered. “Can you fly away up to the top of the
towers and see whether a red wyvern or a blue Marid is there to be seen?”

    Gleam brightened a little and disappeared like an orange arrow, darting
up through the howling storm. September watched her go, crouching behind
a slime-slathered boulder. She did not want to think about the door. All
prisons have their gates, and all prison gates are guarded. The gate of the
Lonely Gaol glimmered faintly in the storm-light, bolted with iron.
     To keep them in, September thought. For iron hurts them so. The two
blue lions flanked the door, their manes waving and curling slowly as
though they were underwater, silver stars gleaming in their tails, their fur.
Still, they slept, but September remembered that even sleeping, they had
stolen her friends away in half a blink. Certainly she would be no work at
all for them.

     September thought furiously. She could not possibly fight the lions--
they were the size of houses! If Ell could not fight them, she had no hope.
All she had was the Spoon and the Wrench and a very wet jacket. And
really, I oughtn’t to use the Spoon. It’s not mine. I’ve no idea about how
witchcraft is done. Might as well ask me to make a pie out here. With ice
cream on top.

     And yet, the Spoon loomed large in her mind, as if offering its services.
September peered around her and spied a little tidepool She crept along the
rocks and stuck her hand into the cold water. She could feel a few stubborn
mussels clinging to the glass, and a great deal of dead kelp and mud. Well,
it was a kind of soup, wasn’t it? September blindly scraped at the glass
lumps around her, scraping lichen and moss and unnameable gunk into the
pool, trying to look like a brave, resourceful witch who knew just exactly
what she was doing. She took up the Spoon and slid it into the pool, stirring
counterclockwise, which is to say: widdershins.

     “Please,” September whispered, squeezing her eyes shut as if wishing.
“Show me a future when I have already gotten through the door, and how I
did it.”
       For a long while, the pool stayed black and murky. The storm laughed
at her, throwing out a few more lightning bolts for good measure.
September stirred harder. She did not know what else a witch was meant to
do. Perhaps it would not work, since she did not have a hat, and was not at
all dressed well. We must dress well, or the future will not take us seriously,
Goodbye had said. Well, certainly the soupy pool had no reason to take
September seriously. She didn’t even have shoes, anymore.

       Slowly, the pool began to quiver. Oh, please! September thought
furiously. A fuzzy, warped image flickered on the surface of the water, like
a broken movie reel. September watched a small version of the iron gate
coalesce, with two small lions on either side. They were not really blue, but
sort of green and wriggly, like mold. A tiny green something walked up to
the lions. Behind the tiny green something floated an even tinier round
light, like a will o’ the wisp. September turned her head to one side, trying
to see what was happening in the tidepool. The tiny green somethings,
which were surely herself and Gleam, walked boldly up to the gate. Herself
took something out of her coat and held it up high. After a moment, the
lions lay down before the tiny green September and put their paws over
their eyes.

       The wrench, September thought. They recognize the wrench! Of
course they do, it’s Queen Mallow’s sword! They must still be bound by
some feline fealty to it, even if she is gone.

       Just then, Gleam came spiraling back down the rain-slick towers. She
tucked in behind the boulders and kept her golden letters dampened and
dim.
    Your friends are in the highest cell.

    I think the red one is sick.




    “Oh, Ell! I’m coming!” September whispered.

    Together, September and Gleam approached the gate. September tried
to be as bold as the little green version of herself in the tidepool. But of
course tidepool girls don’t sweat and breathe very fast and worry about their
Wyveraries. The lions were ever so much bigger than she remembered. A
line of silver light shone under their furry blue eyelids. September
wondered if they were always on the verge of waking, if they ever did
wake, and if, perhaps, they were kind and dear when they did, and not
vicious at all. She held up the copper wrench, and it flashed in the
lightning-shadows. The waiting was horrible--September winced, prepared
for the blow of a great paw. But they lay down, gently, the left one first, and
then the right. They put their paws over their eyes.

    September ran at the door and hauled it open, her bare feet slipping in
the rain. She slipped inside, and Gleam behind her, chased by three
thunderclaps, all in a row: crash, boom, crack.




    Warm firelight turned the Lonely Gaol cheerful and ruddy. A great
white hearth crackled and snapped with fresh logs. Filigree silver torches
shone on the walls. A long, rich rug of every possible color swept over the
grand floor. The lumpy glass walls showed the storm still raging outside,
but instead of a terror it had the effect of a beautiful painting hung in a fine
hall. The boiling clouds were quiet and brilliant, blue and violet and pale
gold all bleeding into one another. Rain spattered the buttresses and left
sparkling drops like cast off diamonds. A few stars even peeked through the
ceiling, their light filtering down through many thin, spiral staircases.

      A door at the far end of the hall burst open. September started and
steeled herself to fight, if she had to. All that mattered was getting up the
staircase and finding Saturday and Ell, whoever she had to go through to do
it.

      A peal of delighted laughter echoed through the glass room and a little
girl in a frilly white dress ran full-tilt across the many-colored rug, her
golden curls bouncing. She embraced September like a long-lost sister, still
laughing and exclaiming with joy.

      “Oh, September, you’re safe! I’m so happy you’ve come, finally, and
not a scratch on you!”

      The Marquess pulled away and cupped September’s face in her hands.

      “What fun we are going to have!” She exclaimed.

      “Fun?” September cried, still dripping, sopping wet. “Fun? You stole
my friends and set the Tsukumogami after me! I broke my leg and I almost
died and I almost froze in the storm! And you cheated! I could have gotten
the wrench back to you in seven days and none of this would have
happened! And now Ell is sick and he needs me and this is fun?”

    September could not help it. Before she even knew she had done it, she
slapped the Marquess across the face. But the Marquess’s hair flushed pale
blue and she just laughed again. She used her laugh like a little knife.
September's hand-print flushed on her face.

    “Of course I cheated. Why wouldn’t I cheat? If I hadn’t cheated, you
would have brought me the sword like a good little questing knight, and it
would have been of no use to me whatsoever. I can’t touch the ridiculous
thing. I needed you. Here, in this place, with your loyal blade at your side.”

    “Then why tell all that furniture to kill me?”

    The Marquess cocked her head to one side. Her black hat bobbed
merrily.

    “September, I had to make it look real. Otherwise you would have
suspected that you were doing my work all along. Oh, just everyone has
told you what a wicked beast I am, you’re quite biased against me. And
more importantly, you had to see how dangerous Fairyland can be. How
quickly these darling little creatures with their funny habits can turn on you,
and destroy you. Otherwise you might not do my work. I am not really
wicked at all. They are nasty and cruel. But I can be so terribly kind,
September.”

    September looked into the Marquess’s shining blue eyes. “But I would
have. to save my friends. I would have done whatever you asked.”
     “No,” answered the Marquess ruefully. “Not this. Not even to save
them. Believe me, September, I have thought on these matters a great deal. I
have made calculations that would beggar your soul. What is it that villains
always say at the end of stories? You and I are more alike than you think?
Well,” the Marquess took September’s hand in hers and very gently kissed
it. “We are. Oh, how alike we are! I feel very warmly towards you, and I
only want to protect you, as I wish someone had protected me. Come,
September, look out the window with me. It’s not a difficult thing. A show
of faith, let’s call it.”

     September allowed herself to be led to one of the sheer crystal walls.
Gleam followed silently, flashing with anxiety. Below them, the sea crashed
away, sending up spray and spume. The Marquess held up her hand--and
the sea calmed, drew aside, all in a moment. The sky cleared in a widening
circle, like an iris. Stars beamed through, and half a moon. And where the
sea had been were huge stone shapes in the water, turning at a creeping
pace. Click. The shapes had wide square teeth, like gears. Gears of ancient
stone, enormous and inexorable. Click. They turned against one another.
Click.

     “What are they?” September asked.

     “The Gears of the World. We are within the secret heart of Fairyland,
September. The current that moves through the sea begins and ends here.
And more than that--so much more.”

     The Marquess raised her hand again and the sea drew further away.
September watched as the stone gears ground into something else--iron
gears, more deliberately made, sharper.

    “This is the place where your world joins ours. Where the human
world touches Fairyland, just for a moment. This place is all that allows
folk to travel--only occasionally and by strange roads--from one place to
another. The touch of the iron makes fairies weaker, so that they cannot
storm over your world and subdue it. The stone keeps humans at bay. But
some can pass through. Without that brief kiss of iron and stone, the worlds
would uncouple, and separate entirely. No one would ever get trapped here,
or in the human world. No child could be stolen and replaced with a goblin,
or worse, replaced with nothing, and her mother left to mourn. No one
would ever get lost.”

    “Oh…”

    “You see, don’t you? What you have to do.”

    “I don’t want to.”

    “But it is the right thing. Take up thy mother’s sword, September, the
only girl in Fairyland who could have pulled a wrench from that casket,
whose mother could have known and loved machines, engines, tools. As
soon as you told me about her, I knew, I just knew that we were meant to
find one another, here, at the end of everything. Uncouple the worlds,
September. Tear them apart so that no one can ever again drag a poor, lost
child across the boundaries and abandon them here without a friend in the
world.”
      #




OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XIX: Clocks

    In Which All Is Revealed




    “Surely the wrench is too small,” said September.

    “I told you,” coaxed the Marquess, her hair full of storm colors, violet
and grey. “It is not a wrench. It is a sword, impossibly old. It will be
whatever size you need it to be.”

    “But…then there would be no more adventures. No more fairies in my
world to tell stories about, and no humans here to know what a wyvern
looks like. No more fairy tales at all, for where would they come from?”

    “No more fairies making mischief, spoiling beer and cream, stealing
children, eating souls. No more humans meddling with Fairyland, mucking
up its politics and tracking mud all over the floor.”

    “And I should not ever be able to go home.”

    “That is why I had to go to such lengths to bring you here, to show you
Fairyland as it really is. It is a sacrifice I ask of you, September. A very
great one, I know. But you must do it, for all the other children to come.”
The Marquess’s hair seeped indigo. “Besides, it shouldn’t be that hard. You
didn’t even wave goodbye to your father, shooting at people in some awful
battlefield! You didn’t think of your mother at all! You don’t want to go
home, not really. Stay here and play with me. I will let your friends free and
we can all dance together through the snow and the storm. I know such
wonderful games.”

    September might have cried, a week ago, shamed at how she had
treated her mother and father. But she was wrung dry of tears now.

    “I won’t,” she said firmly. “It was wrong of me not to say goodbye.
That does not mean it is right to put an end to everything. How awful it
would be to say that no other child should ever get to see what I have seen?
To ride on a wyvern and a highwheel, to meet a witch?”

    The Marquess frowned. Her hair shivered into a frosty white. “I
suspected you would say that. You are selfish, after all, and heartless, like
all children. But allow me to make my argument?”

    Iago, the Panther of Rough Storms, appeared silently at her side as
though he had always been there. He purred.

    September, her skin finally, slowly warming in the hall, allowed the
Marquess to pull her onto Iago’s back, where an onyx saddle bore her up.
She could not help but think of the Leopard and the Green Wind as the
monarch of Fairyland settled in behind her and put her arms around
September’s waist.

    Gleam hesitated:
                                 She will lie to you.




     “I know,” September sighed. “But how else will Saturday see the sun
again? Or Ell?”



                   I am one hundred and eleven years old.

                       That is a long time. I know her--




     With a singing snap, a silver arrow pierced Gleam’s papery skin and
she dropped to the floor in mid-sentence. September whirled in the saddle.
The Marquess tucked her iceleaf bow behind her back, where it disappeared
like vapor, the thorny branch of it still quivering slightly as it dissolved.

     “Old folk are so terribly annoying, don’t you agree? Always trying to
spoil our fun with their incessant babbling about bygone days!”

     Before September could protest, Iago leapt into the air, soaring up into
the towers of the Lonely Gaol, leaving the ruin of a paper lantern, broken,
behind them.

     A pale green hand crept out of the top of the lantern, covered with
blood. After awhile, it was still.
    Everywhere she looked, September was surrounded by clocks. In a tiny
room at the top of a bulbous tower, the Marquess, Iago, and September
crowded in, nearly squeezed out by the volume of clocks: grandfather
clocks and bedside alarm clocks and dear little Swiss cuckoo clocks with
golden birds in them, pocket-watches and pendulum clocks and water
clocks and sundials. The ticking went on and on, like heartbeats. Under
each clock was a little brass plaque, and on each plaque was a name.
September did not recognize any of them.

    “This is a very secret place, September. And a very sad one. Each of
these clocks belongs to a child who has come to Fairyland. When it chimes
midnight, the child is sent home--all in a huff, whether she asked to go or
not! Some clocks run fast, so fast a boy might dwell in Fairyland for no
more than an hour. He wakes up, and what a lovely dream he had! Some
run slow, and a girl might spend her whole life in Fairyland, years upon
years, until she is snapped horribly back home to mourn her loss for the rest
of her days. You can never know how your clock runs. But it does run, and
always faster than you think.”

    The Marquess leaned forward, her hair shining redder than any apple.
She smoothed the dust from a plaque under a particular clock: a milky pink-
gold one, cut out of a whole, enormous pearl. Its hands stood golden and
motionless at ten minutes to midnight.

    The plaque beneath the clock read: September.
    “You see?” crooned the Marquess. “You have so little time left. Just
enough to fly down to the seaside with Iago and do as I ask. Or else you
will be snatched back, and your friends stuck here with me. I promise, I will
take out my frustration upon them. Don’t be stubborn! Just a little turn of
your wrench, and all will be well. You can eat lemon ices and ride
highwheels to your heart’s content, and your boys safe beside you.”

    September touched the face of the pearly clock. She picked it up,
marveling at it. She was so tired. All she wanted was to sleep, and wake up
to steaming cocoa, and then sleep again. If Saturday and Ell were safe, she
could sleep. She tried not to think about Gleam. It would be wonderful,
really, to live in Fairyland forever. Isn’t that what anyone would wish for?
Isn’t that what she herself had wished for, so often? To fly and leap and
know magic and eat Gagana’s Eggs and meet fairies? September closed her
eyes. She saw her mother there, on the backs of her eyelids. Crying, on the
edge of her bed. Because she had not left a note. Had not even waved
goodbye.

    When she opened them again, her eyes fell on the little brass plaque:
September. Furtively, so that the Marquess might miss her doing it, she
glanced at the other plaques. They said things like: Gregory Antonio
Bellanca and Harriet Marie Seagraves and Diana Penelope Kincaid. But
hers just said: September. And didn’t it look a little tacked-on? Was there,
possibly, just the shadow of something else behind it? September bent her
head and picked at the bottom corner of the plaque with her thumb.

    “What are you doing?” The Marquess said sharply.
    September ignored her. The plaque gave a little--she pried it out with
her fingernails. It clattered to the floor. Behind it was a much older plaque,
gone green with verdigris. It read:



                             Maud Elizabeth Smythe




    “True names,” said September wonderingly. “These are all true names.
Like, when your parents call you to dinner and you don’t come and they
call again but you still don’t come, and they call you by all your names
together, and then, of course, you have to come, and right quick. Because
true names have power, like Lye said. But I never told anyone my true
name. The Green Wind told me not to. I didn’t understand what he meant,
but I do now.” September looked up. Iago watched her with his round, calm
eyes. He flicked his gaze toward the Marquess and September knew, all of
the sudden, she knew it, though she could not say, not exactly, how she
could possibly have known. “This is your clock!” she cried, brandishing it.
“And it’s stopped!”

    The Marquess’s hair went black with rage. Her face flushed and Iago
growled under his breath. But finally, she gave out a long sigh and simply
took off her hat. She lay it gently on the gable of a cuckoo clock. She ran
her hands through her hair--it faded to a plain, dull blonde. She ran her
hands over her dress--it became a grey farmer’s daughter’s dress, with old,
yellow lace at the collar.
    “I dreamed about you!” cried September.

    “We are alike, I said. It would break your heart, September, how alike
we are. This is what I looked like, when I was eleven, and lived on my
father’s farm. We grew more tomatoes than any other farm in Ontario. Just
acres of them. But we weren’t rich. My father drank most anything we
earned. My mother was a seamstress--she took in all the mending from the
neighbors. She died when I was eight, and I took up the mending after that,
so that I could eat some and have a Sunday dress after the harvest was in
and the whiskey-house closed down. I always smelled like tomatoes. And
then, one day, when I couldn’t bear the mules and the chores and the horrid,
horrid tomatoes any longer, I hid in the attic until my father gave up looking
for me and went to work the fields with his hands. I had a splendid day up
there, rooting around among all the old things my mother had left behind,
and her mother before that. Of course, you can imagine what happened.
There was an old armoire, covered in a dropcloth. I pulled down the cloth,
and when I opened the door of the armoire, it was so deep and dark in there
that I couldn’t see a thing. So I climbed inside. And the door closed so fast
behind me. And I kept walking, until somehow the sun was shining again
and I was standing in a field of the greenest grass and the prettiest red
flowers you ever saw. And right there in front of me was a Leopard, as big
as life.” The Marquess’s eyes filled with tears. “I Stumbled, September, into
Fairyland. I didn’t know what I’d done, only that it was so beautiful, and
the wind was so sweet, and there were no tomatoes anywhere. I certainly
didn’t know I had a clock. I had such adventures, oh, so many! I grew up a
bit, and was so glad to grow up a bit, and not be small and grey any longer.
I learned such things--I met a young sorcerer with funny old wolf-ears, and
he let me read all of his books. Can you imagine? A farmer’s daughter,
being allowed to sit and read all day with no one to bother her? I though I
would die with the pleasure of it. And every day the sorcerer would ask my
name, but I was ashamed to tell him. Maud is so ugly and plain, and
everyone here was named something marvelous. But, one day, we were
working the garden. The sorcerer was showing me how to harvest a
particular root to make a kind of candy that might, if you boiled it just right,
turn your hair all manner of colors.” The Marquess looked up at September,
tears streaking her face. She spread out her hands, trembling. “I took his
hand in mine, and I said: you can call me Mallow.”

    September’s mouth dropped open.

    “The days went by like dreams, September. Before I knew it I had a
sword and I’d faced down King Goldmouth and his army of clouds, and I
was Queen. I ruled long and well and wisely. Anyone will tell you. I
married my sorcerer. We were happy. Fairyland prospered, and I could
hardly remember what a tomato was anymore. My Leopard played at my
side. I discovered, by and by, that I was with child. I had not told my
sorcerer yet. I was enjoying my secret, lying in the broad lawn outside my
palace and drifting off into sleep, my head propped up on my Leopard’s
flank.

    I think, well, when I remember it now I think I can remember the tick.
The last tick of my clock. With one awful ticking I was swept out of
Fairyland as though I had never been there. I woke up in my father’s house,
curled up inside the armoire, as though no time at all had passed. No
Leopard. No sorcerer. No child. I was eleven again, and hungry, and my
father was just getting home from his day’s work. He bellowed up to me,
his voice thick with liquor. But oh, how I remembered it all! I remembered
it fiercely, my whole life in Fairyland, taken away in an instant! Because a
clock ran out! September, surely you can feel in your bones the unfairness
of it! The loss! I screamed in the armoire. I kicked the wooden walls in,
trying to get back. I cried as though I was dying. My father found me and
gave me a good thrashing for sneaking around where I oughtn’t. I tasted
blood in my mouth.”

    The Marquess sank to her knees. Iago pressed his silky black head
against her cheek.

    “How…how did you get back?” September said softly.

    “I clawed my way back, September. I would have broken the world
open to crawl back in. I searched every scrap of furniture in that attic for
another way. But the armoire was just an armoire, and the closet just a
closet, and the jewelry box just a jewelry box. I read newspapers
ravenously, looking for missing children, begging my father to take me to
the places where they’d vanished. He refused. He got a new wife, and she
sent me away to school, to be rid of me. I didn’t care--I was glad to be rid of
them! My new school was old and creaky, with dusty corners and drafty
halls. Just the sort of place that might conceal a door to Fairyland, in a
story. And one morning, just walking to geometry class, I took one step on
those dirty cobblestones and took the next one in a broad golden field full
of glowerwheat. It was a hard passage--blood shot out of my nose and I
think I probably fainted. We aren’t meant to come that way, so harshly. But
it was the only way.”
    “What was?” September was almost afraid to know.

    “The clock, September. The clock is all. It is the only arbiter. What I
needed was a man on the inside. Someone in Fairyland, a friend. Not a
husband, or a Leopard. Someone whose loyalty and love for me was greater
than any law, any boundary, stronger than blood or reason or cat or man.
Someone I had made with my own hands, who loved only me, who could
not bear to be parted from me.”

    “Lye!”

    “Yes, Lye, my poor golem. She risked her whole being to come here,
where the water is relentless and wore so much of her away. She battled the
guards, who in those days were bear-wights, and gained entrance to this
little room. She set my clock going backward, and pulled me back into this
world by the scruff of my neck. I didn’t know that, then. It was only later,
when I came here myself, that I discovered her tracks. Standing in her
soapy footprints I stopped my clock, so that it could never snatch me back
out of my own life again. I was a child once more, but I was home. Time is
a mystery here. Only a year back home and everyone I knew here, in my
life as Mallow, had grown old or died. No one remembered what I looked
like as a child. I told them I’d killed her. I tore down her banners and broke
her throne. And so I had my revenge.”

    “But why? You could have ruled well again, and been loved! Maybe
your time was done, maybe defeating King Goldmouth and restoring
Fairyland was your destiny, and when it was finished…”
    The Marquess grimaced. She ran her hands back over her hair--the
black curls returned. She ran her hands over her dress--black crinoline
flowed over her, and lace, and jewels. She placed her hat firmly back on her
head and dried her eyes.

    “I am not a toy, September! Fairyland cannot just cast me aside when
it’s finished playing with me! If this place could steal my life from me,
well, I, too, can steal. I know how the world works--the real world. I
brought it all back with me--taxes and customs and laws and the Greenlist.
If they wanted to just drop me back in the human world, I can drop the
human world into theirs, every bit of it. I punished them all! I bound down
their wings and I set the lions on them if they squeaked about it. I made
Fairyland nice for the children who come over the gears, I made it safe. I
did it for every child before me who had a life here, who was happy here!
Don’t you see, September? No one should have to go back. Not ever. We
can fix this world, you and I. Uncouple the gears and save us both! Let this
be a place where no one has to be dragged home, screaming, to a field full
of tomatoes and a father’s fists!”

    September reeled. She had thought she was done with crying, but she
could not bear the Marquess’s tale. Tears flowed hot and frightened and
bitter. Iago howled, mourning for Mallow or the Marquess or Fairyland,
September could not be sure.

    “I’m sorry, Mallow…”

    “Don’t call me that,” the Marquess snapped.
    “Maud, then. I’m so sorry.”

    “Are you going to tell me how wicked I am?”

    “No.”

    “Good. Now do as I say, little girl, or I shall throttle your friends in
front of you, and let Iago have the meat of them.”

    Iago grimaced a little.

    September still clutched the pearly clock to her breast. She could not
imagine it--living a whole life here and then, suddenly, horribly, being a lost
child again, all of everything gone. It was too awful to think of. Gently,
September turned the clock over in her hands. But the Marquess, poor
Maud, was broken now, and she wanted to break Fairyland, too, to make it
like her, sad and bitter and coiled up like a snake, ready to strike at anyone,
friend or foe. September slid her fingernail under the latch. The door of the
clock’s workings sprang free. What if it had been September, and she had
lived here so long that she forgot home?

    September’s hands found the stopped gears. She knew she could do it.
Clocks were easy. Her mother had taught her about clocks ages ago. Even if
it were me, she thought, I could not chain Ell’s wings like that.

    September drew the wrench from her side. It was huge and long, its
copper hand gleaming brightly.

    “It will be as big as I need it to be,” she murmured.
     And the wrench sighed. It melted in her hand like a popsicle in the
summertime, until it was delicate and tiny, a jeweler’s tool. Before the
Marquess could tell her not to, September gripped the offending wheel
within the heart of Maud Elizabeth Smythe's clock with her wrench and
pulled at it.

     “Don’t you dare!” cried the Marquess. She ran her hand along Iago’s
black spine. He just looked up at her, his emerald eyes sad.

     “Mallow…” he whispered. “I’m tired.”

     “Please! I can’t go back!” The Marquess snatched September’s hand,
squeezing it horribly tight.

     “Don’t you touch me!” cried September. “I’m not like you!”

     The Marquess laughed her knife-like laugh again. “Do you think
Fairyland loves you? That it will keep you close and dear, because you are a
good girl and I am not? Fairyland loves no one. It has no heart. It doesn’t
care. It will spit you back out just like it did me.”

     September nodded miserably. They were both crying, struggling with
the wrench. September plunged her fingers into the clock, desperately
trying to turn the wheel on her own. The gears cut her chilblained hands and
soaked the clock’s innards with blood.

     “No, no, I won’t let you! I won’t go home!” The Marquess sobbed.
And then she did an extraordinary thing.
    She let September go. The Marquess took a step back, as big a step as
she could manage in that tiny place. The storm flashed lightning and rain
behind her.

    “I won’t let you. Either of you. Not you, not Fairyland. I won’t let you
win.” She put her hand on her chest. “I have magic yet. If you will set the
clock working again, then I must be still. I have read quite as many stories
as you, September. More, no doubt. And I know a secret you do not: I am
not the villain. I am no dark lord. I am the princess in this tale. I am the
maiden, with her kingdom stolen away. And how may a princess remain
safe and protected through centuries, no matter who may assail her? She
sleeps. For a hundred years, for a thousand. Until her enemies have all
perished and the sun rises over her perfect, innocent face once more.”

    The Marquess fell down. It was so fast--one moment she stood, the
next, she had dropped like a flower snapped in half. She lay perfectly still
on the floor, her eyes shut, serene.

    September turned the wheel with her tiny wrench. The hands moved,
slowly at first, and then whirred faster and faster.

    In the room, suddenly, a soft alarm bell began to ring.
      #




OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XX: Saturday’s Wish

    In Which Escapes Are Made, A Great Wrestling Match Occurs, and a
Stranger Appears




    “Is she dead?” whispered Iago.

    The Marquess breathed deep and even. The Panther of Rough Storms
bent his ponderous black head and bit her experimentally, the way one
pinches oneself to test whether one is dreaming. She did not move.

    “I don’t think so…” said September fearfully.

    “I ought to take her away somewhere. Somewhere quiet. I think a bier
of some kind is traditional, in these cases.”

    “Shouldn’t she…go back now? That the clock is working?”

    “I’m not an expert. Maybe she is back. Maybe she is dreaming of
tomatoes and her father. I hope not.” The Panther meowed horribly. “I did
love her. In her sleep, she looked so like Mallow. I kept thinking: one day,
she’ll wake up, and it’ll be like it once was, and we shall all have a nice
cake and laugh about how silly things got.”
    A distant shatter and crash echoed through the Lonely Gaol. Iago
looked up, unconcerned.

    “She held half this world together with her will. It will all come apart
now. I wonder what we shall all look like, without her?”

    “I have to get my friends out! Help me, Iago, please, I can’t get to them
by myself!”

    “Oh…well, I suppose someone ought to have a good ending, out of all
of us.” The Panther’s eyes were glassy and faraway. “She fed me fish,” he
whispered. “And blackberry jam.”

    “Not together, I hope,” said September, trying to make him laugh as
she climbed into his saddle. A great tear splashed onto the Marquess’s
sleeping cheek as Iago rose up and away from his still, cold mistress.




    “Oh, Saturday…”

    The Marid lay on the floor of a cell, his hands bound behind his back,
his mouth gagged. Terrible bruises bloomed purple and black where the lion
had bitten him. His eyes were sunken and sallow.

    “Wake up, Saturday…”

    He groaned in his sleep. A savage crack appeared in the tower wall
behind him, squeaking and shrieking as if about to burst.
    “Saturday!” September cried. She took her wrench by the hilt--it grew
huge again in her hand. She swung it with all her might against the moss-
slimed glass door of Saturday’s cell. It shattered--the shards tinkled to the
floor. September pried the manacles open with the hooked hand of her
wrench and pulled the gag away. She held him for a moment, stroking his
hair. Slowly, his eyes opened.

    “September!” he croaked.

    “Can you walk! We have to go, the Gaol is breaking!”

    “It will be alright, the dragon will build it up again…”

    “What? We’re up so high, we’ll be killed!”

    “Well, she’s not really a dragon, but…”

    “Saturday! Pay attention! Where is Ell?”

    The Marid gestured weakly toward the next cell. Iago glanced inside.

    “He’s really rather poorly, that one. I don’t think you’ll get him out.”

    September lay Saturday gently down and went to Ell’s cell. The
Wyverary lay curled up on the floor, huge, crimson, and fast asleep. Ugly
green gashes ripped through his scales, still oozing blood. Dried turquoise
tears stained his dear face.

    “Oh, Ell! No, no, don’t be dead, please!”
       “Why not?” said Iago. “That’s what happens to friends, eventually. It’s
practically what they’re for.”

       September brought the wrench crashing down on Ell’s door, but the
beast did not move. Outside the glass walls, September saw the towers’ tips
begin to break off and tumble toward the raging sea.

       “Iago, I’ll never move him!”

       “Probably not.”

       “Help me!”

       “I can fly. That's all. I’m not omnipotent.”

       The ceiling exploded in a shower of glass. Blood welled up along
September’s arms. Rain poured in.

       “Please!” she screamed.

       “Someone here is, though,” the great cat said. “Omnipotent. Or nearly
so.”

       September stared numbly for a moment and then scrambled away from
Ell.

       “Saturday!” she cried. “Saturday, wake up!”

       “Hm? Sort of a fish, but not really…” the Marid murmured.
    “You have to wrestle me!” September laughed wildly as she said it,
half out of her mind with terror.

    “What? The dragon hates wrestling… and I…I couldn’t wrestle a
mouse…”

    “Good! Then it won’t be so hard for me to beat you.”

    Saturday quailed.

    “Don’t you see? I can wish us all away and safe! Only you have to
wrestle me. You told me how to do this. A Marid can grant any wish, so
long as he's beaten in a wrestling match.”

    Saturday’s face colored and blanched as he slowly understood her. He
rose up, shakily. The crack behind him grew, grinding, shrieking.

    “I can’t hold back,” he warned.

    “I know,” September said, and darted at him, meaning to tackle him by
the knees, to take him by surprise.

    Saturday stepped nimbly away. She lunged at him again and he caught
her, thrown back against the glass wall, which shattered noisily, dropping
them both into the night air. They landed with a shower of glass like snow
several stories below. Saturday broke September’s fall, but suddenly, in her
arms, his grip tightened. His eyes flashed feral in the stormlight. The wish
had woken in him, the Marid blood, sea-bright and stormy. It would not let
his wounded body lose, even now, even when he needed to lose most.
    Saturday hit September's chest with both fists. She held on--but just
barely. Saturday snarled, his lips curling back. His face was unrecognizable.
He tore away from her and scrambled up onto a glass staircase. September
ran after him, knocking him down from behind. She shut her eyes as she
struck out at him--she didn’t want see herself hurt him. Her fists connected
with the blue muscles of his back and he howled in pain, turning on her and
pulling her hair savagely. September screamed and whipped back around to
claw him with her fingernails. They separated, panting, bloody, two feuding
jackals. Saturday started after her, but the weight of them was too much for
the staircase--it shivered and broke, and beneath it the floor. They fell again,
this time onto hard stone as the cliffs began to mingle with the glass of the
Lonely Gaol. Once again, Saturday took the worst of it. He moaned.
September drew away.

    “Are you all right?”

    The Marid raked her face with his claws, his eyes gone narrow and
dark with the strength of the wish in him, trying desperately not to get out.
September grasped him around the waist and hurled him back with all her
strength. They grappled, breathing hard and shoving each other, gaining an
inch here, an inch there. September knew that if he were well, she would be
no match. She bit him cruelly on the neck and he recoiled, knocking into a
half-shattered wall and sprawling out onto the stone floor of one of the
Gears of the World that the Marquess prized so. Rain poured over him.
September threw herself against him once more, and they tumbled back
over the stone.

    Just a little further, she thought. Just a little more.
    She no longer even tried to hit him, though his great blows landed on
her shoulders, her ribs. Blood trickled into her eye. Relentlessly, she threw
herself against his body again and again, pushing him back, further and
further, until suddenly, it happened.

    Saturday fell off of the stone gear of Fairyland, and onto the iron gear
of her own world. He landed on his back and immediately howled agony.
Sores rose up on his arms as he touched the poisonous iron. Saturday wept
and thrashed. September climbed down to him. She sat astride the sobbing
Marid. She wanted to stop and hold him and make him well. Instead, she
pinned his arms down and hit him again.

    “Yield!” she screamed over the storm.

    Saturday screeched rage and defeat. September nearly let him go to
clap hands over her ears, so piercing was the sound. But she held on. And
Saturday went slack beneath her. Something had passed out of him and he
was quiet again.

    “I yield to you, September.”

    September collapsed against him, rain pounding at her, blood mingling
between them. He gave a tiny sob, and shut his eyes against her skin.

    “I wish that we were all of us away from here,” she whispered in his
ear, “somewhere safe and warm and bright, and that Ell and Gleam were
both well and whole, and no one dead.”
    She let him up then, holding out her hand to help him. He took it. They
stood together in the storm, smiling.

    “Hello,” came a small voice.

    September whirled around. Up on the stone gear, far above them, a
small child stood, looking down, blinking in the rain. Her skin was blue,
though not so blue as Saturday’s, and she had long, dark hair. She had a
mole on her left cheek, and he feet were very large and ungainly. The child
looked quite solemn—and then suddenly, she smiled.

    “Now, we shall play hide and seek!” she yelled down at them.

    Saturday’s eyes widened with understanding. He looked at September,
dumbfounded.

    Then, they both disappeared, quick as a thought.



                                        #




                             OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XXI: Did You See Her?

    In Which All is Reasonably Well, But Time Is Short




    The sun fell golden and warm onto a field of gleaming wheat--just a
touch blue around the edges , and rosy in the middle, as is the way with
glowerwheat. Broad trees full of gleaming fruit shaded four bodies. They
lay in the grass as though dreaming. A girl in a green smoking jacket with
long, curling dark hair and a high, healthy blush in her cheeks rested with
her hands closed over her chest. A boy with blue skin and rich, thick hair
gathered up on top of his head slept curled next to her, with no bruises at all
on his chest. A little ways away a great red wyvern snored pleasantly, his
red scales whole and unbroken.

    Near his tail an orange lantern glowed, dimly.

    September rose up and stretched her arms, yawning. Then she touched
her hair and it all came back, the Marquess, the Lonely Gaol, the awful
storm. She looked down at Saturday, sleeping sweetly. She moved over to
him and lay very close, and then she cried, quietly, so that he couldn’t see.
All the ache and horror of it, the sea and the fish and the sadness of Queen
Mallow and Iago and all of them, poured out of her into the grass, into the
day. Finally, she touched Saturday’s blue back ever so gently, with the tips
of her fingers.

    “Saturday,” she whispered, wiping her eyes. “It worked. I think it
worked, anyway.”

    His eyes slid open.

    September pulled at her curls. “How did my hair grow back?”

    Saturday rolled over in the long grass. “You wished for everyone to be
whole and well again,” he said softly.

    September crept over to Ell. She could hardly breathe for hope. Slowly,
she touched his huge face, his broad cheeks, his soft nose.

    “Oh, Ell, do wake up. Do be well.”

    One great turquoise eye creaked open.

    “Did I miss something?” A-Through-L yawned prodigiously.

    September squealed delight and threw her arms around the Wyverary’s
nose.

    “And Gleam! Gleam, you’re back!”

    Golden writing looped across her face:



                              Paper can be patched.
    September hugged the lantern, though this was a bit of an awkward
operation. Pale green arms reached up out of the paper and embraced
September--but vanished quickly, as though Gleam was embarrassed of her
limbs, as if they were a secret, just between September and herself. Still, if
she could have smiled, Gleam would have beamed like Christmas.

    “Halllooooo!” came a bellowing, booming voice out of the sky. The
four of them looked up to see a Leopard swooping and leaping down to
them, and none on her back but the Green Wind, in his green jodhpurs and
green snowshoes, his green-gold hair flying.

    September thought she would burst. She lost count of the hugs and cat-
lickings and tumbling about.

    “But how can you be here? I thought you weren’t allowed!”

    The Green Wind grinned broadly. “The Marquess’s rules are done
with! No chain could keep me from you now, my little chestnut. And I have
brought gifts!”

    The Green Wind snapped off his green cape and lay it on the ground
with a flourish. Immediately, it covered itself in every delightful green thing
one can eat: pistachio ice cream and mint jelly and spinach pies and apples
and olives and rich herby bread--and several huge, deep green radishes.

    The Leopard paced nervously, however.
     “Has my brother come with you?” she growled. “I do not see him.”

     September’s face fell.

     “You did not wish for him,” Saturday whispered fretfully.

     The Leopard gave a little cry, quite like a kitten who has lost her litter-
mate. “It is all right. He would have gone back for her. I’m sure of it. For
that which was Mallow still, who we both loved. And he was always good
in a storm.”

     “She is only sleeping, Green,” said September slowly. “Might she
come back someday?”

     “One can never be sure,” the Green Wind sighed. “There is always the
danger of kisses where sleeping maids are concerned. But you are safe now,
and for awhile yet, and why worry about a thing that may never come to
pass? Do not ruin today with mourning tomorrow.”

     September looked at her hands. She did not know quite how to ask
what she needed to know.

     “Green,” she said, her voice trembling. “I know it was not my clock the
Marquess showed me. But…where is my clock? How much time do I have
left?”

     The Green Wind laughed. A few fruit fell from the trees with the boom
of it. “You don’t have one, love! The Marquess knew it, too, which is why
she tried to trick you with hers. The Stumbled have clocks. It is their
tragedy. But no one has quite the same tragedy. Changelings can’t leave
without help. And the Ravished…” The Green Wind pulled an hourglass
from his coat. It was filled with deep red sand, the color of wine. On its
ebony base was a little brass plaque. It read:




                          September Morning Bell




    The upper bell of the hourglass was almost empty.

    “That’s still a clock,” Saturday pointed out.

    “True. But the Ravished have their own miseries. The Stumbled cannot
stay--the Ravished cannot leave.”

    “What?” cried September.

    “September, do you remember your big orange book that you like so
much, full of old stories and tales? And do you remember a certain girl in
that book, who went underground and spent the whole winter there, so that
the world mourned and snowed and withered and got all covered in ice?
And because she ate six pomegranate seeds, she had to stay there in the
winter, and could only come home in the spring-time?”

    “Yes,” said September slowly.
       “That is what it means to be Ravished. When the sand runs out you
must go home, just like poor Mallow. But when Spring comes again, so will
you, and the hourglass will turn over again. It will all begin anew. You are
bound to us now, but you will never live fully here, nor fully there.
Ravished means you cannot stay, and you cannot go. You ate heartily in
Fairyland, and I am so terribly glad you did, even though it was certainly
naughty of me to have tricked you so. But I do think I warned you not to
eat, so you cannot bring suit against me.”

       September laughed. “You did warn me.” She thought of her mother, of
leaving her every Spring. But, then, hadn’t the Marquess said that when you
go home, it’s just as though you never left? Maybe her mother would not
miss her. Maybe it would be like dreaming.

       A-Through-L tucked his huge head against September’s little neck,
nuzzling her.

       “When spring comes, I shall meet you at the Municipal Library, and
you will see how much I’ve learned! You’ll be so proud of me and love me
so!”

       “Oh, Ell, but I do love you! Right now!”

       “One can always bear more love,” the Wyverary purred.

       Suddenly, September thought of something that had, excusably,
escaped her until this moment.
     “Green! If the old laws are all broken, then Ell’s wings needn’t be
chained down anymore!”

     “Certainly not!”

     September ran to the great bronze chains--they were still bound with a
great padlock, and no amount of rattling budged them.

     “Oh, if only I knew how to pick a lock!” sighed September. “I’ve
turned out to be no kind of thief at all!”

     You and I may imagine this simple plea floating up and out of the
golden field and up into the sky, winding and wending toward our stalwart
friend, the Jeweled Key which had sought September through all of her
adventures. We cannot fully understand the joy that exploded in the heart of
the Key as it heard September’s cry, and how fast it flew, knowing she
needed it, knowing its girl cried out for it.

     Winking down out of the sun, the Key fell like a firefly. It flashed and
sparkled, a glittering dart, and came to rest just where September longed for
it to be--nestled in the lock of the Wyverary’s chains. It glittered with the
shock of arriving just when it was called for, the pleasure and surprise of it.
With a click, the Key turned. Peace and contentment flooded through its
tiny body. The padlock fell away; the chains slid to the earth. A-Through-L,
for the first time since he was a tiny lizard at his mother’s side, spread his
wings.

     The great scarlet things cast them all in shade, and kicked up warm
winds as he flapped them once, twice, and lifted uncertainly into the air. Ell
choked, tears welling in his eyes.

    “Did you know I could fly, September? I can! I can!” The Wyverary
soared up, whooping, spitting joyful fire into the clouds.

    “Oh, I did know, Ell,” September whispered as her friend looped and
did somersaults in the sky. “I did.”

    September looked down at the Key, finally. Her Key, with which she
had unlocked the puzzle of the world. It basked in her gaze.

    “Have you followed me all this way?” she gasped.

    It spun around, terribly pleased.

    “Oh, Key, how extraordinary!”

    The Key thought it might die of the sound of her voice. September
gathered it up in her hand, and it felt it must die all over again, for the touch
of her fingers.

    “Will you do something for me?”

    It would do anything, of course it would.

    “Go and unlock the others. All over Fairyland, everyone chained and
unable to fly freely. When you’re done, it will be spring and time for me to
come back, and then we shall not be parted again, and you shall ride on my
lapel, and we will share jokes in the moonlight, and look very fine on
parade.”
     It bowed a little to her, not a little puffed up. Then, the Key rose up and
flew away out of site, twinkling like a tiny star.




     “It’s almost time,” said the Green Wind gently. The wine-colored sand
was nearly spent.

     “I understand now,” September said ruefully.

     “What?” said Saturday.

     “What the sign meant. To lose your heart. When I go home I shall
leave mine here, and I don’t think I shall ever have it back.”

     “I will keep it safe for you,” Saturday whispered, barely brave enough
to say it.

     “Will you see the witch Goodbye gets her Spoon, Green?”

     “Of course, my lambswool.”

     “And you’ll show Gleam Pandemonium, and the sea, and the
highwheels, and all sorts of things, Ell? Like she wanted, to see the world.”

     The Wyverary laughed. “If the Library gives me weekend liberty, I
shall!”

     The orange lantern bounced and shone.

     September turned to Saturday.
    “Did you see her?” the Marid said nervously, looking at her with great
dark eyes. “Our daughter. Standing on the Gear. Did you see her?”

    “What?” said September--and then she winked out, like someone
blowing out a candle, and all the field was still.




                                       #




                              OceanofPDF.com
Chapter XXII: Ravished Means You
Cannot Stay

    In Which September Returns Home




    Evening was just beginning to peep through the windows of
September’s little house, glowing blue and rose. September found herself at
the kitchen sink, with her hands deep in soapy water that had long gone
cold, a pink and yellow teacup still clutched in her hand. Behind her, a
small, amiable dog yapped away at nothing. September looked down--her
lonely mary jane, who had missed all the adventures, lay cast off and
forgotten on the parquet floor. Her feet were bare.

    “Mama won’t be home yet!” she said suddenly. “Oh, how glad I shall
be to see her!”

    September put on a kettle of tea for her mother, and set out a clean
little plate with an orange on it, and opened all the windows to let fresh air
in. She even let the small dog kiss her nose. September got a blanket out of
the closet and curled up in her father’s big, threadbare armchair just by the
door, so the first thing her mother saw when she came home would be her
girl, safe and sound. Besides, September felt as though she could sleep for a
century. She pulled the woolen blanket up around her chin as the dog
chewed its own tail at the foot of the chair.

    “I wonder what did happen to the fairies after all?” She said to the dog,
who wagged his tail, pleased to be paid attention to. “When I get back, that
will be the first thing I shall ask Ell about! After all, Fairy begins with F!
And when spring comes again, I shall be sure to leave mother a note and a
nice glass of milk.”

    September drifted off to sleep in her couch, her long hair wrapped
around her. When her mother came home from a long shift at the factory,
she smiled and bundled her girl off to bed, snug and whole and warm.

    She didn't notice. Of course she didn’t. Who would, after a long
graveyard shift and with her back so sore? A mother cannot see every little
thing, and glad we may be that she could not, as it would have caused a
great deal of trouble September would never have been able to explain. All
stories must end so, with the next tale winking out of the corners of the last
pages, promising more, promising moonlight and dancing and revels, if
only you will come back, when spring comes again.




    For when she lifted her daughter up out of the threadbare couch,
September cast no shadow at all.


                               OceanofPDF.com
