OceanofPDF.com



We Cast a Shadow is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are the products of
the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or
persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 2019 by Maurice Carlos Ruffin

All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by One World, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin
Random House LLC, New York.

ONE WORLD and colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ruffin, Maurice Carlos, author.
Title: We cast a shadow: a novel / Maurice Carlos Ruffin.
Description: First edition. | New York: One World, [2019]
Identifiers: LCCN 2018021024 | ISBN 9780525509066 (hardback) | ISBN 9780525509080 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: African Americans—Fiction. | BISAC: FICTION / Literary. | FICTION / Satire. |
FICTION / African American / General.
Classification: LCC PS3618.U4338 W4 2019 | DDC 813/.6—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/​2018021024

Ebook ISBN 9780525509080

oneworldlit.com
randomhousebooks.com

Book design by Diane Hobbing, adapted for ebook

Cover design: Rodrigo Corral Design

v5.4

ep

OceanofPDF.com



Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Epigraph

Part One
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8

Part Two
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18



Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
Chapter 24

Part Three
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
Chapter 31
Chapter 32
Chapter 33
Chapter 34
Chapter 35
Chapter 36
Chapter 37
Chapter 38

Part Four
Chapter 39
Chapter 40
Chapter 41
Chapter 42
Chapter 43
Chapter 44



Dedication
Acknowledgments
About the Author

OceanofPDF.com



There are few things in the world as dangerous as sleepwalkers.
—RALPH ELLISON

See how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when once love comes
to bend them.

—HERMAN MELVILLE

Look at this tangle of thorns.
—VLADIMIR NABOKOV

OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com



1

My name doesn’t matter. All you need to know is that I’m a phantom, a
figment, a man who was mistaken for waitstaff twice that night—odd, given
my outfit. I managed to avoid additional embarrassments by wallflowering
in the shadow of the grand staircase. Their cheeks pink from Southern
Comfort, the partners—or shareholders, as the firm called them—stood
chatting in clusters around the dining room.

I had been invited by my law firm’s leaders to attend their annual party at
Octavia Whitmore’s mansion on the Avenue of Streetcars. It was a highlight
of my life, an honor for a lowly associate just to be invited, although I was
surprised to be told to show up in a costume.

Rough fabric chafed against my collarbone. I was dressed as a Roman
centurion. I had rented the mega-deluxe option, no expense spared: full
tunic of lamb’s wool, leather sandals, and five—count ’em, five—
Hollywood-prop-grade weapons: a sword, a javelin, a bow and arrow, a
shield, and a dagger. I never knew that Roman soldiers used daggers. But
the costume guy assured me that they did too use daggers, the dagger being
the preferred weapon of choice for when shit got real, which apparently it
did from time to time.

The first floor of Octavia’s mansion was a series of large rooms. Playful
notes of sandalwood and jasmine lingered in the foyer. I spotted my fellow
black associate Franklin beyond that entryway. Franklin, who got white-girl
drunk at every firm function, karaoked “I Feel Pretty” into a microphone.
Franklin had come wearing the perfect icebreaker. He wore a white smock
and a black bow tie, the uniform of every black busboy and waiter at every
old-line restaurant in the City. Café des Réfugiés, Carnation Room, Pierre’s
—no, not Pierre’s; there were no brothers at Pierre’s. I wasn’t sure what



must have been more mortifying for Franklin: that he was singing so poorly
or that no one paid him any mind. It couldn’t have helped that he was too
black to be pretty.

My frenemy, good ol’ back-slapping Riley, was bent over a table giving
the managing shareholder, Jack Armbruster, a foot massage. Sweat made
Riley’s bald head glow. He looked like a scoop of chocolate ice cream
melting under the parlor lights. Riley was dressed as a parish prison inmate,
which rankled my sense of propriety. They saw enough of us dressed that
way in news reports. However, I had to admit it was an impressive getup.
He wore a Day-Glo orange jumpsuit, and even a fake chest tattoo. He
carried clinking leg shackles slung over his shoulder, as if ready to
reincarcerate himself on request.

Riley was working the old fart’s feet, feet so gnarly they seemed like
roots ripped from the field behind the mansion. He dabbed his dome with a
handkerchief. Was a promotion and bonus worth the kind of humiliation
Franklin and Riley were undergoing? Confetti rained down on the junior
shareholders in the adjacent parlor. You betcha.

My son Nigel’s procedure would be expensive. After feeding the
snarling, three-headed beast of mortgage, utilities, and private school
tuition, I only managed to pocket a few copper coins each month. But if I
were promoted, I would earn a fat bonus, and Nigel would finally get a
normal face, over his mother’s objections.

I idled on the sidelines, nursing a rum and Coke, which, in turn, nursed
my ever-present migraine (thankfully, almost down for the night). I had lost
count of how many drinks I’d had over the last few hours, which meant by
now my blood was probably 75 percent alcohol by volume. And that was
on top of the dissipating effects of the Plum I took that morning. I told
myself on each awakening that I didn’t need Plums anymore. I told myself I
could quit anytime I chose. But I knew better. Those petite purple pills,
which turned my nervous system into a tangle of pleasurably twinkling
Christmas lights, had become a constant companion.

Riley ambled over. He exaggeratedly wiped his palms on his jumpsuit
pants. Smiling, he jabbed his hand out for a handshake. I shook my head.

“Where is the love?” Riley glanced at his hand and sniffed. “I don’t
blame you actually. I think Armbruster’s been on his feet all day.” He



grabbed the sleeve of my tunic, tossed his head back, and chuckled. “You
don’t think you’re going to win in this, do you?”

“I like my look,” I said, taken aback. “Check out this hand-stitching—
wait. Win what?”

“Win this hazing ceremony. Tonight is a competition, after all. There’s
three of us, but only one promotion. You knew that.” Riley raised his
eyebrow. “You didn’t know that.”

“But this is just a party.”
“And one of us will have something to celebrate.” Riley always seemed

to have inside knowledge about the firm’s workings. But he was also the
kind of person to say things just to get a reaction from me. Still, he
wouldn’t joke about this. The stakes were too high.

“What happens to the losers?”
He leaned in to whisper. “You know how it works. It’s up or out.” Riley

adjusted my breastplate. “I didn’t mean to mess with your confidence.
You’re right. This is a great look.” He straightened up and nodded. “Really
authentic.”

Riley patted my shoulder and trotted off, his manacles clattering against
the back of his jumpsuit. He shook the hands of a couple of shareholders
and laughed.

I suddenly realized I had made a serious miscalculation. Riley’s costume
was a great way to get attention and spread good cheer. Mine, on the other
hand, was the sartorial equivalent of a glower. Centurions were badasses
who killed anyone who crossed them. The only way I could have made this
group any more nervous was if I showed up as Nat Turner, but I knew
better. Or I should have. There were many unknowns in my pursuit of
happiness, but one thing I understood: law firms like Seasons, Ustis &
Malveaux didn’t hire, let alone promote, angry black men. If this was a
competition, I needed a new strategy. The shareholders wanted
entertainment. They wanted a good time. They also wanted subservience.
They did not want to feel threatened. If I was going to win, I would have to
demonstrate I was willing to give them exactly what they wanted.

I quickly moved from room to room searching for anything that could
help me. In the back den, I spotted Octavia Whitmore in a gingham dress,



carrying a terrier in the crook of her elbow and a drink in each of her hands.
If anyone could help me find an advantage, she could. After all, she was a
senior shareholder, and I her legal footman. I was the associate who did the
grunt work that was beneath her valets. She needed me.

“You look just like Judy Garland,” I said. Octavia hadn’t noticed me, so
her face momentarily lit up in surprise as I approached. I kissed her cheek.

“Well, aren’t you sweet?” she said.
I liked Octavia. She was one of the good ones, even if, as she once

drunkenly admitted to me in a stalled elevator, she sometimes fantasized
about wearing blackface and going on a crime spree. After shattering
storefront windows and mugging tourists by the Cathedral, she would wash
the makeup from her face, content in the knowledge that the authorities
would pin her deeds on some thug who actually had it coming.

That was when I realized that the Toto in her arm was a cat—a
Ragamuffin cat wearing a wig. I’d never seen a cat wearing a wig. It was a
night of wonders.

“Why you off to the side like this, sugar?” Octavia licked her thumb and
polished the foot of a gilt bronze cherub.

“Someone has to stand watch over these rabble-rousers.” I puffed my
chest out and stamped my javelin on the marble floor.

“But who’s guarding you? Here, this will freshen you right up.” She took
the javelin and handed me another glass. I gave my empty rum glass to one
of the waiters, an onyx-skinned man who would have otherwise eluded my
attention if not for the fact that he’d clearly undergone enthusiastic
rhinoplasty, his broad-winged brother’s nose replaced by a narrow, upturned
pointer. Such procedures had become much more common among black
folk lately. I couldn’t tell if he’d only had his schnoz done because he was
too poor to afford the full procedure or because he was afraid. Half
measures were such a waste of effort. If you were going to skydive into
whiteness, aim for the town square, not the outskirts.

“What’s this?” I said.
“A Sazerac,” Octavia said with a wink. Her hair’s silver streak glinted.
“But you know I don’t drink,” I said, drinking.
She chuckled.



“I don’t think I’m a fan favorite in this.” I gestured to my clothing.
Toto growled at me. That cat took its role seriously.
Handling my javelin as if it were a pool cue, Octavia leveled it at the

crowd, but I couldn’t tell who she was shooting at. She leaned it against the
stairwell banister. I reached for it, but she stopped me.

“Leave it,” she said. “I have something for you upstairs.”
We climbed the stairs until we reached a side gallery that looked down on

the atrium. Powder-blue shapes shimmered from the aquarium and formed
waves across the checkerboard floor. Riley passed behind the bars of the
staircase, dragging his chain. I was glad to be away from the scrum of
shareholders with their plastic smiles, the smiles of sharks before a feeding
frenzy. You really shouldn’t be able to see a person’s molars when they
grin. The whole situation made me jumpy, as if a squid were twitching
around in my tunic. I should have worn underwear.

Octavia led me into a long room. Every wall was covered with leather-
bound books. Eyes Without a Face. The Hip Hop Ontologist’s View of Leda
and the Swan. Blackstone’s Law. I pulled that book from the shelf and
opened the cover. Dust motes pirouetted into the air. I sneezed.

“You read all these?” I asked, wiping my nose with the back of my
Sazerac hand.

“Shit, no.” She ran a French-tipped nail along the rim of my glass.
“Neither did my father. They’re real, but mainly for effect.”

“Oh.”
She pointed past me, and I followed her line of sight.
Statues lined the back wall. Just like me to notice books but not creepy

wax men lurking in the shadows. One mannequin was Chinese, I guessed.
He wore a fulvous robe and had long tufts of hair along his chin. Another
looked like a Jack Kirby Thor, square jaw, blond hair, and Mjolnir, the
magic hammer. I caught the theme even though there were no placards.
Gods of the Human World.

“What do you think of this one?” she said.
It was a black man. He wore a headdress, face paint, and a bone

necklace. I had no idea which African deity he was supposed to be, but I’d
read enough to know there were more black deities than anyone could



possibly keep track of, so many, in fact, that it cheapened the idea of
godliness. If everyone was a god, no one was a god.

Whoever made the statue apparently believed the myth that all us black
men were hung like Clydesdales, a myth that led to plenty of awkward
dating experiences since I was only average in the Joe department. The
African god’s loincloth did little to obscure his bulge. It was a safety
hazard. Someone could poke their eye out.

As for my overall opinion of the statue, whenever a white person asked
me any question just because I was the onliest black guy in the room, the
possible responses rattled around my brain like dice in a cup: one, answer
with anger; two, answer with humor; or three, answer with a question.

The first, I practically never used. Anger, of course, could get you killed.
The second, humor, was fine in most situations, but it was only

something I deployed in safe environments. This was not a safe
environment. Octavia was up to something. Something dangerous, or
brilliant, or both.

“Is this a museum?” I asked.
“My father’s private collection.” She trailed her index finger down my

bare arm. She walked behind the African god. From its perch on Octavia’s
arm, Toto sniffed the statue’s butt. “These were sculpted by the same man
who did the original Madame Tussauds. The hair is real human hair. Even
the eyelashes. Even the eyeballs, I think.” She squatted by a low drawer and
rummaged through it. She pulled out a gong. “There are accessories all
around the room. You can upgrade your look to something more…
appropriate.”

She struck the gong with her glass, producing a hollow sound.
“Why are you helping me?” I asked.
“I like you. Always have, but also I put a dollar on you winning.”

Octavia stepped into me, the way she might if we were about to tango, close
enough that I could smell her liquor-drenched breath. “If you want to win,
gather your balls and get out there, boy.”

“Thanks?” The only non-black person with permission to call me “boy”
was my wife. Yet I knew I couldn’t say anything. Octavia had probably



consumed a liter of Sazerac, and who could fault anyone who had probably
consumed a liter of Sazerac?

She flourished her hand and strutted toward the door. “Don’t worry. I
won’t watch you change,” she said. “This time.” And then she left.

I don’t know how I missed the giant figure just inside the door back to
the gallery. He was easily double the size of the other gods. He wore a toga
and had a beard that would have made Jerry Garcia proud. Actually, given
Octavia’s wealth, it could have been Jerry Garcia’s actual beard. The statue
held a lightning bolt. Zeus! That was who I wanted to be.

Zeus was a shameless choice in my quest to climb the social step stool.
Who could fault me for choosing the ruler of Mount Olympus? Victory was
close at hand. Possibility whisked me away. I wondered whether the
virtuoso plastic surgeon I had in mind for Nigel’s procedure preferred credit
cards or cashier’s checks. I imagined my boy’s wedding day in the distant
future, his cheeky face flawless as a seaside sunrise.

No. I couldn’t be Zeus. If I went back to the party as the king of gods, the
shareholders would think I was conceited, crass, uppity.

I needed something that would give me a fighting chance against
Franklin’s Stepin Fetchit uniform and Riley’s “20 to life.” I had to sink to
the level of the shareholders’ expectations. My fellow melanated associates
fit in better than me because everyone was used to seeing black waiters
tending to tourists or black convicts being led to work in neck shackles.
There was a comfort in these familiar images, as reassuring as steaming
apple pie or drones dropping barrel bombs on terrorists. The Zulu chief
stared over my head. I only had to fulfill an expectation. I only had to say
yes one more time, right? Examining the various fasteners and clips of a
remnant barely large enough to cover a child’s bottom, I thought: I can
totally do this.

Once I finished changing, I inhaled, threw my shoulders back, and
descended the curving staircase with all the resolve of an overlooked but
hopeful debutante. I anticipated a collective pause when people noticed me.
There was. Entering a crowded room full of intoxicated lawyers wearing
nothing but a loincloth, leg tassels, and feathery headdress is bound to
attract attention. What I didn’t expect was that Jack Armbruster, who prided
himself on never wasting so much as a molecule of bourbon, dropped his



highball glass. It shattered with a satisfying crack against the marble.
Liquor spread, a pale imitation of lifeblood.

I gazed at the shareholders in their costumes, a zombie pilgrim, a
cheerful Madame LaLaurie, and a diminutive Honest Abe, all silent for
what felt like an hour at the bottom of the ocean’s deepest trench.
Armbruster whipped out a silk handkerchief from his blazer—I think he
was the Millionaire from Gilligan’s Island, but it was hard to tell because
that was more or less how he always looked—and wiped his mouth with a
flick. Everyone watched him. He chuckled and clapped once. The room
burst into applause.

I realized that I’d walked out smack into the middle of the judging
session. The other associates had been cleared out, probably into the field
behind the mansion. The big plate-glass windows reflected the interior of
the room, the shareholders, and myself. But by concentrating, I caught a
glimpse of the world beyond the mirror. Sure enough, amid the restless
security personnel who guarded Octavia’s neighborhood with machine
guns, Riley and Franklin stared at me from the grass, their faces featureless
in that spectral mansion glow. They clapped, too. My chest tightened as if
someone were squeezing my lungs from the inside of my chest.

Then the drumbeat kicked in.
The firm had hired an Afro-Cuban quartet, trumpet, keys, drums, and

congas for the party. Possibly sensing a chance to fill their tip bucket, the
band stuttered into a dark tribal beat. Not the kind of rhythm that rock and
roll was built on, but the kind of rhythm that predated bluesuede‐
rockaroundtheclockpleasepleasefightforyourrighttoparty by at least a
thousand years.

I danced. I wasn’t a dancer, but I was a decent mimic. I’d watched Mardi
Gras Indians buck jump my entire life. I’d seen people around the
neighborhood twerk and p-pop. I’d seen crackheads have seizures.

Facing the shareholders, I couldn’t see myself. But if I could have sprung
from my own body and watched myself from Zeus’s perch upstairs, I would
have seen a skinny, nearly naked Negro in a sumo squat, flapping his arms
and legs as though they were on fire. People laughed and imitated my
movements. Flashes popped. The videographer swung in for a close-up. It’s
a strange thing to feel so alive even as a part of your soul turns to cold green



goo and oozes out of your heel. Every time I raised my spear, they cheered
louder. The higher I raised it, the louder they roared.

And then suddenly the music shifted—like a runaway tour bus
transitioning from cliff to air. Silence. Armbruster covered his mouth with
his handkerchief, his eyes locked on me. Octavia fanned herself.
Somewhere in the room a camera clicked twice.

It must have been the buzz of the alcohol and pill that delayed the feeling
of a licking breeze across my lower body. The loincloth had come undone,
and I was naked as a peeled egg.

Do you know how eerie it is for a hundred people to go completely quiet
at the sight of your manhood?

Toto ran over, and I backed into the wall, all eyes on me against the
world. I snatched him up, using his furry body like a pom-pom. I stumbled
out of the mansion’s back door and into the field.
OceanofPDF.com



2

We lived, at that time, in a part of the City once inhabited by Mosopelea
Indians who migrated to the marshlands to avoid the white man, then by
immigrants from Continental Europe who, having left behind crowd,
famine, and disease, fled the City to escape the black man, then inhabited
by blacks who were vigorously reappropriated to the penitentiary at the
parish line, and finally by the descendants of those earlier whites who
returned when the coast was again clear. Except for me and half of my son,
there were no other blacks in our neighborhood.

Our enclave was not without its charms. Sometime before we bought in,
our neighbors prosecuted an altogether different kind of war of the roses so
that every porch and garden box was an explosion of floral fireworks:
elephant ears reared back from mouse flowers, pineapple lilies and calla
lilies brushed sisterly hips, a Mexican hen and chicks soundlessly clucked
from a terracotta pot left behind on our porch by the previous owners.

Our house was very fine, long and narrow as a folio book, so it seemed
quite quaint from the front. But inside, the house, with its long, left-
centered hallway, went on for many chapters.

Past the den where our frumpy paisley couch nested, past the dining
room where the drop-leaf mahogany table gave port to an armada of
Penny’s acrylic paint tubes and brushes, past the second bedroom where
Nigel’s vintage Rev. ManRay McKintosh poster (gifted by his
grandmother) hung, was our kitchen, where my wife and son gathered the
morning after my failure at Octavia’s mansion. From the bedroom door in
the back corner of the kitchen, I entered in rumpled, kaleidoscopic pajamas,
hyperactive gorillas pounding kettledrums in my head. I wore opaque safety
goggles left over from a welding-accident case I’d worked years earlier. I



could hardly see a thing, but they served a purpose. They were meant to buy
me time.

“You look like you lost a wrestling match.” Penny poured orange juice
into the leaf-green carafe without looking at me. As usual, she was already
ready for work. Whereas I took an eternity to put myself together, Penny
wasn’t the kind of woman to overdo it with hair or makeup. She was a
pragmatist. A little foundation. A little blush. No lipstick. She still wore her
red curls long, although not as long as she did in the early days of our
marriage. Her light green blouse matched the underside of the leaf she had
just filled. “Doesn’t he, munchkin?”

“My dad doesn’t lose fights.” Nigel poured batter onto the well-seasoned
iron skillet, a wedding gift from Penny’s mother. My nose twitched to
cinnamon and a hint of ginger. Eleven years old, and it was an accepted fact
that Nigel was the most talented chef in our tribe. We discovered this at age
three when he grabbed a shaker of seasoning salts and dumped it into my
bowl of bland grits.

“He won, and I bet the other guy looks way worse.”
“Crap.” Penny righted a quart of chocolate milk that had spilled on the

counter. I asked if she needed a hand, but she was already pushing the lake
of dairy into the sink with a ream of paper towels.

I returned my gaze to Nigel. “That’s my boy.” I ran my hand through my
son’s hair, a velvety tousle of black laurel, and poured a cup of coffee. He
didn’t have to attack his hair with noxious chemicals, like I did, to make it
unkink.

Penny jotted a note on the fridge to-do list. Her chicken-scratch was
almost impossible to read, except for the note that had been next to the door
handle for years. In block letters, it clearly read, “I love my boys!”

I gestured. She folded the paper she’d just written on and stuffed it into
her bra. “I’m calling the City about those surveillance vans,” she said.

“They’re safety patrols, not surveillance vans,” I said. Yes, the City
Police van visited our block twice a day. And yes, it had cameras and
infrared devices that could look into the deepest reaches of our home. But
the vans checked in on any neighborhood where black folks lived to
monitor vital signs: low heart rates suggested barbiturate use, elevated heart



rates meant conflict, no heart rate was self-explanatory. It was for our—that
is, black folks’—own good. When I was growing up, it wasn’t uncommon
for people to attack us in the streets.

Since Nigel and I didn’t live in a black neighborhood, the poor officer
assigned to protect us had to ride all the way over from the Tiko. He had to
speed to stay on schedule.

“Those goons almost hit Mrs. Kravits this morning.” Penny tossed the
soiled paper towels into the garbage and pressed down with both hands.

“Okay. I’ll call, if it makes you feel better,” I said.
“It would.” She washed her hands.
“May I?” I gestured toward her chest. She smirked. I removed the

reminder note.
“So are you going to explain that?” Nigel pointed at the goggles on my

face.
“I have no idea what you’re talking about.” I parked at the head of the

table. Penny pitched a look of disgust over Nigel’s shoulder at me. We had
fought a few minutes earlier about my behavior. That is to say, my darling
dragon fruit did not appreciate my stumbling into the house sometime
around three A.M. wrapped in the plaid picnic blanket we kept in the trunk of
my car. Nor did she enjoy my bleary recitation of the night’s absurdities
before falling asleep on the floor at the foot of our bed or my presentation
of red-rimmed eyes on awakening that were a sign of—well, she knew what
they were a sign of.

I caught Penny’s look and stirred it into my bitter coffee. “Oh. You mean
these?” I removed the safety goggles. Beneath them I wore a small pair of
dark sunglasses.

Nigel screwed his mouth up in mock derision. “Jerk.”
On checking myself out in the mirror that morning, my eyes were puffy,

pink, a side effect of all I’d ingested the day before, plus a lack of sleep and
a bellyful of stress. I didn’t want to miss seeing Nigel off to school, I never
missed doing so. So I plied my peepers with the prescription eye drops I
kept for just that purpose and donned the goggles and glasses to give the
drops time to do their thing.



Penny asked Nigel to go grab her phone from the bedroom, and he went.
Ah. Coffee. No sugar. No cream. I liked my java so black, the police
planted evidence on it. And I was such a lucky man. My beautiful wife. My
lovely, intelligent, redheaded wife swung across the room, her hips, about
which she was unduly self-conscious, clicked in sympathy with my cuckoo
clock heart. Then my amazing soulmate whacked me in the back of the
head so hard, coffee squirted from my nostrils.

“Ow,” I said. Penny smiled slightly. Plums were sometimes called
zombie pills due to their anesthetic effect. My pain proved to her that I was
still with her in the land of the living.

“Why aren’t you dressed?” she said through clenched teeth so Nigel
wouldn’t hear.

“I told you I’m not going,” I whispered. After the previous night’s
debacle at Octavia’s mansion, I had no doubt that Franklin or Riley had
already been promoted. The sun was still scrubbing darkness from the sky
outside the high window, but I was sure that Administration had already
ripped my nameplate from my office door and deleted my biography from
the firm website.

“So that’s your solution?” she said. “You won’t even find out what
actually happened?”

My hand trembled and coffee splashed out of my mug. Without my job,
we wouldn’t be able to keep the house, the cars would get repoed, and worst
of all, I wouldn’t be able to pay for Nigel’s procedure. But I couldn’t
change that. I had been held up to the light and found wanting. I could
imagine Penny’s estranged parents guffawing at the thought of her being
forced to move back in with them. Interracial marriage was perfectly legal,
of course, but it—along with mixed-race births—had been on the decline
for years, especially in the South. Our dissolution would be proof that her
folks had been right about the folly of such unions.

Penny wasn’t on speaking terms with her family. They hadn’t come to
our wedding, not that they would have, if invited. Penny had grown up in a
highly exclusive planned community upstate. The only people of color she
knew were her Filipino nanny, Esmeralda, and Mr. Bowman, the elderly
black man who handled the lawn care. When she dated a Muslim boy from
an equally successful family, her parents almost disowned her. She broke



off that relationship, which she would regret, but moved to the City as soon
as she finished high school. She was in college when I met her.

As for my failure to procure Nigel’s treatment, Penny didn’t want some
mad scientist fooling with her baby’s face anyway. She thought it best for
him to learn to love himself rather than slice and dice his little body in a
quest for acceptance. It was the only area of discourse where there was
daylight between us.

Nigel reentered and threw his hands up. “Ma,” he said, “I didn’t see it
anywhere.”

“Really,” she said, rummaging through her burlap purse on the hutch.
“Here it is. If my head wasn’t stapled to my shoulders…”

Penny and Nigel decked the table with pancakes, vegan bacon, and a
bowl of raspberries. We ate. The flavors wreathed my stomach in joy.

“Mm,” I said, drowning the last of my cake in maple syrup. “So good.
Who gets to eat like this on a Friday morning?”

Penny reached out to touch Nigel’s face.
“Ma!”
“You’ve got gunk in your eye.” Of course, I didn’t see any gunk. I saw

the thing on my son’s face.
It was very small at first, the spot. After Nigel was born, cleaned, and

placed in Penny’s arms, I had to count backward from ten three times
before I stopped shaking enough to actually see him. He was a gorgeous
ball of fat with a miniature version of my family nose and Penny’s pinkish
coloration, the shade a fingertip turns once released. I finally understood
why little old ladies, when pinching chubby toes in sequence, often spoke
of wanting to “eat the child right up!” Until that moment, the notion had
been a dark one, bringing to mind flashes of Goya’s Saturn Devouring His
Son.

There was a speck, like a fleck of oregano, on Nigel’s eyelid. He had
been baking in Penny’s oven nine full months, so it made sense that there
would be bits of gristle in hard-to-clean creases. I gently touched the spot
and realized it was part of him, a birthmark.

Nigel pulled the sunglasses from my nose. He gave me a queer glance,
then put the frames on his face. The birthmark flashed at me. It had



metamorphosed over the years. First, it had grown. By preschool, what had
been a dot had spread to the ridge of his eyebrow, and, eventually, down the
side of his face. Second, it changed shapes from a rough circle to a wedge
to a silhouette the shape of New Zealand or perhaps the Wu-Tang Clan
symbol turned on its head. Third, it darkened with him. Nigel’s general
shade stabilized to an olive tone so that he might be mistaken for a Venetian
boy who spent his summers cartwheeling across the Rialto Bridge, but the
birthmark colored from wheat to sienna to umber, the hard hue of my own
husk, as if a shard of myself were emerging from him. It was the reason I
encouraged Nigel’s love of baseball caps. Anything to keep the birthmark
from blackening.

I asked him where his hat was, the new neon-yellow one that I had gotten
him. It was a kind of anticamouflage, really, a target designed to draw the
viewer’s eye away from his beautiful but distorted face.

“Oh”—Nigel glanced at his book sack by the exit door—“I must have
left it in my room.”

“So today is the big day, huh?” Penny said.
Nigel nodded and grunted, knowing that talking with his mouth full was

verboten.
I wondered what they were talking about. My boy was involved, in

varying degrees, in so many school activities that one could easily lose
track: the visual arts society, soccer, the Big Fish lit mag, the keyboard
chamber orchestra, peer tutoring in math, speech and debate, the drama
club, and kiddie slam poetry every third Thursday. We kept a calendar on
the fridge, but the shorthand that Penny used was as indecipherable to me as
Chinese hanzi.

What big day was it? How did I get here? Why couldn’t I ever follow the
plot? I bet even that busybody down the street knew what big day it was. A
tiny me, feet propped up in the back-theater row of my mind, spilled his
popcorn and let loose a Bronx cheer.

“How do you feel about it?”
“Like I’m going to win, Ma.” Ah, Nigel’s class at the School Without

Walls—an offshoot of the Montessori tradition—was having a creativity
show-and-tell. Students were encouraged to “make the impossible



possible.” Favorites would be selected for display in the auditorium. Nigel’s
project had something to do with the magic of mirrors, but between
Elevation Night and working late all week, I wasn’t able to help out. Not
that this was any great loss to Nigel. Penny was the hands of the family. My
fumbling efforts at arts and crafts usually led to a frantic bandage search,
both for my damaged digits and for my ecchymotic ego.

Nigel skipped away from the table. Penny raised her hand to whack me
in the back of the head again but stopped and did that thing she did when
she wasn’t whacking me in the back of the head; she swept her hand
sideways like a blackjack dealer laying cards on a table. The lower edge of
her tattoo said hello to me from behind her blouse sleeve. I could only see
the bottom tendril of a vine that led up her forearm to a garden above her
elbow where a butterfly—a Leopard Lacewing, if that was the artist’s
intention—hovered over a white-haloed flower on her right shoulder blade.
She shoved the bowl of leftover raspberries away and held my chin between
thumb and forefinger.

“I know things have been crazy at work, but you worked like crazy to get
there. Maybe it’s over, but if there’s any chance of changing their minds,
you’re the only one who can do it.” She grabbed the scruff of my neck like
a lioness taking a cub between its teeth and pulled me closer. “I’m sorry I
thumped your noggin, baby.” Her breath smelled like citrus. Citrus and
embers.

“Who doesn’t love a good thumping?” I leaned in for the kill.
“Gross!” Nigel stepped back into the kitchen. He wore the neon-yellow

baseball cap. “Again with the kissy face.”
Penny and I straightened in our seats. She gave me a look that said,

Could you just try to keep it together for our son? I gave her an As you
wish.

“Tooth inspection,” I said.
Nigel groaned.
“You’ll understand when you’re older,” I said. “Cavities are the great

scourge of adulthood.”
Nigel carried a box-shaped arrangement of cardboard and plastic. He set

the box on the table and pointed at the plastic window on its side.



“You have to get really close and stare inside,” Nigel said. “Go on.”
I stared. A light snapped on. A diorama appeared. It was a simple

reconstruction of Nigel’s bedroom, the bed and dresser made of folded
jacks and queens—Nigel and I sometimes played euchre or Forty-fives—
and near the wall, to the right, was Nigel, or rather a cutout of a photo of
him with his arms thrown up victoriously.

I recalled that photo well. I had taken it on a Gulf Coast beach two
summers earlier. The scent of seawater assailed my memory, the murmur of
waves. A seagull wing whirled cryptically out of view. Nigel and I raced
from the car parked on the coastal highway. I gave him a head start, but
soon found that I couldn’t catch him. His long-toed feet beat against the
clay until he stopped at the water’s edge and a cloud of water surged around
his calves. He turned back to me with a smile so bright, I was shocked it
didn’t reduce me to ashes. Penny was just beyond the frame when I took the
picture. A moment later her arms were wrapped around him, and I took that
picture, too, of them so deliriously happy in the surf, but the shot came out
blurry.

I couldn’t help but notice how much he had grown in so short a time. He
had been shorter and rounder of face then. Plus, the birthmark had been
smaller.

Suddenly, mini-Nigel vanished, although the rest of the tiny room
remained exactly as it was. Where did it go? Despite myself, I gasped and
drew back.

Nigel and Penny watched me with complete satisfaction. Penny smacked
the table and guffawed, her somewhat wheezy laugh that jangled the keys to
my heart every time. They had gotten the response they wanted. Penny
kissed Nigel’s forehead.

“Pretty good, right?” Nigel blushed and adjusted my sunglasses on his
face.

I sputtered for a moment asking how, shaking my head. Nigel explained
about relative levels of light and the expectations of the person watching,
but I was distracted as Nigel brought his hand to the birthmark and lightly
scratched. Dermatologists assured us long ago that the mark was no danger
to him in any way and that it certainly wasn’t infectious or spreadable by



rough handling, but the cup clanging against the bars of my mind said that
scraping it might make it worse. It could inflame; it would spread to other
parts of his body. What if the dermatologists were wrong? My medical
malpractice cases had taught me that doctors are no better at predicting the
future than weathermen.

“Don’t do that.” I grabbed Nigel’s wrist, harder than I intended, and saw
framed in the oval lenses my own frantic, bloodshot eyes.
OceanofPDF.com



3

Firings at Seasons were low-key affairs, or so I’d heard. I’d never witnessed
one, and I certainly didn’t plan on witnessing my own. Yes, I had promised
Penny to make a run at saving my career, but the escalators changed my
mind. They were out again, which I took as an omen. How could I secure
my position if the skyscraper itself, all sixty-two stories of it, was against
me?

The Sky Tower, where Seasons’ offices nested, was a sprawling affair. A
rotating, highly illuminated steel sculpture fountain—it blinded you if you
looked at it the wrong way—sat in the center of the ground floor. Above,
the rippling, curvaceous terraces surrounding the atrium seemed to spawn
and respawn into infinity. But the diagonal distance from the concourse to
the lobby—where a trio of middle-aged black female security guards
chatted like a Greek chorus—was only about three stories via a series of M.
C. Escher–like mechanical stairs, all frozen now.

By the time I made it to the main elevator bank, I was clammy and
winded. Deflated, I understood that talking my way back into the firm was a
fantasy in the same way that I thought my voice sounded great, even
angelic, in the shower. Occasionally, I went so far as to record myself. On
playback, amid the pinging current of water and our crusty, clanging pipes,
I heard my voice. What a whiny, keening instrument fate had saddled me
with.

No. I needed to slip into my office, grab my things, and slink out
unnoticed. I’d tell Penny I gave it my all. As for Nigel’s procedure, there
were no better-paying jobs in the City, but I’d simply have to find another
way.



Getting in and out of the office unnoticed wouldn’t be difficult. In a firm
of more than five hundred employees, you could do almost anything
without causing a stir. Last year one of the transactions shareholders had
died cradling a telephone. No one noticed until Accounting came by to
check his invoices. When they touched his shoulder, his body exhaled.

Behind me, an elevator arrived. I climbed into the vertical coffin, careful
to avoid making eye contact on the way up. My fellow passengers stared at
their devices.

The firm’s receptionist didn’t give me a second look when I padded into
the vestibule.

Something crinkled in my breast pocket. I pulled out a folded receipt.
Penny had written on the back of it, “Nihil taurus crappus.” Penny never
cursed in real life, but her cornydog Latin had been drawing a smile from
me since the day we met. My best friend.

Etherine passed me in the hall, carrying a tray of utensils and saucers.
She wore her everyday uniform, a gray housekeeper’s dress. I told her good
morning. She harrumphed and kept walking. Nothing unusual there.

I went to the kitchen. Coffee and a few minutes of quiet would calm my
nerves. I opened the door and stopped midstep. People were in the room. I
leaned backward, hoping to leave without being noticed, but I knew the
door would squeal like a pig the second I moved. So I froze in place, with
half my body in the kitchen and the other in the hall. My brogue hovered
above the threshold.

Dinah Viet Dinh stood by the sink, dumping out her thermos. “God.” She
removed her horn-rimmed glasses and stuck out her tongue. “It tastes like
liquid butt.”

“Speaking of which”—Paul Pavor leaned against the refrigerator, running
a hand through his blond hair—“I wouldn’t be surprised if they cut all three
of those boys loose.”

“From last night, you mean?” Dinah asked.
“I would be surprised,” Quentin Callower said. “I gather the major

shareholders were rather impressed with those dehumanizing displays.” He
hunched over his herbal tea, his bald spot showing.



“Look, Riley’s prison rags had me rolling on the floor. I mean, I like a
little fun as much as the next man,” Pavor said, winking at Dinah, who
rolled her eyes. “But the last thing we need to do is keep dead weight for
the sake of meeting some quota. Someone better missed out on a shot at
working here because those clowns were in the way.”

Dinah opened her mouth to speak, but shook her head and inhaled.
We had all gone to law school together and were hired as part of the same

class, although Callower was older than the rest of us. Pavor was from
upstate; tall and blond, he left a failed acting career in his past. Today he
looked like someone who might play a lawyer in a twentieth-century soap
opera about attorneys and their convoluted love lives. He was biding his
time until his parents believed he was responsible enough to take over the
family marijuana empire back home.

Callower was the great-grandson of a former mayor of the City, a staunch
segregationist who left town during one of the waves of white flight. His
family lived in the suburbs, and the rumor was that they had disowned him
for living in the city limits.

Dinah and I went back to grade school. We played strings in a youth
orchestra together along with Riley, who was the pianist.

Dinah was born in Vietnam, but her mother got an engineering job at a
solar company and moved the family over. Dinah used to say her parents
never wanted to come to America because white people would expect them
to assimilate. She took to the City quickly, even telling everyone to call her
Dinah instead of her birth name, a fact she hid from her parents. But she
was only doing what the other Vietnamese kids did. The members of the
Vietnamese community in the City were known for fitting in and sacrificing
for one another. The other Vietnamese kids I went to school with got mad
when I asked them to teach me Vietnamese phrases or to tell me about
Vietnamese culture. They didn’t even live together in clusters like most of
the black folk. They were spread out, almost like they were trying to hide in
plain sight.

Dinah, Callower, and Pavor had all been promoted months ago. They
worked upstairs and only came down to fifty-nine because that’s where the
best espresso machine was and to cat-and-mouse the rank and file.



It was tradition for new shareholders to give the subordinate lawyers
ludicrous assignments that seemed more or less legit. Dinah had gotten me
good. She asked me to run a legal analysis of porn shops under the City
code. The firm served every vice company you could think of—bars,
tobacco distributors, massage parlors—so it wasn’t an off-the-wall ask.
When I brought the memo to her, she sat me down and held a straight face
for all of five seconds before losing it and almost falling off her chair,
laughing.

“I think this new executive assistant”—Dinah was still working her
mouth as if to roll the taste out—“I think this new executive assistant is
really trying to poison me.” She said “executive assistant” with air quotes.
She wasn’t big on political correctness. She had run through four secretaries
the prior year.

“It’s not like you don’t have it coming,” Pavor said.
“It’s not like you don’t have a drone strike coming to your condo,” Dinah

said.
“It’s too early for violence.” Callower held his face in his hands. “And

talking. Everyone should just be quiet for once, for me.”
Pavor and Callower had been at Octavia’s last night. They had been

trading shots of Jägermeister in a side parlor last I saw them. Was that
confetti in Callower’s hair?

Pavor pinched Callower’s cheek. “Aw, sugar plum’s got a sore noggin?”
Callower pushed Pavor’s hand away.

That was when Dinah noticed me. Pavor turned my way. Callower didn’t.
I shrank back, not wanting to give away how vulnerable I felt, but that

was a giveaway in and of itself.
Dinah walked toward me, her silver stilettos sparkling.
“Hey, buddy.” Pavor saluted me with his cup of vodka.
“What the fuck are you wearing?” Dinah pointed at me.
My stomach turned. I sported a three-piece rose-tinged seersucker with

saddle shoes and a favorite fedora. They all had on seersucker suits, too—
Dinah’s was a skirt ensemble with those extra-high heels she favored.
Seersuckers were the firm uniform, of sorts. I never wore them—striped
linen doesn’t go that well with brown skin—but this morning I had figured,



what the hell? I donned it out of protest. A sign that I could have been one
of the club if they hadn’t pulled the treehouse ladder out of reach.

“That was one hell of a performance you put on last night.” Pavor
crouched and threw his elbows out. “You were like a dancing ninja.” He
wiggled in place.

“The funky chicken on LSD,” Callower said.
“Today’s the day,” Dinah said.
“Yeah,” I said.
Her eyes widened. “You don’t think you made it,” she said. “Hey, he

thinks he’s been pushed out.”
“Really?” Pavor said with too much perk in his voice.
“Have you heard different?” I said.
Dinah said nothing. Callower furrowed his face. Pavor sipped vodka.
Etherine entered the kitchen, laid her serving tray on the counter, and

wiped her hands on her apron. What kind of black person came to work
dressed like Mammy in Gone with the Wind? Etherine did, that’s who.

—

One night, years earlier, I was at the firm late. Some clients from out west
were in town, and the shareholders were having a big to-do for them in the
conference center. Walking by the prep area, I saw Etherine putting away
flatware.

She glanced over at me. “Why you shaking your head?” she asked.
I was startled because I hadn’t realized I was doing it. “It was nothing.”
“You think I don’t know you look down on me just like them people?”
“I’m just trying to go home.”
“I know you,” she said. “You think you so fancy with your degrees and

everything.”
“I just don’t know how you can dress like we’re in the antebellum

South.”
“You think we ain’t?” she said. “I got two daughters in college and a

house that’ll be mine after I pay out the mortgage. That’s how I do it.” She



shook her head. “You wearing that fine suit now, but give it some time.
They’ll have you in a butler getup before too long. That’s when you’ll see.”

—

“Did you set up the big room?” Dinah asked Etherine.
“I did, Ms. Dinah,” she said.
I was struck by two feelings at that moment. One was that once I left the

building, I’d never see any of these people again. The other was, thank
goodness that once I left the building, I’d never see any of these people
again.

I went to my office. I couldn’t believe that I’d put so much of myself into
Seasons. Eight years—and for what? So they could raise Riley and Franklin
up and shove me out? I was a better lawyer than either of them or Dinah
and the others. I won hearings. I settled cases. I made Seasons look good.
And why should I work at a place that made Etherine walk around looking
like the resurrection of Hattie McDaniel? I shouldn’t. Seasons was just a
den of thieves. It had stolen the best years of my life, my vigor, my self-
esteem. I would leave and never look back. But first I’d leave a parting gift.

I went to the supply room. I scanned the shelves. I saw what I needed: a
green spray can.

Malveaux was more a trophy case than a conference room. It was named
after one of the long-dead early shareholders. Plaques covered almost every
inch of wall space: plaques for donating legal services to the homeless, for
representing death row inmates, for sponsoring Little League games, for
every good deed imaginable. I thought the firm protested too much. There
was a blank wall at the far end of the room. My perfect canvas.

Frosted glass separated Malveaux from the rest of the firm. I turned off
the lights and lowered the blinds. My heart hammered.

But what should I write? For some reason, Sir, my dad, came to mind,
sitting in his lonely prison cell, but I pushed him out of the way. I ran
through a raft of possible messages and rejected them all: Give me liberty or
give me death. (Too patriotic.) In the hands of the Almighty. (Too religious.)
Freedom suit! (I wasn’t even sure what that meant.)



I thought about drawing a scene, like when Huckleberry Finn meets
Nigger Jim. (Too unrelated, and I couldn’t draw.) A yin-yang symbol. (Too
abstract.)

Maybe a simple word would do. Love. (Hell no.) I dropped the can. Fuck.
Yes, that old stand-by. Fuck. No. Too generic. Anybody might write that—

Etherine shuffled by on the other side of the frosted glass but didn’t seem
to notice me. I could just make out the silhouette of her dark head floating
above the frilly lace collar she wore.

Suddenly, one word screamed to the front of my mind. I raised the spray
can.

Someone cleared their throat behind me. “What are you doing?” Dinah
asked.

“I—I was just…” I lowered my arm.
Dinah sat on the edge of the conference table. “I mean, word travels fast,

but you’re celebrating already?”
“What?”
“The shareholders were just saying nice things about you.” She told me

the executive committee had met up on the top floor, sixty-two. “They
picked you.”

“You mean I’m not fired?”
“No.”
A heat rose in my body. I had been so afraid. I wanted to breakdance at

the news. Instead, I pumped my fist. “Wait, you’re on the EC?”
“As of today.” She placed a golden doubloon in my hand.
It had the firm’s name on one side and the logo, a crescent that looked

like a frown, on the other. “What’s this?”
“It’s yours,” Dinah said. “You’re the new diversity chair.”
I laughed. “That’s impossible. The committee is all white.”
You had to be a senior shareholder to be on the committee, but there were

no senior minority shareholders in the firm. Ergo, the committee was all
white. The exclusion of the firm’s minority members from the diversity
committee wasn’t racist. It was simply a matter of protocol. Franklin used



to say the committee was a regular rainbow coalition that anyone could
serve on provided they were ivory, eggshell, or pink.

Then it struck me. Not only was I on the committee, but I was the head.
That could only mean—

“So I’m a shareholder,” I said. The house, the cars, Nigel’s face.
Everything would be saved.

“Um. Not exactly. You need to talk to Octavia.” Dinah walked toward the
elevators.

I dodged the mail girl pushing a cart full of folders, one for each attorney,
and held Dinah’s shoulder. “Why, what’s going on?”

“You wouldn’t believe me if I told you I didn’t know, would you?”
“No,” I said.
Dinah was Octavia’s right-hand glove. Anything Octavia touched, Dinah

did, too.
“I know what you know,” Dinah said. “She’s supposed to fill me in at the

plantation.”
The plantation? Since when did the firm have a plantation?
Dinah stepped into the elevator. My device rang. Nigel’s school. I

couldn’t get into the box without losing the signal.
“Wait,” I said. “Tell me more.”
Dinah pointed at her fingers. She was going to get a manicure. She

waved, and the elevator doors closed.
Octavia pinged my device. She wanted to immediately meet in her office

to discuss my position in the firm. My heart fluttered. Finally, I would find
out what was really going on. I turned down the hallway toward Octavia’s.

But my device rang. The connection was fuzzy, although the voice on the
phone was familiar. Mrs. Beardsley, a dean at the School Without Walls,
said Nigel had had an incident.

“Is my son okay?” I asked.
“More or less,” the voice said.
“What kind of answer—is he bleeding? Is he unconscious? Has an

ambulance been called?”
My device pinged again—question marks from Octavia.



I returned to the reception area. I couldn’t just blow off my boss. Perhaps
I could just talk to Octavia for a minute. But Nigel.

“Your son is physically okay, but he’s asked for his mother,” Mrs.
Beardsley said. A pause. “And for you.”

I jabbed the elevator button, which lit up and went dark every time I
touched it. Such unreliable machines. The stairwell was a few feet away. I
took it.
OceanofPDF.com



4

I probably shouldn’t have left the Bug sputtering smoke in the front yard of
Nigel’s school, the School Without Walls. Dashing, I left the driver’s door
ajar, the bumper kissing a fire hydrant, the windshield wipers squeaking
against dry glass. The School Without Walls was a compact compound of
buildings made of simulated logs in a miniature wood. Largest of the
buildings was the Central Hall, situated on the left edge of the property.

It had been the site of the first Negro school in the City and later, during
the Jazz Age, home to several speakeasies. Once the old structures were
razed, the City planted trees, which over decades sprouted toward heaven,
muffling the moans of displaced ghost clarinetists. Even though the area
looked like something out of a Harriet Beecher Stowe novel, the City
skyscrapers played peekaboo just above the crenulated treetops. The Sky
Tower, tallest obelisk in the state, was clearly visible, as it was from nearly
anywhere in the City.

I should have centered myself. I should have taken a few deep breaths of
evergreen oxygen. Instead, I took Central Hall’s stone steps two at a time. I
scared some students hanging out there. Or I would have scared them if I
hadn’t run into the locked main door and bounced off like a pebble. The
students’ laughter fell around me. My fedora tumbled across the landing.

“The other door open,” a girl in a purple fur-collared coat and plaid skirt
said. She had innumerable knots of twisted hair—some in red or green
ribbons—and was darker-skinned than me, darker even than Franklin, blue-
black, the dark of a shadow in a cave. She grabbed my hat and twirled it on
her index finger. I reached, but she swiped it out of reach, a pocket-size
matador. They didn’t exactly teach respect for elders at the School Without
Walls. I snorted at the girl.



“What’s your hurry, mister?” she said.
“It’s kind of an emergency,” I said.
“What’s with the hat?” She bent the brim back.
“What’s with the coat?”
“It’s cold,” she said.
I didn’t have time to jaw with some brat. The call from Mrs. Beardsley (a

call while flying across town confirmed that it was her), dean of student
growth, had been stymied by bad reception. Sunspots. Then in the car,
reception was worse than in the Sky Tower. Our conversation was a jumble
of gerunds and inquisitives, a discourse in Cubist style. Locking what?
You’re telling me—telling me he’s all right, right? Okay, don’t go calling his
mother—his mother—okay?

Nigel had been doing well that year. No random shouting. No throwing
of history books. No flameouts in the boys’ lavatory. His grades were good.
He seemed to like his teachers. Why would he have barricaded himself in a
utility closet?

A wailing, then a fire truck—the station was only two blocks away—
trundled up the narrow clay driveway. No doubt called by the school to deal
with my son.

I ran inside and swam through an eddy of children on my way down the
interior stairs. It wasn’t one of those schools where the kids wore uniforms.
This let the kids conform to mass media culture by wearing gaudy, real-fur
coats, often dyed an eye-torturing violet, the uniform of that annoying pop
princess whose face popped up in every ad on every device I owned. Of
course, the School Without Walls was so permissive that no one objected to
all the mama rabbits and baby foxes that died to make the coats. Banning
any fashion would have been considered fascist by the parents on the board.

I had wanted to send Nigel to a more mainstream school, one that
required khaki uniforms and distributed little folders with crests on them,
somewhere he could socialize with the children of the shareholders I
worked with at Seasons. But the private schools only had so many slots for
kids whose parents weren’t alumni and megadonors and connected enough
to know how to navigate the arcane application process. My top choice for
Nigel, the Morrison School, hadn’t admitted a child of color in over a



decade. Ultimately, Penny’s argument won out. If I was so worried about
Nigel’s face, why not send him to a school where appearances didn’t
matter? But appearances always mattered. He was one of perhaps six
students of color in a body of several hundred, and he reported bullying at
the School Without Walls, just like at his previous learning institutions. At
least the School Without Walls had an on-call therapist to help him with his
anxiety.

I made the first floor. Mr. Gonzales’s art class, the same room as at the
last open house. Some kids gathered around the classroom door.

Mrs. Beardsley, in dark trim slacks and a button-down shirt, threw her
arms out. “Clear this area, children.” She shooed the kids, and they fluttered
away like pigeons. As soon as she turned her attention to me, a round-faced
but otherwise nondescript girl pecked closer again. Beardsley escorted me
into the room.

Penny was kneeling at the closet door, her ear pressed to the wood. She
stroked hair away from her ear and rose when she saw me. We hugged. She
had somehow made it across the entire city, a ten-mile swing from Personal
Hill Hospital, where she worked as a social worker, in the time it had taken
me to make the relatively short drive from the Sky Tower downtown.
Beardsley must have called her first and well before me. Penny’s forehead
was pink with worry, a condition that yanked my strings out of tune.

Mr. Gonzales stood near the chalkboard, a sweater tied around his neck.
He ran fingers over his knuckles and wouldn’t look at me.

“He’s in there?” I said.
“Nigel won’t tell me why he went in,” Penny said.
A white smudge trailed from the center of the classroom several yards

toward the closet door. The mysterious substance, which had a yogurt-like
consistency when I nudged it with my brogue, led under the closet
threshold.

“The class was in a free-painting session,” Mr. Gonzales said. “There
was a commotion, and he ran inside. I simply don’t know what started it.
The drama helper ran to call the fire department. He’s very swift.”

The door was decorated with cutouts of a pocket watch, a cuckoo clock, a
sundial. Nigel was behind that barrier. He could be bleeding, or



unconscious, or eaten by rats. All I wanted was to go to the far side of the
room and launch my body against the door. Whether I killed myself in the
process wasn’t important. I needed him out of there.

“Hey,” Penny said. She squeezed my hand. “You with me?”
I glanced back at the door and bit my tongue.
“He’ll be all right,” Penny said.
We went to the door.
Penny leaned on it. “Baby?” she said. “It’s Mommy.”
Nigel’s voice, a sob from the other side.
“Nigel boy?” I yelled.
He called for me.
I grabbed the knob with both hands, a transparent crystal bulb, a dollop

of frozen light. The beveled edges grated my skin. I pulled. The knob
twisted free from the door. Now the door couldn’t be opened from the
outside.

I stared at Penny, horrified. She pressed her hands to the door. “You can
come out now,” she said. “We’re here to bring you home.”

“Open the door, kid,” I said.
Penny gave me a look. Teachers and children watched us from the

doorway to the hall.
“I’m sorry,” Nigel said, his voice muffled.
“That’s okay,” Penny said. “Just let us in.” She lightly drummed an

offbeat rhythm on the door.
Nigel matched it. The door clicked but didn’t open. He couldn’t get out.

“It’s locked,” he said.
“In times like these,” Mrs. Beardsley said, “it’s important to remember

the school’s philosophy of nonconfrontational optimism. We’ll sort this out.
The firepersons are just outside.”

Yes. The firepersons were outside. All that malarkey about them being
heroes—pshaw. Hype! Probably polishing their helmets and checking the
certifications on their ax handles. Regulations. Procedures. Whatever they
were supposed to be doing, they weren’t in the room rescuing my son.



I scanned the area for something to batter the door open with. The chairs
and easels were too lightweight. Mr. Gonzales’s desk was too heavyweight.
Mr. Gonzales himself? Right weight. Battering ram. Could I, in my
adrenalized state, toss a 180-pound Latino man through the door? Yes! Wait.
No.

I went to the hallway, shaking my head. Students crowded me, some
slurping ice cream cones as they enjoyed the spectacle of me. I barked, but
they kept slurping. That was it. Ice cream. Whipped cream. Foam. Fire
extinguisher. Super genius me, I patted one of the kids, a tall boy with a
mop of tawny hair, on the head and found a fire extinguisher in the hallway.
It was heavy, solid as an anvil. A twinge buzzed in my lower back, but it
was a muted pain, easily ignored.

“Wait,” Penny said.
I told Nigel to get away from the door and cover his eyes. I rammed the

butt of the canister into the knob apparatus. Nothing. Again, harder this
time. The door cracked. Once more with feeling! Fell through the doorway,
end over end, onto my face.

Nigel was not there. It should have been dark in that closet, but daylight
from the hallway washed in through an open-air grate in the wall. I crawled
through it.

Penny was on her knees hugging Nigel. My Nigel. He must have crawled
out through the grate before I broke in. A white smear had splattered half
his face.

“I’m sorry,” he said. “I’m so sorry, I didn’t mean to.”
“Are you okay?” Penny asked.
“I’m okay,” Nigel said.
By this point, I was on my knees, too, the three of us roped together by

our arms. Something struck me as odd. I reared back, rubbing my thumb
along his cheek. That white obscured most of Nigel’s birthmark. So help
me, he looked like a normal child.

“Is this paint?” Penny licked her fingers and scrubbed Nigel’s cheek.
“No. Skin cream.” The girl in the fur coat stood next to Penny. “Nige was

putting it on, and someone called him a beauty queen.” The girl produced a



plastic container of face gunk, gunk that I was very familiar with, and gave
it to Penny.

“Who called him a beauty queen?” I asked.
“I did.” The girl in the fur coat shrugged.
“Madam C.J.’s Lightening Formula?” Penny asked.
I shook my head, but Nigel didn’t notice.
“Dad gave it to me,” Nigel said.
“You gave our son skin bleach?” Penny said. “Tell me you didn’t give

our son this shit.” Penny, like most people, had different levels of anger.
Cursing in front of our son meant that she was near the max level. The only
higher level was the one where she separated my head from my body before
driving a stake through my heart with her bare hands. “What’s wrong with
you?”

Of course, it shouldn’t have been that big a deal. Skin toning cream has
been around for millennia. It was the secret weapon of Egyptian pharaohs,
Indian hijras, and legions of heads of state who had been unfortunately born
a few shades too dark. People everywhere used it for their beautification
needs, but I knew well enough that Penny wouldn’t appreciate me giving it
to Nigel to reduce the appearance of his birthmark. That’s why it was our
little secret. Or had been.

On the outside landing, Penny ran her hands through her hair and tugged
hard, a nervous tic.

“What are those firemen doing to Dad’s car?” Nigel asked.
“What?” Penny asked. She ran down the steps. “Guys, don’t do that.”
Smoke streamed from the back of my Bug, that muffler I needed to

replace. A fireman unleashed a torrent of water into the interior. Another
fireman raised his ax above the back window.

I noticed that Penny’s rubbing had removed some of the cream from
Nigel’s face, revealing a dime-size view of his stain. I opened the container,
which Penny had dropped on the landing, and worked a fresh glob of the
cream onto the birthmark.

“I love you,” I said.
“I know, Dad.”



OceanofPDF.com



5

I needed to connect with Octavia, who was probably not pleased that I had
ignored her request to meet. With the antic activities at Nigel’s school, I
forgot to at least tell Octavia why I didn’t show up. Having ghosted her for
nearly eighteen hours, I figured messaging her would be less effective than
meeting in person, which meant driving to a restored plantation one
hundred miles out of the City. The firm retreat, Seasons’s annual orgy,
where sex was replaced by talk of market trends, potential clients, and how
to best take over the world, would begin in a few hours. There would be
much maniacal laughter and twirling of mustaches. And while associates
like myself were encouraged to go, the shareholders liked it just as well if
we stayed back in the office and churned billable hours for them.

Maybe it would have been better to wait until Monday. After all, I hadn’t
been canned, and Octavia would be back in the office by then. Yet I also
hadn’t been promoted or gotten my balloon bonus, pending for 96,342
hours, not that I was counting. No bonus meant no procedure for Nigel’s
face, a situation I could not abide.

I was loading my overnight bag into the hood trunk when Penny
sauntered up—no woman anywhere sauntered like my Penny—carrying a
floral-print duffel decorated with Hibiscus mutabilis.

“You’re coming?” I asked.
“On one condition.” She dropped her bag. “Two conditions, actually.”
“Shoot.”
“Apologize for hiding that cream from me, and promise you’ll never

have our son use that crap again.”
My cheeks flushed. I was more embarrassed, I realized, that I’d been

caught than that I’d given Nigel the cream behind her back. But a part of



me wanted to make the promise, to give in to the possibility that maybe
Penny was right. She always thought I was overcompensating in my
attempts to protect Nigel. She seemed to think I saw monsters everywhere I
looked, which was correct, of course.

“That’s a nice offer,” I said, “but I got this. I’ll just go, handle my
business, and come home.”

“Dammit. Don’t be an idiot. Can’t you see I’m worried about you?”
“I’m all good.”
Penny grabbed my face. I tried to look away, but she wouldn’t let me.

“Are you really? All good? I need you to be better for your son. I need you
to love this family and love yourself.”

I knew what she meant. We got along pretty well most of the time, the
three of us. But most of the emotionally violent arguments Penny and I had
pertained to Nigel and how to best help him. Like what had happened at the
school the day before. As usual, Penny was reacting to something I said or
did that caused Nigel’s anxiety to manifest. If I hadn’t pushed the cream on
him, he wouldn’t have wound up cowering in a closet. I needed to say less
and do less. My family could be happy. We could be grinning fools.

“I’m going with you,” Penny said. “That’s all there is to it.” She raised an
eyebrow, and those eyes, those sea-green peepers, washed away my
remaining resolve.

“Fine,” I said. “And I’m sorry.”
“For what?” She crossed her arms.
“For hiding the gunk from you.”
“And?”
“And I won’t let him use it again.” I sighed and put her duffel in the

trunk next to my battered canvas valise.
“Now, give me your palm.”
I extended my hand. Penny took out a blue permanent marker and drew a

misshapen circle. She often did this when we first met. She had a
philosophy about focusing on the basics, the people in our orbit who
mattered, the actions that supported instead of harmed. She chose a circle as



a symbol of inclusion, but also because it was impossible to hand-draw one
perfectly. Perfection was the enemy.

Suddenly, I felt ashamed for hiding anything from her. It felt good to be
forgiven. “Shouldn’t you be at work?”

“I called in,” she said.
“What about kiddo?”
“We can leave him with your mother. They don’t spend enough time

together.”
Leaving Nigel with Mama meant he would spend the weekend in the

yard behind her restaurant in the deceptively hyperborean sun, drying up
and darkening like a raisin, my warnings that she was setting her grandson
up for lethal melanomas notwithstanding. Not to mention all the
propaganda she would cram into his head. Black empowerment. Racial
righteousness. Resistance. The woman fed filthy protesters for free.

“Let’s make a family outing of it,” I said. “Bring him along.”
Once I covered the Bug’s waterlogged seats with plastic, we hit the

highway.
“Look at this, Dad,” Nigel said. “It’s like a sponge.”
I glanced over my shoulder. Nigel was pressing his outstretched fingers

into the seat cushion. Water bubbled through a hole in the plastic.
“Don’t do that, son,” I said. “Why don’t you sketch for a while?”
“I don’t want to sketch now.” Viewing him through the rearview mirror,

the shadows of trees flowed over his face. “It smells like dog back here.”
“Just occupy yourself, kid.”
“And put on your seatbelt,” Penny said. “We should’ve taken the van.”
“Wouldn’t have made it.” We prided ourselves on not having car notes.

My car was an unfortunate bit of forced inheritance, given to me as my
father had no use for transportation. He was an indentured servant—had
actually cut organically grown sugarcane—in the fields not very far from
the plantation we were headed to. As for Penny’s ride, we’d paid that off
years earlier. The minivan was safe for her commutes around town, but it
shook with righteous indignation at being forced to travel at highway
speeds. My Bug, although an antique, was a solid bet on long trips. I drove



it to hearings in small-town courts all over the state without incident. I was
sure the car would cruise the highways and byways of my nation long after
I, and everyone I loved, went dust to dust.

When we hit the northbound interstate, I put on Pet Sounds. Penny turned
to me from the passenger seat. I didn’t look, but I could tell she was
studying my face as if to say, I can’t believe you still listen to that crusty old
white boy music. My grandparents didn’t even like the Beach Boys. You
must be the whitest black man on earth. I thought it would just be a phase.

“It is,” I said, forgetting the nonverbal aspect of our chat. “A very long
phase.”

“What?” she asked.
“Nothing,” I said and wobbled into the second verse of “God Only

Knows,” but Carl Wilson’s tenor was far too high for me to glide with for
long, especially with other people’s ears at stake. After the bridge, Penny’s
voice came in as clean and clear as the original. Nigel leaned forward from
the rear, gripping Penny’s seatback for stability. By the swirling, three-part
finale, we were all singing together.

Penny and I both looked back at our son for an extended beat. Nigel
smiled at us. He was missing a canine tooth then.

“Put on your seatbelt,” we said in unison.
“Okay, okay,” he said. “Jeez.”
We exited the highway and dashed into molehill country. Somehow Nigel

convinced us to take the scenic route for the last leg. Country towns in the
South gave me the jimjams. I worried about every police station, every
church I saw. I wondered what evils were done in the name of separating
the whites and coloreds, as if people were nothing more than dirty laundry.
We passed brick-faced homes that sat far back from the road like they were
waiting to pounce. Some had little American flags on their rickety
mailboxes. Scarecrows. Spinning windmills. It must have been anxiety-
inducing to travel those roads many decades earlier, say, in the time of my
father’s father or even earlier yet—like in the 1950s.

What would the people in those houses think of a well-dressed Negro, a
redheaded beauty, and an olive-skinned boy puttering by in a spotless
German car? Would a patrolman pull us over? Would Penny have to explain



that I was her chauffeur? Would the cop knock out a headlight and write us
a ticket? Or would he bring us to an abandoned schoolhouse for
reeducation?

Still, there was something about that shadowless afternoon, wheeling the
freeway with my family. I wasn’t particularly religious, but I noted brief
sequences in my life where the invisible medium—air, mist, water, I could
never say what the medium most resembled—seemed to drain away. In
those moments, there was nothing at all between me and them, the two
souls I cared most about in all the unknowable universe. Those were the
times when I believed that there was a plan, although I wasn’t privy to the
details, and that it was a just and good plan designed to benefit Nigel,
Penny, and perhaps even me. Those slim fissures in my logic never lasted
long enough.
OceanofPDF.com



6

I’d never been to Shanksted Plantation. Actually, I’d never been to any
plantation. I actively resisted it. Every time someone tried to lure me to
Harper’s Alley or Carriageway for a day trip, I begged off. I’d lived in the
City my whole life and swore that I would drink a cup of bubbling battery
acid before I dipped my ladle in the polluted cultural springs of the
hinterlands. In my thinking, the entire South beyond my hometown was just
one sprawling countryside of ectoplasmic Colonel Sanderses on horseback
chasing runaway spirits until the Rapture. Hardly my idea of a refreshing
getaway.

Of course, I knew the basics from movies, books, and Joey Watson’s
fifth-grade Gone with the Wind poster board, which I poured chocolate
syrup all over before the start of class. (Joey still won best presentation. He
hung a Mammy/golliwog/gorgon from the board. How could he not win?)
However, none of my vicarious experiences prepped me for being on
plantation soil. I’d never done a double-take at a gleaming white chateau
with shadowy, Dracula-teeth columns. I’d never ridden up a rustic
promenade, across the same twigs and pebbles over which somebody’s
barefoot mom once hauled kindling. I’d never wondered if it was better for
a pregnant woman to die from strangulation or a broken neck.

“What are those?” Nigel asked.
Penny squinted, her mouth agape. At first, I thought the wavering

golden-brown shapes dangling from the branches were Spanish moss, but
I’d heard that all the moss was eaten by pests years ago. The shapes were
fabric, perhaps a tip of the hat to what the plantation had lost. Strange fruit
indeed. Good Lord. The Shanksted trees were positively crawling with
banshees.



“They look like strung-up people,” Nigel said.
“God,” Penny said. “I hate this place so much.”
I steered us toward a clearing in the distance. The mansion was only a

front. Behind it, in the forest, was a complex of hotel buildings all done in
an antebellum theme. The Big House, a building with covered galleries on
each of its four floors, was where check-in awaited our arrival.

“I don’t know how this happened, sir,” the lanky brunette at the front
desk said. “Your name is here, but somehow we don’t have a room for
you.”

“We’ll take whatever you give us,” I said.
After a conversation with her supervisor, the lanky clerk returned from

the hidden room behind the desk and said, “We’ve found a solution for you,
sir.” She gave me a key card and beneficently pointed us to the narrow
staircase at the back of the lobby.

Upstairs, we found our accommodations, a megaroom called the Planters
Suite. The bellboy, a little guy who could have been an older cousin,
brought our bags up. He could have been a cousin except for the work he’d
had done to his face. His lips had been deplumped so that he seemed to
grimace in pain as he pointed out the myriad gracious features of our
quarters, the hot tub, the balconies overlooking the whole property, a basket
full of complimentary chocolates—dark, milk, and premium white.

At the door, as I counted off his tip, the bellboy gave Nigel a strange
look. In such situations, I had to figure out what the person found
unsettling: Nigel’s face, my marital relationship, or the offspring of our
union. These shadows followed us wherever we went. Sometimes I felt like
we all had birthmarks.

The bellboy shook his head. I realized from the way his eyes swept over
each of us that it was likely a combination of all three reasons. Penny didn’t
notice. She was opening the curtains to let some daylight in. Nigel furrowed
his brow. I sent him to his room. I was no stranger to such audacity.

Mixed-race couples were rare these days, having reached a climax during
Sir’s youth, before the authorities overreacted to a protest by a black
nationalist organization. As for the porter’s distraction by Nigel’s
birthmark, that was just one more reason Nigel needed the procedure.



I pinned the money to the bellboy’s chest with my fingers. “That’s
enough,” I said. He took the money and left.

I went to Nigel’s room, one of three bedrooms other than the master suite
allotted to Penny and myself. The balcony doors were open, and a brisk
wind swooped in. Nigel sat on his bed, flipping through a book of colorful
sea creatures. He wasn’t looking at the pictures, just turning the pages
absentmindedly. Nigel loved real books made of real paper. Bless him, the
little weirdo. But occasionally he stroked the page as if trying to switch
over to the next screen.

“This place is cool,” he said.
“It is, isn’t it?” I said.
Nigel glanced at me, then averted his eyes back to the book. I closed it.

He lowered his chin.
“That man,” Nigel said. “I don’t like being looked at that way.”
“Some people lack all refinement,” I said.
“Would you speak English?” Nigel sat up. “It’s like he thought I was an

alien or something.”
“Hey.” I grabbed Nigel’s chin and considered what Penny would say if

she were in my position. “None of this is your fault,” I said. “Don’t let
anyone else’s opinion cross you up. You’re exactly the way you were meant
to be.”

“You sound like Mom.”
Such a smart boy. “She knows what she’s talking about.” I wanted to tell

Nigel about temporary injustice and how everyone had to persist in difficult
situations until things cleared up, but the strings in my chest were too tight.
Words were only words after all. “You— Do you want a chocolate?”

He nodded.
I made a wrapped square of milk chocolate appear then disappear, using

sleight-of-hand Sir taught me when I was around Nigel’s age.
“You’re going to show me how to do that,” Nigel said.
I reproduced the chocolate between my thumb and forefinger. “Maybe

when you’re ready.” I dropped the chocolate into his palm.
“I’m ready.” He unwrapped the package and ate.



“Not quite.”
Nigel groaned.
“Do you have your comics?” I asked.
He gave a thumbs-up. I switched on the light because he’d read in the

dimness if I didn’t.
“Look, Dad.” Nigel took a jar of Madame C.J.’s cream from his book

sack. “I remembered the cream!”
I glanced over my shoulder to make sure Penny wasn’t around and placed

a finger over my lips. I’d forgotten that I’d stocked Nigel up with several
jars of the stuff weeks earlier. Based on my promise to Penny, I should have
taken the jar away and explained that he no longer needed it. But the
bellboy’s gawking reminded me of reality. The cream was for Nigel’s own
good. “But remember,” I said, “between us.” I kissed him on the forehead
and went to the door. “Be sure to wear your big hat when we go out. It’s
getting sunny.”

Then I closed his door. In the hallway, between his room and the master
suite, I pulled a Plum from my shirt pocket. The pill slipped through my
fingers and bounced across the carpet. I picked it up and, without checking
it for debris, popped it into my mouth. My esophagus lit up as that little
elevator descended into my basement.

Penny lay on our bed, a four-poster canopied special, like something out
of Lady Chatterley.

“Everything all right?” she asked.
“Hakuna matata.” I locked our double doors and turned on the stereo.

There’s a point where you’ve been married long enough that you can pluck
hidden meanings from the ether. In the middle of our ongoing fight over
Nigel’s skin cream and how best to handle his adjustment problems, Penny
had chosen to join me on this expedition into the heart of darkness. During
meaner times, she would have let me drive off without a word. Her singing
in the Bug was another such sign. In a full-on argument, she would have
grumpily turned off the stereo. The slight blush on her cheeks as the song
ended, and that mischievous glint in the corner of her eye as the last note
echoed against the glass. The subtle presence of feminine pheromone only
detectable by the ever-so-slight itch at the back of my throat. Unspoken



communication. Married-folk semaphore. An invitation to a truce. A man
has only two options in circumstances like that: play it cool and risk the
train chugging from the station without you, or climb into the engine cab,
knock out the engineer, and toot that horn.

I tossed my fedora onto a wine rack by the fireplace and undid the first
few buttons of my shirt. The overhead fan shook and the ferns around the
room dipped in sympathy to those currents.

“You called for your Mandingo, Miss Penelope?” I asked.
“Oh, hush, boy,” she said, and flipped the smoke-gray sheets away from

her naked body. I kissed the top of her foot and yanked her closer to the
bottom of the bed. Once the sheets settled, we fucked a flame into being.
OceanofPDF.com



7

In the late afternoon, I decided we should go down to the Old House, the
mansion we had driven by on the way in. Octavia was not responding to my
emails, but she had to be somewhere on the property. The resort offered
golf, skeet shooting, a spa. Tennis courts, bike rentals, and canoeing.
Scavenger hunts. A tour would depart from the Old House soon. Tour title:
“Paradise Lost—A Survey of Antebellum Farming Life.” The tour was my
best chance to locate Octavia, so I signed us up.

The sun came out from behind the clouds. Nigel seemed to have left his
own black cloud in the suite. Hauling his book sack of widgets and goodies
—magnifying glasses, jars for insect collecting, soy jerky, etc.—he slid
down the staircase railing in the Big House, laughing, and we set off for the
tour. We immediately got lost. Penny, Nigel, and I wandered out onto the
property, using a cartoonish map provided by the concierge. Not only did I
find the mascot icon—a dark-skinned man in tatters—offensive, but the
map itself was useless. Penny was better with maps than me, but even she
was confused. The chart wasn’t to scale. The proportions were way off.
Those tennis courts weren’t right behind the Big House as suggested, but a
few hundred yards away, behind hedge-obscured fences. The lying map
claimed the swimming pools were slightly east and the amphitheater
slightly west, but everything was due south.

Penny and I held hands as Nigel orbited us like a proton. We passed a
neatly trimmed garden. Then another set of tennis courts. And another
neatly trimmed garden. No. The same neatly trimmed garden. We were
trapped in a loop.

“Is this really happening?” Penny laughed nervously.



“Maybe we went forward when we should have gone back,” I said.
Between Penny’s and my linked bodies, Nigel passed, a neutrino. The
fishing hat looped around his neck brushed against my side. It should have
been on his head, not his back. “Put it on, son.”

“Aw, but it’s too big.”
“Don’t back-talk your father.” Nigel righted the hat on his head. “And

don’t you roll your eyes, young man.”
“There’s got to be a way out of here,” I said.
Nigel trotted to a hedgerow a few yards away, his fists clenched to his

sides. The fishing hat bobbed in time to his footfalls. He had grown
considerably in recent months, but he was still on the smallish side, and the
brim of the big floppy hat brushed his shoulders on the downstroke.

“That hat is a little obnoxious,” Penny said, grinning. “He looks like
Dumbo before he learned to fly.” I shrugged. It could be hard to tell where
the line was with Penny. Whereas I felt Nigel should only go outside in a
mirrored hazmat suit to protect his mark from darkening, she was sanguine
about the whole affair. Sure, there were various no-fly zones in the airspace
of Nigel’s birthmark. Penny was 100 percent opposed to lightening cream,
for instance. Yet she more or less agreed that hats were sensible protection
from the genetic-mutation-inducing qualities of the jolly old sun. She wore
a field hat and sunglasses herself.

Nigel found a knob and pulled a door open, hedge and all.
I glanced at Penny. “My side of the family,” I said.
“Might be.” She took a protein bar from her purse and tossed it to Nigel,

who grinned.
The main hall of the Old House was flanked by two broad staircases.

Freshly waxed wood and engine oil scents predominated. About thirty
shareholders were gathered, dressed in khaki shorts, maxi dresses, and flip-
flops. There was enough wrinkly flesh to challenge a pugs-only dog show. I
waved at Paul Pavor, who sipped something from a go-cup, then gave me
finger guns. I didn’t see Octavia.

Our tour guides, a man and a woman in period clothing, introduced
themselves as Nathan and Mary. The woman wore a complicated wig-and-
bonnet arrangement.



“Why are they dressed like that?” Nigel asked.
“We should go,” I said to Penny.
“No.” She pursed her lips. “I want to see this.” I didn’t want to spend any

more time with my superiors than I had to, but my nervous system was too
happy to argue much. Penny rarely turned away from incidents of obvious
racism or bigotry. She jumped into them like a Viking with a long sword,
her neck flushed as she dismantled her opponent’s arguments.

The pair led the group through the mansion, pointing out Venetian drapes
and fine china, over here the property owner’s desk for writing letters to his
business partners, over there Old Miss’s pouting room.

In the grand ballroom: “Andrew Jackson Smith’s troops ransacked this
very home.” Nathan had a high-country accent. “It took over a decade to
restore the property to its original splendor.” He jammed his hand into his
gray overcoat and sniffed as he walked past us.

The guides brought us to the back porch and offered white parasols from
a copper drum. I didn’t take one, nor did Penny.

“It can get awfully bright out there,” Mary said, fanning herself. She
smiled from the cheeks down, but her eyes were dead. She adjusted her
wig. “A small price to pay for a nice Southern life.” Her crinoline was so
wide, I was sure she’d get stuck in the door, but she turned sideways and
popped through with no trouble.

She and Nathan led us across the field, the one I’d seen from our room at
a distance, and the crowd closed into a dense semicircle around us. A pair
of iron doors erupted from the grass several yards away.

“What’s that?” Deb, a labor lawyer from one of the Carolina offices,
asked.

“Looks like a storm shelter,” Pavor said.
“That’s a hotbox,” Nigel said.
“Very good.” Nathan wiped his forehead with a handkerchief.
“How did you know that?” I asked.
“Mom’s genes,” Nigel said. Penny laughed that wheezy laugh of hers.
“You have to remember,” Nathan said, “there was no police force or

easily accessible court system. The farmers needed a simple but humane



way to maintain order hereabouts. The box was rarely used because it was
so effective.”

“I bet,” Penny said.
“You didn’t want to end up in that box.” Mary chuckled.
“Good way to kill people, too,” Penny said.
Everyone stared at her. The sun was unusually intense, so much so that

the grass seemed more yellow than green.
Nigel had taken his hat off again. I told him to put it back on. “Aw.” He

furrowed his brow.
“Be like your old man.” I tipped my straw fedora and nudged him.
We continued into the woods and stopped at a small clearing. Nathan

took off his wide-brimmed hat and held it with both hands at his waist. I
could tell he had said whatever he was about to say a hundred times before.
Someone stepped in a cow pie and cursed.

“The Southern economy,” Nathan said, “of the mid-1800s was a
powerhouse of the world. A land of unheard-of splendor.” His accent got
thicker in the woods. Southern was “suh-thun.” Powerhouse was “pow-ah-
haus.” Every time he said splendor, I thought he was talking about the
sweetener I used in my coffee. Mary talked the same way. I couldn’t tell if
they were laying it on thick as part of the show.

“See these individual pine trees here?” He threw a thumb over his
shoulder. “There are hundreds of them. Today they stand where acres upon
acres of grade-A-quality cotton, sugarcane, and tobacco once grew for
export the world over.”

“The Southern economy,” Mary said, “was such that Southerners enjoyed
a level of opulence not seen since the time of the pharaohs of ancient
Egypt.”

Penny clenched and unclenched her fist. Her knuckles were white. “Can I
yank that animal off her head?” she asked.

“Easy,” I whispered. “I have to work with these people.”
“You’ll recall,” Mary said, “that the Northern section of this present

nation launched its war of unprovoked aggression on the presupposition
that it was sovereign supreme. To wit: the North believed it had the right to



impose absolute authority over the economic structure and governing
freedom of these Southern states. This was in no way different than the
tyranny the founders fought and defeated in the Revolutionary War.”

Penny’s nose twitched. She raised her hand to her shoulder. I pulled her
wrist down. She reraised it.

But Nigel beat her to the punch. “What about slavery?” he asked.
Some of the shareholders grumbled. Pavor snorted. It struck me that this

was the first time I’d seen Pavor without Dinah nearby in a while.
“Is that a question?” Nathan asked.
Penny stepped forward. “This place only has nice furniture and tapestries

and shit because everyone was forced to work for free. They were denied
their human rights.”

Sometimes I almost forgot about Penny’s activist streak, that I’d met her
at a protest against low wages in the retail sector, that I’d bailed her out of
jail. My little insurgent. She spent her present days, pen in hand, jotting
notes about her clients. But I could still see her angrily charging across a
parking lot with a red placard because of some real or imagined slight.

“Well, I never,” Mary said, still in character, fanning herself.
“She has a point,” I said. “The Civil War started because of slavery and

the—”
Mary held her hand out to stop me from talking. This shouldn’t have

worked, but I found that I couldn’t say a word. It was almost like she had
my vocal cords in her grip. She stared at me. Or maybe through me. She
was looking at the Old House behind the group.

That’s when I noticed that she was a lot older than I thought. It must have
been the humidity that revealed her. Her makeup was running at the cheeks.
Underneath the melting foundation, her skin was mottled, the color of raw
beef tongue.

“Sugar,” she said, “every schoolboy knows the Civil War didn’t start
because of slavery. That was just spin Lincoln’s cronies put out to keep the
Europeans from joining the Confederacy. Read a book.”

“How much do they pay you to tell these lies?” Penny asked.
“Wait just a minute, little miss,” Nathan said.



Penny gestured at Mary. “This kind of stupidity and romanticizing a past
that never existed—”

Nathan waved his hands as if trying to put out a fire. “I do not think—”
“People like you”—Penny stepped toward the guides—“are the reason

everyone is confused about what actually happened.”
“That’s it!” Mary yanked off her wig and bonnet. “You got some nerve,

sister.” Out of character, Mary had a New Jersey accent. “Busting my hump
when I’m just trying to make a living.”

“Let the composed head prevail,” Nathan said, still performing.
“Stuff it, Jake!” Mary threw her wig and bonnet to the ground and

stormed back to the Old House, holding her skirts up the whole way. At the
top of the stairs, reduced to the size of a poodle by distance, she turned
back. “I quit.”

“Come on, Merle,” Jake said. “Don’t be that way.” He gave us a nasty
look and jogged away. The group walked back to the mansion.

“Where’s Nigel?” Penny asked.
Pine branches swayed overhead and a rabbit jumped into a hole in the

middle of the field. We called for Nigel, but he didn’t answer. I hoped this
wasn’t another of his disappearing acts. He’d been better recently about not
scurrying away like a field mouse when he was stressed. But the incident at
the School Without Walls had been a reversion to form. I didn’t want him to
have to go back on anxiety meds. He was doing so well.

“The hotbox,” Penny said.
We went to the box. The iron doors were too heavy for me to open alone,

but with Penny’s assistance, I managed to crack one open enough to see that
our son wasn’t inside. I pressed my hands against the side of my head.

Nigel wasn’t in the gallery of the Old House, the pouting room, or the
kitchen. No one had seen him. I called security. Sometime later a man with
a bloodhound showed up. It was the bellboy who had brought up our bags
and gawked at Nigel. He said his name was Moses.

“The security man on the other side dealing with some foolishness, so the
manager sent me over with Rufus here to help you folk find your young
one.”



“I guess you won’t need a picture,” I said. “You got a good enough look
at him earlier.”

Penny gave me a Don’t be a jerk—he’s here to help. Moses wondered out
loud if we had anything of Nigel’s that Rufus could sniff. Penny produced
Nigel’s hairbrush from her purse.

Before long, we were in the woods. Since the end of the tour, the sun had
receded a good bit, so the woods were more shadow than light. We couldn’t
see that well. Moses took a stick from the ground and wrapped it in a greasy
cloth. He lit the assembly to make a blazing torch. Rufus, jowls shaking,
woofed in delight.

At the entrance to the woods, Moses took Nigel’s brush and held it to
Rufus’s nose. The dog leaped forward, pulling Moses along.

“Y’all try to keep up. No time for lollygagging. I’m missing tips for
this.”

Penny and I followed.
“Oh. He must got him a good scent,” Moses said. And it did seem as if

Rufus had read the directions. Unlike our earlier stroll, we didn’t double
back or wander. We moved more or less in a straight line for a good while
until the woods thickened considerably. A little ways off, a pack of coyotes
ran away from us, and I realized the sun was completely gone. The orange
flicker of the bellboy’s torch provided the only light. Then, as unexpectedly
as he had started, Rufus stopped.

“Would you look at that?” Moses said. I couldn’t tell what he was talking
about since Rufus’s jowls covered whatever it was he sniffed. The dog
gathered the thing in his mouth, but Moses made him give it up. The
bellboy deposited the wet ball in my hand. A crumpled dark-chocolate
wrapper.

“You don’t think Nigel came this deep into the forest, do you?” Penny
asked.

I shrugged, not wanting to stoke the hysterical fire building in my gut.
My shoulder was still sore from breaking through that door at the School
Without Walls. And in the forest, I felt especially helpless without any
doors to ram through. What could I do? Knock down a tree? Dig a new
route to China? My son is resourceful. My son is okay. I repeated these



words in my head like an improvisational drum solo. My SON is
resourceful. My son is OKAY. I yelled his name.

Rufus took off again, pulling Moses and, by extension, us. But a few
moments later Penny cried out. She reached down and grabbed a small
high-top shoe. Nigel’s shoe. The other one was a few feet away. A coyote
yowled. Penny and I locked eyes for an extended moment.

Moses motioned for us to come over. I spotted a protein bar wrapper near
Rufus, who sniffed the base of a nearly vertical earthen structure. It was
almost more of a wall than a hill. Moses said Nigel was up there.

“There’s no way,” I said. “Not unless he grew a tail.”
Penny went to the wall, grabbed some exposed tree roots, and climbed. I

leaned on my knees to catch my breath. I wished I had gone along with
Penny and Nigel to the indoor rock-climbing facility those few times they
had gone. A section of soil broke loose and showered down on me. “It’s not
safe,” I said. But Penny wasn’t listening. All this, and I never caught up
with Octavia.

Then something happened that I never forgot and could not initially
explain except to say it was confusion of my senses, a synesthetic illusion. I
heard splashing, laughing, singing, and in leaves above the hill, I saw the
twinkling of stars that could not have been so luminous or active.

Penny climbed faster. I called Nigel’s name again. No answer, but the
singing stopped. I grabbed a root and followed Penny. Without the torch,
my eyes adjusted to the night. The far side of the hill was steep, but not as
steep as what we had just climbed. It was there, atop the hill, we found
Nigel’s hat, shirt, and a ribbon, the color of which I couldn’t make out in the
gloom.

“What’s that?” Penny asked. A bulb of light drifted into her hand. A
firefly. Beneath us, dense foliage partially obscured a stream.

I lost my footing and dirt-surfed down the slope of the hill. A short way
off I saw my son, buck naked in a burbling current. He was waist deep and
standing motionless, as though waiting for me to collect him from the
sidewalk outside school. A rustling in the brush, as if from a gaze of rabid
raccoons, sent a prickle down my ribs.



I asked Nigel what he was doing. He drew his hand across his face in an
attempt to dry it. “Just swimming.”

“But why didn’t you tell us where you were going?”
Nigel had the strangest smile on his face and looked fit to burst into

laughter.
Penny appeared. She looked worried, relieved, confused.
“You knocked them over, Dad.”
A mason jar lay on its side at my foot. I had knocked the lid off. Fireflies

flew out of the jar and lit into the treetops.
OceanofPDF.com



8

Although I was an average talent, I always possessed a great love of sport,
competition, game. In high school, I was mildly athletic, the kind of boy
who could run the expected number of laps without complaint or deploy
any number of defenses in a chess club match to keep my king out of
serfdom for a reasonable time. But my love of competition outstripped my
talent: I couldn’t outrun the speedsters, and my deflections rarely led to
victory over my young masters.

I played, for a single season, on our basketball team, the Chickenhawks.
Hootie hoo! I wasn’t particularly tall, fast, or agile. I certainly didn’t have
the hidden ankle wings of my fellow airmen that allowed them to dunk the
ball from the concession stand. However, I was blessed with a facility for
ball control. I became the team’s point guard after the starting senior was
arrested on possession charges and died of a rare and undiagnosed heart
problem while in custody. A terrible loss, as he’d already got an offer to go
pro. I remained Chickenhawk number one until I blew out a knee while
blocking the shot that would have knocked us out of the state playoffs. My
sacrifice was all for naught. Three nights later I sat on the bench, my leg in
a black brace, while Royceland, a crew of upstaters that preferred three-
pointers over dunks, bombed my beloved Chickenhawks to smithereens,
114 to 81. What was the Royceland Red Roosters’ cheer? Ah. “Death from
Above,” son.

“If you could have played on crutches, you would have,” Nigel said.
“You’ve heard this story before, eh?” I tugged his baseball cap down.
“Just once.” He smirked and pulled the cap back up. “Or a million

times.”



The Monday after Nigel’s plantation bath, he and I were in the bowels of
the City’s professional b-ball arena, Secret Nine Arena. There were two
reasons I had never brought Nigel until that night. First, I almost always had
to work late.

Second, Nigel had always shown an innate ability as a young sportsman.
At age six, he could cartwheel and leapfrog like any other American boy,
but he could also drive a soccer ball like a transplanted Brazilian. Whatever
gene existed in me had combined with Penny’s fairer ones and amplified
Nigel’s sportiness, even in informal settings. I was disturbed no end that
whenever he visited my office, he’d stand as far away from my wastebasket
as possible and plunk crumpled balls of paper into the receptacle like so
many pennies into a well. The last time I brought him to my office, I
snapped at him to stop, and he did. I felt guilty, of course, but for the love of
Meadowlark Lemon, did the world really need another child of the diaspora
with highly developed ball skills? The answer was in the question, and I
made all indirect efforts to discourage his growing love of sports. America
could cheer someone else’s brown boy down a field and, after he’d wrecked
body and mind, into an early grave.

It was an irresistible magnet that drew us to the cavernous arena that
weekday evening. Octavia pinged me with a message: “Meet at the firm
suite and bring your kid. Seven-thirty P.M. Gate seven. Suite 342. Do not
miss.”

We breached the building through a restricted side entrance reserved for
kings and their retainers. We were early and wandered the semiprivate
corridor, where workmen sped by in motorized carts and vendors offered
frozen drinks, pretzels, and gaudy, glossy pamphlets. My son fairly
hummed with electricity. He was dumbstruck by the many people milling
about, the glowing advertisements floating above, the echo of the arena
announcer’s voice telling us not to miss our shot at a photo with the team
mascot. Nigel’s joy flowed into me, and we carried his awe in tandem.

As we rounded the base of the arena, we came to a darkened tunnel. At
the far end of that tunnel was a clear view of the bright, marqueted
hardwood floor where players in warm-up suits dribbled basketballs in and
out of view. Faint holographic shapes—circles, lozenges, clouds—appeared
on the floor and vanished to a rhythm I couldn’t catch. Nigel paused



midstep and watched. It was during this reverie that I bought him an
oversize We’re Number One foam hand and a veggie hot dog. In retrospect,
I probably should have purchased the foam hand after the hot dog because
my son refused to put down the one in order to eat the other. I found some
amusement in watching him solve this puzzle by using the foam hand as a
food tray.

I also noticed that his baseball cap had disappeared.
“Where is your hat?” I asked. Nigel shrugged. He said he must have lost

it. “How is it possible that you lose every hat I buy you?”
He shrugged again. “There’s not even any sunlight in here,” he said. “It’s

nighttime.” I realized he was right.
Across from the tunnel where we stood, an older white woman in chintz

smeared balm on her lips with a pinky. “Do you know where the garbage
cans are?” she asked.

“No,” I said.
“Oh. Well, can you take this?” She offered her plate of picked-over crab

claws to me. She thought I worked for the arena, that I was a janitor.
I glanced down at my T-shirt and immediately regretted my choice to

dress like a normal person going to a basketball game rather than wear a top
hat and tails. Of course, then she would have thought I was the doorman. I
shoved my hands into my pockets.

“That’s nice team spirit you have,” the woman said to Nigel.
“Thank you, ma’am.” My polite boy. I placed a hand on his shoulder.
“Where did you get it?” she asked.
“Right over there. I think.” It was about then that I noticed she was

concentrating quite deliberately on Nigel to the exclusion of me, but this
wasn’t about his birthmark. The woman wasn’t judging the composition of
his face so much as his relationship to me. She was a Good Samaritan. I’d
participated in this puppet show before, too. It wasn’t the first time
someone, thrown off by the variance in our physical appearances, thought
that I’d kidnapped my own child.

“Did this man buy it for you?” she asked. She had a booger of garlic on
her lip.



“Uh-huh,” Nigel said, dropping a bit of veggie chili on the smooth
concrete below.

I nudged him. “Don’t speak with your mouth full, son.”
“Sorry, Dad,” Nigel said.
A giant security guard, possibly a failed player himself, seemed to be

trying to decide whether to cross over from his comfortable post on the far
side of the corridor.

The woman knelt and grabbed Nigel’s wrist. “You can trust me.”
“Don’t touch my son,” I said.
The woman ignored me. “Are you okay, young man?”
Nigel looked at her, his eyes wide. For a blink, I worried he might say

that he wasn’t. “Miss, can you let go of me?”
The woman shook her head, as if casting off a spell. She rose to her feet

and walked away, her Birkenstock sandals slapping her heels. She glanced
back once more before dumping her trash into a receptacle and turning in to
the arena proper.

Someone tapped my shoulder. It was the security guard, who stared down
on me from two and a half heads up.

“Is there a problem?” I asked.
“Are you with the firm up in the Seasons Ustis suite?”
“So what if he is?” Nigel said.
“A lady asked me to escort you.”
“How did you know it was me?” I asked.
“She described you to a T.”
We followed the guard into a side tunnel, passed a couple of paramedics

smoking cigarettes, and rode an elevator to suite level. The firm’s spacious
suite loomed near center court several stories up. Mixed in with numerous
shareholders, including Armbruster, his right-hand man, Scott Forecast, and
Callower, were heavy hitters I was more likely to see on television than in
person. Armbruster and Forecast spoke to Mayor Chamberlain, with her
signature bouffant hair, who was preparing to run for her second term.
Dinah was removing lint from Pavor’s lapel. Pavor grabbed her other hand,
but she brushed his away and glanced around to see if anyone noticed.



A young man who’d starred in an action film about shapeshifting gnomes
tucked into a slice of marionberry pie and wrinkled his nose. I had tried a
slice on the way in and agreed with his assessment. On a ten-point scale, I
wouldn’t have given the stale-crusted, gloopy wedge much more than three
and some change.

I escorted Nigel to the exterior seats that afforded a view of the game
with the unwashed masses just below our feet. Men careened across the
court. Whistles blew. Someone did a 720 dunk, and the whole cave rocked
with applause. At halftime, the arena lights dimmed, and a squad of
cheerleaders with small wings on their backs appeared and flew around
under laser beams.

A waiter offered a tray of cocktail wieners. Nigel took some, but I didn’t.
I was too shaken to eat. In fact, I probably hadn’t said much more than yes,
no, or maybe for some time. To Nigel’s question as to why Herman was the
only one with gold-plated kicks, I replied, “Maybe.” My wistfulness wasn’t
the result of a pharmacologically induced state. I hadn’t had a Plum since
the morning, although it was high time.

Octavia sat next to me, removed her sunglasses from her face, and put
them in her hair. “I was starting to think you made other plans.”

“Not at all.” I gave her a double-cheeked air kiss.
She glanced at the cluster of men talking to Armbruster. “The good old

boys have run this place long enough. Do you know Seasons hasn’t had a
woman managing shareholder in twenty-seven years, three months, and
eight days?”

“I had no idea,” I said.
“It all comes down to who society chooses to respect. Like when you

didn’t come to my office on Friday when I messaged you. That was
disrespectful.”

“I’m sorry about that—”
“I’m talking. Do you know why I called you to my office that day?”

Octavia went into her suit jacket pocket and pulled out a lapel pin. One of
her sun pendants. “To congratulate you for winning on Elevation Night.”
She attached the pendant to my T-shirt. “A lot of people had money on that
Riley, but I knew you were up to the task.”



I exhaled. The pendant meant I was one of Octavia’s people, which
afforded me a measure of job security. Job security meant I was that much
closer to helping my son. “Thank you,” I said.

“Don’t thank me. You’ve got your work cut out for you, and people who
wear my pendant aren’t allowed to slack. But you knew that.”

I pointed at the pendant. “So this means I’m promoted to shareholder.”
“About that. No. A majority of the executive committee had to sign off

on it. None of you got a majority of votes, but you got the most. So you’re
not a shareholder, but you’re not canned either. You’re provisional until a
revote or I release you.” Octavia glanced up toward one of the suites that
ringed the arena. “You should have cleared it outright, but I think
Armbruster convinced a few of the others to turn their nose up at you to
spite me.”

“Why?”
“Because they know I’ve got aspirations. I’ve got a potential client on the

hook, a real whale who’ll give me enough juice to make a run at head
honcho. That’s why I need to know that you’re in up to the hilt.”

“Of course I am.”
“If you come through for me, I’ll have enough clout to get you that

revote. Of course, if you crap out or I do, we’ll both be in the
unemployment line. People who make a run for the top of the mountain and
miss don’t last very long. But you knew that, too. Any questions?”

I swallowed—ludicrous, considering we had worked together for years.
But I couldn’t shake the feeling that everything I cared about was at stake in
how I handled the next few minutes. “The diversity committee. Why did
you put me on it?”

She tilted her head in the direction of Armbruster, who was chatting up a
leggy young brunette. “What do you see when you look at old Jack? Be
honest.”

I didn’t want to insult Octavia. But I knew she would see through any
attempt to be tactful. “I see success. Some deserved. Some not. I heard he
was in line to be in charge after only a few months in. Big clients flock to
him because he’s got the look and profile that people buy. It’s a closed loop,
a self-fulfilling prophecy.”



Octavia pursed her lips and nodded. “That’s good. I couldn’t agree more.
I’ve spent my whole career paddling in his wake. I made my group number
two by force of will, and now it’s time to overtake that big rusty cruise ship.
Know how we’re going to do it?” I shook my head. “We’re going after
PHH.”

Personal Hill Hospital, or PHH, as people called it. I wasn’t surprised
that her target client was the hospital where Penny worked. PHH was one of
the biggest employers in the City, and if Octavia managed to bring it in, she
would become one of the wealthiest shareholders in the history of the firm.
PHH had a level-one trauma center and an acclaimed, renowned cancer
treatment service, but its plastic surgery clinic was all over the news since
that pop singer underwent a transformation there. It was where I planned to
bring Nigel when that sunny day came. Rumor had it that Octavia herself
had had a good deal of work done. Franklin once told me that Octavia was
just another light-skinned black who had her nose sharpened so she could
pass. I never believed that story. After all, her family had owned that
mansion on the Avenue of Streetcars since before recorded time.

“That’s where you come in,” Octavia said. “I need to show that the firm
cares about the community. It’s the price of entry to even be considered for
their approved-legal services list.”

“By community, you mean black people.”
“Don’t be crass with the race talk, but that’s right. That’s how the game is

played. They lose their federal funding without the right mix of vendors.”
“What can I do?” I asked.
“I need you to put together a campaign that proves the firm is committed

to diversity.”
A great roar erupted in the arena. Nigel jumped up, pumped his fist.
Octavia tilted her chin up and smiled. “I remember your résumé. You

were what? Second in your class?”
“First.”
“See that there. You’ll think of something. I’m a big believer in putting

my people in position to do their best. Callower has a job to do. He’ll be
running down the permitting and licensing side to see if we can find
something that will increase PHH’s profits. Companies love when lawyers



find money just lying around. Dinah has a job to do. She’ll keep track of the
competition and ensure that we’re one step ahead. And now you have your
orders.”

Made sense. Dinah and the others all seemed extraordinarily busy with
things other than drafting briefs and going to depositions. I had to grab the
reins while the grabbing was good.

“I’ll need a budget,” I said.
“Oh, you’re quick,” she said. I tossed out a number, not really knowing

what I’d do with the money. “You can make do with half that.”
“Do you want PHH or not?”
Octavia sniffed. “Fine. If there’s one thing I cotton to, it’s initiative. Take

this puppy, for instance.” Pavor stooped next to Octavia and licked
barbecue sauce from his thumb. Octavia squeezed Pavor’s cheeks like a
cheerful aunt. “Look at this face. Wouldn’t you vote for this man?”

I had no idea what they were talking about.
“I’m running for mayor,” Pavor said. “The firm is backing me.”
“You?” I asked. “Since when do you care about politics?”
“Since boss lady needs someone on the inside to move things along,” he

said. “I qualified this afternoon.” Pavor noticed a line of sauce on his blazer
and cursed. He wandered away wiping it.

“He and that Dinah make a pretty effective team.” Octavia gestured
toward Dinah, who was pouring club soda onto a cloth. “What do you
want?” Octavia asked. “I mean psychologically, if you catch my drift. What
do you need as a human-type person?”

“To do my job well.” I studied my hands. It was true, in a sense.
“Nice answer, boy-o, but body language doesn’t lie. I saw you look over

at your kid again.”
Nigel leaned forward at the rail, waving his foam finger.
“You’re a good heart,” she said. “That’s what I like about you.”
Armbruster walked down the steps to where Nigel was. He patted Nigel

on the back.
“What about Armbruster?” I asked.



“What about him?” she whispered. “Managing shareholder isn’t a
lifetime position. If he’s smart, he and his contingent will back me. I don’t
think he’s that smart, though.”

Nigel led Armbruster over. “This is your boy?” he asked.
“Last I checked,” I said. A small part of me wanted to feel sorry for

Armbruster. He was a grandfather, after all. Chairman of the water utility
board. A respectable man. Octavia usually got what she wanted, and with
Armbruster in her sights, he was as good as done.

“I had no idea. Such a handsome boy. A good-looking young man. Must
have got it from his mother.” Armbruster guffawed. I chuckled, too. “I bet
you’re good at basketball.”

“Not really?” Nigel glanced at me, apparently wondering if that was the
right answer.

Armbruster plucked a cigar off a server’s tray. “Too bad.”
Octavia and I both noticed my knee, which was leaping up and down like

a thrown engine rod. I put my hands on my knee. The shaking stopped.
“Did you see that, Dad?” Nigel asked.
“What, son?”
“Some stuff happened,” he said, twisting on one foot, “but we won.”
“Never doubted we would.” Octavia extended a hand. “Did you?”
“Not for a second.” I clasped both my hands around one of hers, the

universal, diplomatic black man’s handshake.
OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com



9

“The face of Seasons Ustis law firm, huh?” Mama adjusted her kente cloth
chef’s hat. “You better hope you don’t get punched in the face.”

We were in the Chicken Coop, the fried chicken restaurant slash
community center slash sometime boardinghouse Mama had taken over and
put me to work in when I was a teenager. A place I avoided as much as
possible as an adult. It was bad enough to participate in a cliché. How much
worse to propagate one? A black family selling fried chicken to black
people in the ghetto? Even a racially insensitive hack screenwriter would
avoid that setup. Yet to be honest, my difficulty with flaky fried fowl
fingers had a more personal dimension.

In high school, in the second half of my sophomore year, I dated a girl for
about two weeks. Or rather I should say she, Sharane, dated me. She
became an eventual Rhodes scholar and CEO of an entertainment company
out west. However, when I knew her she was a cherrywood-skinned
goddess—the cheerleading captain!—with all the physical bells and
whistles necessary to send the hormones of an apelike teenager such as
myself rocketing into the magnetosphere. Any neutral observer could have
taken one look at me—the thick glasses I wore over my uncorrected eyes,
the hair parted straight down the middle—and seen that I was outclassed. I
questioned whether her interest was an elaborate setup to shame me at some
upperclassman’s upcoming drinking party. But it turned out that she just
really liked Mama’s chicken. She would show up to the restaurant shortly
after I wrapped an apron around my waist and wait for Mama to step into
the pantry. Then with the stealthiness of an American spy tiptoeing through
the lowest subbasement of the Kremlin, I would smuggle a few extra-crispy
thighs over the counter. Not that I fooled Mama.



Our liaison reached its sell-by date pretty fast. As soon as Mama
announced that I could no longer just give Sharane half our stock, the girl’s
presence became scarce. For my part, I lost my taste for eating fried chicken
around then. And for years afterward, I suffered nocturnal indigestion every
July 6, National Fried Chicken Day.

Mama went behind the counter, slipped on a pair of plastic gloves, and
mixed flour and seasonings in a bowl. “My son a figurehead,” she said.
“You’ve always been different, but I thought you had better sense.”

I glanced at Penny, seated next to me. “I thought we weren’t going to
bring up my work stuff.” When I had told Penny about the situation, her
face turned red, and she sliced an eggplant right down the middle. She saw
it not as an opportunity but as an exploitation. If the firm really wanted to
show their appreciation for me, they should have given me a raise or made
me lead on one of our major client cases.

“It just slipped out.”
Penny rolled her eyes upward. The restaurant air conditioner clunked to

life. “But see? Your mother thinks it’s a horrible idea, too.” Mama thought
the firm wanted to use me as blackface. A way to make the organization
more palatable to the clientele. She was right, of course. But it would put
me in position to help Nigel. I couldn’t tell her that. I knew my mother well
enough to understand that she would object to my plans for Nigel even
more vehemently than Penny did. Best to avoid the topic and enjoy time
with my family.

“Forget that they’re not paying you extra for doing it.” Mama cracked
several eggs into another bowl. “Why can’t one of them do it? And what in
the world qualifies you to be the face anyway? Lord knows you don’t look
like most of them.”

“It’s the chance of a lifetime,” I said. “A chance to break new ground.”
Mama opened a beer and poured some into the wet ingredients. “Boy,

Uncle Tomming existed way before Harriet Beecher Whatsherface wrote
that novel. You ain’t doing nothing new.” She poured more beer, then
stopped. Her banana earrings swayed as she gulped the remaining contents
of the beer can. “Don’t mind me none.” Leaning toward Penny for effect.
“He always been stubborn.”



Penny stepped to the register. “I have a dream that one day he’ll come to
his senses, and we’ll live happily ever after in a little cabin in the woods.”

“Don’t hold your breath, sister,” Mama said. “He’s just like Sir.”
I grunted.
Mama placed the battered chicken into a basket and lowered the basket

into the deep fryer. It was hard to believe that when Mama and Penny first
met, they both confided in me their reservations about each other. Penny
found Mama overbearing and self-concerned. Mama thought Penny was
clueless white trash. The tats and black eye makeup didn’t help.

Nigel entered through the double doors that led to the community
center’s day room. “Where is everyone?” He washed his hands.

“Honey, they at that protest.”
“The kids, too?” Nigel dipped his finger into the dry ingredients. He

tested it on his tongue and pointed at the pepper mill. Mama smiled and
nodded. Nigel ground three heartbeats’ worth of pepper into the mix.
“Shouldn’t we be there, too? I mean, maybe they could use our help.” He
tasted the mix and gave Mama the thumbs-up.

“Protest?” I said. “No son of mine is going to stand shoulder to shoulder
with a clot of troublemakers. You could be arrested or shot. And besides,
they probably don’t even know what they’re protesting for. Is it higher
wages? Is it banking reform? They probably think it’s for longer kennel
hours.”

“You don’t even know about the protest, do you?” Mama put her hands
on her hips. “Look at him.”

“Well, I— That’s not the point.”
“Hello?” Penny said. “We talk about it almost every morning.” She

reminded me that the protest was at PHH—not the main building where she
worked, but at the plastic surgery clinic. For the past few weeks, she had to
drive through angry people at the employee entrance. “Not that I’m mad at
them. Their hearts are in the right place. Even if they shake the van
sometimes. Someone  graffiti-bombed the clinic building with these big,
weird letters….”

Although it beat discussing my work obligations, I wasn’t really
interested in talking about protesters. An envelope lay faceup between the



register and the condiments caddy.
“Oh!” Mama said. “It’s for you. A letter from Sir.”
I held my hands up. “I don’t want that.”
“I’ll take it.” Nigel grabbed the envelope.
I took it from Nigel and ripped it in half. “We don’t associate with

criminals.”
“Your father is no criminal.”
“That’s not what the court said.”
“Well, if he is one, that criminal put food on our table,” she said. “That

criminal paid for your frou frou edumacation. That criminal is your father.”
Yes, Sir was my father. “Sir” was the nickname Mama gave him for what
she sometimes described as his “particular bearing.” I now found the usage
of the nickname creepy and disturbing, like those parents who referred to
each other as “Mother” and “Father.” Also, it was hard to fathom that my
father and I had once been so close that people took to calling us Big Sir
and Little Sir, an appellation that I now strictly forbade even Mama to use.

“What did I do to deserve such a siddity son?” Mama turned her nose up.
“You need to come around here more and stop acting like you weren’t
raised right. It’s not healthy to spend all your time up in that white tower.”

My field of vision went dark. Someone had placed their hands over my
eyes.

“What’s up, Frank Sinatra?” Only one person ever called me that. It was
a reference to my fedora, which lay upside down next to me.

“What you selling today, money?” I asked in light Ebonics. Supercargo
released me, mussed my hair, which I hated, and stepped into view. He had
taken my fedora and put it on. Supercargo was my cousin. He had lived
with me, Mama, and Sir for years. We’d been close as kids—I taught him
how to tie his shoes—but I’d kept my distance from him after he dropped
out of high school and got himself locked up in City Prison. He said it was
all a setup. That white people had more use for him as a felon not in direct
competition with their sons and daughters. Supercargo was a little nutty.
Choose your company wisely, I always told Nigel.

“I see you still conking your fro, brotherman.” My fedora sat atop his
wild dreadlocks like a bird on a hippo’s back.



“I see you’re still annoying as ever.” I turned to Mama. “I told you about
harboring all these agitators in the restaurant. The City will be after you.”

Mama raised her pinky. “Shut up, boy,” she said, and laughed.
“What’s up, girlfriend?” Supercargo kissed Penny’s cheek.
Nigel came around the counter and tried to hug him, but Supercargo held

his hand out to give Nigel a pound. “I’m too ripe for a hug,” Supercargo
said. Nigel hugged him anyway.

Supercargo said the riot squad moved the barricades back one hundred
more feet from the hospital. Now they were confined to a small patch of
grass near a drainage canal.

Mama asked him about the two bundles he dropped by the door. Balled-
up banners in one.

“And those tablecloths you asked me to pick up from the Kendrick’s
cleaners,” Supercargo said. Mama thanked him. “There were a couple of
guys in robes and hoods.”

“That’s rich,” Penny said. “They must think it’s 1968.”
Mama placed a hand on her collarbone. “Did they cause trouble like

before?”
“Nah. We run them off.”
“Now, that’s how you handle an issue,” Mama said. “Why don’t you

handle your problem like him?” Sometimes I could swear Mama liked my
cousin better than me. He wasn’t even my real cousin, just a crumb-stealing
stray whom I loved like a brother.

“What problem?” Supercargo asked. I explained. “So, basically, your job
want you to be more black so they can look like they care about black
people.”

“In a nutshell,” Penny said.
“Sounds like he’s doing what he gotta,” Supercargo said.
Penny and Mama looked surprised.
Nigel tapped Supercargo’s arm. “I’m going to be main guy in the school

musical.”
“Main guy?” I asked. “Musical. What foolishness are we speaking of

now?”



“Not quite the lead yet.” Penny pulled Nigel to her body and curled an
arm around him. “He still has to win the role.”

“Oh,” I said. “That.” My jealousy mounted. There was something about
Nigel’s ability to create words that my presence warped. Around me he
sometimes seemed like Charlie Chaplin or Fancy Fox, able to act but not
speak for himself. But in my absence, Nigel apparently reached Proustian
heights of discourse, detailing the colors and smells of his life with startling
clarity. He had known about his audition for the School Without Walls’
production of The Musical Life of Cletus Prufrock Morris, the blind black
organist and, later, blind black vice president, for days before I overheard
Penny and him talking about it. Supercargo walks in and Nigel tells all in
under sixty seconds. I took my fedora back. I didn’t want it sullied.

“You know how to play the keys?” Supercargo asked.
“A little.” Nigel hung his head slightly.
“That’s nonsense. Nigel is a veritable virtuoso.”
“Thanks, Dad,” Nigel said.
“The new teacher at school, Mr. Riley, has been showing me. He’s really

good.”
“Riley?” I asked.
“He said he used to work with you,” Nigel said. So that was where Riley

wound up after the firm dumped him on Elevation Night.
“Mr. Riley said if I stuck with it, I could get really good.” We had

brought in a tutor and paid him handsomely for weeks before Nigel
admitted he didn’t like the man. Following those sessions, Nigel could play
“Yankee Doodle” and “Twinkle Twinkle Little Star” but little else. He
couldn’t be a natural at everything, apparently.

“You just need to practice more, baby,” Penny said.
Supercargo gestured for Nigel to follow him into the community center,

and I received a jig of haptic feedback from my amygdala. My cousin was
mostly a good guy. Maybe the countless times he had been stopped by the
police and occasionally been taken into custody and sometimes even
charged and now and again incarcerated—for vagrancy or carrying a joint
—weren’t his fault. But fault wasn’t the question.



I couldn’t help but feel that every time he left my sight, the next thing I
would hear about him was that he was profiled, chased, arrested, shot,
killed, or any combination of the above. Still, I put a lot of the trouble on
his appearance. He often dressed well, if a bit too garishly, during his
leisure. But his various work uniforms, frumpy and bland, put him in the
same visual class as the brothers begging for change at the soup kitchen.
And his hair, his magnificent, unstructured, unprofessional hair—the huge
locks branched off in five or six directions, a photo negative of the final
fireworks of New Year’s Eve—made him a target. I had been trying to
convince him to cut the growth or at least tame it for years.

A slightly out-of-tune piano interlude to an R&B song emanated from the
other room. The syncopated interlude played a couple of times before
stopping midnote. It restarted shakily, like a fawn using its legs for the first
time.

“Is that Nigel?” Penny’s face lit up.
“Sounds like it,” Mama said. Penny went to see. I was going to follow,

but Mama said that she bet I had forgotten how to prep an order. I bet her
she was wrong. As I mixed wet and dry ingredients into a steel bowl, I
realized Mama was watching my every move, studying my face.

“It’s just the kind of opportunity I’ve been waiting for. I slaved for this.”
“Don’t con me,” Mama said. “I won’t take it. You still trying to bring that

boy in for that procedure. I know you.”
It’s impossible to outmaneuver the person who taught you how to walk,

talk, and lie. “We don’t have to talk about this now.”
“But we do. You losing yourself. Your heart. Your roots. Like another

man I know.” She grabbed her own forearm and wrenched her fingers
around it as if trying to take herself apart.

I looked away and grabbed the pepper Nigel left behind. “I’m not about
to wind up in prison.”

“They transferred him to City Prison, you know,” Mama said. Sir had
been at Buckles Correctional for the length of his term. The idea of him
being in the City—barely a mile away—startled me. I struggled to suppress
my surprise. “I’m going to visit him during open hours next week.”

“Great,” I said.



“Don’t sass me.” Mama raised her pinky. “I know you ain’t well. It’ll
break me if you let whatever is chewing on you hurt that boy.”

“We’re fine, Mama. I promise.”
“Stop,” she said.
“But we really are.”
“The mix.” She grabbed my hand. Without noticing it, I had emptied the

pepper mill. The mix was pitch black.
OceanofPDF.com



10

Despite Mama’s misgivings, I knew I had to stay proactive, so I went to my
friend Jo Jo’s place out in Sunny Vale. Sunny Vale was once a gated
community, but the fence boards had rotted out before the most recent
recession and were never replaced. Now nothing separated its nearly
identical rows of fussy American Craftsman–style homes from the service
road Nigel and I waited on. We were in the Bug. We were caught in a long
line of cars turning into the subdivision. My knee quivered.

Nigel watched my knee. He wore my fedora, which, although pushed
back from his face, sloped down to cover his ears. As he leaned forward,
with his palms pressed against the dash, I had that hiccup-in-time feeling, as
though I were the passenger and Nigel were driving.

“Can you see what the holdup is?” I asked. Nigel slid back the fabric
sunroof, gleefully climbed onto the seat, and peeked out. This was all
strictly verboten in Penny’s presence, of course. But my dove wasn’t
around, and I needed a distraction, because to answer Nigel’s unasked
question: Dad was not okay. Dad was not in the same ballpark as okay. Dad
was on a cruise missile headed in the opposite direction of okay at
hypersonic speeds. My throat was a knot of twigs. Eyes sat on rusty ball
bearings. Left heel swarming with bees. I had another more pressing reason
for going to Sunny Vale. Imagine my surprise when I found my pill holder,
a Daffy Duck Pez dispenser, empty.

My desperate state was my own doing. I should have planned ahead. I
should have restocked days ago. I should not have brought Nigel. But with
Penny at work, I couldn’t explain a midday disappearance, leaving Nigel at
home.

“What’s the deal?” I asked Nigel.



“It looks like some kid dropped a ball,” he said.
I stood up through the sunroof, crushing Nigel to one side of the gap. A

ball was wedged under the bumper of a dump truck.
“This calls for evasive maneuvers, petty officer.” Thus continuing a role-

play we engaged in less and less frequently as the world adulterated Nigel.
The narrative was ridiculously complex by that point, but the basics were
easy enough to understand. We were in a submarine when we received a
garbled command to attack the mainland of that tragic kingdom, our
homeland. Meanwhile a distress call came in: innocents trapped on a
sinking ocean liner. Nigel: We should probably save those kids. The captain:
Hell no. Me: Oh well. Exposing the captain, Captain Swartzman, as a
double agent, Nigel confined the cretin to quarters. We usually succeeded in
our rescue mission. But in recent times we tended to arrive belatedly due to
a confluence of quick-moving icebergs and demonically possessed winds,
which hampered operations and, by extension, saved lives.

Nigel saluted. “Aye-aye, XO.” He wiggled back down into the car.
I followed suit. “Safety first,” I said. “Prepare to surface.”
“Preparing to surface, XO.” Nigel clipped on his seatbelt.
“Blow the ballast.” While I depressed the clutch, Nigel threw the stick

shift into drive. “Brace yourself,” I said. And we swerved around the
kerfuffle. Horns honked. Voices called out angrily. I cut through a backyard,
glimpsing an elderly woman on a radioactive green Slip ’n Slide.

Entering the neighborhood proper, I clipped a yard jockey, putting him
out of his eternal misery. After I killed the engine in Jo Jo’s circular
driveway, the Bug’s rear engine pinged in well-earned exhaustion. Nigel
was pressed against his seat.

“Did we save them?” I asked.
“Some,” he said.
Inside, Jo Jo greeted us wearing jodhpurs, riding boots, and a black beret.

He was dressed like someone’s idea of a film director from the silent era.
He even wore a floppy black mustache that didn’t match his sandy brown
hair or pale skin at all. Same old Jo Jo. My college roommate had a
penchant for the oddball, the whimsical, the obscure. I fit all the categories,
which I suppose is why we hit it off from the day we met in freshman



orientation. Our tastes were generally different—I liked classical pop, he
enjoyed contemporary avant-garde; I favored dandyish clothes, he liked
whatever didn’t stink too bad that day; I tended to date white girls, he never
went out with anyone lighter than a paper bag (until he met Casey)—but
our energy signatures were the same. We rarely had to explain ourselves to
each other. Like we’d been separated during a mix-up in the maternity
ward.

In our undergrad days, when it looked as though we might get a black
woman president, it seemed as if the country were turning away from the
old troubles of systemic racial oppression. Jo Jo used to say that one day we
would walk into a room and people would see us as the twins we were,
despite the fact that he was white and I wasn’t. I bought into the hopes, too.
But those hopes died fast. It sometimes felt like we were the only people in
the world who experienced the whiplash and loss of those years, because no
one else talked about that era. Not that Jo Jo and I did.

“There’s my handsome brother,” Jo Jo said.
“What’s with the Cecil B. DeMille?” I asked.
“Dress for the job you want, killer.” Sometimes Jo Jo worked in the local

film industry as the guy who stood a mile away from the action to ward off
the public. He had wanted to make movies—used to make funny-as-shit
shorts starring me and our classmates—before he became a pharmacist and,
later, a discredited pharmacist. He got a headless teddy bear each month
from the mother of the child he’d inadvertently poisoned.

“Where’s Randy, Jerry, Reynaud, and Milford?” Nigel asked.
“You didn’t tell him?” Jo Jo asked.
I hadn’t brought Nigel to Jo Jo Baker’s in a long time. His wife and kids

had moved out the previous year. Casey and the boys were replaced by a
rotating cast of scruffy subculturalists who loved the irony of Jo Jo’s
suburban compound: a local experience so authentic that it was more or less
exactly like where they came from, only with endless Plums and other
exotic nipple twisters like ziziphus berries.

Jo Jo, the poor bastard, seemed to think Casey would step out of the
kitchen at any moment and declare that all was forgiven.



A woman stumbled from the kitchen on one platform heel. Her hair was
piled into a crooked beehive, and she wore little more than an unsashed
kimono that revealed one light brown breast. Mild, hard-to-pin-down accent
when she spoke.

“Tozz fiik, Jo Jo. You could have warned me that you had a kid in here,
no?” The woman cinched the kimono together with a looped metal belt.

Jo Jo introduced her as Polaire from Egypt. A friend. He told her who I
was.

“I’ve heard much about you, Jo Jo’s friend. You have such a fantastic
complexion. Like the chocolate they melt onto strawberries.”

“Um. Thanks?” I said, my cheeks warmed.
“Oh no. Did I embarrass you?” she asked.
“Honestly? A bit.”
“Good,” she said.
Nigel and I stepped into the kitchen and opened Jo Jo’s fridge. I saw an

empty egg carton, some Camembert, and a cornucopia of beers, but there
was a container of freshly squeezed lemonade. Nigel removed the container.

“Whoa, kemo sabe.” Jo Jo took the container from Nigel and turned to
me. Jo Jo took off his mustache. “Not for the little one. Not unless you want
him seeing orange stars and green clovers. Would you?” He nodded at
Polaire, who grabbed Nigel’s hand.

“Want to see something spectacular?” She gestured toward the staircase.
I gave Nigel the okay signal. “Come, my little chimpanzee,” she said, and
led him out of the kitchen.

“Is she safe?” I asked.
“Her? Safest person in this flying circus. Daughter of a sultan or

something, but don’t bring it up. Speaks like a dozen languages. Brilliant
photojournalist, too, although she’s too busy trying to get back to that war
zone. Those animals shot her. She barely made it out.”

I asked him how he was doing lately. He said his life sucked, but at least
he kept busy. “You didn’t come here to check on me, brother.” He placed
hands on both sides of my neck, squinted, and sniffed. He snapped his
fingers. “A little out of focus.”



“It’s not just the Plums. Work trouble.” I told him about the diversity
campaign. I sipped juice from another cup and immediately spat the liquid
out. “Castor oil?”

Jo Jo handed me a napkin from his sleeve. “Probably.”
“So I need a director to make a commercial. Someone with style. I’ll

need some stills, too.”
“I can help you with that.”
With Octavia’s budget and leeway, I could build any team I needed to get

the job done. Jo Jo was flaky, but he knew his shit. He’d gone to school to
become a pharmacist, after his parents’ wishes, but he blew that off and
eventually found success as an independent video producer. He started out
doing weddings, then training films for midsize companies. Now his artistic
video installations were the talk of the City and quite lucrative. It turned out
my pal was a creative genius after all.

And while a normal person couldn’t pay him enough to do commercial
work, he could help me make an Afrocentric Seasons ad campaign to
impress Octavia and PHH. Octavia would be one step closer to her big deal.
When she closed the deal, I’d get my cut, and Nigel would be healed.

I grabbed Jo Jo’s shoulder. “I’m thinking something light and quick. Lots
of smiling black faces. Upbeat music—”

“Like one of those Caribbean tourism commercials,” Jo Jo said.
“Precisely—”
“But with local flavor.”
“Correct.”
“We’ll need some good locations,” Jo Jo said. “Location is everything.”
“I know just the place.”
The doorbell rang. I opened the door and a man in fatigues stood there, a

shotgun slung from his hip. I raised my hands. He shoved me into the wall,
choking my windpipe with his forearm.

“Hey, hey, hey,” Jo Jo said. “Easy, officer. The good brother is with me.”
“Oh. I didn’t know.” The officer released me. I grabbed my throat.
“Why’d you do that, man?” Jo Jo said. I gasped and coughed.
“I did it for his safety.”



“My safety?” I asked. “How is that possible?”
“I had to make sure you weren’t a danger to me or yourself,” the officer

said. His neck was bigger than his head. “I’m not used to seeing black guys
around here. You can’t be too careful these days. There was a robbery—”

I was still coughing. Jo Jo patted my back. “Just take your goods,” he
said. He threw a stuffed brown paper bag to the officer. The officer tossed a
stuffed envelope to Jo Jo and left.

“Sorry about that,” Jo Jo said. He explained that the cop wasn’t a real
cop. Not anymore. He and his buddies had a camp out in the swamps where
they ran tactical maneuvers 24/7. They needed stimulants to stay alert.

“You mean they’re a group of crazies,” I said.
“By definition, any gathering of humans is a group of crazies.” Jo Jo

waved at the man as he drove off in his gigantic black pickup. “You look
like you could use a backrub.”

“No, thanks. Maybe a medic.”
“Not that kind of backrub. A Blue Geisha Backrub. One of the kids

camped out back said I should call it a Blue Geisha Blowjob, but that’s just
crass, y’know?”

Jo Jo explained that the Blue Geisha Backrub was a Plum, so it did what
all Plums did: pumped the air back into your soul. “Two differences
though,” he said. “It’s a little slower on the uptake, but more powerful. And
you know that stuff I add to the Plums that warms your insides? It’s got a
lot more of that.”

“That’s three things.”
“I guess so.” Jo Jo gave me a packet of regular Plums. Then he counted

out three Blue Geishas into his palm. “You don’t want to take more than
one of these a week. Trust me on this.”

I swallowed one. Jo Jo sipped lemonade. He clicked on the television. A
commercial for Paul Pavor for Mayor came on. Jo Jo sipped lemonade,
which had somehow taken on the appearance of Malbec, and made finger
frames with his hands. Terrible composition. I had the sensation of time
stretching like a wad of currently-being-chewed gum. He sipped lemonade.
Actually, it’s Zinfandel. Although I didn’t recall asking Jo Jo aloud. You



can’t escape. The wall is real, and it goes on in both directions forever.
Eventually, Polaire and Nigel appeared at the bottom of the stairs.

Nigel was in blackface. My words came out in the strangest way, like
cannonballs down a children’s slide: “Why. Does. My. Boy. Look. That.
Way?”

“He said he’s playing a famous musician in a play but he’s too light.”
I tried to stand but collapsed onto my knees. Soon I was crawling. Spit

drooled from my lower lip.
He can’t look like that.

OceanofPDF.com



11

The massive Tikoloshe Housing Development aka Da Tiko aka Cargoland
aka Mondayville aka The Big Oil Slick/The Oil Slick/The Slick was one of
the last projects in the City and the perfect place for my guerrilla marketing
squad to capture video of black locals. The Tiko was important enough to
have made the National Register of Historic Places, although there was a
debate as to whether it dated to the silver age of high-density housing or
whether it had always been there in one form or another. It was also where I
had lived for a sizable portion of my childhood, where I watched the world
from the bubble-glassed bedroom of our third-floor walk-up.

The complex was surrounded by a tall barbed-wire-rimmed fence, and
we had to show our IDs to get inside. If we lost our IDs, they wouldn’t let
us out.

I was still a bit bouncy-castle-brained, so Jo Jo drove while I reclined in
the back of the Bug next to Polaire. Nigel had called shotgun.

“How about over there?” Nigel asked. I sat up, struggling, as my arms
still felt like noodles. We were riding by the central field, a round patch of
brown grass called Wright Park. The red-brick buildings were arranged in a
multiringed circle, broken up by alleys that communicated to the gates. I
once saw the complex from above while flying out of town on business.
The arrangement seemed like a stylized impression of a gun muzzle, seen
dead-on.

I began to question the wisdom of coming back here, a neighborhood I
assiduously avoided, especially with Nigel. The unit where I grew up was
on the back side of the Tiko. And although I couldn’t see it, I smelled it as if
it were landfill just upriver. And too, the Chicken Coop was just outside the



fence. If anything really wacky happened, Mama would hop the fence to
tell me what an idiot I was being.

Jo Jo hopped a curb, rattling us around. We stopped. Everyone got out
except me—I fell out. Jo Jo helped me. Then he squirted something up my
nose, and my vision cleared.

“What was that?” I asked.
“Placebo,” he said.
Our plan was brilliant. Create an attractive nuisance. We would set up a

giveaway table and place props to get the attention of Tiko residents. Once
they came around, Jo Jo would take pictures and video of me with my
fellow disadvantaged people. Then he’d convert the pics and vids to
pamphlets and commercials that showed how much the firm cared about
“the community.” The props? Little old me and a teepee. At Jo Jo’s place,
Polaire had found a double-breasted khaki tux—Jo Jo’s wedding getup—
which I now wore. We’d borrowed the teepee from the smelly kids in Jo
Jo’s yard, fastened it to the Bug’s roof.

We erected the teepee, surrounding it with a few cardboard boxes of T-
shirts that Polaire insisted had fallen off a truck. She draped the boxes with
their contents: purple Crooked Crown T-shirts. The finishing touch was a
prominent, hand-painted sign that said FREE. We were like a purple blossom
in the middle of the field. The bees would swarm shortly.

An older man walked up. “What is all this?” He stood with one hand on
the front of his hip, his other hand shoved into the pocket of his football-
logo jacket.

“Take a picture with my celebrity friend and get a free shirt,” Jo Jo said
from behind his video camera.

“Celebrity? I ain’t never seen none of him.”
“Well, you do see him now, no?” Polaire said. I shook the man’s hand.

Polaire leveled her still camera and quickly took a few pictures of us.
“I guess.” The man rubbed his chin. “What kind of shirt we talking?”
Nigel held up a shirt. “Exclusive Crooked Crown shirts, sir.”
The man’s face lit up. I never understood what people saw in Crooked

Crown, the purple-clad pop star who seemed to be everywhere lately, on
shirts, on TV, in jail. I only knew her name because Penny had been a fan of



hers back when she was the lead singer in that R&B group, the one where
the members each wore distinctive black face paint. But that was before
Crooked Crown visited PHH for lip thinning, a nose job, skin bleaching,
and the Devil knows what else, a process called demelanization or a demel
or a scrub. She had been a black girl from Baltimore. Now she looked more
or less like a Greek woman.

Surprisingly, Penny seemed to like her music more since the changes.
When I ribbed her about this, she said that you can’t judge a person’s
artistic creations in relation to the choices they make in their personal life.

Nigel thought Crooked Crown made good music. “We’re the only place
in town that has them. And now it’s yours.” He handed over the shirt.

The man held the shirt up and drew his hand along the fabric as if it were
the finest Egyptian cotton. “She the one beat that cop up on that reality
show?”

“She was defending herself,” Polaire said.
“My granddaughters love them some Crown.”
“If you take one, mister, it would help my dad get a promotion at work.”

Nigel smiled.
The man grunted. “I’ll pass the word,” he said.
And that’s how it went. Dozens of people passed by. Polaire took a bunch

of photos. The boxes were soon nearly empty.
“Maybe I give the next people a little makeup?” Polaire tapped Nigel’s

head. “A darkener to bring more of an authentic atmosphere?”
“What is it with you trying to make everyone look blacker?” I asked.
“Not blacker. Browner. Don’t you think rich brown skin is beautiful?”

She pinched my cheek. “No blue veins. No irritated reds. Just smooth,
gorgeous brown.”

I couldn’t tell if she was shitting me.
The sun was setting when we realized that our otherwise successful plan

had a flaw: no bathroom facilities. Nigel announced he had to go. I
concurred that I was in the same leaky boat.

“Me three,” Polaire said.



There were several shelters, as they were called, positioned around the
Tiko. I had been taught to avoid the shelters growing up, as most residents
referred to them as flytraps. But it seemed like some effort had been made
to upgrade them to a reasonable level of safety and security. The one nearest
to our setup, a flytrap with an orange-and-white-polka-dot roof, was clean
swept and guarded by potted plants around the perimeter.

But as we approached the shelter, I realized how shabby the Tiko actually
looked. Yes, the high-density, brick living units were still intact. But gutters
dangled from brackets. Paint flaked from doorsills. And basketball-size
chunks of earth were missing as if someone had gone at the grounds with a
giant ice cream scoop.

Near the shelter, a streetlight had been knocked over, the light’s globe
shattered, the globe crystals scattered like salt across a marble counter.

“That y’all?” someone said. A man crossed the grass, avoiding the
strange potholes in long strides. His dreads frolicking with his motion, I
didn’t recognize him as Supercargo until he was nearly upon us. “What
y’all doing up in here?”

Nigel hugged Supercargo. “Mr. Jo Jo and Ms. Polaire took pictures of
Dad with some people to make some advertisements to post on the Net so
Dad can impress his boss and get a fat raise,” he said. “This is Mr. Jo Jo and
Ms. Polaire.”

Supercargo gave Jo Jo a pound and Polaire a cheek kiss.
“Didn’t I meet y’all at this one’s wedding?” Supercargo asked.
I wanted to correct the flap, since he was clearly confusing Polaire for Jo

Jo’s ex, but Jo Jo intervened. “You met me, bro.”
“Well, either way,” Supercargo said, “you can’t be using these.” He

glanced around. “Even if the popos are playing hide and seek. Come use my
place.”

—

I never visited Supercargo in his nest because of my fear of the Tiko, its
inhabitants, and the goings-on. I was aware of the oddness of these feelings.
After all, this had been my home first. My culinary-school-trained mother



and professor father picked this place as the launching pad for our family.
Rougher elements of the City’s black community didn’t become the key
demographic of the Tiko until their developments and neighborhoods were
razed to build that NASCAR track, that apple orchard, that megamall, all
following a series of unfortunate calamities, some man-made, others
heaven-sent.

We climbed the narrow stairs of building number seven. My building had
been number fourteen, but the hallway smelled the same, the same sharp
stink from the chipping green paint I always imagined was full of lead
specifically placed to sap the intelligence of any kid unlucky enough to eat
it.

“This reminds me of my grandmother’s flat in Tunisia,” Polaire said.
“Did your gramma like to toke up?” Supercargo asked.
“All the time,” Polaire said.
Nigel giggled. Some boys sat on the third-story landing, smoking weed.

They tightened up when they saw us but immediately decided we weren’t a
threat and went back to smoking and talking.

This was an L-shaped building. Some were square blocks. Others, like
the one I grew up in, were long rectangles. We traveled down a hall and
hung a sharp left past the elevators. The elevators were a great idea, but
they hadn’t worked even when I was a kid, and none of the adults I
encountered back then recalled them working. If you wanted to get
anywhere in the Tiko, you had to do it under your own power.

We passed an open unit where tidy-looking white people in business
casual clothing sat upright on a couch. One man, his hair neatly parted,
loosely lolled his head. The women on either side of him were zonked out
also. One of the boys from the hallway checked his device clock and
stepped into the unit. The trio’s time was up. The Tiko was a good place to
find your jollies for those with free right-of-access. Fly in from out of town.
Stop at the Tiko for a tune-up and make your noon meeting with time to
spare.

Supercargo opened the door to his apartment, and a musky but not
entirely unpleasant smell, like that of a recently burned forest, filled the
hallway.



“Welcome to Supercargo’s abode,” Supercargo said. “Super-cargo’ll be
your guide to all things Supercargo. Please leave all negativity outside. If
you can’t, please leave yourself outside.” He took Polaire’s hand high and
guided her into the unit. The rest of us followed.

“I’ll give y’all the tour.” He gestured around the room, explaining that we
were standing in the den, dining room, computer center, and kitchen, all of
which happened to double or quintuple, you see, as his bedroom.

“Who sleeps back there?” Polaire pointed at a door in back.
“Uncle Tyrod.” Supercargo chuckled. “He’s probably knocked out.

Ladies first.”
Polaire excused herself to the restroom. Nigel had gone right to a large

TV and activated a video game.
“Nice place you got here,” Jo Jo said. “Reminds me of my college pad.”
“This is so cool.” Nigel hopped onto his haunches.
“That boy act like he don’t get out.”
“Dad doesn’t allow video games.”
Polaire reentered carrying a small djembe drum. She sat next to Jo Jo on

the sofa. They patted the membrane arrhythmically, making animal noises
with their mouths.

“This reminds me of my visit to Mauritania when I was a child. Those
savages would…”

In the restroom, I took my time collecting myself. I cupped cold water in
my hand and popped a Plum. I smoothed my eyebrows with wet thumbs. I
spun on my heel and did finger guns. I squatted in place and rubbed my
knuckles along the bristly fibers of the rug. I was just ascending when I
heard a scream from the main room.

A giant stood in the room.
“What kind of party y’all having up in here?” It was Uncle Tyrod. He

stank of gingerroot. His black hedge of an Afro probably hadn’t been
trimmed in months, if not years. The hair seemed to reach in all directions
like an animated shadow. How long since last I saw him? Five years?
Twenty-five?



“How’s your daddy?” he said, looking down on me. I’d forgotten how
tall he was. His fingernails were brown, at least two inches long, and curled
like pork rinds.

“He’s fine.” I was struggling not to look disgusted.
“I guess I look different,” he said.
“Little bit,” I said.
“He one of yorn?” Uncle Ty knuckle-pointed. I told him Nigel was

indeed mine. When he asked about the white people, I told him that they
didn’t belong to anyone.

Lean and muscular from his job delivering furniture, Uncle Ty had been
the one all the Tiko women loved, everyone loved. He was charming, a
man’s man who could cook a pot of gumbo, then go out and beat anyone in
a footrace. Not anymore.

Now Uncle Ty was shapeless and hairy and generally seemed like
something that had crawled from a swamp. Something inside me twisted
and fell over. My father and Uncle Ty had never exactly seen eye to eye. Sir
thought of Uncle Ty as common and not living up to his potential. Uncle Ty
saw Sir as confused and siddity. But they were both strong men in their own
right, the patriarchs of strong houses. The last time I saw them just kicking
it together was in our old unit. Sir wore an argyle sweater vest. Uncle Ty in
his oversize jersey called Sir “Carlton.” But Sir was hardly a paragon of
fatherhood these days. And Uncle Ty—he was hardly even a person now.

Of course, Uncle Ty wasn’t my real uncle any more than Supercargo was
my real cousin. The authorities often threw people together with no regard
for their connections or lack thereof. If you needed a place to call home,
you had no right to be choosy. That’s how two grown men of different
generations came to live together.

“Sorry,” Jo Jo said, gulping. “So sorry. I must have caught a bad one
earlier.”

“You had me so worried.” Polaire stroked his hair and kissed his
forehead.

“It’s okay, Mr. Jo Jo,” Supercargo said. “I feel kinda the same way when
I drink lactose.”

Uncle Ty sat on a stool. He seemed dreamy-eyed. “Y’all like my place.”



“It ain’t your place no more, Unc,” Supercargo said. “I’m on the rent-
control papers.”

“Whoa,” Jo Jo said. He stood. Polaire tried to stop him, but he shrugged
her off and went to the mantel above the bricked-over fireplace. “It’s you.”

“How does it compare to your crib?” Uncle Ty asked.
“My house is okay,” Jo Jo said. “It’s empty of the people I want to see

and hear though.” He glanced at Polaire. “Except for this one.” He asked if
he could pick up the framed paper on the mantel.

“I was possessed.” Uncle Ty forced his way into the spot between Polaire
and Supercargo. It was a big sofa, but the middle of the thing sagged so that
the three of them fell in together. Even Supercargo looked uncomfortable.

“You don’t need to talk about problems, Unc,” Supercargo said, “not
tonight.”

“That minister who used to check on me said I’m supposed to talk,”
Uncle Ty said, “and ask for forgiveness. I spent five years in Woodville
before they transferred me to City Pen Special with the other crazies.”

Supercargo stood up and grabbed Uncle Ty’s arm to pull him to his feet,
but it didn’t work. Supercargo wasn’t strong enough.

“What’s this about?” Polaire said.
“I ate my boy,” Uncle Ty pointed his knuckle at me, “your cousin

Jacques.”
“Ho ho ho.” Polaire placed her fingertips against her neck. “You’re him?

Le Cannibale Noir?” She snapped a shot.
“I had a nightmare where I was buried under the ground. I had dirt in my

eyes and mouth, but I could hear footsteps over my head.” Uncle Ty shook
his head. “I was scared, and it felt real. I knocked myself out inside the
dream. Then a mob with broomsticks was chasing me across a hot place,
and sand turned to waves of water that washed me away. Next I knew, I was
in a valley where the Devil was waiting with a pack of hellhounds. The
Devil looked like a normal dude in a tracksuit, but I knew it was the Devil
all the same—don’t ask me how I knew, I just did. The hellhounds weren’t
even pit bulls, just Snoopy dogs—you know, beagles—but I knew they
were hellhounds all the same. I run as fast as I could, but they was after me.
Seemed like no matter how fast I run, they was on top of me. I climbed a



mountain of dirt, and I was happy because I knew I was free. The Devil and
hellhounds were ghost, and I was by myself. But my stomach was sunk in
like I was wasting away. So I got on my knees and dug out all the seeds and
ate them. But when I woke up for real, I was in the kitchen.” Ty pointed at
the stove. “Little Jacques was in the stew pot—what was left of him—and
my stomach was swole full.”

Polaire had been darting around the whole time, taking pictures of
everything from different angles. She must have gotten a few shots of me
with my mouth hanging open.

“Stop telling stories,” I said. I didn’t know what kind of scam Uncle Ty
had going, but I wasn’t going to take his lies. All that stuff about hellhounds
and Devils was straight out of old blues songs, and I’d had enough
embarrassment for one night.

Supercargo grabbed my arm and whispered in my ear.
“Don’t contradict him,” Supercargo said.
I drew back to see his face.
“He can’t take it, cousin.” Supercargo gestured to his own mouth. “The

blood. You know he ain’t been right since the shooting.”
The memory came rushing back. Uncle Ty and Jacques. Stopped by an

officer as they walked home from work. Jacques with an outstanding
warrant for not paying court fees on an expired driver’s license conviction.
Jacques shot in the lung for resisting arrest. Uncle Ty attempting mouth-to-
mouth but finding only his son’s lifeblood.

I glanced at Uncle Ty, who hadn’t stopped talking to the others. He knew
the truth but couldn’t face it. The murder of his son had deranged him.

“It wasn’t your fault, Uncle Ty,” I said.
He pointed at me. “I ain’t lying, boy,” he said. “I was in the mental

hospital till last year. A woman came around talking about paying me for
Hollywood rights. She wasn’t the first one. I never had so many people
offering me money before all this started. Then they was coming out of the
woodworks. Sneaking in and shit to see me like I was some kind of griot.”

Uncle Ty said they let him out of the hospital because of overcrowding.
He wasn’t a danger anymore.

“I wanted to stay though,” he said.



“I cannot believe you are real,” Polaire said.
“I got something.” Uncle Ty dug in his pocket.
Supercargo quickly got up. “Don’t be showing that.”
“Did you take any of the money people offered you?” Jo Jo said.
“Nah,” Uncle Ty said. “It didn’t seem right.”
“I can pay you for your trouble,” Polaire said.
“He don’t need your money,” Supercargo said.
“Ah, here.” Polaire took a triangle from her purse. “Take this.”
“What’s this?” Uncle Ty flipped the triangle. It was her calling card.
“Call me,” Polaire said, “and we’ll do a proper shoot one day.”
Uncle Ty said he’d never been the modeling type and he didn’t want to

start now.
“Well, at least give me another good shot.”
“Okay.” Uncle Ty took a bone out of his pocket. It was a sliver of a long

bone, a fragment broken from a whole. He put the fragment in his mouth.
“Oh yes!” Polaire said. “Perfect.”
Supercargo grabbed Polaire’s camera by the lens. “It’s time to go.”
“Careful with that,” Jo Jo said. “It’s her art.”
“You don’t leave now, I’ll put her art up your ass.” Supercargo turned to

me. “You too. Nigel can stay. But y’all got to go.”
OceanofPDF.com



12

However, before we leave the Tiko, I feel I would be remiss if I didn’t
share, in these notes, an early experience from when I called the
development home.

Picture, if you will, the swarm of flies that used to gather around the
garbage can at my childhood home. What if I told you that the flies were
one City patrolman and the can my old neighborhood? One man orbited the
Tiko incessantly, maniacally.

Officer Dred Douglas was a hero, a myth, a legend. Judge, jury, and
occasionally, hangman. A national news anchor once called him America’s
top cop. He seemed to work 24-hour shifts 7 days a week, 365 days a year.
And perhaps he did. It was not unusual to find him napping in his squad car,
wearing highly reflective sunglasses so as to make us residents think he was
watching, always watching.

Douglas’s omnipresence was the way of Douglas. Sometimes during the
ride from school in the Bug—back when it was still Sir’s—we’d see
Douglas sitting in his patrol car near the entrance of the Tiko.

“There’s that windbag cop,” Sir would say, glancing in the rearview. I
wouldn’t look back for fear that Douglas was monitoring me through the
side mirror reflection. Yet by the time we arrived at our building, which was
about a two-minute drift into the center of the development, Douglas would
be waiting at the corner, pretending to check the channels on his walkie-
talkie—click click clicking from one line to the next. Douglas, in this way,
could come up at the start of a sentence and also be the last word in it.

“That guy gives me the jeebies,” Sir might say. Or “You would think they
would have promoted him out of here by now.” He would then rub his
forehead beneath his fedora.



So Douglas was everywhere, and he saw everything. Like a football
referee who ejected players for improper shoe lacing, no infraction—no
matter how apparently insignificant—escaped his Argus-eyed view.
Douglas would have made an excellent poster child for the community
policing/broken windows war, if the City produced such posters. Douglas
was a paragon, his light blue shirt and dark blue pants starched and creased
to military specifications. In the summer, he wore a wide Stetson, and in the
winter, he grew a beard that he didn’t cut until after the New Year, so that
by Christmas he looked like Black Santa. But he delivered abrasions,
contusions, and shattered bones all year round.

Although he had the look of the kind of officer who might appear in a
public service campaign, directing pregnant mothers to avoid live power
lines, he hated children. He hated adults, too. He even hated pets—I once
saw him punt a cat. Neither Sir nor Mama spoke to him. No one did
because talking to him meant you’d have to make eye contact. And eye
contact was highly suspicious to Douglas. As was the conspicuous
avoidance of eye contact. The best policy was to maintain a distance of
about five hundred yards from him at all times, which basically meant you
had to stay out of the Tiko to avoid him. (This was before the City began
expanding the Tiko’s fencing to accommodate new settlements for people
who lost their homes in other parts of the City.) He seemed to think he was
stationed in a war zone. And that if he only held out, his reinforcements
would be along at any moment to shock and awe us with Daisy Cutter
bombs dropped from helicarriers disguised as cirrus clouds. We were all the
same to him: nurses, bus drivers, drug dealers, preachers, car thieves, and
professors alike. He’d show us good when the time came, his baton seemed
to say, as he paced the Tiko slapping the stick against his thigh.

I suppose under one analysis, Douglas was a good man doing the job he
was hired to do. No one could deny that he was a diligent officer of the law.
He was like an overeager linebacker who blitzed on every down. It didn’t
matter if he got the sack as long as he disrupted the play. And he disrupted
both work and play. During the years we lived in the Tiko, I personally
observed him bodily searching nearly every man, woman, and child at least
once. It didn’t matter if he had a reason to suspect that some crime was
being committed. No body was left unturned. Yes, all the swaggering



Jeromes with their baggy pants and fitted T-shirts, but also the mothers and
daughters. And if he could find them, that is to say, if they existed outside
jail or the cemetery, the fathers, too. I saw it all. Elderly men with their
pockets turned out. Girls dressed for parties in platform heels with the
contents of their purses scattered across broken concrete. Splattered ice
cream cones. Overturned red wheelbarrows. So much depends upon a man
with a hatred of his own.
OceanofPDF.com



13

I stood between my open office door and the wall, where hung a three-
quarter-length mirror. I had come in a few days before to find Melvin
Marvin, the frumpy facilities guy, supervising some other frumpy facilities
guys as they transported my belongings from my cramped space on fifty-
nine to a new office only two doors down from Octavia’s on the sixty-
second floor. Sixty-two was unofficially the senior shareholders’ floor.
Octavia had pulled a string, inviting a mere mortal to frolic among the
masters of the mountaintop.

Sixty-two was the main floor of the firm. The firm library, which still
contained honest-to-goodness physical books, was here, as was the
demonstrative trial exhibits room. A sky lobby looked out over the river and
a winding staircase, whose elegance suggested a river flowing backward up
a hill. Even the pile of the carpet was more luxurious on sixty-two. I didn’t
belong here. But I could.

Leaning toward my office mirror, I tried to tame my tie, but it refused to
cooperate. The tie’s divot was crooked, and the whole thing kept bunching
up under my neck like a sharp-knuckled fist. My office door swung into me
from behind, pushing my face into the mirror.

“Mfft,” I said.
“Showtime, sweetheart,” Octavia said. I wiped the mirror made greasy by

my face, but that only made it harder to see. Octavia pushed her sunglasses
to her forehead. Her silver streak darkened behind the lenses. She gave me
elevator eyes and chuckled. “Oh ho ho. Somebody’s ready for the prom.
And maybe a little action behind the bleachers. Are those spats?”

“Fortune favors the well-dressed.”



I adjusted one of my yin-yang cuff links. I felt ready. Every strip of
fabric, every accessory, every button and aglet projected an image and
reflection. The suit as armor, talisman, lure.

My links were from Penny. Mama had given me the tie for graduation.
Crammed into the inside coat pocket was a folded sheet of paper Nigel had
made when he was only five. The outer leaves said “World’s” and “Best.” It
could unfold to the size of a large placemat. Although I had expected the
inside to say “Dad,” the interior featured a giant stick-figure head with
charcoal-shaded skin, clawlike hands, and furrowed eyebrows that lent it a
pensive look. I patted my heart. The paper crinkled.

“The executive committee is happy, sugar, so you know what that
means.”

“You’re happy?” I said.
“You damn skippy I am. My office.” Octavia’s corner office was a

crowded one, full of objects from her exploits. A dusty trophy from the year
she was the fastest teenager in the state sat on a low table by the window.
Exotic hand-woven rugs covered the hardwood, hardwood she installed
when she became a capital shareholder. There was a painting of a woman
who could have been an ancestor tilling a field in World War II England.
Photos of Octavia and two different presidents, one Republican, one New
Whig, hung behind her desk, near a small picture of her adopted daughter,
whom I’d never met because she was a relief worker in Finland and refused
to reenter America on moral grounds. Then a pic of Octavia, in fatigues and
brandishing a spear, next to a wild boar she had brought low.

Octavia unclipped the portfolio—prepared by Jo Jo and Polaire—that I’d
given to her the day before. She removed a stack of glossy eight-by-tens
and flipped through them, showing me each as she went. A shot of me
posing with two button-nosed children. Me laughing with an elderly woman
with cornrows. Me and Uncle Ty, that thigh bone in his mouth. I thought Jo
Jo had destroyed that one. The copy read: “Together for a Better
Tomorrow.”

“I’m glad you like it,” I said.
“Like?” Octavia asked. “This is better than I imagined. The firm will

fund a full campaign around these. So I don’t have to pay out of my own



pocketbook.” Octavia’s candy dish was a Punu mask turned on its face. I
felt a pang of envy at the fact that she had been to the African continent a
half-dozen times whereas I had never. Would never. But it was a mild pang.
Even though some African Americans bought into the Garveyan notion of
going back to the Motherland and others thought of it as a war-, famine-,
and disease-infested land, I knew the truth: It didn’t matter whether Africa
was great or awful, nor did it matter how much dark blood coursed through
my veins. Africa wasn’t home. For better or worse, this vicious hamlet—
where I dreamed perchance of a bright future for my son—was home.

Octavia tossed a hard caramel from the bowl and chewed. “Pop-up ads.
Billboards. Inserts for firm client brochures.” The single silver streak in her
hair reminded me of our polluted river. When sunlight hit the diluted
particulates just right, it was quite beautiful.

“When?”
“Already in motion. I’ll show you.” She explained that we couldn’t play

around. Armbruster’s group was making a play for that international media
conglomerate, the Darkblum Group, which recently placed a major office in
the City. Octavia went to the window and pointed at the McNamara
Building. It was only a third as tall as the Sky Tower, so it was perfect for a
rooftop billboard. An advertisement for Blanco’s Chocolate Milk with a
screen capture of that actor in elderly woman drag struggling with a cute
black-skinned kid over a comically large jug. Tagline: “You bet not steal my
good milks!” The ad shimmered like falling stars and shifted, winkingly, to
reveal the next ad in stages: the firm logo, a forehead, the edge of Uncle
Ty’s bone. I turned away.

“What?” Octavia asked. “You don’t like it.”
“Um. No. Yes. It’s great.”
“Good,” Octavia said. “You’re really on your way, you know that?”
“Really?”
She gestured to the abacus on her credenza. The executive committee

kept track of our efficiency with the Racing Form. Although any
shareholder could pull the Racing Form up on their computers, it was
hidden from the view of peons like me, but I knew what categories it
contained: billable hours worked, billable hours written off, billable hours



paid by the client, and bonus points for special work that added value to the
firm. Octavia’s abacus was a physical manifestation of the Racing Form.

Instead of beads, her abacus had rows of colored semitransparent stones,
a different-colored row for each person in her group. I didn’t know who
each row stood for, but Dinah was clearly the top rung, where half of the
amethyst stones had already been shoved to the complete side weeks ago.
As Dinah worked harder than anyone I knew, she racked up stones faster
than anyone I knew. My sardonyx stones were second from the bottom. A
quarter were on the complete side.

“I’m not even close,” I said.
“We close this PHH deal, you’re all set. Even if I have to kick in some of

my goodwill on loan. Let’s go.”
We left her office. We passed various staff people in the halls. We must

have looked impressive or, at least, determined, because they nodded or
smiled at us with a peculiar intensity, as if they all knew we were going
hunting. I tripped on the rug in the lobby, but didn’t fall.

By the time we exited the Sky Tower garage in Octavia’s sports car,
which sat so close to the ground I could feel the pebbles in the macadam
and hear the pleas of ants, storm clouds hovered above. As we reached the
Personal Hill complex, the heavens let loose.

Personal Hill Hospital occupied fifty-five acres of prime City real estate
just north of the business district. It was once two hospitals. Adelaide Hill
Medical Center dated back to the Civil War, when a wealthy Northern
heiress moved to the City and established a hospital for injured
Confederates. The Personal Clinic Corporation bought out the old AHMC.
The new buildings surrounded the old AHMC building, which was
punctuated by turret-like projections. The new buildings were outsize and
prone to taking off at odd angles. The old building looked like a Gothic
castle surrounded by a Rem Koolhaas–designed castle.

Driving up the private boulevard that bisected the campus, we saw steel
barricades that held the protesters back on either side—get back, you dogs
—their placards melting in the rain. I searched for Supercargo but didn’t see
him.



The general counsel’s secretary set Octavia and me up in a waiting room,
where we sat until a group of people, three men and two women, came in.

Octavia had met with some of them in preliminary meetings before. The
group was mostly white. All I knew was that the CEO was a man named
Eckstein. A square-jawed, graying-at-the-temples man in nautical blazer
approached with hand extended.

“Mr. Eckstein,” I said.
Octavia shook her head and gestured at the only black person in the

group. An elderly black man in an ascot with big active eyes and conked
hair not unlike my own. “He’s Mr. Eckstein.” I apologized, but Eckstein
shot me a fearful look. We took our seats around the conference table.

We exchanged social lubricants. Eckstein’s son went to the same school
in London as Octavia’s daughter. A red-nosed man quipped about the
protesters drowning outside. We passed our materials around the table. One
of the underlings gave Eckstein a brass-handled magnifying glass that he
used to examine Jo Jo and Polaire’s photos. He didn’t look pleased. Then he
scanned some of the text I’d ginned up to give the portfolio the semblance
of substance. One section boasted statistics about cases and projects
Seasons had done for the City’s poor; another explained Seasons’s efforts to
recruit local minorities from a shrinking pool of applicants.

Eckstein pushed the documents over to his assistant, who carefully
rearranged them.

Eckstein crossed his hands. “Have you ever done prison time?” He was
staring at me.

I pointed at my chest. “Me?”
Octavia squirmed in her seat. I had never seen her uncomfortable before.
“I’m a direct person. I don’t mind telling you the truth. I know you’ve

noticed me staring at you. You remind me of a young man who mugged me
after a parade on the avenue years ago. Took a family heirloom. A
stopwatch that belonged to my mother.”

My mouth swung open at the accusation. I wasn’t sure whether to laugh
or yell.

“This one?” Octavia said. “He’s safe as they come.”



“That’s right.” I patted my chest. “I’m firm catastrophe warden for the
fifty-ninth floor.”

“Three years running,” Octavia said.
Eckstein raised his hand. “That’s not the reason I’m not going with

Seasons. It’s your firm profile. I’m sure you know by now how important a
strong respect for diversity and community involvement is to us here at
PHH. That comes from the board, not me.”

“What did you think of our materials?” Octavia asked.
“The numbers don’t convince me that Seasons has been dedicated to it

for long enough. Offer your services again next year, and we can
reevaluate.”

Eckstein got up. His upper lip curled. “For what it’s worth, the marketing
campaign disgusts me, but it’s also exquisite—it’s just the kind of thing
people in this town respond to.” I thought he might spit on us, but instead,
he left.

Octavia and I walked down the hall. I moped. Octavia fumed.
I was the first to speak. “What do you think we should—”
Octavia shot a look of disgust. “Those bastards. Armbruster and his frat

boys are going to have a field day when they hear about this. You think the
firm wants me to succeed? They would just as soon have me sit quietly in
the corner during shareholder meetings, batting my eyelashes and laughing
at all their jokes. I’m the one who made them bring in you and Dinah and
the rest of them. They would love if the firm were lily-white forever. Now
this Eckstein thinks I’m some kind of poser, and you’re asking me what to
do. How about you bring some ideas for a change?”

“I’m sorry,” I said.
“No. It’s not your fault.” Octavia stopped and placed her palms against

the wall. She wasn’t breathing. I was about to ask if she was okay when she
kicked the metal panel that covered a fire extinguisher. She kicked the panel
repeatedly until her shoe flew off. The panel was dented.

I grabbed her arm. “Stop. You’ll hurt yourself.”
She kicked the panel with her other foot and swiped hair out of her eyes.

“I’m not going down quietly. It’s always men standing in my way. Well, not



this time. I’ve only just started.” She told me to meet her in the garage and
entered a restroom.

In the lobby atrium, a woman in a skimpy purple getup and matching fur
coat stood on a temporary stage. She was thin, pale, and being questioned
by a swarm of reporters.

In the garage, I was almost to Octavia’s Aston Martin when someone
called to me. “Excuse me, but Ms. Breedlove would like to speak with
you.” A man walked toward me from the stairwell. He wore a plastic purple
kilt and a helmet with built-in sunglasses.

“Who?” I asked.
An entourage stepped out of the garage stairwell. There was something

Picasso-esque about the group of young people with their architectural
hairstyles and violet-color-schemed clothing. They arranged themselves on
either side of the door. A musical cue, like digitally altered flutes, played
from one of their devices. A musical herald.

Crooked Crown, her platform heels clicking on the cement, entered.
Beneath her purple coat, which I now realized was more of a shawl, she
wore a form-fitting outfit composed entirely of sizable purple patches, some
of which seemed made of taffeta, others wool, and still others lace. Yet the
patches exposed portions of skin in her R- and X-rated areas. This was to
say nothing at all of the monitoring collar she wore around her neck.

Last year she had attacked a police officer while taping a locally shot live
TV special for NBCBS. Most people would have gotten years in prison or
been put down in the case of repeat offenders. But her record label lawyers
had worked a deal that required she (1) dump a few hundred thousand
dollars into the City coffers, and (2) not leave the City until the judge
decided she’d suffered enough.

“Who are you?” she asked, her hips swinging like church bells as she
approached. There was something otherworldly about her. “I saw your face
on a billboard whilst being driven.” That was another thing I joshed Penny
about: her phony British accent. But she had the involuntary effect that all
celebrities had on me. Each time my cheeks flushed, and my IQ seemed to
drop by a third. She must have seen the firm billboard that Octavia had put
up.



I said I was a lawyer. I gave her my card.
“How do you live in this place?” she gestured as if to suggest my bed

was stashed behind a pickup. “This town is like a vulture burning the flesh
from my soul.”

“I get by,” I said.
“Do you know who she is?” the one in the kilt asked.
I told them I did.
“Only Crown, dahling,” another of the entourage, a girl wrapped in a

purple cylinder, said. “She dropped the Crooked part when she went solo.”
“I fancy your style,” Crown said. “It’s rare that a body captures my

attention. I wager you’re wondering why I’m here. Can I sign anything for
you?”

“Sign?”
“My autograph. People seem to like when I do that.”
“Well, I don’t have—”
Crown raised a hand to her shoulder. One of her people placed a marker

in her hand. She uncapped the marker, grabbed my shoulder with her free
hand, then drew on my jacket what appeared to be a backward C.
OceanofPDF.com



14

I was a killer in court, a master of oratory, an unstoppable disciple of
Cicero, Nelson Mandela, and Sukarma Kamenetz. But I hated going to
court. Why? If you watched enough award-winning films or read a bunch of
crime thrillers, as I did as a boy, you would get the distinct impression that
courts of law, indeed, the entire system of codified expectations, was fueled
by the search for truth. This was not so. Our courts were powered by two
things and two things alone: fear and fear itself.

In court, I was afraid of everyone: the client who relied on my
competence and zeal; the armed bailiff, whose job it was to subdue zealots
like me when we overstepped our bounds; my opposing counsel, whose
raison d’être was to cut my limbs from my body until I was nothing but
head and torso; and the judge, whose duty was to pound me into the
floorboards like a railroad spike. My opponent feared their own client, the
bailiff, and the judge as I did. And even the judge feared the appellate
courts that could overturn any decision with impunity. And the appellates
feared, presumably, God. But who did God fear?

Dinah Viet Dinh sat to my left, fondling rosary beads, our elbows
rubbing. We were on a pew in one of the lower chambers of City District
Court surrounded by dozens of other attorneys. We were the only two non-
whites in the hall. Not that I was counting.

It was Rule Day, a time for prayers and complaints to be heard. Every
lawyer in the room had filed a pleading during the prior month, motions to
stop things, motions to start things, injunctions against up, exceptions in
favor of down. All throughout the hallowed courthouse, on each of the five
floors, counselors perched on the edges of their seats, ready to grumble and
carp on behalf of their patrons.



“Jesus Christ.” Dinah Viet Dinh folded a sheet of blue paper and slid it
into her little metallic purse. “Does he ever show up on time?” The woman
in the row in front of us, a blonde in a yarmulke, glanced back at Dinah.
When the woman turned away, Dinah snarled her lips. Dinah was right, of
course. Judge Lordes was notorious not only for showing up long after
scheduled hearings but also for faulting lawyers who did the same. His
disciples—for example, the court reporter who never pronounced my name
right—ratted out the tardy. If the judge learned that you’d arrived, say, ten
minutes late, he might kick your case to the back of the docket, make you
wait until the end of the day to be heard. One poor sap complained about
this treatment and was sent to the north tower brig on contempt charges. He
was supposedly still chained to his cell like some anchorite. More than
likely court legend. But maybe true. I hadn’t seen the guy in at least five
years.

Dinah and I were there on separate cases. If it were anyone other than
Dinah, I would have been pissed. Callower, for example, tended to bring his
intemperance to court. Last time, he slipped a silver flask into my trial bag
to avoid a snooping bailiff. And Pavor was just as likely to duck out at the
last moment and ask me to cover for him. Not Dinah. She was a pro. She
took the calling as seriously as I did. Still, today there was also something a
little off about my friend. I couldn’t pinpoint what it was. New eye shadow?

Dinah was involved in a settlement involving some local musician. “So
what’s your problem?” she asked.

“No problem,” I said. “I’m ducky.”
“You’re nervous.”
“Am not!”
“Are too!” Dinah nodded toward my lap. I was unwittingly doing that

thing I did when I had pregame jitters: crafting origami out of court papers.
It was something I’d learned from Penny back when we were dating. I
tucked the last edge of paper underneath, creating a powder-blue butterfly. I
unfolded the paper until it was again a show-cause pleading.

“What are you here for?” Dinah asked.
“Hitch,” I said.



“Jesus Christ.” Karol v. Hitchens Corporation was an all-purpose
punchline. Had a bad case? Least it wasn’t Hitch. Ran up astronomical
expenses on a file? What did you think this was—Hitch? Long wait for a
ruling from the Supreme Court? Poor sucker. Hitch will come down before
you get word.

Over the last fifty years, nearly every attorney who worked at the firm
touched the file at one point or another.

The plaintiffs in my case had sued after their house was atomized by
space junk. My client’s entire defense of the claim was based on the
argument that a falling satellite was an Act of the Big Fella Upstairs.
Sometimes while puttering around His workbench, He dropped things:
screws, satellites, asteroids. No mortal creature could be liable for an
accident set in motion by a celestial butterfingers. Just ask the dinosaurs.

I glanced at the roll call screen on the wall. Dinah’s name scrolled past,
followed by the real name of Crooked Crown.

“How could you not tell me you’re representing that singer?” I asked. “I
mean. She’s on TV every day.”

“It’s no biggie. The firm is representing her. So technically you’re her
lawyer, too. She’s kind of not as much of a douche as I thought she would
be. She came to my apartment the other night when Pa—when this guy I’ve
been seeing was there. We lit a few up and played with tarot cards. You
mumbled something about needing my advice. Well?”

I explained how Octavia and my visit at PHH had imploded. “Octavia is
pissed at the situation, pissed at me, too,” I said. “And that Eckstein treated
us like we were telemarketers.”

“You’re toast,” Dinah said. “She’s going to fire you. You should start
looking for a new gig, maybe like a teaching job or something at a bank. I
have a hookup— What?”

“Thanks a bunch.”
“Your problem is that Eckstein wants you to be different, so be different.

Go volunteer at a school for delinquents or raise money for a Little League
team like car dealers and moving companies do.”

An idea hit me. “Supercargo!” I said. Dinah stared at me in confusion.
“My cousin’s been asking me to get involved with his civil rights group for



years.”
Dinah laughed. “I wouldn’t buy you as an activist.”
“Have some faith. I’ll be the most activistic person you’ve ever met.”
“Thine eyes of mercy toward us,” Dinah said, playing with the last bead

of her rosary. “And after this our exile—”
“All rise.” The court crier, a man wielding a ceremonial truncheon staff,

opened the rear chamber door. We all stood.
A black-robed figure stepped into the room and quickly ascended the

steps to the bench. This detail caught my attention more than any other: the
judge had very bony hands.

“That’s not Lordes,” I said.
“Nice going, Dr. Watson,” Dinah said. “Has your investigation revealed

anything el—”
“In re Tyresha Breedlove-Eckstein,” the judge said.
“Jesus Christ,” Dinah said, gathering her purse and briefcase. She passed

the bar and took her place behind one of two counselors’ tables. “Dinah
Viet Dinh on behalf of the petitioner, Your Honor.”

As she launched into her argument, a surprisingly poetic, roaring
soliloquy on the dangers of avarice, I realized that I was only slightly
prepared. Of course, I had read the plaintiff family’s latest brief in my case
—they alleged res ipsa loquitur, the idea that some offenses are so obvious
and indefensible, there is only one side to the story. And you, defendant,
must pay all the monies. But it struck me just then the precariousness of my
position. If I lost the hearing, the firm would finally realize how clueless I
was. They would recall Franklin or Riley or find some other fresh-faced
indentured servant. I’d be out on the street. Nigel and that spotted face of
his would never be corrected, perfected.

He sat on the head of a stone lion in City Park. He seemed younger than
he should. More innocent. “Come on, Dad,” Nigel said. “You can see me!”

“Am not?” I asked.
“Wake up.” Dinah shook my arm. I glanced around the room, which had

taken on a sickly green hue. Most of the other lawyers were staring at us.
The plaintiff family’s lawyer was already in position at counsel table one.



Why wasn’t Dinah at the podium? I was in the front row? I’d seen Dinah at
the podium just now? But she was at my side? I had the same emerging-
from-the-depths feeling I had every morning when I awoke. Like I was
piloting a submarine from the bed of the Dead Sea. Dinah jabbed her elbow
into my ribcage. This was happening more and more frequently. Time
jumps. Spatial hiccups. Distorted sensory processing. Brought on by Plums
and Japanese women? No. Jo Jo’s Geishas. But I couldn’t remember if I’d
had one that morning. Or maybe I’d had three?

I wiped my forehead on my suit sleeve and walked to the free counsel
table. If there was only one really important rule in running onto the playing
field, it was, Don’t let them see you stumble, don’t falter, get to the huddle in
a calm, orderly fashion—women and children first.

This ship is unsinkable. I smelled delicious maple bacon.
The opposing lawyer stood up and took her place at the podium

microphone. It was the woman in the yarmulke. She smiled, introduced
herself, and pointed in my direction a couple of times. I wiggled my fingers
at her.

“—a clear-cut instance of fault occasioned by wantonly negligent
actions,” she said.

A fly buzzed my ear. For a moment, I saw the whole insect, the antennae,
the wings, and the hind legs quivering with life. It was tired, hungry,
nervous. I caught the fly, in the palm of my hand—in one quick snap—and
squeezed. A burst of energy faded in my palm, which prickled as it cooled.

The plaintiff’s lawyer went back to her seat. I stood up and wiped my
hand on my coat. Two pulsing stalks of light on her back at the shoulder
blades. The plaintiff’s lawyer seemed to have blue butterfly wings sprouting
from her back. But some Muppet inside me yelled that this did not compute
and that I’d gotten a bad Plum before, so I’d better find my center and dunk
that ball!

“Your response, counselor?” The judge was an undifferentiated blob of
robe and shadow by then.

“I thought—” I grabbed the podium and clutched it. I felt like I had
grabbed the vibrating world by the neck. The room stabilized. “I thought



you’d never ask.” Cotton mouth. I spritzed Binaca. Shit. It tasted like
bacon.
OceanofPDF.com



15

I read somewhere once, perhaps in Family Health magazine (or was it
Hearth and Home?), while waiting in some foyer for a Plum to kick in, that
museums are proof of humanity’s narcissism. A museum with its glass
display cases and terse, descriptive cards is a way of declaring how
important we are. We rock. We matter. On approach from the Oort cloud,
aliens probably wouldn’t be sure whether we were an intelligent species.
They would scream across the sky, in their aluminum saucepans, atomizing
entire shopping districts—bye-bye Dolce, poof goes Gabbana—until they
came across a museum, at which time one of the horrified Plutonians would
exclaim, “Stop the culling, Xerblatz. We have made a horrible
miscalculation. These creatures feel.” A museum is proof positive of a
community’s heart and values, its history, manner of speaking, culture, its
soul.

Of course, a museum is also a boneyard.
The Musée du Nubia du Africq, also known as the Musée or the MdNA

(the second d was omitted), was founded before most of the City’s blacks
were swept out of the main body of the City and into the Tiko or the
hinterlands. The museum founders must have somehow sensed what was
coming, the way a bird intuits the coming of a particularly harsh winter.

In their panicked foresight, the founders of the Musée collected core
samples of blackness from various eras and areas of the City’s history: a
sepia-toned color wheel used by a protester during the Brown Bag Riot of
’24; a set of turntables owned by DJ Oya; an ankle monitor worn by the
City’s last African American mayor before her unfortunate demise; a chisel
purportedly used by the Invisible Artist, who engraved the Sky Tower’s
calcified walls with gargantuan abstract faces that peered vacantly into the



hinterland swamps until the faces were sandblasted off by management. In
this way, the MdNA was something like Noah’s Ark. Only the Musée saved
Nubian gewgaws, not stone tablets. Also, the waters were not liquid but
purely metaphorical. The reversal of white flight, a white scourge.

I had heard others complain about this passage of our village’s history,
but I was of the belief that history is neither good nor bad. History is
landscape. History is backdrop. It is context. Anyone who peers into a
canyon and finds something hateful in it is seeing their own reflection.

“You’re a good man, Jo Jo Baker,” I said, glancing at him in the
passenger seat.

“Why am I doing this again?” Jo Jo motioned at the camera around his
neck.

“Because I need a wingman.” Dinah was right. I felt better now that I
was back on offense. All I needed to get into the good graces of the
organization that ran the museum was a positive attitude and a few
handshakes. Once I insinuated myself, I would present proof to Octavia that
I was hard at work making Seasons look good. She would be able to parlay
my efforts into something useful.

“I thought I was promoted out of that spot when you got married.” He
snapped a shot of me.

“Once a wingman, always a wingman.” Pulling into the parking lot, I
remembered the bombed-out storefronts and drugged-out bums who
populated the neighborhood during my childhood. The Musée was now
flanked by a lovely patisserie and a classical mime college.

The organization that owned the museum, the Blind Equality Group,
nearly lost the franchise due to a tax debt. The BEG, as it was sometimes
called, believed in creating a completely color-blind world. Their ongoing
fight was against those who would divide the citizenry by race, even if that
meant ignoring history, statistics, policy, and rhetoric. They just wanted us
all to get along. But hopes and dreams don’t pay the bills. To raise funds,
they converted the property into a tourist attraction. As I recalled from
school trips to the establishment when I was a boy, it was more of a gift
shop than anything, trading in the iconography of blackness throughout the
decades, from baggy jeans and head wraps to big red wax lips and combs



shaped like clouds. (Someone—maybe Sir—had told me that the combs
were originally fist-shaped but the fists were outlawed by City ordinance.
The idea of a comb shaped like a folded hand sounded like one of my
father’s typically dubious ideas. He had been a frequent purveyor of the big
fish tale, a veritable fishmonger.)

The Musée was one of about a half-dozen places where Supercargo
worked part time. Most of my cousin’s jobs were like that. Fifteen hours
here. Eight hours there. A graveyard shift when he could swing it.

Supercargo greeted us with a flurry of daps and hugs as soon as we
entered. “Cuzzie,” he said. “I never thought I’d see you up in here, but I’m
glad you came. And you brought my man Jo Jo. Give me a second, y’all.”
He went behind the checkout counter and righted a discount sign. A group
of tourists in hockey jerseys clustered around a turning rack. A brunette
woman clutched a familiar-looking plush doll to her chest. I purchased a
vanilla-crème-filled chocolate eclair from the patisserie. A dollop of that
delicious, wholesome goop dropped onto my shoe. As I reached into my
blazer for a handkerchief, I was suddenly taken over by nostalgia. I picked
up a doll that was identical to the one the brunette had held.

“What is that thing?” Jo Jo finished his baklava and wiped his hands on
his pants. I gave him the doll. It was a representation of the civil rights
leader—that former mayor I mentioned—Jacquelle Suhla, herself. It was
clad in a gray pantsuit and brown bow tie. Of course, the doll’s humanity
was substituted for something more salable. An adorable monkey.

Some people thought the Suhla Monkeys were racist. But others believed
they were a preemptive strike against bigoted minds. If we could transform
our best leader into a marmoset, then what did it matter if certain people
wondered if we blacks had tails that we tucked into our underwear? As for
me, I found the monkeys cute. I’d had one when I was in grade school. It
occupied a prime position in my childhood bedroom: hanging from a strap
over my dresser mirror. Whatever happened to my monkey?

“How much?” the woman asked me. “This is the cutest thing. My niece
will just love her.”

“Well, I—”
“He doesn’t work here,” Jo Jo said.



“Everything is twenty percent off today, miss,” Supercargo interrupted,
pointing to a sign hanging from the rafters.

“You work here?” the woman asked. Supercargo said yes. “You have
amazing hair.” The woman’s eyes widened. “May I?”

Supercargo offered a length of his dreads, which she stroked as a child in
a petting zoo might.

“Such an earthy, soulful texture,” the woman said, and wandered off to
gather more swag.

Supercargo smiled at me. “It’s better to meet her type in here than in a
darkened alley. I’d never make it out alive.” He flipped up the counter and
stepped from behind it. “Come check out the hall. I’m glad you came, cuz.
You too, Jo Jo.” I palmed a tube of skin toning cream from a stack on the
counter with the intent to purchase it later. Supercargo parted a beaded
curtain.

“What, no secret handshake?” I asked.
“Would you know it if I asked, brother?” Supercargo asked.
“He’s got a point.” Jo Jo took a picture of Supercargo and me.
“So he does.”
The hall was a simple, wood-paneled affair with metal folding chairs

arranged in rows. At the front of the room, a microphone jutted from a
podium. Affixed to the front of the podium, a placard said, BLIND! EQUALITY!
NOW! A few people were already seated. I was no stranger to such rooms.
When I was a boy, Sir had brought me to this lecture or that sermon. To
protests and strategy sessions. To the inner sanctums of community,
resistance, and struggle. Such events fit Sir like a well-worn pair of slippers.
Regardless of the audience or location, he was always ready with a word of
support for the cause, even when it wasn’t clear what the cause was. After
all, what was equality other than a typographical error in the Constitution?

Yes, the Founders had meant that all men were created equal, but they
failed to include an index of defined terms. Ever since they drafted that
screed, no one wanted to admit that Washington, Jefferson, and the rest of
those guys meant only to protect the rights of white, landowning men.
Through sloppy copyediting, our illustrious forefathers set off the human
rights skirmishes that would beset the nation all the way to the present. If



any of the seventy-plus delegates at the Constitutional Convention could
have bothered to bring along a gray-wigged man of letters or even a lowly
print shop owner, the document would have been clearer, so generations of
people wouldn’t have spent their lives dreaming of rights they were never
meant to have, wrongheadedly attending protests, getting beaten or killed.

Had Sir tried to make me more like him, in visiting so many of these
struggle spaces? He must have realized somewhere along the way that he’d
failed. And how would he have felt about me bringing Jo Jo? Sir wasn’t a
racist. The oppressed can’t oppress, boy. That’s like blaming the lobster for
the temperature of the pot. But he never met a white person he didn’t have a
problem with. Bringing Jo Jo into a historic inner sanctum such as the back
room of the MdNA would have been like inviting the Sons of the
Confederacy into a planning session of the original Million Man March all
those decades ago. Every time I wondered what he would have made of
Penny, I short-circuited the thought by trying to recall the name of
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis’s black great-grandfather.

“Tyson?” I mumbled. “Jenson? Or was it great-great-grandfather?”
“What?” Jo Jo asked.
“Nothing,” I said.
“I’m thinking of taking a trip up to Brooklyn—”
“To see Casey? That’s not a great idea.”
“She can’t keep my kids away from me.” I reminded Jo Jo that his ex-

wife could indeed keep the boys away from him until his attorney, another
law school classmate, managed to garner visitation rights for him. Against
my advice, Jo Jo hadn’t had representation during the divorce or custody
hearings. Now it was up to his new lawyer to wrench him out of the hole
he’d dug for himself. I sometimes questioned the plausibility of two people
so deeply in love ending up as mortal enemies. Maybe love was just the
larval stage of hate, the comely caterpillar in advance of the hideous
butterfly.

I had come to the Musée with a simple plan: Join up with BEG. Maybe
get Seasons to sponsor the organization’s Christmas party. Then use
Seasons’s support of the race community’s activities as one more arrow in
the quiver next time Octavia and I made a run at the hospital.



I was surprised to see that at least a third of the room was white. After
all, Supercargo, like Sir, was not above throwing up an occasional black
power fist. I expected a room full of sixth-wave Black Panthers, but the
gathering was a mix of people from various races and classes. Supercargo
introduced us to a few people. A brother with surgically recolored blue eyes
—it was easy to tell, the blue was too blue, the perfect, beautiful blue of a
Midwestern sky—who drove streetcars. A woman who worked on the
janitorial staff of the School Without Walls; she seemed perhaps Afro-
Latina by her accent and medium-light brown skin, but her nose had a
papery aspect to it, a telltale sign of early-process demelanistic
reconstruction. A youngish white couple in dashikis. The Galton–van
Riebeecks, Jan and Marie, I would later learn. Supercargo and Jo Jo fell into
conversation with some of the others.

Near the back of the room, a man in a seersucker suit bent over a
cardboard box and fiddled with the contents. That bald head. That almond
skin tone. My mind served up an image of the same man bent over at
Octavia’s mansion, rubbing Armbruster’s gnarly, waxen feet. He recognized
me as soon I recognized him.

“Riley,” I said.
He placed one fist on a hip, a standard Riley pose. “Well, if it isn’t the

boy who lived,” he said, his weight shifting from foot to foot. He was a
beast in doubles. “Give me some!” He threw both arms around me and gave
me a lingering, almost tender hug. “How are things on the Great White
Way?” He covered his mouth and glanced around with exaggerated
sheepishness like someone from one of those historical Wayans Bros. clips.
“I shouldn’t say things like that, especially around here, but I’ve had it
rough since they fired me, and I’m dying to know if the place has burned to
the ground yet. Least they deserve.” Riley told me he had gotten his pink
slip as soon as he came in the morning after Elevation Night. He’d made a
few calls and snatched a teaching job at Nigel’s school. “School pay is
godawful, but there’s a little less intrigue, as you can imagine.”

A clot of schadenfreude rose up the back of my throat. Riley had always
been a social climber with an air of superiority about himself. It was funny
to see him humbled to a profession that society deemed hardly as important
as street sweeper, given the pay scale. But I felt a twinge of shame. I



couldn’t deny that I missed him at the firm. He usually knew what was
going to happen before the rest of us associates did, and he shared
information freely. Beyond that, he could be a good guy, even selfless. Like
the time he took me to lunch and explained all of Octavia’s expectations
and pet peeves.

“You always did land on your feet,” I said.
“That’s me,” he said, “part pussy cat.”
“How’s my kid doing?”
“Oh. We get along eminently, but he’s on a different schedule, so I don’t

see him much.” Riley cupped my elbow. “Listen. You really shouldn’t be
here.”

“That’s no way to welcome an old buddy.”
Riley’s face suddenly darkened, and he punched my shoulder hard. “I’m

serious.” His face went back to normal as a couple walked over. “Have you
met Marie and Jan? They’re two of BEG’s biggest benefactors.”

“No.” I rubbed my shoulder.
“That was before our diamond stocks plummeted,” Marie said. She

grabbed my forearm. “I thought he’d be blacker.”
“Yeah,” Jan held out a pale hand next to my dark one. “We’re more

African than you.”
How much shock registered on my face? Did my eyes bug? Did my

tongue loll in my open mouth? Supercargo pointed at me. Jo Jo chuckled.
So did the Galton–van Riebeecks.

“They’re from Namibia,” Riley said.
A short sister in a pantsuit entered. I’d seen her on television. She was

the granddaughter of Suhla, the former mayor.
“Oh, baby,” Riley said. “Zora doesn’t look happy.” I shrugged my

shoulders interrogatively.
“Funding issues,” Marie said. “The City keeps futzing around with the

grant allocations. They keep the organization on a tight leash so we don’t
escape from the yard.”

“Don’t look at me,” Riley said. “My contacts in the City Finance
Department don’t return my calls now that I don’t have that Seasons Ustis



Malveaux shine.”
Supercargo gave Riley a nasty look, then showed me to a seat near the

front of the room. The Galton–van Riebeecks sat behind me. Supercargo
played MC and called Zora to the podium. She said a prayer, her wide, open
face turned up to the fluorescent lights. I found a meeting agenda on the
seat next to me. I scanned it. There were slots for old business. Marie
oversaw BEG’s fundraising. Intake was up. Supercargo was the recruiting
coordinator. New member enrollment was down, but hopefully my presence
was a sign of change. Then the testimonials started. The streetcar driver
spoke in stilted terms about the value of everyone coming together and
“rolling along the same track.” The janitorial woman said we shouldn’t fear
“sweeping changes” because sometimes you have to “clean the mess out
and start from fresh.” It was Supercargo’s turn up.

“Y’all know we been working a long time for the dream. We trying to
bring our community together in a new way, a permanent way.” Some
people nodded. “It’s been a long time coming, but I can feel that we turning
a corner. Our protests at the hospital have been making a difference. People
are paying attention and hear our message.”

A few in the room clapped. But not everyone. For instance, the janitor
wrung her hands, while the streetcar driver stared straight ahead. The
Galton–van Riebeecks, though, clapped vigorously. “And now ain’t the
time to back down or let up. I don’t know about y’all, but I ain’t about to
back down. I don’t even know how.” Another smattering of appreciation.
“But I ain’t going to run on because I want y’all to hear a word from my
best cousin. He a good dude. He really is.” Light applause.

I didn’t move. They couldn’t make me move. If I just sat, eventually they
would move on to other business. It was a familiar fear, always present the
moment just before I spoke in court. In that moment, I considered the
possibility of failure, of humiliation. Jan tapped my shoulder, and I popped
up like a piece of burned toast.

Supercargo took the seat I had vacated. More light applause. Jo Jo
snapped shots of me in rapid succession. I tried to clear my throat, but there
seemed to be a gigantic ball of wet, warm cat hair lodged in my esophagus.
Somehow the audience took this as cause to clap harder. I didn’t want to
argue in favor of the protests at PHH. I liked the work PHH did. After all, I



would be sending Nigel there soon enough. And how could the BEG be
anti-demelanization when at least three people other than the streetcar
driver and janitor had obviously undergone procedures?

But then I remembered why I was there. I needed to build a foundation
that Octavia could relaunch her PHH campaign from. If I could convince
the group to accept me as one of their own, I would quickly move up the
ranks. They would vouch for me when the time came. Along the way, I
would make sure there were plenty of photos documenting my place—
Seasons’s place—in the movement. Eckstein wouldn’t be able to say we
had no commitment to the black community. We would be the community.

I employed a technique I learned back in law school. I placed my hands
on either side of the podium, firmly gripping the edges. I spaced my feet
shoulder-width apart. I took three deep breaths. This trick was given to me
by my mentor at the University of Alabama Law School, a beautiful sister
called Mimi LaVon of Chicago, who was two years ahead of me. Mimi’s
technique grounded me in times when it seemed like the whole planet was
vibrating on an untenable frequency.

“Brothers and sisters,” I said, “there is a black cloud over our city. A
wave of darkness that threatens to wipe away our identity. We’ve all seen
the nefarious work being carried out at the shadowy clinic. The thinning of
lips. The whittling down of noses. The whitening of skin.”

“You tell it,” Marie said. Several people leaned forward in their seats. Jo
Jo clapped a little too loud—I didn’t know he cared. I wasn’t quite sure
what to say next, so I used Penny—that is, a word salad of things she had
said at one time or another—to make the point.

“And for what purpose? To divide us. Now is the time for us to prove to
our fellow citizens the value of self-love. The value of accepting one
another as we are.” I pulled my monogrammed handkerchief from the
inside of my jacket and wiped my forehead, then my cheek, as I had seen
my pastor do in the church my parents brought me to before it was
condemned. An eclair crumb lodged in the corner of my lip. I ate it.
Chocolate. “My dear brothers and sisters. Countless people have climbed
this mountain before us. Countless have suffered indignity and even death
to open this path. But today we have reached the other side and find a
valley filled to the brim with the briars of iniquity. It’s up to us to chop



down those briars, to clean out the vestiges of a caste system based on the
color of our skin!”

At the last line, I pounded the podium. The room rose to its feet in
response, as if I’d just brought down the hammer at a state fair, and they
were the puck. Everyone clapped, even Mr. Streetcar and Janitoria. Except
for Riley, who remained seated with his arms folded. But never mind him.
There was an electric vibration inside me as they chanted my name.
Supercargo led me from behind the podium. People grabbed my hands,
hugged me, kissed my cheeks.

“I guess this means you in,” Supercargo said.
“You reckon?” I asked.

OceanofPDF.com



16

Nigel had too many birthmarks to count. If this fact surprises you, it’s
because I’ve done a poor job of describing the true wingspan of the
albatross hanging around my dear boy’s neck.

I knew the blot on his face greeted him in the display cases of the School
Without Walls. I knew he saw his defect in the black mirrors of electronic
devices. I knew his stain was apparent in the barely disguised reactions of
strangers who had been smiling the moment before they recognized his
defect.

I won’t take you through all the myriad incidents that we—that’s him as a
boy, me as a boy, and us in our patrilineal relationship—experienced in the
course of events. It would be impossible to do so. But I could randomly flip
through my journal, a Big Chief Bigboote tablet where I kept a written
record of all the indignities my son and I experienced.

Memories could be questioned, distorted, forgotten. But a transcript
could not. The physical act of remembering is a bulwark against insanity.
Against the possibility that the insidious big white machine exists only in
my head and in the heads of similarly delusional persons. That the big white
machine’s carcinogenic pheromones and countless rows of razor-sharp teeth
are the result of indigestion, a bad Plum, an inferior mind. In any event, my
written journal was far more secure for posting these thoughts than some
digital cloud where Uncle Sam, Anonymous, or God could get their talons
on them.

I’m seated now under an Adansonia looking at a page that I opened to by
chance. Here are notes from a long-past outing: It’s the summer before
Elevation Night. An ideal Saturday afternoon. A well-maintained,
semipublic pool. Only a five-minute stroll from our house. To get in, I



showed the desk clerk my neighborhood association card. Then he asked
for my federal ID, which he held up to the light. We wetted ourselves in the
exterior shower. Matching swim trunks purchased by Penny. Blue field with
Captain America shields in an orderly pattern. Deck chairs mostly
occupied. Pool active, but not crowded. Nigel and me not the only ones like
us. A black family already splashing around in the shallow end. Joyous and
common like any family at any pool on any hot day anywhere. But even I
wonder where they came from. Lifeguard hunches on his perch. Stares at
them. They ain’t done nothing. The lifeguard ain’t done nothing. But I
staple my eyes to the scene. And that’s something. The act of observing
rewrites reality.

Nigel swims back from the deep end. A strong swimmer. Water streams
over his small back like encouragement.

He climbs out. “I think somebody spilled soda in the pool.” He sticks out
his tongue, flicks water from his face. “What?” he says.

I grab his shoulder and spin him around. That dark medallion of skin on
his tummy is bigger. Nigel’s other blemishes cover his body. The greatest
concentration of marks: belly and back. A dark asterism. Some flaws
approach the size and complexity of the stigma on his face. Some
discolorations have undergone transmutations similar to the facial mark.
Some even seem to have moved over time from one hemisphere of his body
to another. My fear is that these islands will merge to form a continent. The
lesser smudges, they’re just ordinary freckles. But what image would
emerge if I traced those dots? His mother’s face? Our home? A playground
viewed from a hilltop? But there I go again being melodramatic with a
capital dramatic.

“Maybe I should go home with them.” Nigel nodded toward the black
family. “I bet they’re really nice people.” My boy’s mark humor, his scar-
chasm.

“No,” I say. “You’re all mine.”

—

After my speech at the Musée, and after I dropped off Jo Jo, I drove home,
mentally mulling over Nigel’s blemishes as I pulled in to our driveway. I



brought the Bug so close to Penny’s minivan’s rear bumper that my vehicle
seemed to be puckering for a kiss. Inside our house, Penny was swabbing
her decks and battening down her hatches, so she could shove off for her
shift at the hospital. I’m being too coy. Have I mentioned the giddiness I
inevitably felt watching my wife prepare for her day? She stood, leaning
slightly over the bathroom sink, on tiptoes. My girl. I’ll spare the reader my
X-rated thoughts. But I’ll confess that they involved a lightning-quick
reimaging of the Rapunzel myth, which, of course, is nothing more than a
prudish allegory about sexual desire and climbing with one’s lover to
orgasmic heights.

Actually, whenever I think back to that time and Penny’s prework prep,
I’m drawn to an entirely different fantasy. One where animated nightingales
float down through the skylight to land on her shoulder. A white rabbit
scurries up from a hole in the hardwood to say, “You’re late. Hurry up. Get
your sun shades. Because it’s bright and you’re late!”

“Ground Control to husband.” Penny pinched my cheek.
“What?” I asked.
“You were off planet again.” Penny crossed into the closet and grabbed a

jacket. “Nigel does the same thing. How was the museum thingy?”
“Weird,” I said, “but that’s to be expected with anything Supercargo is

into.”
“Well, I’m glad you went, even if it was work-related,” Penny said

tersely. That tone had been entering her voice more and more since I told
her about my assignment as the Face of Seasons.

“You should spend more time with your cousin anyway. He adores you.”
“I guess. How’s the kid?”
“In his room. There’s something different about him lately. He didn’t

want to help in the kitchen just now.”
“It’s a hard age.” I leaned in for a kiss.
“Just talk to him.” Penny bopped my nose. “There’s Tater Tot casserole

in the oven.”
Nigel’s room was situated in such a way that the sunlight poured in

during the morning. But by late afternoon, as our snow globe city spun
away from the sun, his chamber grew dark. It was his habit to spend entire



weekend afternoons on his bed reading classics or doodling in his sketch
pad or playing with his device if he was very bored. The world shadowed
around him. He never bothered with the lights.

Nigel’s position was usually such that, standing in the long hallway, I
could silently watch him without being noticed. An invasion of privacy?
Yes. A little creepy? Prolly. But doesn’t every parent do this in some
fashion or other? Don’t we all feel that some substantial portion of our
essence has made its way into the child? In this sense, the voyeuristic parent
is really watching herself and hoping for some revelation. Or at least a tip.

I had seen all the seasons of our child’s life: the winter he stacked a set of
alphabet blocks to spell safe even though he was surely too young to know
what that word meant; the spring he ran a remote-control school bus into a
crowd of action figures and, seeing the horror of his actions, gathered the
figures in his arms and laid them under bedsheets to recuperate; the fall he
pulled one of my hats over his eyes and shadowboxed an invisible gang.

Now Nigel lay on his bed, a sketch pad open before him. In small,
cramped strokes, he created something I couldn’t make out.

Nigel glanced at me. “Dad,” he said in a way that was both cheerful and
wary. He swept the pad closed.

“What you got there?” I asked.
“Nothing. Just drawings.”
“Can I see?”
Nigel pulled the pad away from me. “That’s okay.”
The truth is I knew precisely what was inside. It was the latest iteration of

a comic Nigel had ginned up years before during a particularly difficult
time in our household. Our caped hero was a stand-in for my boy, of course.
A kind of Nig-El. The baddie was a weasel-faced villain he called the
Fascist Fedora, who went around forcing the citizens of Sun City to wear
super fancy hats: top hats and bonnets, derbies and Gainsboroughs, etc.
This didn’t bother me. The family organizational chart listed me as “father,
breadwinner, protector, role model.” The part about me as a best bud was
somewhere in the addendum.

“I brought you something. Take off your shirt.” I said. Nigel sat on his
haunches in bed but didn’t take off his shirt. I showed him the tube I’d



gotten from the Musée.
“Super extra strength,” I said. It was bad enough that skin toning cream

was relatively hard to find within the City excluding the Tiko, which I
avoided for reasons already described. Even within the Tiko, so much of
what I found was watered down. Lower percentages of active ingredient.
The jar of Madame C.J.’s that Penny chucked off the steps of Nigel’s school
was an example of the lower-quality product. But not J.B.’s Whitener. It
was the skin-toning equivalent of acetone.

“I don’t want to,” Nigel said.
“Don’t be that way,” I said. “We’ll go out for ice cream after. Won’t that

be great? Maybe head over to the bowling alley.”
“I just don’t want to.”
“Why not?”
“It stinks, and it stings.” I knew that Nigel was right on both counts. I

had, many moons earlier, smeared some J.B.’s on the right side of my torso
over the ribs. It smelled faintly of sulfur and burned worse than an
analgesic. The next morning there was a faint patch of reddened skin that
seemed somewhat lighter if viewed under the powerful light of the vanity
from a certain angle. I never used the cream again because I recognized
how silly I was to try it. I would have had to dive into a pool of the
ointment to fix my skin. I was too dark all over. A full body stain.

But even with my personal experience, I knew Nigel wanted the cream.
How did I know? Because he held the hem of his shirt between his thumb
and index. I knew my son.

Of course, we had discussed this before. We didn’t have to during those
times when he relented without comment. But during other times, I had to
remind him of where I was coming from. Of whose side I was on in the war
we were fighting.

“Why do we do this?” I asked.
“So that I can get better,” he mumbled, sounding for all the world like his

five-year-old self, that being the first time we did this.
“And what happens when you’re better?”
“We won’t have to do it anymore.”



“There are dark things and light ones, and you’re the very best thing in
the world.” I threw my arm over his shoulder. “You know I love you, right?
One day this will all be in the rearview.”

Nigel nodded. The edges of his eyes were wet. Such a sensitive boy. But
my eyes were wet, too. Empathetic me. Nigel removed his shirt and his
shorts. My son in intermezzo. The interplay of his light skin and dark spots
brought to mind the stracciatella in the freezer. I stretched a latex glove
onto my hand and let go with a snap.

Now, I’m perfectly aware of the judgmental thoughts running through
your head as you read these words. I suspect your pupils have dilated, your
lips are agape, your heart filled with venom toward me. But let me make an
attempt to clarify my position as this is neither the time nor the place for the
mincing of words or slightest prevarication of any kind.

I am a unicorn. I can read and write. I have all my teeth. I’ve read Plato,
Woolf, Nikki Giovanni, and Friend. I’ve never been to jail. I’ve voted in
every election since I was eighteen. I finished high school. I finished
college. I finished law school. I pay taxes. I don’t have diabetes, high blood
pressure, or the itis. If you randomly abduct a hundred black men from the
streets of the City and deposit us into a gas chamber, I will be the only one
who fits this profile. I will be the only one who survives. Is it because I’m
better than the other ninety-nine? No. It’s because I’m lucky, and I know it.
Somehow the grinding effects of a world built to hurt me have not yet
eliminated my every opportunity for a happy life, as is the case for so many
of my brethren. The world is a centrifuge that patiently waits to separate my
Nigel from his basic human dignity. I don’t have to tell you that this is an
unjust planet.

A dark-skinned child can expect a life of diminished light. This is truth
anywhere in the world and throughout most of history. But let’s stick to the
Home of the Free. Place young Jamal on an all-white basketball team, and
guess who will get ejected from the game more often for normal
rambunctious behavior? Give a hiring manager a stack of applications. Let
him choose between an equally qualified Jamal, Jane, or Jonathan. See
Jamal waiting at the unemployment office. Again. (Admittedly, none of
these examples are particularly shocking, and I fear that I risk insulting your
intelligence, dear reader, but ride with me awhile longer.)



See Jamal evicted from his apartment. See Jamal arrested for vagrancy.
See Jamal mysteriously die in a transport van on the way to the City jail. A
brief interlude of cursing the heavens. Resurrect Jamal with lightning.
Smoke. Sparks. The smell of burning cocoa butter. Put a toy gun in Jamal’s
hand in an open-carry state. Wait for Jane or Jonathan to call the police due
to a “suspicious-looking black guy.” See the cavalry show up and scalp
Jamal. No questions asked. Jane is heartbroken for the tragic
misapprehension of the situation, she says over a pumpkin spice latte, as
Jonathan bites the tip off a double chocolate biscotti.

I have a natural aversion to numbers and statistics, as they can be
manipulated by any reactionary with an agenda. But that doesn’t change the
objective fact that prospects for African Americans have devolved even
since my grandparents’ time. Black women make thirty cents for every
dollar a white man does, and 90 percent of black moms are single mothers.
Unemployment among black males is the norm, not the exception, and nine
out of ten brothers have done time. And virtually none of us black guys and
dolls can vote since felons and the children of felons need a voucher from
an upstanding citizen to earn a voting pass. (Jo Jo was mine.)

None of that even takes into account the fact that every black person is a
de facto enemy of the state. They used to call bringing every able-bodied
black male to jail for questioning racial profiling. Now it’s called excellent
police work. Did I mention that blacks in most major cities live in fenced-in
ghettos just like the Tiko? There may be beauty in my blackness and dignity
in the struggle of my people, but I won’t allow my son to live a life of
diminished possibility. I see a constellation of opportunity that those of my
ilk rarely travel to. I see my Nigel at the center of those stars.

This reraises the question I’ve occasionally concerned myself with during
Nigel’s life: What if I can ensure that my boy is not perceived as a black
man? What if he is simply a man?

“Ah.” Nigel winced. Did I enjoy using the noxious stuff on my son? Of
course not. What parent likes to see their baby cry at the barber or squirm
beneath the dentist’s drill? But weaker creams weren’t effective.

As for Penny, she loved our son as much as a person could. She gave
more hugs. She provided more words of encouragement. She was the
practical one, the reason Nigel got all his shots on schedule and never



missed a day of school. But what did my amazing, considerate wife know
of the unseen slights our son experienced, the monstrous episodes so
internally disturbing that our doomed boy would never tell anyone—not
Penny, not even me—about? Still, I didn’t have to hear words to
understand. Wasn’t I also among the marked?

He stood in front of his bed in skivvies while the cream dried into his
skin. I couldn’t have him rolling around and spreading it on his bedsheets.
Even the milder version stained.

“Last spot,” I said. “Close ’em tight.” He shut his eyes. This was the
most important part of the care. But also the trickiest. The tarnished skin
around his eye was naturally quite tender. And then there were the delicate
membranes nearby. I had to use finesse. I squeezed a teardrop’s worth onto
my purple-gloved pinky and gingerly applied the unction. I was nearly done
when Nigel flinched.

“Keep still,” I said.
“Ah!” he said. “It burns.”
“Hold on.”
“Dammit. Stop!” He grabbed my hand, roughly.
“Ow,” I said.
For a moment, Nigel glared at me with one eye clamped shut. He let go.

He went for the open door. All along his back, blotches of white cream
gleamed like gems.

I had talked with the parents of older kids about the transition to
teenagedom. Nigel was on the cusp of that ever-expanding dark interior
world. Even in moments of small rebellion, there had always been an
agreement that he was not the final arbiter of his own life. But I could tell
that my job of preparing him for the best of all possible worlds had just
gotten harder.

In the second bathroom, Nigel ran the sink. In the kitchen, I tied off a
garbage bag containing the soiled latex gloves. I opened the door and ran
the overhead fan. I couldn’t leave any evidence in the house for Penny to
find. As I walked outside to the garbage can, the white sack dangling from
my fingers, I heard something like Nigel’s laughter from back inside my
home.



OceanofPDF.com



17

Those were the times when I thought about Sir locked away in his rusty
prison cage. Sir, whom I had only spoken to once since his arrest, when
Mama had, after some considerable prodding, convinced me to see him in
his new native captivity, a visit the three of us would come to regret.

But it wasn’t that encounter that came to mind now. What I recalled was
a family reunion we attended when I was a precocious preteen, just before
Sir’s arrest. Ours was a large family, although the great body of us lived in
the state next door or the state next to that one. I’m excluding the
overhanging branch, our distant light-skinned cousins; those yellowish
leaves had grown in California valleys for generations. They never showed
up for anything.

The reunion was an especially auspicious gathering as it marked my
grandfather’s ninety-ninth birthday, which would turn out to be his last, as
he would die suddenly a few days later. I didn’t know him very well, in part
because he sired Sir late in life, shortly before abandoning my sainted,
deceased grandmother and moving to the country. He and Sir didn’t get
along.

He was a scary guy to young me. In retrospect, I had no good reason to
fear the man, who worked multiple jobs until his eighties. But also, in
retrospect, I realized that my fear had something to do with my father’s
attitude toward him (“He’s just another wog”) and with the clothes he wore
when not working: stiff-billed snapback caps, baggy white T-shirts, baggy
blue or black jeans that slouched low on his waist and occasionally below
his butt. In other words, he dressed like an old-timey thug. In still other
words, I was scared because I was supposed to feel scared, in the same way
that one is jokingly terrified of a faux-blood-covered man in a haunted



house. As I grew older, I recognized the ridiculousness of my position and,
that day, consciously tried to correct my attitude and treat him as if we’d
gone crabbing every summer of my young life.

“Do you feel ninety-nine, old man?” I knelt next to him, in the respectful
way that I had seen some of the grown men—my cousins and half-uncles—
do, with my forearm resting against the side of his wheelchair. The metal
frame felt like ice against my skin.

“Every bit of it, caterpillar. Every one of those years was a different
problem. And now those problems done piled up on top of me. Hurts to
move. Hurts to breathe. They shove a hose up my Johnson so’s I can pee.
I’m just about done with all this. This world been too many for me. I had
dreams when I was an up-and-comer—”

He stared out at the reunion. We were on a park knoll in the state next
door, where he lived. From the knoll, it was easy to watch the family, the
many dozens of us, on the field below gathered around grill pits, playing
bid whist at picnic tables, boys tackling each other with a contraband
football, old ladies praying hand in hand. My parents had walked to the
small promontory by the lake and were making their way back, two
shadows beneath the evergreens.

On the opposite end of the green, a trio of state troopers, in their black
armbands and Stetson hats, observed our gathering. The white lights on
their interceptors blinked slowly and out of sequence.

“I’ll tell you something, lil shorty.” He put his hand on my forearm. His
skin was wrinkled, but not as much as I would have expected. And his
fingernails were as large and clear as if each were a window into his body.
“I tell you this because you special even iffen you too young to feel me.”
He leaned toward me. “You listening?” I nodded. “Peep this. I spent my
whole existence working for white folk, and I did good for myself and all of
you. I was a chef for forty-five years at the Wallace National Golf Club. I
worked odd jobs to make ends meet. I been an under-the-table butcher
’cause I ain’t have no certification papers. I worked nights at Loafer’s
making French bread for fancy restaurants all over the South. I been a
chandler, too. I tell you to watch out for them though.” He squeezed my
wrist. His eyes popped. “White people ain’t no more evil than the next man,
and don’t let nobody tell you they are. But white folk radioactive, too.



Because they got the top card and always will. ’Cause they glow in the
dark, they can’t help but hurt you like what make cancer. You get me?”

I didn’t nod, but I didn’t shake my head either. I froze. Clearly, my
grandfather’s brain was infected by devils.

He turned me to face him and gestured with his hands. “We like snails at
a parade, and they tossing salt from the floats. Onliest thing you can do to
shut it off is to use guilt for your umbrella. Guilt them into respecting you.
When I die, tell ’em a Klan man killed your old grandpa. Tell ’em whatever
you want to keep them off your back. Make them feel like they owe you
something. Shame ’em to death. It’s the only way you’ll make it with them
in this world, believe me, I tried. Self-respect will be your end.”

“Time to go,” Sir said.
My grandfather seemed to suddenly deflate, as though Sir’s presence

sapped his strength. Grandpa stuttered when he spoke, and his hand shook.
“Y’all raising this boy right,” he said. “He going to be a real gentleman.”

I stood and went to Sir’s side.
“You would know.” Sir rubbed his elbow patch. We had driven straight

over from the college where he taught, so he was still in his sweater vest
and blazer. Not that he would have changed clothes. That was his standard
look.

Mama rubbed Sir’s shoulder. Her flowy orange and brown top fluttered
in the breeze. “Thank you, Mr. Ben. You look hip with your Kings hat.”

“You so sweet, honey,” Grandpa said. “I wish y’all would bring this boy
around more.”

Mama said something affirmative. But Sir muttered, “Not a chance.”
“What was Mr. Ben talking about?” Mama asked when we were a

distance away.
“Nothing,” I said.
“I didn’t have to overhear to know,” Sir said. “He was trying to turn his

head into a landfill. But the facility was closed, right, son?” I nodded
absentmindedly.

As we walked, Sir placed a hand on the back of my neck. “You
understand the importance of personal pride, and you certainly understand



that life’s rewards come from knowing you’re as good as anyone else, as
important.”

My grandfather was still seated in his chair on the knoll. Some family
girls brought him a second helping of sweet potato cake, his favorite.

“You listening, son?” Mama asked.
“Yes, Sir,” I said. “I mean, yes.”

OceanofPDF.com



18

It turned out that Jan Galton–van Riebeeck, the white guy in the dashiki,
was BEG’s director of strategic initiatives, one of the few paid positions in
the organization. This meant he was linked into all things BEG. If I could
impress him with my dedication to the group, then he would explain things
that a peon like Supercargo wouldn’t know. Organizational structure,
current methods, future plans. He would roll out the carpet so I’d know
exactly where to walk.

Several days following my induction, I left the office early and met up
with Jan and Riley at the organization’s downtown satellite office, an old
book depository. The office was tiny—only two small rooms and a closet
full of crabbing buckets—but it was to be used at my leisure once Jan
cleaned the cobwebs out of the space—and my mind. We were going over
BEG’s core tenets, which had been developed and deployed by our
forebears, most of whom were lost to history.

On the table before me lay a half-dozen pastel pamphlets with cartoony
figures of many skin tones—including jaundice yellow and fabulous
magenta—holding hands, hugging, or ululating. One sloppily drawn figure
probably should have been pointing his finger at his heart. However, the
errant digit angled toward his head. “We’re All the Same Where It Counts,”
the thought bubble read.

Jan chewed a plastic straw and paced. Riley stood over me with his arms
folded over his olive suit vest.

“Okay,” Jan said. “Now, what does it mean?”
“It means that regardless of a person’s skin—”
“No, wait.” Jan stopped walking. He took off his round glasses and

pinched the bridge of his nose.



“We just went over this.” Riley turned from me to Jan. “I don’t think you
even understand what we’re all about.”

“Give him a chance,” Jan said. He sat on the edge of the desk across from
me.

“It’s simple. You’ve got to stop thinking of America in racialized terms.”
Jan wiggled his fingers. “Race is nothing more than an idea, like city-states
or heaven. Whenever you call me white and yourself black, you’re falling
into a trap laid by bigots. We’ve got to ignore race to transcend it!”

“He won’t get it,” Riley said.
“Hey, take it easy,” I said. Ever since that day at the Musée, Riley had

been brusque with me. I couldn’t tell whether it was because of envy that
I’d outlasted him at the firm or anger that I’d moved in on his territory
within BEG.

“Let’s take a break.” Jan grabbed his page boy cap and took a smoke
break. Riley took a phone call—“I’ll have that shocker good to go in a
couple days, hun,” he said. I took a spot at the window. HI! HOW ARE YOU? a
billboard said. These New Truth advertisers and their gimmicks. This whole
situation took me by surprise. A drizzle fell, silver sheening the streets of
the business district. A green and white banner flapped.

Of course, I knew the theory that race was a figment. Who didn’t? Sir
himself had explained it to me when I was about nine, while mocking his
department head at the university.

We were in our living room–den–kitchen in the Tiko. Sir paced back and
forth by the open window. Mama sat at the table with me, eating lemon
petits fours while I gorged on a slice of homemade chocolate cake and milk.

“…and she had the nerve to get upset with me.” Sir gestured at his chest.
“Called me a Cro-Magnon. I may be an iconoclast scofflaw, but I’m a
thoroughly modern iconoclast scofflaw.” Sir sipped his to-go coffee, which
had been sitting on the open windowsill. “And another thing—”

Mama stopped him by raising her pinky. “You ever stop to think she
might have a point?” She bit another petit four, her dangly earring swaying
as she chewed. Her right ear was bare. Her earrings were perpetually
escaping and turning up in unexpected places.

“Not you too, Sadie.”



I laughed.
“Oh, you think I’m funny, young man?” Sir held his coffee cup toward

me. “Thy tongue outvenoms all the worms of Nile.”
“Thou art a villain,” I said. I wasn’t as versed in Shakespearean insults as

he was. I hadn’t taught a class on it. I was only nine.
Mama waved him off. “I’m saying some people think too much about it.

It gets like weeds choking off the good growth.”
He rubbed his hand across the side of his prematurely graying hair.

“Listen, Magee won’t have a point when I hammer a stake into her heartless
heart.”

I snorted milk out of my nose.
“You like that one, huh?” Sir wiggled his eyebrows.
“See that?” Mama slapped the table. “Knew I was right.”
“What?” Sir asked.
“You only think about violence when you losing the argument.”
“I do n—” Sir shook his head and smiled, his signature grin, sheepish and

glowing at the same time. Sir and Mama had been high school sweethearts.
They knew each other’s ticks and tells. “Yeah. Well. Just because I’m losing
doesn’t mean I’m wrong. I could lose all day and still win.” Sir folded his
arms. Just when his hands came to rest under his armpits, a muted thud
came from across the common outside the window. “Get down!”

Mama grabbed my arm and pulled me under the table. We lay on the
spotless floor, which Sir mopped every night before he bedded down. Sir
was on his belly ten feet away, his eyes locked on us, commanding that we
not move until the coast was clear. The wake of Mama’s breath hit my ear,
and out of the silence came the sound of distant firecrackers—gunshots, a
flurry of them so fast that had the police been aiming at a paper target, the
target would have instantly vaporized.

“Not yet,” Sir said. Pock pock. The sound of a small gun at close range.
His shoulders loosened.

Mama got up.
“Wait,” Sir said. “We don’t know if—”



But Mama was already on her feet and headed to the window. Her socks
whiffed across the tile. Sir wasn’t about to let her look on without him. I
went over. At windows all over the Tiko, people, their faces terrifyingly
angelic from the amber ground lights, glanced down on the entrance to
Building Seven where a group of Anti-Violence Task Force police—heavily
armed and armored—streamed out of the doorway like a long muscular
centipede.

I was used to hearing the voices of women screaming after these
incidents. But there was no screaming. Whoever had been in that apartment,
whatever their gender or age or employment, was dead now.

“That ain’t right,” a woman’s voice said. It was Ms. Wendy Woods, in
her hotel maid’s uniform, bulling her way through a collapsible barricade.
“That ain’t even much right!” A man, Bowman, the street sweeper driver
who had been courting Ms. Wendy Woods for decades, followed and
begged her to come back. One of the police officers’ helmet lights swept
across the cement and landed on her face, which I couldn’t see from my
angle at the window.

“Wendy!” Mama said, and Ms. Wendy Woods looked back. The helmet
light turned red. Something pierced my bare foot, Mama’s missing earring,
a golden scythe.

—

I jumped in place when Riley grabbed my shoulder. A fire truck passed
below the window. The truck cast light—red-white-red—against the rain-
soaked nearby offices. No siren.

“Maybe you can get it,” Riley said. “Who knows? But you think I don’t
know what you’re up to? I know all the plays, baby. You feel like being
here is good résumé padding, but you need to step off that right away. BEG
is all about the UNITY. You’re part of the problem we’re trying to fix.” He
spoke under his breath while gesturing toward the world beneath the
window. The marble plaza steps of the Sky Tower, like the terraced pages of
an open book, were just in view.

“I didn’t hear you complaining when you thought you were about to be
promoted,” I said.



Riley sneered. “And since when do you care about human rights
anyway? This whole thing seems like a put-on.” He crossed his arms. “I
changed, okay? Some things are more important than a bigger paycheck.”

“Would you feel better if he did his trial by ordeal today?” Jan asked.
“My what?”
“In this slop?” A slow smile spread across Riley’s snout. “That’s the best

idea you’ve had all year, Janbo.”
Apparently, trial by ordeal was a requirement of membership in BEG

instituted after Suhla’s failed reign as mayor and BEG leader, after the
Teleprompter Massacre where a school full of black children and teachers
were gunned down by a half-dozen white nationalist crazies, two of whom
were black. The City went nuts about then. Suhla was jailed for the protests
she had led in the past, which were characterized as riots, riots that led to
the police leveling several city blocks where activists had holed up. I’d seen
the photos. It astounded me how much damage a barrel bomb from a drone
could do.

The organization was nearly disbanded by decree, but instead a
placeholder leader was installed. One of the jobs of the caretaker was to
lower the temperature of discourse among the City’s people. One way to do
that was to encourage members to get out into a community that was
increasingly dismissive and fearful. If a potential member could go out into
the City streets and spread BEG’s message without getting beaten, arrested,
or shot, then they were BEG material. Trial by ordeal.

Riley had stuck a BEG sticker—block-printed white letters on a black
background—to my chest. My job was easy enough, on its face: hand out
one hundred pamphlets in one hour. I stood at the corner of Avenue and
Planter Street, an umbrella vibrating in one hand, a sheaf of pamphlets
tucked under my other arm. Drizzle swirled.

“Excuse me,” I said to a group of well-dressed white women walking
toward the river where that Myrtles mall was. If I could convince the seven
women to take a pamphlet, I’d be almost 10 percent to goal. BEG had a
handful of approved introductory statements. One for every occasion,
including women who looked like they were returning to the salon after



only twenty-four hours away. “Ladies, have you considered that your
children and my children were created equal under the Constitution?”

I was greeted by dismissive hand waves. A man in a business suit—
similar to my own—didn’t respond to my line that equality was good for
the bottom line. A group of tourists in cowboy hats crossed to the other side
of the street. One of the men kept his hand near his six-shooter.

And that was how it went for the better part of an hour. Meanwhile
BEG’s office windows were in view a hundred yards away. Blond Jan stood
in one, dark Riley in the other. Like a pair of mismatched irises.

I noted a red smudge on the ground that I would come to learn was all
that remained of a homeless black who had illegally camped at the corner of
the Sky Tower for some time. A black eventually identified as a former
employee of a local firm. It was unknown whether he worked in facilities
management or cleaning services.

“What are you doing?” a man asked. He was blond and skinny, like he
could have been one of Jan or Jo Jo’s cousins. He wore City maintenance
overalls.

“Sir,” I said. “What is your name?”
“No, thanks.”
“Have you considered that the best way to fix our future is to come

together as one American people?”
He glanced at my sticker. “Oh. You’re one of those guys.” He turned

away.
“Don’t let me scare you off.”
“I’m not scared. I’m just not interested.” He walked. I fell into step next

to him.
“Please take one of these.” I flapped a pamphlet at him.
“I don’t want one.”
“What’s your name?” As it turned out, we shared the same surname. I

jogged around in front of him. “Please please please please please take
one.”

“What’s it to you?”
“Do I have to get down on one knee?” I asked.



The man raised an eyebrow.
He was halfway down the street to the shuttle that ferried workers to the

suburbs. A pamphlet jutted out of his back pocket. My pant leg was wet,
and my knee somewhat bruised, but I had found an effective technique.
After ten minutes of groveling, I was empty-handed.
OceanofPDF.com



19

Another day. I cut out of the firm early to visit the Nzinga Clinic because
Jan and even Riley were pleased with my results from the trial by ordeal.
After I’d given out all the brochures, one insistent couple even followed me
back to the BEG satellite office to get their own. Jan said I could consider
the satellite office my domain. I’d receive further instructions soon. That’s
why I was at Nzinga’s. I’d just jumped from the backroads to the highway.
It was time to map the final route to Nigel’s future.

The clinic was in the medical annex adjacent to Personal Hill Hospital.
Sitting in Dr. Nzinga’s waiting room, the short medical tower where Penny
worked was clearly visible. Fourth floor, northeast corner. I could feel her in
there. Her heartbeat. Her breath. I was sure the hairs on the back of her neck
stood up just then.

In the foyer was a maquette of a proposed massive new clinic large
enough to service the City for generations to come. I imagined Dr. Nzinga,
that tall, noble dark-skinned—but not too dark-skinned—man, somehow
still practicing at the age of 101, holding the hand of my future
granddaughter and telling her that life would eventually improve.

I see you have your grandfather’s nose. Do not worry. It is easily
resected.

Life did eventually improve. But hope wasn’t enough. You had to work
at it.

In the distance, the Sky Tower roof floated beneath milky clouds.
I had visited the clinic once before on my original fact-finding mission.

That time the waiting room was populated by all kinds of people: a girl with
a partially corrected cleft palate, a large-bellied man, a redhead in cycling
clothes. I had quickly downloaded the demelanization brochure (only



available if you stopped into the clinic) but accepted a couple of brochures
about varicose vein correction to cover myself and giddily ran out. This
time everyone was black (and half of the room wore purple faux-fur coats).
This time I checked in at the counter and took my seat in a far corner with
my back to the wall like a mafioso. I needed to meet Dr. Nzinga. I needed to
tell him about my intentions for Nigel.

“Hey, brother,” the man next to me said. It was the streetcar driver from
the Musée. The one with the stained blue eyes. “You here for a scrub, too,
huh? What you looking to have done? Nose? Lips? You got some real
repugnant back-to-Africa lips, for sure. Need to trim them shits down.”

“I’m just here for work,” I said.
“Makes sense.” The man sipped a can of P. Cola, the can’s pulsing blue a

color I always found happy and hygienic. “I saw this thing on TV about
folk who get some of this done. They get paid more. That’s why I’m going
to get this trimmed down some.” He pinched his nose. “Gonna upgrade.
Maybe I’ll finally make supervisor.”

“Good for you.” An ad popped up on my device—for a butcher shop in
the Myrtles mall—but I couldn’t really focus—because the guy—wouldn’t
stop—talking—I vaguely noticed a scrolling promotion for that ridiculous
Tony Award–winning musical, A Comical Furrier Funs. I also came across
a plug for the Nzinga Clinic that I’d seen around town before. A dark
woman’s face under a wash of sunshine: YOU CAN BE BEAUTIFUL, EVEN MORE
BEAUTIFUL THAN BEFORE.

One of the nurses opened a door and called out a name. Unfortunately,
the streetcar driver remained seated. He gabbed on about all the procedures
he wanted to have done. Suddenly it dawned on me that he was just a lowly
City employee. How the hell would he bankroll any of his dreams?

“Pilot program for municipal workers,” he said. “City covers up to
seventy percent. Can’t say that’s not fair. I’m working as much overtime as
I can pinch.”

A woman entered the waiting room from the examination room area. She
wore a scarf like one I’d seen at work and large sunglasses that I’d once
tried on and found too tight. Overall this woman looked an awful lot like
Dinah. I called out to her. The woman looked at me with surprise and



stepped into the hall. I opened the door and yelled her name, but the woman
kept walking.

Ads kept pinging on my device. Very irksome that the ad bots tracked
your movements and offered up their masters’ wares. I rarely clicked on ads
—why reward them?—but I needed a distraction from Chipper Charlie the
Chatty Conductor.

A bookseller, offering a suite of books, to wit:
Mommy, Why Is My Skin So Dark?
Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?
Lakeisha’s First Perm (with new foreword by V. Sirin-Johnson!)
Dilution Anxiety and the Black Phallus
Black Past, White Future
Keep Your Child Out of the Sun!
I was about to purchase the last one when I recalled that I’d read it ages

ago, even quoted choice passages to Penny.
My name was said. I glanced at the driver. He smiled at me and said good

luck. A girl—I couldn’t remember her name—from Nigel’s school walked
in with her parents. I had been struck by her round face and diaphanously
pale skin in the past, even as I noticed that her parents were black. I stepped
into the medical suite.

I should probably pause to say another word about Crooked Crown, the
pop star I bumped into the day Eckstein kicked Octavia and me to the curb.
Other than making really annoying songs—if I never hear “Love the Real
You” again, I will be very pleased—she had set in motion several fads. She
was the reason, for example, that purple fur coats were all the rage among
common black folk. She was also the instigator of the demel fad. It seemed
ridiculous to me that one person could completely alter an entire society’s
image of the physical ideal. But stranger things have happened. After all, it
was Coco Chanel who got white people to tan for a whole century before
tanning salons were outlawed. And Hitler permanently removed the
toothbrush mustache from the dapper man’s fashion vocabulary.

In Crown’s case, it was clear that demelanization had changed her life.
She went from being a background singer in a moderately successful R&B
group—Faith Colombo or Kate Sambo, I could never recall their proper



name—to one of the biggest stars in pop history. Which brings me to
Nzinga, who not only perfected and performed the first successful full-body
scrub but was also Crown’s Merlin.

The nurse in the consultation room checked my vitals. She had clearly
been black…once. And I suppose she still was on the inside. But she must
have undergone the full panoply just like Crown. The brochures called it the
Spotless Special. Must be nice to get the employee discount.

Still, the work wasn’t perfect. There was something not-quite-right about
the curves of her lips and the way the skin tone around her knuckles was
oddly dark. Even Crown suffered from these hiccups, pointed out by some
of her haters on social media. That was the problem with being an early
adopter of such wondrous technology. They hadn’t worked out all the kinks.
Fortunately, there had been improvements to the technique.

Another nurse entered, this one with dark skin and Africa-Face. What
was it about people who were late of the Motherland? There was something
about the cant of their cheeks and noses that made them instantly
recognizable in relief to run-of-the-mill African Americans like myself. I
guessed that people like this nurse’s ancestors were history’s victors, the
lucky souls who had avoided the Middle Passage and miscegenation.
Coffee never diluted by creamer.

This second nurse measured my forehead with a set of calipers. She
pinched my nose. She yanked my lower lip.

“Good elasticity,” she said rhapsodically, in her rhythmic accent. Still
holding my lip, she jotted something on a chart.

“Whabt?”
“It means you are a good match for the program.” She let go. “Still, you

are going to require some effort.”
“When will the doctor see me? I’m kind of in a rush.”
“Excuse me, Mr. ‘Kind of in a Rush,’ but the doctor sees you now.” She

shone a penlight in my eye. I squinted.
“I’m sorry. I didn’t realize—” In all the literature I read about the clinic,

I’d never seen a picture of Dr. Nzinga. I’d assumed she was a man. Penny
would say this was another of my blind spots.



“Do not dwell on it. After all, the place you dwell is the place you live.
Shame is no proper residence.” Dr. Nzinga groped my face, kneading my
forehead as if I were a lump of clay. “Now. You will tell me of your
dreams.”

“Actually, doctor.” I had a frog in my throat. This was a moment I’d
anticipated for years. I was frozen. My heart whirled in my chest. I was in
danger of coming across as a lunatic. “I—uh. I’m here for my son.”

I pulled up a picture of Nigel on my device and told Dr. Nzinga
everything. I was probably too sincere. But once I started, I couldn’t slow
down. I told her about my fears and the sleepless nights. About the skin
creams. About how I wasn’t sure if I was doing the right thing in general.

“What father is certain he’s doing the right thing?” Dr. Nzinga put a hand
on my knee. “Why do you think I moved my program here from Abuja? We
can help your— What is his name?”

“Nigel,” I said.
“We developed these protocols precisely for people like Nigel. I

anticipate that his birthmark sinks to the subcutaneous layer, but his
condition is relatively minor and can be revised.”

I couldn’t help myself. I hugged the woman.
“Now, now, good father,” she said. “We are only doing our jobs.”
“Does it hurt?”
“No more than removing a tattoo. Although it is much more involved

than that.”
“How much does it cost?”
Dr. Nzinga directed me to speak with one of the clerks. She said there

were financial programs to help, if necessary.
“Once you work all that out, be sure to bring this—”
“Nigel.”
“—Nigel in so that we can do a full assessment.”
I floated out of the consultation room but quickly ran aground as the

clerk and I reviewed an estimate sheet. The cost of the procedure had gone
up since my recon visit. The success rate was over 90 percent now, but the



improvements to the procedure had not made things cheaper. Short of
finding a pot of gold, the bonus was my only shot.
OceanofPDF.com



20

It was a roaring, late spring day in the City. Bright but unseasonably cool. A
sparkling patch of green, green grass. A blue jay mobbing a hawk. The
happy sound of nearby hammers bringing something into being. Pung.
Kapung. Pung. Pung. Kapung. Me and my boy. I left work early to grab
Nigel per a plan I couldn’t quite recall. Nigel and I walked across the grass
of the Great Lawn at the School Without Walls. He wore a brown scarf and,
for a change, a baseball cap, the neon-green one, without my prompting.
His curly brownish hair poked out from the edges. He was due for a haircut,
although I liked the way his hair partially obscured the mark. I removed his
backpack and hefted it onto my shoulder. Oof. When did knowledge
become so heavy?

“Thanks,” he said with his fingers. His class was learning American Sign
Language so that students who heard the magic of words would be able to
communicate with those who heard the magic of silence. This meant I was
learning ASL, too. The boy hadn’t even peeped that morning when I kissed
him on the forehead.

Suddenly Nigel hurried in front of me. He held out his hands, so I would
stop. I stopped. Seeing my inability to comprehend his signs, he tried
charades. We were master charadists, the pair of us.

A girl cut across the lawn. It was that dark-as-dung brat who’d ratted me
out to Penny about the skin-toning cream, that time Nigel trapped himself in
the closet. Like a gnat, she often buzzed around when I came to pick Nigel
up.

There was no uniform requirement at the School Without Walls—they
were against such orthodoxies. But just like the other times I’d seen her, the
girl wore a traditional school uniform with a twist: a plaid skirt, a white top,



and a purple faux-fur jacket. I took this as a sign that she was a program
student, one of the kids the City gave handouts of tuition, lunch, and
uniforms. I didn’t like that she sometimes visited Nigel at the house. She
was flippant and crude. And the dozens of twisted kinks and ribbons on her
head made her look like something that belonged on the cover of a
nineteenth-century minstrel ad. But Penny didn’t mind her, so the girl—she
had a name: Araminta Ahosi—sometimes visited Nigel at the house, where
they played handheld video games or hide-and-seek, which apparently she
was skilled at. At least she had some veneer of decorum. She always called
me mister.

“Hey, mister,” she said. “Hey, Nige.” What was this “Nige” business
anyway? My son didn’t like people freestyling his name. Whenever I called
him Nigerious or by his verbalized initials, he pursed his lips.

“You’re interrupting a very important discussion,” I said to the pest.
“Oh. You must have forgot about— Mmph!” Nigel clamped a hand over

her mouth.
He held up two fingers. Two words. He circled his thumb and forefinger

around the opposite ring finger.
“Ring,” I said. He gave me a weak thumbs-up. Right track. Wrong word.

“Wedding.” He kept pointing up. “Wife? Penny?” Nigel hopped and did a
little leprechaun dance.

“Dweeb,” Araminta said.
Nigel poked out his tongue. Second word. He motioned like his stomach

was covered by a balloon.
“Whale.” Araminta threw her arms wide.
Nigel held a finger over his own mouth.
“Fine, boo.” She put a hand on her narrow hip. “I ain’t got to say nothing.

I can just stand here and be quiet.” She switched hips. “See? Won’t say a
word. I’m shutting my trap. Right now. Just like that. Zippit.” She
imaginatively zipped her lips shut and flung the key over the iron fence.

Nigel forced down a laugh, but my guts betrayed me, and I guffawed
despite myself.

I straightened my face but chuckled again.



“Fat?” I said. “Pregnant?”
Nigel wagged his finger. He pulled his shirt collar over his head so that

he was hidden like a frightened turtle. The crown of his skull emerged from
the neck hole. He mock-screamed as he emerged. I was second-guessing
our decision to teach that kid about the facts of life before he was big
enough to hold a sippy cup.

“Mom’s birthday!” I clapped my hands. How could I have forgotten?
Nigel’s eyes brightened, and he offered a fist bump. I shook my head. He
knew better. We shook hands.

“Can I ride with y’all?” Araminta asked me.
“I don’t think that would be a good idea,” I said. “Tonight is a very

special—”
“My dad has to work late,” she said, “and I don’t want to be there alone.

The people upstairs make weird noises every Thursday at nine-seventeen
P.M.”

I sighed. Nigel had told me that her father presently held a number of
menial part-time jobs, including a horrible gig for the City Department of
Sanitation, removing dead rodents from drainpipes or something similarly
repulsive. Her mother had tapped out of life at some earlier point.

“Fine,” I signed.
Nigel signed that we had to hurry. He was right. We had much to do and

precious little time. We had a cake to buy, and Penny would be home soon.
Araminta took off toward the Bug. Nigel sprinted to catch up. His hat fell in
his wake. I recovered it. Cake time.

Thank the fates for my considerate son, who prompted me with
reminders of Penny’s birthday. Or as Nigel and I rebranded it some time
ago: One Cent Day. Once we cleared the whirlpool of car-bound parents
and children that were in the area around the school, crosstown traffic was
quite tolerable. We were skimming along like a hippo on an ice floe.

I checked the rearview mirror. They were having a conversation in sign.
Nigel wasn’t the type of kid to have a ton of friends. He once had a few
who were especially close, but most of those he left behind at his prior
schools.



Nigel and Araminta laughed audibly, breaking the fiction of deafness.
What was so funny? Araminta flipped the device around. An animated ape
getting blown up by an exploding cigar. Silly major-key music playing in
support. They watched the sequence again and guffawed, one of them
stomping the wheel well in delight.

Was there anything better than watching my shy, taciturn, neurotic boy
laugh uncontrollably? My misadventures, in the final analysis, were all
about pulling Nigel into a land where such giggles and happy grimaces
were frequent.

The Mall of the Seven Myrtles parking lot was crowded as usual. But this
didn’t bother me. I didn’t advertise the fact, but I was a lover of the Myrtles.
It was riverfront property on the former footprint of a church and earlier
tourist area that had fallen in a storm.

I got warm fuzzies each time I crossed the reclaimed cobblestone
pavilion, which presently faced the water, and passed the historical statuary
—our state’s first governor, Jean-Jacques LePieu, clad in a fetching tricorne
hat. His knee was raised high like that pirate in those cheeky rum ads. I
couldn’t help checking that both of his arms had hands. Some squirrel in my
subconscious had been trying for decades to convince me that he had a
hook. But no. One mitt held a stalk of maize, and the other a newborn babe.
He had graciously just accepted both from kneeling, naked Native
Americans.

The steamboat calliope tooted “I Wish I Was in Dixie,” as if we weren’t
already.

The Myrtles combined my love of several fields of inquiry—architecture,
people watching, snazzy duds—into a ginormous mise-en-scène I could
stroll through without pissing off the director or the audience. The design
team that built the Sky Tower also constructed the mall, so that the
structures were as alike as they were different. They were a pair of elegant
sisters, one tall and thin, the other wide-hipped and round-bosomed. The
seemingly countless levels of undulating terraces that formed the atrium of
the Sky Tower were limited to merely three floors in the Myrtles. But those
gorgeous, gold-trimmed, curvilinear decks stretched onward to the edge of
sight. Video panels displayed happenings in other sections of the mall such
as the food court or the terrarium. A jumbo panel above showed a children’s



kazoo band performing at the main entrance fountain. A crew of actors in
superhero costumes worked the food court.

The mall’s long ceiling was a pearlescent canopy that changed colors
depending on the viewer’s perspective. “How does the ceiling change like
that?” Araminta asked.

“It doesn’t change,” I said. “Your eyes are crooked.”
She smacked her lips.
Nigel and Araminta played with the electronic mall directory. I didn’t

think I’d ever seen anyone as black as her. Did she lose herself in the dark?
When she reentered the lighted world, did she have to make sure that she
didn’t leave any of herself behind in the shadows? A spinning compass
faded away. A map dotted by hundreds of icons, each for a different
business, materialized.

The mall was shaped like a stylized, seven-branched tree. The trunk
sprouted from the river, and our cakery was perched near the tip of one of
the upper branches. We stepped onto a conveyor belt. We passed the food
court. The ersatz comic book heroes must have been prerecorded because I
didn’t see them. However, we passed a duo in cowboy hats playing banjos
—the Myrtles hired performers to roam around and entertain in much the
same way Disneyland did.

We passed stores Nigel and I had experienced before with Penny, Mama,
Nigel’s other friends, or any combination thereof. Here was the handmade
toy emporium where a red, yellow, and blue biplane on a tether ceaselessly
circled the checkout counter. We’d bought Nigel’s first wagon in that place.
There was the sundry shop that used to give away free photo negatives. We
did that as a family when Nigel was about four. I never liked the picture. It
was tucked into a closet at home.

A red-faced girl in a pinafore yelled that she didn’t want to. Her mother,
a woman in her twenties who seemed prematurely aged, yanked the girl by
the wrist. The girl yelped. I wanted to reach out and say something. But
even though I had stopped walking, I ludicrously continued to float away
thanks to the conveyor belt. The mother looked right at me, as if to say,
What do you think you’re looking at?



We got off the belt at a four-way intersection. I smelled sugar, butter.
Hope transmitted on an air current. Cakery Royale was close.

Just as we arrived, someone called my name. A woman with light brown
skin and sleepy eyes. Zora Suhla Smits. I’d only seen her a couple of times
since the first meeting I crashed at the Musée. She wore a skirt suit. I
introduced her to Nigel and Araminta. “Nice to meet you,” she said. Nigel
said that the pleasure was all his without moving his lips. I explained the
sign thing to Zora. She signed something back.

“You have lovely children,” she said out loud.
“This one isn’t mine,” I said. “She’s on loan from the pound.”
Araminta growled.
“Lovely.” Zora grimaced. “Can we talk for a few moments?”
“Sure,” I said.
Nigel signed that they were going to the arcade in the third branch. I was

about to tell him we didn’t have time, but Araminta poked out her tongue.
Then she grabbed the back of her own collar and led herself away. Nigel
grabbed his collar and did the same.

Zora lobbed small talk at me. “Aren’t we having fine weather?”
“More or less,” I bunted. I was still trying to decide where Zora fit on the

leadership scale. Was she an indomitable firebrand like her grandmother or
the kind of malleable black figurehead that history preferred? She was
tallish but young and somewhat ill at ease, as if she’d only just grown into
her shell. I realized then that she was probably only in her early thirties, but
an old soul. Yet I knew enough about history to recognize that the
descendants of great people are rarely great themselves. Despite having
some of the visual and verbal tics of their forebears, many people in Zora’s
position simply swam in their ancestors’ wake, often for profit or D-list
notoriety.

We walked into the bakery. A lanky man in a baker’s coat offered free
samples of bread pudding in disposable cups. I wished Penny were with me.
She loved free nosh in disposable cups. The sweet shop had made my and
Penny’s wedding cake. We’d been hooked ever since.

“Riley tells me you’re soaking up the philosophy well.” I had been
working out of the satellite office several evenings a week, after my firm



hours, distributing pamphlets or writing drafts of manifestos for Jan, Marie,
and Riley to pick apart. My job was simple: Draft position papers that
argued for a nation without divisions. Instead of “out of many, one,” BEG
thought of America as a big bowl of milk into which tiny drops of
chocolate, caramel, dulce de leche, coconut, or tamarind could be diluted
out of existence. “Out of many, only one.” Try as I might, I wasn’t good at
adhering to their fiction as I would have liked. I kept inadvertently
mentioning multiculturalism, diversity, facts, history, reality. Once I
mistakenly inserted the phrase “white supremacy” into a pamphlet. I
thought Riley would rap me on the knuckles with a ruler.

“Funny,” I said. “I thought Riley might tell you to lock me out.”
She forced a smile. “Do you know how movements change the world?

Through coalitions and a belief that we can make progress, if we use all the
tools at our disposal. My grandmother was an agent of change through her
persistence and eloquence. When she spoke, everyone heard her. She made
a difference through sheer force of will.”

“Those were different times,” I said. “Seems like you’re doing well under
the circumstances.”

“That’s kind of you,” she said, “but not true. I’ve run BEG for years, and
I have to admit we’re in park. Maybe it’s because I was educated up north.
Or maybe it’s because I’m too light-skinned.” She seemed to be staring at
my cheek when she said this. “The point is I don’t care about your personal
motivations. We need you.”

“Me?” I asked.
“You’re a talented speaker, and people in the right places are aware of

you, comfortable with you. We haven’t had an official spokesman in years.
However, I would understand if you can’t do it, with all your obligations.
You have a job, and this is only a volunteer position. Plus, the glare of the
spotlight can be taxing. I’m sure also you’d have to clear channels with
your—”

“I’ll do it.” I hadn’t imagined that my plan would work so well. But here
I was. My path to winning over Eckstein was opening before me.

“Really?” Zora asked.
“I’m happy to help.”



“What a pleasure to hear. Show up for this on Thursday morning.” She
handed me a glossy push card. For all of BEG’s shortcomings, they could
print the piss out of propaganda. The card featured the organization’s pastel
color scheme as well as their emblem, a stylized, palm-up hand. Ribbon
cutting at the Trueblood School. Eleven-thirty A.M. Truce Garden
dedication. What on earth was a Truce Garden?

A tremendous thud rocked the building, and I grabbed a post for balance.
Several of the megavideo panels flashed pure white light, which died down
after a moment. The people on the panels—the people by the main entrance
—seemed to be attacking each other.

No. They were running for their lives.
Far down the hall, shoppers stormed through the entrance doors. They

ran toward me. I began to turn tail, but—Nigel and Araminta. Where had
they gone?

Someone shouted my name. “Sir, your cake.” The tall baker held a black
cake box by its pink ribbons. I grabbed it and ran.

I didn’t use the conveyor. I probably passed Zora along the way. But I
didn’t notice her. I didn’t notice much of anything other than intermittent
groups of shoppers pointing up at the video panels along the way and,
occasionally, at me. I was a good runner. I could jog a couple miles on a
cool day without killing myself. But I didn’t normally create the spectacle
that I did now: a black man, balancing an oversize cake box on one hand,
running against the tide. I was really asking for it. Security would be on me
any moment.

I cleared a stand of kiosks and paused at the glass exit doors, which were
veined with cracks and hard to see through. Wedging my foot into the gap,
fingers reached in. Together, with the unseen people on the other side of the
door, I opened it. A mass of smoke and desperate shoppers pushed in on
me. A baby wailed. I was trapped, suspended in a crush of bodies. It was
bad outside.

Smoke. Dust. Sirens in the distance. A thud nearby. A pile of something
on fire—the LePieu statue, rendered to slag. I felt the heat of it even fifty
yards away. Shopping bags and purses everywhere. A plastic Crooked



Crown tiara broken in half. A dark pool of liquid. I stumbled away from the
scrum and into the clear.

Children scampered like in a panicky game of hide-and-seek. A boy held
his arm at a strange angle. That kazoo band! A man lay on the ground,
clutching his side. Strangest of all, scraps, like plus-size confetti, green, red,
and black, were everywhere.

“Go inside!” a woman in a gray one-piece, mall security, said from just
beyond the molten statue. “Terror!”

A thin figure in a hard, brown mask, like something from an African arts
and crafts show, shoved the guard to the ground. The figure pointed a
revolver at the guard. A black van screeched, hopped the curb, and stopped.
The side door slid open. A brown hand beckoned from the van’s interior.
The figure leaped inside. The van pulled away.

A news helicopter hovered somewhere overhead. I suddenly became
aware of high-pitched voices behind me.

“Dad!” Nigel and Araminta were standing inside the mall doors. I hustled
over and drew them into my arms. They both seemed rattled but otherwise
okay.

“Are you crazy?” Araminta said. “Why’d you go out there?”
I gathered the children in my arms and squeezed them. “Thank god

you’re safe,” I said.
Nigel patted my arm and pointed at misshapen letters that were spray-

painted on the wall. A massive graffiti tag: ADZE.
OceanofPDF.com



21

We agreed not to tell Penny. What I mean to say is that when we got back to
the Bug, I made Nigel and Araminta raise their hands and swear to keep
their mouths shut. There were a billion police cars at the mall by the time
we rolled out. Several more helicopters had arrived. Even the police
department dirigible. This would be a thing. It would be on TV and the
Internet. People at work would bring it up at the water cooler.

I didn’t want to get into all that. We were fine. But if Penny knew we had
been so close to danger, she’d be terrified. This was no way to celebrate
One Cent Day.

In the driveway at home, I went over our cover story.
“But—” Nigel said.
I raised my palm to stop him. “No ‘but,’ ” I said. “Now, tell me.”
“We left the mall before it happened,” Nigel said. The sun was setting. A

streetlight popped on.
“And?” I asked.
“We heard about it on the radio driving home,” Araminta said.
Penny opened the side door of the house, the one that overlooked the

driveway. She held herself. Mama and her childhood friend, Aunt Shirls (no
relation) in her horn-rimmed glasses, looked on from behind.

“Break,” I said. We got out of the car. I collected the cake box from the
hood trunk.

“Happy One Cent—” I said. Penny motioned for us to hurry.
“They’re back.” Nigel pointed.
Termites, like tiny, possessed snowflakes, swarmed around the streetlight.
“Quick,” I said. “Don’t let those bugs in the house.”



The kids ran up the steps to the door. Penny clutched them to her body.
She said she was happy we were safe.

I opened the cake box. “We were long gone,” I said. Without letting go of
Nigel and Araminta, she popped the back of my head. I hardly felt it. But
the concept hurt. She knew.

“Don’t protect me.” She pressed the children close to her body, covering
their ears with her hands. Nigel was so tall now that this technique wasn’t
as effective as it used to be. His body-side ear was almost over Penny’s
shoulder.

“Look,” I whispered. My head buzzed. My teeth—all of them—were on
fire. “They’re not that fragile. Everything is fine. Nobody got hurt.”

“Three died,” Mama said.
“Kids,” Aunt Shirls grabbed Nigel’s arm. “Little ones.” Aunt Shirls had a

way of making the most awful facts sound mundane, so it was no surprise
that she made awful facts sound like personal condemnations. Or maybe I
was just being paranoid. I’d just taken my second Blue Geisha of the day,
inadvisably, probably.

“Oh,” I said. “How?”
The women eyed me. They knew. I felt as if my feet had sunk a quarter

inch into the hardwood. Like I might continue sinking until I suffocated in
clay.

“Don’t tell tales,” Penny said. “You were there when it happened. I saw
you on national TV for a moment—”

I leaned against the doorjamb, suddenly too exhausted to argue. “You’re
right.”

“You were standing on a message written in—” Penny whispered.
I raised my shoe, the bottom of which was covered in someone’s blood. I

removed the shoe and threw it across the neighbor’s fence. “I’m sorry,” I
said. I limped to the kitchen table and put down the cake box.

Penny looked afraid. “I was worried about all of you. They say a group
called ADZE was behind it.”

“It can’t be them,” I said. “That doesn’t make any sense.”
“Why not?” Penny asked.



“They used to give out fruits and veggies to all the kids in the Tiko,”
Mama said. “They didn’t attack folk.”

“They all got locked up anyway,” Aunt Shirls said. “Or blown up.” She
was right, of course.

Depending on who you asked, ADZE were community heroes or bigoted
terrorists. They were a big deal until they organized a protest and tried to
tear down the LePieu statue with a stolen backhoe. It was a federal crime to
damage monuments that had been erected before the turn of the
millennium, and the FBI arrived on the scene to arrest the whole crew.

But things got out of hand when armed statue supporters threw a grenade
at the protesters. ADZE believed in armed self-defense. There was a
shootout. People, including a federal agent, died. The feds chased the
surviving ADZE members back to an inner-city house and dropped a gas
bomb on the neighborhood not long after. The fire from the explosion
spread to nearby houses recently bought by young white professionals.
Over 170 people died in the incidents, including a white family fresh from
Idaho. The City, state, and feds did investigations. Congress held hearings.
Ultimately, ADZE was blamed for the whole mess, and the City put fences
and checkpoints all around the Tiko, even though only a couple of the
ADZE protesters lived there.

Police harassment made other black neighborhoods practically unlivable.
With the national media pushing the story that sleeper cells of black
revolutionaries were lying in wait all across the country, it was only a
matter of time before other towns enacted similar measures. None of the
original statue supporters were charged with any crimes.

“We tried to let you know what was going on,” Araminta said. I made a
face that must have registered my confusion. She held up her device. The
news channel, 444, played a loop of a masked, dreaded man in a white suit
firing a weapon over the crowd. The news item must have appeared before
we were even out of the parking lot.

“How about some cake, Dad?” Nigel said.
“I’m not feeling well,” I said. “I think I’ll lie down.”
“What’s that buzzing?” Aunt Shirls asked.



“They coming inside the house,” Mama said. We’d had the doorframes
and windows weatherproofed to keep out the termites. But a line of them
were streaming in from a gap in the doorjamb.

“Quick. Turn off the lights,” Penny said. Termites loved lights, craved
them. Making the house dark was one way to make them change their
minds, to convince them that life was better somewhere else. Araminta hit
the switch, and suddenly only the planes of my loved one’s faces were
visible, odd facets like Mama’s eye whites, Aunt Shirls’s glass lenses,
Penny’s chin, and the clean side of Nigel’s face. A termite flew past my
nose.

The candles on Penny’s white cake hadn’t been lit, but it was still the
brightest thing in the room.

“We’ve got to cover it up!” I yelled.
But it was too late. The swarm descended.

OceanofPDF.com



22

Displays of affection do not necessarily come easy to me. Yes, when Nigel
was still in his crib, perhaps it was easy to press his soft feet to my mouth
and kiss them. Or lift him up by the underarms and nuzzle my nose against
his belly as he giggled. But as he grew and began to look more like me in
cant of body and cadence of walk, I found myself withdrawing. One day
when Nigel was about seven, I picked him up from school—St. Moritz, a
truly wonderful school—on Brighton Lane.

Nigel climbed into the passenger seat, his eyes reddened.
“Well, spit it out.” I leaned across to clip his seatbelt on.
“This kid said I was a cow.” It was farm day in class. The students had

taken a virtual tour of a farm. At one point, the class came upon a field of
amber-colored grain. A spotted cow grazed. Some genius child made a
connection between Bessie and the mark on Nigel’s face. I didn’t want to
scar Nigel with an overreaction on my part or act as if the teasing would
hurt any less in the future. He would need a tougher skin to survive.

“That’s silly.” I started the car. “Ignore that kid, okay?”
“Yes,” Nigel said.
“We’re having cheese ravioli tonight.”
He smiled weakly. We drove off. Having settled the issue, I placed it in a

box at the back of my mind, closed the lid, and removed the skeleton key. I
had a federal court brief to write, and if it didn’t go over well, I’d take the
blame. We’d lose the account.

We were nearly home, stopped at a red light. Vehicles flowed through the
intersection. A scooter. A sedan. A tour bus. Maybe if I applied third circuit
state court precedent, I could create a procedural pathway that would—



Nigel hiccupped. Not a hiccup. His head was ducked between his
shoulders. He had been crying the whole time, silently. He covered his face
when he noticed me watching him. Such grace. Suddenly, Nigel seemed so
small, as if the Bug’s bucket seat might snap shut on him like a Venus
flytrap.

I swerved the car into a gas station at the last major intersection, just
three or so turns from the house. I reached out but found I couldn’t touch
him. How had I become one of those fathers who were deathly afraid of
showing any sign of tenderness? What was I doing to us?

I had been ignoring my son’s predicament. Instead of engaging with his
pain, I did everything to minimize it. The kid who called Nigel a cow
wasn’t unusual. Other kids cast similar aspersions, bullied him like it was
their jobs. More would in the days to come. But I’d heard of a way to help
people like Nigel. I knew what I had to do.

I put the car in drive and took us home to Penny.

—

Several nights after One Cent Day, Zora sent a message reminding me that I
was to represent at City Hall. This was the first thing she said about the
event since our brief encounter at the Myrtles, so of course I forgot all about
it. We were eating dinner.

Penny looked up from her creamed spinach. “Something important?”
“BEG wants me at the press conference for the emergency ordinance

signing.”
“With the mayor?” Nigel asked.
“That’s right, son.”
“Oh no,” Penny said. “You can’t act all chummy with that fascist.”
“She’s not a fascist. She’s just trying to look tough before election

season.”
“Human rights don’t have a season.”
“Don’t be so dramatic,” I said. “As the BEG spokesperson, I have to be

there. It’s just politics.”



I got the impression that Zora and the mayor were frenemies at best. But
since Chamberlain had always supported BEG, someone from the group
had to be there. I saw it as a plum assignment, a sign of trust in my abilities
and in accordance with my desire to ingratiate myself quickly into the upper
echelon of BEG. Eckstein would see my face on TV. It would be proof of
my involvement—of the firm’s involvement—in the lives of the black
community.

Zora instructed that I be ready to declaim BEG’s platform, its mission
statement, its accomplishments both recent and distant in time, and most
important, its support for the government’s action. BEG was about the
safety and security of all peoples. It was BEG that lobbied for the safety
patrols that watched over the Tiko and our house. It was BEG that filled in
the void left by the collapse of the original ADZE with new youth work
programs and the like. It was BEG that kept radical elements from passing
truly discriminatory laws like the one in the next state over that required all
blacks to accept tracking implants. After helping Penny and Nigel with the
dinner dishes—she washed, he dried, I put away—I locked myself in the
guest room and stood up reading policy and jotting speaking points on a
legal pad. I scratched out lines, tore out whole pages and tossed them into
the wastebasket.

As sunlight crept through the lace curtains—a design to my imagination
of disembodied moth wings—it struck me that in all my years as an agent
of the law, Nigel never saw me in action. Early in my career and before
Nigel was born, Penny often visited court to watch me plead. Mama was
present for my first argument before the state supreme court. Even Jo Jo,
through some awesome trick of fate, wandered into a cross-examination I
performed at a suburban law center. But Nigel, of all the people who
mattered, was outside this circle of experience. The thought of my son
getting to watch the old man do his thing, even if it wasn’t an actual legal
proceeding, filled me with a kind of manic joy. I rose from my desk and
stretched, smiling like a tomcat. I patted my stomach. I could’ve stood to
lose a couple. I pulled one of the short curls on the top of my head. It was
turning kinky again. There wasn’t enough time to freshen it up.

—



I crossed the parking lot of the Reinhardt Upliftment Center, leading Nigel
and Araminta by the hands. Araminta, despite being a pest to the very core,
was compliant, even pleasant. But Nigel’s face was reddened by my display
of parental affection. I squeezed his hand harder.

Reinhardt was in the Tiko, on the site of an old commercial sector. Long,
long ago, in the very same place that we walked, Jewish, black, Irish, and
Italian immigrants sold jewelry, hand-cobbled shoes, and small-batch
candies from storefronts. The buildings that made up Reinhardt were once a
paint factory—Pure American Paints—if memory served. Eventually, they
outsourced most of production to Bangladesh. But that was only after much
of the original plant was destroyed in a boiler explosion.

Colorful placards banged against light poles in the breeze. The placards
were printed with slogans: STRIVE TO ACHIEVE! WORK WITH US NOT AGAINST
YOURSELF! IF YOU BREAK THE LAW, THE LAW BREAKS YOU. Arrows pointed
down at the pavement. There was nothing of note on the pavement.

“It’s smaller than I remember.” Nigel pulled his hand from mine and held
the glass door open for us. I couldn’t tell if he was being ironic. Reinhardt
was one of the biggest complexes in the black part of town. It had once
actually been outside the Tiko, but at some point, the barbed-wire fence that
surrounded the Tiko reached out like an amoeba and swallowed Reinhardt.

Reinhardt contained a restaurant, a physical-book library, a police
substation—Douglas’s hive—an after-school work-study program, and even
a Reform AME church. People went to the center to pay utilities, register
themselves, and process government assistance requests. A body could
spend an entire day at Reinhardt and never fail to come across something of
interest.

“That’s because the last time you were here,” I said, “you were a lot
smaller.”

“My daddy ain’t never let me come in here,” Araminta said. “He say it’s
a joke.”

“That’s a small-minded attitude.” I myself was a beneficiary of
Reinhardt’s programming. When I was a freshman in high school, I was
selected with only ten other black kids from across the City to serve in their
ambassador program. It was a huge boost for my self-confidence. A few



times a month, I was transported from the rather pedantic concerns of Ms.
Leni’s Southern American history course (we learned mostly about the
battle for states’ rights) and Mr. Himmle’s calculus class (my least favorite
hour) to events like the press conference. We were talked about using
cliché-ridden metaphors, told we were the flowers of our community—the
brightest petals, who through diligence and deference would sprout into
future leaders. They even gave us blazers, each embroidered with a tulip
crest. I patted my crest for good luck before events. We greeted people,
opened doors, and carried trays of bacon-wrapped kale. I looked pretty
sharp in my navy blazer and khakis, let me tell you. Sometimes, even as an
adult, I found myself absentmindedly stroking a phantom tulip on my chest.

Nigel broke away and turned to us. He held an imaginary microphone
and a real index card. Some of my notes were on the card. In typical Nigel
fashion, he had already run me through a few hypothetical questions in the
car. He got that from his mother, his desire to see me succeed. I didn’t
deserve him. I didn’t deserve either of them.

Araminta ripped the card in half and stuffed it in Nigel’s shirt pocket.
“What’s the big idea?” I asked. Nigel laughed.
“Mr. Nigel’s dad,” Araminta said, walking backward through Reinhardt’s

lobby. She motioned for the imaginary mic, which Nigel handed over. She
thrust the mic at me while Nigel took imaginary pictures. “Would you
rather be the Ugly Duckling or Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer?”

“The swan,” I said. “Although there is a certain utility to that nose.”
Nigel tweaked Araminta’s nose. She playfully slapped him away.
“Mr. Nigel’s dad,” Araminta said, “how come dogs and fruit flies have

been to space but no girls?”
“Girls are already in space.”
“I mean girls my age,” she said.
The dark scent of red beans burbling in a pot. The salty tickle of seafood

gumbo. The effervescent pinch of black pepper against catfish batter. We
came to the pride and joy of Reinhardt, the Respectibility Cafe—yes, the
name was misspelled from the start, but that was another story. All the
employees were disadvantaged youth, like I had once been, though I never



worked there. The youth participants were not necessarily poor or illiterate,
mind you, just born of black parents.

Here, in a program administered by BEG, young people received the
training they needed for careers in the food service industry, which certainly
beat their other prospects: jail time or the welfare rolls. Look at that girl
scribble an order. See that boy wipe down a food tray. My chest swelled at
the thought of all the young people the little eatery had ushered into lives of
quiet dignity.

I held up my imaginary microphone. “Dear Mr. and Miss Children, what
has perfectly white fur, a cat’s head, a dog’s floppy ears, and—”

Someone stared at me from the other side of the glass separating the hall
from the cafe. Someone very familiar but absolutely foreign at once, like a
twin I’d never met. Where had he come from? He hadn’t been there a
moment ago. The coldness in his eyes froze me in place.

“Cousin Supercargo!” Nigel said.
“Supercargo?” I mouthed. I forgot this was one of the facilities where he

worked. I pointed at my head in recognition of his head, which was as bald
as a freshly shorn sheep’s belly. The sliding doors opened.

“What y’all doing up in here?” He wiped his hands on his apron.
Nigel hugged Supercargo as exuberantly as always.
“What happened to your dreads?” Araminta asked.
“That’s a long story, missy,” he said.
“Wait. How do you know him?” I asked Araminta. But they ignored me,

and for a moment, as they chatted, I felt completely invisible.
“I learned some more music by heart for my school musical,” Nigel said.
“Oh yeah?” Supercargo said. “So you’re good to go for next week.”
“He’s only the bench warmer,” Araminta said.
“Understudy.” Nigel shoved Araminta. “Mr. Riley says I’m the backbone

of the band.”
“That’s nice.” I didn’t like the fact that Riley, as a teacher at the School

Without Walls, saw my son more than I did. Maybe I could somehow get
Riley transferred. Nigel didn’t need additional father figures. I was the first,



last, and only. “No shoving,” I said. But no one heard me. I was starting to
panic. What if I remained invisible forever?

“I thought you were the star,” Supercargo said.
“This kid named Monte is. His father donated money to refurbish the

teachers’ lounge. That’s okay. I like Monte. I get to be a member of the
band. The second keyboardist. I play the hard parts.”

I took several deep breaths. I realized that in my transparent state, I could
finally leave the struggle behind. I could let go. Float through the acoustic
ceiling tile. Up through the gray cumulonimbus clouds. Into the ionosphere.
Set a course for the dark side of the moon. If I flew overnight, I could land
on that quiet little orb by morning. Set up a chaise lounge and a tray of
white chocolate bonbons. Nigel would be fine. Supercargo would see to it
that he got home safe. Penny would ensure that he survived the vicissitudes
of being born alive into a world covered in poisonous barbs. Wait—no.

“Can we talk for a sec?” I said. Supercargo and I stepped away from the
kids. “Seriously, what happened?”

“They cut it.”
“But who?”
“Who else?” He rubbed the smooth brown crown of his head. “The

police popped me the night of that terror at the mall.”
“What did you do?”
Supercargo shot me a look of anger. “You sound like them.” The police

had suspected that he was involved and interrogated him for almost twenty-
four hours. He didn’t have to explain the rest. Under the Dreadlock
Ordinance, the cops could give any arrestee a haircut if they deemed the
person unsanitary. It seemed like a sound policy. With so many thousands
of men locked up in close confines, the authorities did what was necessary
to prevent infestations of lice and fleas. I saw it with my own eyes during a
Scare ’Em Straight field trip in middle school. Even the largest prison in the
City was bursting at the seams. Nobody wanted an epidemic.

Still, I couldn’t remember a time when Supercargo hadn’t sported a
stereotypically Afrocentric hairstyle. When we were boys, he had cornrows.
Later he grew a truly magnificent Afro. Although I believed that dreads
were a way to draw unwelcome attention from the authorities—clearly what



happened here—I knew Supercargo took great pride in his locks.
Presumably those locks had been tossed into the incinerator at the City jail,
along with part of my cousin’s identity.

I grabbed his shoulder and gave him a half-body hug. “I’m sorry.”
“It’s all right.” He rocked from foot to foot, an edge to his voice. “Maybe

when it grows back, I’ll get a permadoo like you. Nobody mess with me
then.” He glanced into the cafe. “Say. Your boy old enough. You should let
him volunteer sometime.”

“I’ve got bigger plans for him than working somebody’s grill.” The
words spun out of my mouth faster than I could catch them. “No offense.”

Supercargo smacked his lips. “You’ve always thought you were better
than me.”

“Can we not talk about this now?” I checked the time on my watch.
“That’s right.” He undid his apron. “You’re Zora’s patsy.”
“Excuse me?” I asked.
“She asked me first. I refused. I want nothing to do with it. I resigned

from BEG the other day.”
“What? Why?”
“ ’Cause they playing us. You see what they trying to do with them laws.

They going lock down the Tiko even more than it is now. They going
profile us harder and scoop up anybody for anything. And BEG going to go
hand in hand with them? Want me to be a part of that? No, sir. Cannot be
me.”

“Aren’t you being a bit hyperbolic?” I asked. “And aren’t you the guy
who signed me up with BEG?”

“That was a mistake. I thought I could get them to take on some real
challenges. To fight what’s happening. Like the way ADZE used to. This
City trying to eat us alive, and all Zora want to do is grovel for government
grant money to cover her salary. What’s the point if we doing the man work
for him?” Supercargo closed his eyes and inhaled, his chest expanding for
several long moments. He turned without saying bye and disappeared into
the stockroom.



Shortly thereafter I was up on a platform surrounded by dignitaries. The
press corps waited below shoulder to shoulder. There were three walls and a
series of panel windows that looked out on Reinhardt’s garden, where some
young volunteers toiled over a watermelon patch. Mayor Chamberlain
stepped up to the microphone, raising it slightly. I liked her because, against
the odds, she’d beat out the corrupt father-son dynasty that preceded her.
Her signature bouffant hair never looked higher.

“Much has been said about the present state of unrest in our fair city
since the occurrence in our beloved Myrtles commercial district,” Mayor
Chamberlain said. “I have been monitoring the streets. Particularly around
the area of the Tikoloshe Housing Development. We’ve seen an uptick in
violent-crime arrests, and it is clear to me that this part of our community is
on the verge of complete and total social unrest. Most important, we will
bring the black supremacist group known as ADZE to justice. They will be
punished for their reign of terror and for corrupting citizens of all ages to
their hateful cause.” She gripped the podium with one hand and raised a
sheet of paper with the other. “This is a list of actions designed to address
the problem. You can be assured that this administration is doing everything
in its power…”

The police chief had already spoken, as had the emergency services
administrator, two members of the council, an FBI agent, a woman from the
power utility, and a guy who dealt with the City’s parking meters. How
could people talk so much without running out of words? My coat sleeves
felt awkward against my forearms. I felt oppressed by the formality of it all,
like a butterfly under glass. My armpits were moist. I hoped the woman
from the power utility, now standing next to me, didn’t notice. Because of
our height difference, her nose was right there.

The mayor continued. “My plan will curb violence by extending the
curfew at the Tikoloshe Housing Development from weekends to seven
days a week.”

The non-press audience members clapped. What did she mean by
extending the curfew? She couldn’t just lock people in the projects. Could
she?

“I’ve already secured a contractor to raise the Tikoloshe fence and extend
its parameters to encompass eight nearby blocks.” The applause continued.



“This is, of course, in response to the grenade that was thrown over the
existing fence that destroyed a culturally significant statue of Ida B. Wells.
If ill-intentioned persons can’t get close to the development, then they can’t
harm it or our people.” Mayor Chamberlain leaned forward. “There are
many other initiatives, but I’m proudest of our new collaboration with
federal authorities, which allows our stalwart City Police Department to
hand violators of certain laws over to those authorities for deportation to the
African nation of Zamunda, pursuant to an existing treaty entered under the
administration of former president Palmer.”

My face was hot. Supercargo was right, and I had dismissed him! The
mayor’s plans would strip rights from me, Mama, Supercargo, and
everyone who looked like us. I couldn’t be a party to it. I had to find a way
out. But then I spotted Nigel at the back of the room. He and Araminta were
playing some kind of game with their hands. Even here he was so oblivious
to what our society wanted to do to him, as he should be. I couldn’t walk
away from the plan. I was standing five feet from the mayor on live
television in front of hundreds of thousands of people. Octavia was almost
certainly watching, as she kept up with everything political. Eckstein was
probably watching, too. I couldn’t lose my resolve.

“We believe that these laws”—Mayor Chamberlain pulled the mic closer
—“which I will soon sign into effect, are reasonable improvements to
certain ordinances already in force. And these laws are only for the health,
safety, and general welfare of our citizens. Our only aim is to create peace
in our time.” Chamberlain spread her arms out. “As you can see, we have a
consensus among our city’s leadership, including the City’s historic and
award-winning civil rights organization, the Blind Equality Group.”

Cameras trained on me. Nigel and Araminta looked up. I gave a tiny
wave.
OceanofPDF.com



23

Penny and I were at a picnic thrown by Octavia for clients and potential
clients. I was sure Octavia had invited me to say how pleased she was with
my appearance at the press conference. She might give me the promotion
on the spot and end my troubles.

The only other time I had been to the mansion was Elevation Night. I
didn’t realize then how truly impressive the estate was. The house itself was
built in the neoclassical style, all sandstone pillars and arches. I saw
whimsical details that I’d missed earlier, in the darkness. Pouting angels
high up, a pair of stone rabbits guarding the entrance steps, and dicelike
blocks that were part of the banisters on the front porch. They spun if you
pushed them.

A platter of finger food sat on each flat service while some guests relaxed
in the great room smoking and watching girls play chess on the big screen.

The field behind the house sloped downward to a garden maze on the
right and a gazebo on the left. How did Octavia get such a large chunk of
the City all to herself?

The slope ended at the bayou where wooden canoes bobbed. Kids were
everywhere.

“Is this thing over yet?” Penny asked. Her hairdresser had given her
partial holiday hair, Bali braids along the left side of her head. She adopted
this style occasionally, and I found it adorable.

“Almost. Just four or five more hours.”
“Kill me now.” Holding hands, we walked down to the bayou, but away

from the hubbub. We wound up in a quiet spot. A couple in a giant plastic
duck floated across the water.



“Thanks for hanging in,” I said. She wiggled her fingers at me,
emphasizing her wedding ring. This was part of the marital agreement,
wasn’t it? Every married couple has certain terms that they work out
between them, some in advance. Kids or no kids? How many? Other terms
they negotiate down the line, ad hoc. Who gets the side of the bed close to
the TV? Who controls the thermostat? It really comes down to how much
shit one is willing to take.

For example, neither of us liked the other’s friends. Penny’s pals were a
grungy lot. They were covered in tattoos of ancient gods or Sanskrit or odd
birds. They didn’t bathe often enough. They hit a little too close to home
when they called me Geoffrey the Butler or Remus. I just smiled in their
presence. My friends were largely people I went to law school with or my
fellow firm fiends, such as Paul Pavor. I had ingratiated myself with peers
from fine families, people I only saw at functions like this. I remember one
guy, my moot court partner. After a long night of drinking with a large
group that included Penny, he’d asked what it was like to be born trash. I’d
never coldcocked anyone before that night. My hand still aches in cold
weather.

“We should move,” Penny said. “Seriously, what about that job out
west?” It was a recurring topic that she only broached occasionally. I never
knew what inspired these imaginative flights.

Nigel walked down the hill. He seemed a bit deflated since the incident at
the Myrtles. One of Penny’s crisis counselor contacts had been talking to
him.

“Dad, you’re on TV.” We followed Nigel to the house. In the living room,
a dozen people watched Mayor Chamberlain walk across the screen to a
desk and sit. Someone handed her a golden pen. I stood in the background,
staring into the camera. The woman next to me on screen wrinkled her
nose.

A couple of people in the living room noticed me at the door and smiled,
making the connection between the two-dimensional me on TV and the real
me. Eckstein, whom I hadn’t seen since the Personal Hill Hospital meeting,
leaned against the side of a couch. He threw a pissy look my way. Where
had he come from? And why was he there? He’d made it clear at PHH that
he hated Octavia and me. And why was it that people you didn’t want to see



were always underfoot, but beloved relatives and dead lovers went away for
good?

Penny grimaced, but not because of Eckstein. The mayor rose to her feet
on the screen. The audience at Reinhardt clapped. The people in the room
clapped. Except for Eckstein and Penny.

The scene with the mayor shrank to an inset to make room for the
national show host and a couple of talking heads.

“…some critics call these reactions an overreaction. What say you, Mr.
Pavor?”

“It’s a start, but they don’t go far enough. If the City doesn’t have
security, then what do we have? Four centuries of savage black imbeciles
are enough! When I’m mayor…”

Dinah would later surprise me—what stake did she have in whether I
thought our colleague was a bigot?—by vehemently defending Pavor. The
comment was taken out of context, she would say. He was only talking
about the bad blacks. In the little video box, I furtively waved at the camera.

Penny squeezed my hand. Her eyes were closed. “I can’t. I just can’t.”
“What?” I asked. I didn’t really want to know what she had to say. I

mean, I wanted to know, but in the same way one might want to know how
much a fender bender would raise one’s insurance premium. We were
outside.

“They’re going to turn us into a police state,” Penny said. Of course, I
agreed with her. But I couldn’t let her know that. If she knew I agreed with
her, that would be the end of everything. No more BEG. No more plan. No
more saving Nigel. Besides, it’s not like a racist police state would ever
affect her. And once I helped Nigel, he would be safe, too.

“Give me some credit! Do you think I’d be involved if I didn’t think it
would be better for all of us? Jesus. Just trust me for a change. Chamberlain
isn’t that bad. She’s reasonable. And I’ve known Pavor for years. He’s just
playing the game, too. If he wins next month, he’s not going to start
shipping people back to the Motherland.”

“Maybe your mother is right. It’s bad enough you agree with what
they’re doing. But do you really have to be the fucking mascot?”

“I’m doing what I need to do to provide for my family.”



“Are you really? What does that”—pointing at the house—“have to do
with providing for your family?”

“Everything. It has everything to do with it. You! You told me not to give
up. This is what not giving up looks like in the real world. Lord knows if I
don’t, you can’t pay the mortgage.”

“What did you say?”
“Everything isn’t so easy. You don’t know what it’s like to be me. You

act like you have an idea what it’s like to walk around in my skin. You don’t
know what it means to be the breadwinner, and you don’t know what it
means to be black, Ms. Cornrows.”

“That’s your final answer?” She stepped back.
“I can’t win with you. You want both sides of the coin every time.”
“That’s not even a real saying.” She smiled a little through her frown. I

was still always taken aback when Penny found me amusing or lovable. But
I knew this fight wasn’t over. Her eyes had taken on the “not cry” look,
creeping moisture along the borders, a kind of red tension. In other words,
she was so mad or hurt that she would not under any circumstances cry.

I suddenly became aware that several houseguests were watching us.
Penny glared. “I’m going to the face-painting booth.”
“Nigel’s too old for face painting.”
“Who said anything about Nigel?” Her face was impassive. Completely

devoid of emotion. I was in enormous trouble.
I popped a Plum dry and walked down the slope. Along the way, I

swiped a pig in a blanket off a serving tray. A heavily processed version of
that dreary Fats Waller song played, and the breeze slapped me with the
peppery notes of a quick-seared steak. Eventually I was on the far side of
the house. Penny and Nigel entered the hedge maze hand in hand. A sister
stood by the opening wearing tuxedo finery.

“Hold on, baby,” she said. She held a hand to her ear. “Okay. Go on.”
Inside the maze, I heard the voices of people ahead of me. Every few feet

there was a garden gnome or a wrought-iron chair. The hedges were about
eight feet tall, so I couldn’t see beyond my lane when I jumped. I wandered



toward the center, stroking the sweet-scented box leaves. I plucked a tulip—
it smelled of pork. I did a shuffle off to Buffalo.

“I’ll have my man send you a bill for that.” It was Octavia. “I have those
imported from Timbuktu.” She wore culottes. “Each is worth about a
grand.” And a sweater draped over her shoulders. She took quick steps
toward me and abruptly stopped.

“You did well at that press conference.” Octavia smiled bigger than I’d
ever seen her smile before. It unnerved me.

“But I didn’t get to say anything.”
“Doesn’t matter.” She flourished a hand. “The optics work, sugar.”
“But what about”—I looked around to make sure he was out of earshot

—“Eckstein?”
“I’m not too worried about him.” She grabbed my upper arms. “You

getting into that equal rights group was a strong move. Very strong. I have it
on good authority already that some of the other heads at PHH like it. Just
keep doing what you’re doing. We’ll win Eckstein over in time.”

If there was one thing I knew about Octavia, it was that she was a
genuinely optimistic person. Now she was brimming with good vibes. That
was probably why I couldn’t help but ask, “So this means you’re promoting
me?”

She chuckled. “Finish the job. Then we’ll talk.” Octavia squared the
sweater wrapped around her shoulders. “And watch out for the Goblin
sisters.” She left.

I wandered for a bit. Somewhere around what must have been the center
of the maze, I started to worry that I’d never escape. It wasn’t even that
large or ingenious a design, but the hedgerows were thick. I couldn’t just
push my way through them. My device buzzed, but I didn’t check it. I’d
stuck my fist into a hedge just a few moments before, and something
seemed to nibble at my fingers. At my feet was a brick with “Jan. ’77”
carved into it.

I smelled really good weed. “What are you doing in here?” I asked.
Dinah drew from a joint. I hadn’t seen her in ages.
A girl in a purple bikini painted Dinah’s cheek with tools from the

activities tent. “I’m avoiding my father,” she said. The girl drew her fingers



through her long black hair. “And getting away from those creepy guards in
the trees. Worse than paparazzi.” She didn’t look away from the design she
was adding to Dinah’s cheek. The girl took the joint while Dinah checked
her handiwork in a compact. “You really don’t recognize me, do you?”

I tried to place her high cheeks, her supple black hair, the electronic
collar around her neck. My mind was in no shape for solving equations. It
kept spitting out error messages. A black helicopter swung overhead. We all
watched it streak by. A giant man waved at us.

The girl motioned to me to sit. She dabbed a wet brush on my cheek.
“Jesus Christ”—Dinah passed the joint to me, but I demurred—“it’s

freaking Crown. Catch up.” Dinah looked different. I couldn’t quite place it
though. Crown had painted a frog onto her cheek.

“What happened to your British accent?” I asked Crown. She said the
accent had been part of her act.

“She’s off duty now,” Dinah said.
“You trying out different eye makeup?” I asked Dinah. She shrugged.
Crown laughed. “Same thing your boyfriend said,” she said to Dinah.
“What’s it feel like?” I ask. Crown tilted her head. “Your demelanization.

Did it hurt?”
“Probably not that different from weight loss surgery.” Crown took a

drag on the joint. “You know they have to cut all the flabby skin away after
you lose the pounds. That’s how I feel. Lighter. I walk around and feel like
I’m floating. My old look was just flab for people to, like, be judgmental
about. Now I get to judge.”

“Are you judging me now?” I asked.
They laughed.
“Help us figure out something,” Dinah said. Her other cheek was

emblazoned with a pink orchid.
“How to deal with an overbearing parent?” Crown asked.
“You stand up to them,” I said. “Be honest and direct. Make your

position known.”
“I don’t think that will work here. Daddy’s been insufferable since I came

back to the City.”



“Who’s your daddy?”
“You met him. He’s the hospital’s CEO.” Eckstein. She was talking about

Eckstein.
Suddenly I felt exposed. Did I look high? If I looked high, would Crown

rat me out to Eckstein? But I was being silly. A man under the stress of
Eckstein’s position probably dropped a few purr-pills himself. I stooped to
sit with the women and awkwardly fell onto my rump.

My own dad wasn’t exactly an easygoing person. But the older Nigel got,
the more I saw why Sir seemed on edge around me. Imagine being given a
soft-shelled egg and having to shepherd it through a funhouse.

“Maybe you should cut your pop some slack,” I said, sitting upright.
“Why should I? He doesn’t cut me any.” Crown crossed her legs.
“I doubt he wants anything less than the best for you. Even if he’s not

great at expressing it.”
“He’s fun to be around when he isn’t trying to ruin my life.”
“He can’t let you ruin it all on your own.”

OceanofPDF.com



24

A Turkish bazaar in the middle of a snowstorm couldn’t have been crazier
than the backstage area of the auditorium in the School Without Walls.
Parents like Penny and me had crowded in with their kids, making for a
space so cramped that I found myself wishing for the relative roominess of
a utility closet. Backstage smelled of young sweat and candy. Ms.
Kavanaugh, who normally taught English, squeezed by, sewing the back of
a girl’s ripped costume. Another teacher, a black man in thick glasses,
darted by carrying a box of programs on his shoulder. One of the vice
principals kept peeking in from the doorway and scanning the crowd. I
didn’t know how many students were in the show, but there in the space
between the curtain and the back wall, it seemed as if every student in the
school—and all their siblings—had been enlisted to the cause.

“How do you feel?” Penny asked Nigel. The family of the lead actor had
abruptly left town a few days ago, changing Nigel from second banana to
big apple. “Are you up to it? You don’t have to go on if you don’t feel like
it.” He wore a plaid shirt and corduroy pants, both oversize.

“Of course he’s all right, Penelope,” I said. Nigel shrugged.
Penny licked her thumb and scrubbed something from his cheek.
“Don’t freak the boy out.”
Penny cut her eyes at me.
“Nigel!” one of the parent-helpers called from the door. “Makeup!”
Penny gave him a wet kiss and a long hug. Nigel was through the door in

a flash.
“Let’s go get our seats before we wind up in the opening number,” Penny

said. It was the first full sentence she had spoken to me since the hedgerow
maze several days ago. Penny and her self-righteousness! No matter how



much I explained my view to her, she would never fully accept what needed
to be done.

I grunted and glanced back over my shoulder as we departed. Nigel
hadn’t smiled the entire ride over, hadn’t even spoken when spoken to by
his mother. He was an electrified wire, waiting to be plucked, ready to bring
down the house in a squall of electromagnetic energy.

“What is this madness?” I asked. We were walking down a side stairwell,
as small girls in white robes ascended the same steps.

“Oh well, it’s madness,” Mr. Gonzales said. He held a wicker basket of
clocks. “The teacher who runs the drama club didn’t show up today, and no
one can find him. But the assistant, Mr. Riley, stepped in. He’s a real find. A
real find, I tell you.”

“Pardon me.” A teenage girl hauled a bass drum onto the stage.
We got seats three rows back and off to the left. They were good parental

seats because it was close enough for us to see the action and hop onto the
stage in the event of some catastrophe involving our child. But we were out
of the main sight line. Nigel, being left-handed, would most likely look to
his left, away from us. And perhaps most important: We were so far to the
front that the lowest number of observers would see me cry.

I’d learned my lesson. Through every program and project my boy had
been involved in, I always told myself the same thing: Do not cry. It didn’t
matter if Nigel only played a culm (as he did to sad perfection in The
Lorax) or was a featured performer, like when he played a donkey in that
forest fantasy. I started tearing up at his first appearance. Occasionally, I
made it through most of a production without the waterworks, but never
through an entire one.

Suddenly and without warning, the stage lights blazed. Some faced out
into the audience, and behind me many parents, cursing and stumbling,
struggled to find their seats. A short blond girl stood onstage draped in
white. She shook slightly, nerves. She was the only child on an otherwise
completely bare stage.

“Once a boy was born into a quiet, lonely darkness, but soon he would
bring musical light to the world.” She walked backward, slightly tripping at



one point but recovering nicely. I hoped no one else noticed. You root for
these kids. You really do.

A second set of curtains lifted. Waiting there like an army of mercenaries
were dozens of boys and girls dressed in white robes oddly cut to show off
their white rubber boots. They sang a song about the magnificent man who
touched the sun with his voice and piano. It was a little ostentatious, and the
chorus was rougher than sandpaper, but so far so good. Two boys
somersaulted across the planks. A shadowy figure in all black crossed the
stage. I was happy when he went away.

Everything went dark. A spotlight tracked someone being pushed in a
wheelchair by another kid dressed as an old-timey nurse complete with the
cute little hat and red cross emblazoned across the front of her dress.

The kid in the wheelchair’s face was covered in what looked like one of
those “drama” masks repurposed with some brown paint. Big black shades
over the mask. I didn’t need to see his face though. His arms, legs, and
posture screamed Nigel. Penny knew as well. She patted my arm. We
grinned at each other in spite of ourselves. A temporary truce was in order.

The nurse positioned him center stage, slightly facing Penny and me.
Could he see us? I couldn’t tell.

“When I was a boy,” Nigel said, in a creaky, mock-old-man voice that
sounded a little muffled by the mask, but they had mic’d him, “I heard
music from heaven.” Nigel placed a hand by his ear to imitate listening. “I
learned how to play the piano.” He pantomimed working a keyboard. “Then
I was the one making the music.” As he spoke, adults dressed all in black
crept onto the stage maneuvering instruments into place: a trap kit, a bass, a
guitar, and two keyboards. Kids took their places at each one except for
Nigel, who limped to one of the keyboards. Each kid delivered one of the
following lines with Nigel going last. “It was the 1970s.” “Paisley was the
most popular pattern” (tugging at her paisley shirt, polite laughter from the
audience). “President Nixon resigned.” “Gas was so expensive you couldn’t
even drive.” “Not that I was driving anywhere.” (Nigel, still in the mask,
slumped his shoulders, uncomfortable laughter from the audience.)

Nigel grabbed the back of his mask, and my stomach tightened. The
mask had been fastened with sticky strips, and the ripping was audible.
Underneath, his face was all white from stage paint. The band removed



their masks—the same. I was quite pleased by the face paint as it reflected
the purity of the artist’s intention, the triumph of knowledge over ignorance.
Kudos to the director.

Nigel: “Me and my band pushed against the darkness!”
They jumped into a song about how hard city life could be at times. And

at the end of the song, many of us parents jumped to our feet, ferociously
applauding. The next hour would alternate between songs and quiet
vignettes from the musician’s life: avant-garde dance interpretations of the
first time he tasted pizza and first girl he loved. Nigel threw himself into the
role.

Several teachers and students stood in the wings enjoying the show and
clapping along. When the final note played, the entire house was on its feet.
Nigel bowed. Penny cried.

On the drive home, I was giddy. We all were. I stopped short of our
house, near the front porch. But before anyone could get out, I accidentally
let my foot off the brake, and we rolled forward a good four feet before
Penny grabbed the emergency brake between the seats and wrenched it
back. Our momentum carried us all forward, within the Bug’s cab, three
bunnies bowing. I threw the transmission into park, and we settled back, in
unison, into our seats.

A long moment of silence. We glanced at each other. Brows furrowed.
Mouths quivering. Eyebrows twitching. These were my faces, the only
faces that mattered, the only faces that could matter. I opened my mouth to
speak but accidently brushed the horn, which honked. We jumped in place
at the shock of it and burst into laughter. Hard, snorting belly laughs. At the
car. At the early night. At the silliness of us beneath an invisible moon on a
clear night.

I doubled over in full guffaw. My hand, having migrated on its own,
caressed Penny’s thigh. Something about the way she sat reminded me of
the morning Nigel was born. One leg curled against the dashboard, as was
her habit. It had been winter, and the sun seemed reluctant to do its work.
Penny’s ob-gyn had warned us from the jump about the dangers of her
maternity. She risked toxic shock syndrome, gestational diabetes, and a
dozen other family curses, including and beyond death. She could wind up
in a coma and then die. The baby could die, too. And the baby, if a girl,



could inherit some of her burdens. One day during a checkup very early in
the pregnancy, Penny took Dr. Sapirstein’s hand and squeezed it, perhaps a
little too hard: I’m having this baby. Dr. Sapirstein pried his fingers loose:
Yes, of course you are.

But on the morning in question, the sky outside PHH’s Labor and
Delivery Suite was dark. It rained in the early morning hours, a torrent of
rain that left little lakes all over the hospital lawn and dripping stalactites of
water along the eaves. I had stepped in a puddle. My socks were soaked.
My feet freezing.

But Penny’s hair was sweat-drenched. She sat upright. Her shoulders
shuddered. Her red ringlets drooped against the pale of her collarbone. And
her face was pale, too pale. She exhaled and glanced out the window.

The sun rose. The hospital room blazed like the inside of a stoked oven.
Penny uncrossed her legs and curled one against the railing. She placed a
hand on the side of her belly. She gritted her teeth.

By my elbow, Nigel leaned against the side of Penny’s seat, himself
suffocating in our laugh-bubble, his upper cheeks wet, his eyes pressed
shut. Penny still laughed, too. I tried to ask Penny and Nigel to stop
laughing, but all I could do was hiccup with yuks myself. It would be a
terrible and heavenly thing to die from amusement. But I wasn’t ready to
go.

I barreled out of the Bug. I stood with hands on hips. I stood on tiptoes. I
counted, slowly, to five. Then to six. They got out.

“You goofuses,” I said, trying on an angry face. They both watched me.
“That’s enough.” A moment of silence—and we all started laughing again.
A crow perched on the electrical line above, tilting its head in that
mechanical way avians do.

“We should order pizza from Fratelli’s,” I said.
Nigel’s face turned serious, as I hoped it would. Odd boy that he was,

Nigel despised pizza. Penny and I only ate it when he was away on school
trips or sleepovers.

He took the house keys from Penny. “No pizza,” he said. “I have a better
idea.” Nigel ran for the back door. A moth, really a bullet with wings, beat
against the night.



“Is he going to cook?” I asked. It had been weeks since Nigel made
anything, even breakfast. Smiling, Penny placed her fingertips over her
mouth and nodded. Then she kissed me.

“I thought we were fighting?” I said.
“You’re fighting,” she said. “I’ve already won. Besides, I have a honey-

do list for you.”
She was right. I couldn’t win our argument—at least not out in the open.

Besides, the key to a happy marriage wasn’t to avoid going to bed angry. It
was to take every chance for reconciliation. We would fight tomorrow over
my work, over BEG, over Nigel. But tonight—

“This list. Does it involve bed?” I pinched her stomach.
“Why, you scandalize me, sir.” She mock-blushed away from my gaze.

Then she smacked her lips. “Boy, I’m getting the Polaroid. We should
capture the night.”

“Not the Polaroid,” I said. The Polaroid was an antique made around the
turn of the millennium. Penny only pulled it out on special occasions. She
had used it to take that picture of Nigel on the beach. “It’ll take you all
night to find that thing.”

“It’s in the bedroom closet.” She trotted toward the back steps. “I know
exactly where. I just have to find the spare film cartridge.”

“Oh, brother.”
Penny glanced over her shoulder. “The bed idea isn’t a horrible

proposition. I’ll take it under advisement.”
In the kitchen, Nigel furiously mixed batter in a big plastic bowl. He

wasn’t standing on a step stool like he used to. I smelled vanilla. Flour
particles suspended in the air. I didn’t have to ask. He was making our
undisputed family favorite, crêpes suzette. At the end of the dish
preparation, we would turn down the lights. He would drizzle liqueur onto
our plates and light it. For a few moments, our faces would glow in the
presence of the miracle that was us. I kissed his forehead. He didn’t even
flinch.

I found the Grand Marnier in the cupboard and the kitchen torch on the
lazy Susan. I activated the flame and admired the white-blue plume.

“Don’t,” he said. “You’ll burn yourself.”



“But—”
“Like last time,” he said. Who knew that ties were so quick to ignite?

Embarrassed, I put the torch and bottle on the table.
“Um. What’s our fruit?” I asked.
“Raspberry.” He nodded at a dish of ripe berries.
“Most excellent.” I played courier, shuttling eggs, butter, lemons,

whatever my bright boy asked for. How strange to watch this little person
hard at work combining ingredients that would have been disgusting taken
individually into something of gustatory brilliance. He poured the batter
into a container—his thin arms straining against the shifting weight of the
mixing bowl—and put the container into the freezer so he could poof up the
whipped cream. It wasn’t until he fried the last crêpe that I began to wonder
what was keeping Penny. Nigel was preparing the first plate—Penny’s plate
—when she entered the kitchen pinching a red spiral tablet, my Big Chief
Bigboote tablet, by the rings.

My god.
If she had read any portion of that journal—even just the last few weeks

of entries—she knew it all: my plans for Nigel, how I intended to do it, how
I prodded the boy, how much I hid from her.

“Nigel, baby.” She blinked. I’d never seen her eyes like that. Focused and
hard. Taking me in. Dismantling her image of me. I was afraid. “Change of
plans, and this is important. I need you to pack your overnight bag for a
weekend stay at Grandma’s.”

“But the crêpes are hot and ready.”
“Now!” She stepped to Nigel as if to grab him, but he backed away from

the stove.
“Wait a second,” I said. “There’s no need to—”
Nigel went to his room.
“Two minutes,” Penny screamed. She brandished the tablet. “It fell on

my head while I was searching for the camera.” She pulled out the clinic
pamphlet that I had tucked into the cover fold.

“Penelope,” I said.



“No.” Rolling her eyes, she held her index finger up as if putting me on
notice that one wrong move would end me. “ ‘Penny hasn’t suspected
anything of my plans. I admit my surprise at this fact. But the lovely old girl
is too deep in her own confusions to sense what I’m working on….’ ”

“That’s an old notebook.”
“That part was dated last month!”
Cool. Be cool as an underground well. “I was just playing around,” I

said. “You know I always wanted to try writing some fiction.”
Penny fumed and went into Nigel’s room. A few moments later she led

him out of the house.
I ran to the front windows and peeked through the blinds. The minivan

was parked against the curb on the opposite side of the street. Nigel was in
the passenger seat. He was talking to Penny, but she ignored him. The van
lights flickered on, then off. The engine wouldn’t turn over. That ratty old
van was good for something after all. I could fix this. I just needed to get
them back inside. If we made it through the night, we might be us again.

Penny went over to the neighbors’ and banged on the door. After several
moments, skinny, beak-nosed Mrs. Kravits opened the door, followed by
big, panda-bear-like Mr. Kravits in gray pajamas. They talked for a
moment, and Nigel entered their house. Mr. Kravits tousled Nigel’s hair in a
grandfatherly way.

Penny stalked back toward our house. She slowed as an electric utility
truck careened past, its unsecured boom bobbing. I almost opened the door
and cursed that driver out. Idiot. But Penny ran to the back door. I bolted to
intercept her.

“You don’t understand,” I said.
“You’re damn right I don’t. Our son. That’s our son! You never had the

right!”
“Please sit.” I grabbed her shoulder.
She threw my hand off. “Don’t tell me what to do.” She went to the table.

I didn’t see her knock the Grand Marnier bottle over, but it rolled to the
edge of the table and stopped.

“Would you just calm down.” I knew my mistake when I said it. Calm
down? What kind of leaky faucet asks a furious woman to calm down? To



my credit, she did seem a little calmer. Like Mount Vesuvius in the final
moments. She walked to me in short steps. And slapped me. It hurt. I didn’t
move.

“What is your problem?”
“I’m trying to help.”
“By poisoning our son?” She slapped at my shoulders and neck. I

grabbed both of her wrists. She put one of her feet in my gut and pushed me
back. I let go. We stumbled apart. “That shit corrodes steel. Don’t you
understand that?”

“I didn’t poison him—”
“And now you want our son to go to the hospital so that they can shoot

him up with things they don’t even fully understand yet. All for what? So
he can look more like my cousin Shane? You’re that afraid of a birthmark?”
Trying to strike me again. But I held on. “You coward! Afraid the cops will
come after him just because they might think he’s black?

“That’s what they do.”
“Jesus Christ, things are bad. But not that bad. Nobody’s going to kill our

child if he looks like you. We don’t live in the Tiko. Nigel doesn’t roam the
streets in the middle of the night. He doesn’t carjack people. Sometimes the
police do awful things, but you can’t build his whole life around that. The
chances of something like that happening to our son are very low!”

It was then that I realized the distance between us. The talk that all black
parents give their children was such an integral part of my upbringing. One
night when I wanted to play after dark, Sir and Mama sat me down and
basically said, The chances of something like that happening to you are
virtually assured. Penny was aware of this phenomenon. Many white
people were. But her parents never gave her the talk because it wasn’t
necessary, so the whole thing was just a theoretical exercise. Like trying to
choose between ten doors, all but one of which led to immediate death. It’s
not a problem if you never have to choose.

How could two people know each other so well but not recognize so
fundamental a rift? She really didn’t know. She really hadn’t felt what I’d
felt. This was the woman of resistance. The literacy program volunteer. The



fearless protester. She understood the dangers of structural inequality. She
knew the value of dismantling systematic injustice.

But when it came to the basics of walking through life as prey, she had
no idea. It wasn’t just that Nigel would make an appetizing target for some
zombie with a badge and a gun. It was all the little things that were so
obvious to me. The woman switching from one side of the street to the
other. The store owner following him around. The increased scrutiny from
anyone with power over his freedom or happiness. All the things that would
eat away at his soul and make him wonder why we ever brought him into
this world. All the things that would make him me.

“Not all of us in this family are beneficiaries of white privilege,” I said.
She pointed at me. “Don’t you dare.”
I pointed at myself. “I dare.”
“Every time you want to hurt me, you pull the race card.”
“My life is a race card!”
“I’ll tell you something you should remember. Our son is brave. He

won’t crumble just because he’s a little different. Unlike his father.”
“Take that back.” I cornered her by the sink, placing a hand on the

countertop.
“No.” She pushed past me.
“You think that just because you did a few marches and called out a few

people over the years that you’re some kind of racial saint? That’s not how
it works. And it won’t protect Nigel. You must believe I’m trying to do the
right thing. All these years together. You have to give me some credit.”

“I don’t have to give you shit.” Penny closed her eyes. I touched her arm,
and she shuddered away. She was at the door. She opened it. She closed it.

“I’m not afraid of you. But I’m an adult. That boy believed in you.
Thought the world of you.” I flinched at her use of the past tense.

She went to the table and sat. She righted the bottle and drank. “This is
what’s going to happen. I’m going to find a lawyer.”

“Wait—”
“Don’t make me repeat myself. I’ll get the house and full custody.” She

was serious. I had seen her make similar declarations. When she decided to



cut her losses, she cut them through and through. “I used to feel guilty
about your pill problem. I felt guilty about how full of shame you were and
thought if I were a better person I could get you to straighten up. But it was
never about me. It was always about your demented ideas. I was too stupid
to accept that before.”

Penny rose from the table and went to the door. Then she was gone. I sat
there for a moment encased in amber. I would not let it end this way. I could
not let it end this way.

The door jammed. I yanked it open and heard a sound like a large tennis
racket hitting a large tennis ball. The noise disoriented me enough that I
tripped down the steps, landing hard on my hands and knees. I pulled a
shard of metal from my palm. One of Penny’s lost earrings. How long had it
been there? A pearl of blood erupted from my dirty palm. I heard Mrs.
Kravits’s voice, a yelp, but I couldn’t see her, as she was obscured by the
house next to our driveway.

An engine revved. I expected to find the minivan gone, but it was in the
same spot, the hazard lights blinking. I jogged out into the street, feeling air
on my knee. I had ripped my best cotton trousers in the fall. The Kravitses
and Nigel were on the Kravitses’ porch. Mrs. Kravits covered her mouth
with both sets of fingertips. Mr. Kravits placed a big paw over Nigel’s eyes
and pushed him into the house.

“What—” I said. I was about to ask Mr. Kravits what on earth he thought
he was doing to my son. But I realized the three of them had been looking
past me.

A white police van had swerved off the road a few car lengths in front of
the minivan, taking a mailbox with it. I realized I’d never called the City to
ask them to slow the safety patrols down like Penny had asked.

Where was Penny?
The street glowed yellow, then white from the moonlight, then yellow

again from the van’s hazard lights. The driver of the white van, a young
police officer in coveralls, stumbled out. He rubbed his face and looked me
right in the eye. His forehead was bleeding.

“I was coming down this way, and she just—” Suddenly, his face shifted
from confusion to fear. “Where did you come from? I need to see your ID.”



I ignored him and went around the front of the van. Penny was suddenly
there, on the cement, perfectly still and composed, as if sunbathing on a
knoll. Her skirt splayed to one side and one leg lay at an impossible angle,
like that painting of the girl lying in a grassy field. Her head lay against the
sloped curve of a driveway. Her eyes opened. Some blood collected on the
dirt below her neck. I got down to one knee.

“Stop right there!” The officer stood a few feet away, his gun drawn.
“Step away from the woman.”

Penny was blinking and turning her head as if to say no.
“What do I do?” I asked. I wanted to grab her up and run to the hospital.

But I knew I couldn’t touch her. I couldn’t straighten her ruined leg. I
couldn’t cradle her head against me. What could I do for her?

“Baby, I—” she said. She clenched her eyes.
OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com



25

The toaster dings. Good. Two wedges of waffle, hot and ready. Yes, they’re
processed. Yes, they were probably in cold storage for a decade before
purchase. But I didn’t burn them this time, at least, and create a new
catastrophe. Don’t want a replay of when I tried to make Nigel French toast.
Sticky raw egg and bubbling burned butter everywhere. Scalded my skin.
But that was weeks and months and weeks ago.

Now is different. I’ve snipped away the deckled edges of breakfast
preparation for a more modest process. Compartmentalized the routine into
something I can handle efficiently, in few movements. Undercounter to sink
to microwave in five easy steps. Squat, lift, shift, shake, and drop. An
interpretive dance for the morning munch.

Organic syrup. Pulsing in the microwave. Half minute to the correct
temperature. Cantaloupe, sliced anonymously before purchase and
hermetically sealed in cellophane. No muss or fuss. One less thing to
trouble the heart. Fissure the package with the tine of a fork. Voilà. Easiest
thing in the world. I would do better if I could. French toast. Soy bacon.
Hand-juiced juice. More than just a slice of cantaloupe but blueberries, too,
strawberries, raspberries, and snozzberries. I’d have farmers come to us,
riding atop their tractors. They would schlep the produce into our kitchen,
trailing mud from the fields. This I would do for Nigel.

Fold a paper napkin just so. Paper, because a spreading, berry-colored
stain on a cloth napkin is too much to bear on mornings like these. Set out
saucers, forks, and knives for two. Just for two. Only two. Do not set a third
placement. Do not dwell.

Light cuts in through the slit window as if it were the end of the day. A
guillotine for dust and shadow. But it’s barely seven A.M. Soon all the



shadows will perish—blown away—like Hiroshima, Nagasaki, Oslo, and
Perth. Don’t be ridiculous. Don’t bloviate. The Japanese cities, at least, are
fine today.

Grab glass mugs from the freezer. Two ice cubes per mug. Just two. Only
two. Forget that recurrent dream where you kiss your son’s forehead and
your lips stick, so you push away with your hands, but they, too, stick. Soon
you are suffocating. And then a faceless, fingerless corpse.

People argue on the radio. Last month’s attacks by ADZE by a dreaded
man wearing a creepy wooden mask and white linen suit. Killing the killers
is the only way to peace. It’s what Jesus would do. Shoot them in the nads.
Deport the rest, children included. But first sterilize the lot—from babies to
grandparents—and implant tracking devices in their bellies that detonate if
they set foot on American soil again. Pike the heads. Pike the—
Boop. Radio to classical station playing Barber’s adagio. Boop. To station

bumping Tchaikovsky. Boy, that cat sure can swing. It’s all arithmetic.
Exhale unhappy thoughts. Out with the minuses. In with the pluses. Kittens,
puppies, and whiskers on both. Bright copper kettle. Use oven mitt to pick
it up. Pour steaming water over instant coffee crystals and appreciate all the
good things I’ve been doing for myself. Exercising at the Sky Tower gym
on the treadmill overlooking downtown. Three days a week, or four if I can
manage. Looking both ways before crossing the street. Greeting strangers in
the elevators. Under no circumstances screaming at rude drivers or pale
short people in rain slickers gawking at me from great distances.
Pragmatism before teenage wasteland emotions.

I take my place at the table and stare into my coffee water, a foot-brown
pond. I lower Nigel’s waffle onto his plate. And the fruit.

There’s an absence of noise from Nigel’s room. No squeaks from his bed.
No puff of cool air from his ceiling fan. Finding his door closed, I call his
name. The door to my bedroom shifts, but Nigel’s not in my bedroom. No
one is in my bedroom when I’m not in it, even though that familiar red-
haired scent still drifts on the house currents like a melody. My bedroom is
empty. My life—

This is logic. The present. The here and now. Don’t. Think. A. Bout. The.
Past. Pull your ring finger back too far, and let the pain stake you to the
ground as though you were a witch.



Nigel appears in the kitchen and says hey. I say hello and good morning.
We sit at the table, faking consumption. I pour syrup onto my squares. I cut
my squares into cubes. I dissect my cubes into abstract shapes. What is food
even for? And whose idea was it anyway? I pour syrup over the mess until
my plate is a sluice of yellow and brown, like a spring-thaw mudslide.
Nigel has sipped his juice two or three times. But his glass is still nearly
overflowing.

He let his hair grow out, to my surprise, for which I’m thankful. One less
thing to fight over. But he still resists spot countermeasures. So I’ve
established a market-based system to overcome his reticence. He’s almost a
teenager and wants things. New shoes. New shirts. Things that go beep.
Things that light up. I provide a small amount of money when he uses the
toning cream. A larger amount of money when he takes the antimelanin
tincture. The stuff finally came in from Eritrea. It arrived one day in a box
lined with white down. Tincture’s active ingredient: albino turtle shell. It
was said the fishermen used to throw the albinos back. They wanted fish,
after all. But now they go searching for the white turtles. They have to net a
couple hundred dark ones to make the harvest economically feasible. But
one white hit makes a day, apparently.

Nigel doesn’t wear hats anymore. I can’t pay him enough to.
The tincture came in a bottle like the kind that holds cough syrup. I pour

a shivering tablespoon’s worth. Open the hangar, there goes the plane. He
rolls his eyes when I check under his tongue with a depressor. Have to make
sure he isn’t holding the stuff in a pocket of his mouth. Trust but verify. I
lay a small amount of cash on the table.

This is to say nothing of the puckered wound on the inside of his elbow.
Once a week there is injected for a startling sum a supposedly highly
effective compound of things I cannot pronounce that disperse into Nigel’s
young body and collect melanin in much the same way garbage men collect
trash. I’ve noticed some change in Nigel’s complexion, but I no longer trust
my perception.

“It’s what your mother wanted.”
Nigel doesn’t react for a moment. He lifts an eyebrow. “That’s right, Dad.

She said so herself.” He grabs the cash. He grabs his bag and goes outside.



He’s sitting in the car, waiting for me. I’m sitting in here, waiting. I take my
hat from the chair next to me.

We drive the route to the School Without Walls. No music. Too many
cars drifting like angry manatees. An airless commute.

The Centurial Compilation plays through the stereo, a playlist of my
favorite music from long ago, given by Sir. Nigel has earbuds in his ears, a
portable game—a new purchase—in his hands, and an egg-shaped wrist
device that pulses green at random intervals. Where is he? How do I find
my son?

We pass a billboard atop a restaurant down one of the cross streets. It had
been an ad for PHH. Then it was tagged by ADZE. Then it was painted
blank. Now there’s half of an A on the canvas, like the graffiti is redrawing
itself.

I park across the street from the entrance to the School Without Walls
because dozens of other cars clog the reverse lane. Nigel gets out. I shout
for him to look both ways, but he doesn’t. He pulls up his hoodie.

A few other students fall in behind him. The other students are a dark
conclave. It’s as if Nigel has collected into his sphere of influence all the
kids who are anything but white. Although there is one blond girl. I get out
of the car, not exactly sure why I’m following. I fail to note a city bus
railroading from my left. The driver leans on the horn, which is curiously
high-pitched. My hat flies off, but I catch it and press backward into the
side of the car. Nigel and the others, at the top of the steps, watch me before
entering the school together. I fall into the Bug and hold my hat against my
chest.
OceanofPDF.com



26

In the Sky Tower mezzanine, people I don’t know flank me on the elevator.
Their bland faces I never really see. My golden reflection grimaces from the
polished doors. My felt fedora is evenly pitched. My gray suit is creased to
military specifications. Even the little divot in the knot of my tie is perfect.
But I’m thin as a drying rack.

The receptionist greets me with hangdog eyes. It’s the same every
morning. What is she looking for in me? She won’t get it, whatever it is. I
hate a snoop. Once she tried to strike up a conversation, in friendly tones,
about a father or cousin left trapped on the distant shore of eternity. I
straightened my back and stepped determinedly past her. Just like now.
Same as tomorrow.

I stop at Octavia’s office, and she’s not in. But my abacus row is nearly
complete. Just a couple of more beads. Praise Theophilus. It’s the one thing
I have going my way. I’ll make goal. I’ll get that promotion. I’ll help Nigel.
Something good will come of all this, of my life, it will.

I keep having flashes of the first time we met, my wife and me. I was
leaving the law school library after leading a class as a teaching assistant. A
cold front had overtaken the City, but that didn’t stop a group of activists
from camping out on the portico. They were protesting a policy that kept
the children of felons out of school. I picked my way through the throng. I
was down the steps. I was almost to my car when Penny slammed into me.
Knocked me over. My satchel full of index cards and multicolored
highlighters spilled into a puddle. The same puddle I had been knocked
into. My bottom was soaked with freezing water. I was ready to curse my
assailant. But her bright face in relief against the gray clouds stopped me.
She helped me up.



My phone chimes in my pocket. Jo Jo wants me to call him. He’s been
sending me messages for weeks, but I’ve ignored them all. I slip the phone
back into my pocket. He was nice enough to give me something for my
nerves and a few refills. How many months ago? He’s just checking up on
me. Making sure my doses are okay. I’m fine. No need for chitchat.

In my office, I hang up my hat and coat. I tell myself that I’ll sit at my
desk and work. I tell myself that this is a simple thing, something that I’ve
done for about a decade. But I open the flat drawer above my lap and spend
a quarter hour creating objets d’art out of paper clips: a flower, a winged
thing, a very large paper clip.

Strummer, my newish secretary, enters and hands me my to-do list. There
are briefing deadlines to meet, video conferences to attend, correspondence
to compose. Correspondence that will be—once completed—as terse and
brittle as a two-line poem.

Strummer keeps staring at me. He knows the drill. I don’t much work in
my office anymore. Instead, I occupy one of the smaller interior conference
rooms near the kitchen. I say conference room, but it’s really more of a
large storage closet. No windows except for the glazed panels that open
onto the hallway. He follows me in. I find his suspenders an annoying
affectation. Belts work just as good.

My work—file folders and milk crates full of more file folders—is neatly
arranged along the wall and table. All the technology we have these days,
but we lawyers are conservative creatures. Fly me a sheet of paper over an
electrical current. Watch me convert it to paper.

A legal pad sits on the table a few inches from the lip. A single blue pen
waits next to the pad perpendicularly. I begin sketching notes to myself: an
argument I’ll need to make in section seven subsection G to overcome an
opponent’s prescription counterargument. Strummer fiddles with a stack of
documents, fiddles with his cuff links, fiddles with his wire frame glasses,
but there’s nothing for him to do here. He’s already made sure that my
workspace is immaculate, as always. He wants me to talk. And maybe I
should, but this is a professional environment, and I’ve important work to
do.

I go to the door with the intention of telling Strummer to beat it. He must
have other tasks to complete. He’s answerable to other attorneys, after all,



not just me. But Armbruster walks by. He pauses to put a hand on my
shoulder. For a change, he seems completely tuned in to the moment. His
face is unmuddled, clear, hawkish. He doesn’t talk. He just stares into my
eyes with a look I can’t place. He could be thinking you poor bastard or just
you bastard. But who knows? Who can read the minds of other people in
this world?

Armbruster squeezes my shoulder and continues down the hallway. I tell
Strummer to beat it.

After lunch, I’m on the floor of the Labyrinth Room flipping through
client files in a bucket folder. Footsteps approach from the next aisle.
Dinah’s feet enter my field of vision. Still can’t get used to the flats she’s
been wearing lately.

“Don’t get up,” Dinah says.
“Well, have a seat then.”
“Don’t be silly.” Dinah places a hand on her hip. “I’m not ten years old,

and I’m not at my grandma’s eating a bowl of pho. Who do you think I
am?” At least some things are the same.

I stand and squint. Something’s changed about her. Has she had another
procedure? It’s possible, as I haven’t seen her around much lately. Not since
she revealed she and Paul Pavor had fallen for each other a while back.
What else could she have done? Her eyes are one thing. What else is there?
I lean in for a better look.

Dinah smiles and takes off her glasses. “What do you think?”
“What did you—”
“You can’t tell?”
I can. Her jaw and her nose. She’s done something to both. She looks like

a different person. Still Vietnamese but whiter. As if someone hopped in a
time machine and swapped out one of her parents for a Swedish person. I
tap the bridge of her nose. I pinch her jaw. What a miraculous era where
you can fall into a vat of sleep as a caterpillar and emerge a butterfly.

She swats my hand away, gentler than I would figure. “Does it look
natural?”

I nod. I’m not sure what I should say. I can’t quite lock onto the emotions
bubbling up from my gut. They’re just glimmers of emotions. Shadows on



the wall of my psyche. I can’t feel them directly.
“Paul thinks I look like that British actress,” she says. “The one from

those stupid end-of-the-world movies with the talking puppies. I think that’s
his way of saying he doesn’t like it, that I should get more done.” Her
eyebrows furrow. “You think I look stupid, too.”

I tell her not at all.
“Why does it matter what Paul—” I stop myself.
“When you put it that way, you make me sound like an airheaded

schoolgirl. But yeah. I guess it did matter.”
“How does it feel?”
Dinah touches her own cheek. “Like falling down an elevator shaft, but

I’m not afraid of hitting bottom anymore. Well, what is it?” she asks. “Spit
it out. We’ve known each other most of our lives. I expected more of a
reaction from you, of all people. Not just a weak smile like everyone else
around this joint. Except for Armbruster. Armbruster says I look like one of
his nieces.”

Truth to tell, I’m surprised I’m not happier for her. Trapped in my
esophagus, there’s a swirly colored marble of joy, disappointment, and
something else. If I can’t feel it all, then maybe I can interpret the swirls
like reading Braille after the notches have been rubbed off. What remains?

Am I happy for her? Yes, I’m happy because Dinah is my friend. And my
friend seems happier these days. Happiness is too rare a commodity not to
count for something. Still, my happy is the caustic yellow of a safety vest.

“I know you think I did this for Pavor,” she says. “But I didn’t. Everyone
always thinks I do everything to please other people. Like I make all these
sacrifices to be a good Asian girl. Don’t you get it even now? That’s not
me. It never was. That’s a stereotype. And that’s the only thing I’ve ever
been afraid of—being pulled into some shitty stereotype. I don’t need
people to assume I’m some kind of math genius or willing to go along with
whatever everyone else wants. I just want to walk to my apartment without
random guys catcalling that they want to tie me up. I bet that never
happened to Penny.” She sighs. “I didn’t mean to bring her up.”

“It’s okay,” I say. “I’m sure P—” I can’t get her name out of my mouth.
“She always liked you.”



“Listen up, dum-dum.” She points at her face. “My face, my career, my
life, has always been about what I want.” She glances down at her shoulder.
“And then Pavor showed up and made all this easier. My ex-boyfriends
would have broken up with me for ruining their fantasies.” Dinah leans
back onto a file shelf. “It’s still my world. But I don’t mind sharing. We
don’t believe all the same things, but we’re together where it counts. We’re
engaged now.” She holds up her hand. The ring is ornate and loopy. More
metal than jewel. “The stones are synthetic. I couldn’t talk him into getting
one with real diamonds. Something about not supporting savages.” She
wipes her eye with the side of a finger.

I ask her when will they marry.
“In the new year.” She hugs me. It’s the first human contact I’ve had in a

long time that wasn’t entirely about someone feeling sorry for me. Makes
me feel like an empty bag in a breeze. She pauses. “I want to thank you for
being my friend.”

“You don’t need to.”
“Hush,” she says. “You know it’s not easy for me to say that. So don’t cut

me off, okay? I did some things. I made a mess that’s going to get messier.
But remember I’m your girl.”

A gong rings inside me, a thousand miles down. Something isn’t right.
This is more than about her face or her new soulmate Paul Pavor.

“Things are about to change,” she says.
I ask how.
“She means she sold out.” Octavia is at the door. “Sold me out. Sold you

out. Meet Little Lady Judas.”
Fear flashes across Dinah’s face, as if she thinks Octavia might haul off

and punch her.
“I don’t have to talk to you.” Dinah turns to walk away.
“Ah-ah, sugar.” Octavia grabs Dinah’s arm and spins her around. Dinah

tries to break away but can’t. “Not so fast. You’ve got something of mine.”
Law offices are not worlds of physicality. People rarely move, and you

can go an entire year without seeing two humans touch. Violence is as rare
as vibranium. Octavia’s action might seem like a minor flare-up between
two women if you saw it on a busy street. But up here, on the sixty-second



floor of the Sky Tower, among dusty files and beige walls, they might as
well be going at each other with flaming whips and broadswords.

“You were like a daughter to me,” Octavia says.
“I already have a mother,” Dinah says. “And I didn’t do anything you

wouldn’t have.”
“Don’t sweat it, peach. I understand. Business is as business does.”

Octavia snatches something from Dinah’s jacket. Dinah pulls away,
clutching her upper chest.

I ask what in the world is going on. They’ve had verbal altercations
before, but nothing like this.

Octavia opens her hand. Dinah’s sun pendant. Octavia took it from
Dinah’s lapel. Dinah’s not in the group anymore.

“That bitch Armbruster stole her away.”
“He didn’t steal anything,” Dinah says. “I chose.”
“Whitmore, I’m wounded.” Armbruster strolls into the room. “Is that the

language you use to describe your old mentor when you think he’s out of
earshot? Thought I house-trained you better.”

“When he did everything he could to hold me back,” Octavia said,
pointing, “you’re goddamn right that’s how I describe him.”

“Now, heel.” Armbruster whips out a handkerchief and wipes the corner
of his mouth. “Did you really think you’re qualified to run this place?” he
asks. “I’m not going anywhere. This is my ship. Will be till I say
otherwise.” He snorts and pauses in his tracks. “Octavia didn’t tell you, did
she? I guess she was hoping to turn things around before the deal was
done.”

I turn to Octavia, but it’s Dinah who speaks. “Darkblum Group signed up
with Armbruster. They’re his client now.”

“Our client.” Armbruster lays an arm over Dinah’s shoulder. She smiles
stiffly. The significance of this strikes me all at once. Octavia and
Armbruster shared the preliminary Darkblum work all year, but only one
shareholder can take credit. With the company signing up with Armbruster,
all the money and billables from that work will go to him and his team.
Including all the billable hours from the past year. Any hours I worked on



the file will go to Armbruster instead of Octavia. She won’t get the credit.
Neither will I. My abacus bleeds.

“My firm.” Armbruster adjusts his tie.
He takes a sheet of paper out of his pocket and unfolds it. I don’t have to

see the words to know that it’s a Racing Form containing everyone’s stats.
“You’ll be needing to revise this.” He crumples the paper and throws it at

Octavia. But the ball lands at my feet.
OceanofPDF.com



27

Life doesn’t care about your protest. You can rage all you want, curse it,
abstain from it in every way possible. But necessity rears her heavily made-
up face and says, Frown all you want, sweetheart, but somebody got to
handle up on this and this and this. In the middle of our archipelago of
sadness, Nigel and I still had basic needs. Toothpaste. Tissue. Tea.

“Can I stay in the car?” Nigel asked.
“Come on,” I said. He got out, and we walked into ¡Organix!, the

macromarket with heart.
The problem with going to a grocery store when you’re the noncooking

partner is you feel like a phony. You’re out of your element and assuming
an area of responsibility that you aren’t built for. You haven’t kept track of
how many cans of corn belonged in the pantry. You didn’t stock those
shelves. You consumed. Greedily, you lapped up every breadcrumb
lovingly placed before your muzzle, always sniffing for the next bit and
keening whenever you wanted more, which was frequently.

Even the layout of the building challenged me. Should I work
counterclockwise through the fruits and veggies or start with the bread and
sweets? What a farce. As if either choice could give me even a single
moment more with—

“This is dumb.” Nigel picked over a selection of grapefruit. He was
wearing his hoodie up, which I hated. In profile, his shaggy hair sprang
from under the hood like the legs of a hermit crab. “We’re not going to eat
any of this.”

He was right, of course. I didn’t want any of the food in the entire place.
A fetid scent, of charred pig meat, rooted in the air. My stomach pulsed.
Run away, my gut squealed.



But there was a fatherly ticker tape tangled in the rat’s nest of my brain. I
was depressed, and I knew it. But I had certain duties. And even if I didn’t
believe in the goodness of the world or have any hope whatsoever for the
future, I had a job to do. All I had to do was speak the words.

“We don’t get to give up,” I said.
“When was the last time you were hungry?” he asked. “I can’t even—”
“Listen to me—”
He gestured toward the center aisles. “I mean, we just keep buying all

this stuff, and then it gets all moldy, and I have to throw it away.”
“Nigel, I’m trying to tell you something, son.”
I placed a hand on his shoulder. “Horrible things happen. I don’t like

anything now. I don’t like waking up. I don’t like leaving the house. I sure
as hell don’t like being here.”

“Why are we here then?”
“I don’t even like you. I certainly don’t like myself. In fact, I like me less

than you. So in a battle between us, you win. But this won’t last forever.
One day I’m going to wake up and feel like a person again. We both will.”

“You’re talking weird again.”
“Maybe. You should try it sometime. It feels awesome. Now, I was

saying that things can’t suck this hard forever. And one day I’m going to
wake up and my stomach will growl, and I’m going to be pretty mad if I go
to the fridge and we don’t have any frozen waffles. She always made sure
we had frozen waffles, just in case.”

“You’re trying to sound so tough. You can’t even say her name.”
“And you can?”
“I talk about her all the time.” Nigel glanced at me, then away. “Just not

with you.”
I rubbed my forearm and blanched at who he might have felt more

comfortable confiding in. Araminta? Riley? It didn’t matter. “Well, then,” I
said, “you’re a better man than me.”

A tall figure in black crossed between the onions and the potatoes. It was
Eckstein from PHH. The scowl he wore every time he saw me seemed to
soften when he realized who I was with.



“This must be your boy,” he said. He seemed a little frazzled. Five
o’clock shadow. Ashy feet in slippers. His straightened hair uncombed.

I introduced them.
“I saw you at Ms. Whitmore’s mansion,” Eckstein said to Nigel, “and

your mother, too, but didn’t have the pleasure of meeting either of you
then.”

“My mom’s dead. She was run over by a police officer.”
“Oh.”
“But don’t worry.” A strange smirk spread across Nigel’s face. “She’s in

a better place now. She would have wanted us to be happy. And at least we
have memories of our time together.”

Eckstein’s eyebrows shot up.
Nice job, Nigel. Way to sock it to him for the old man. Eckstein’s shock

was the perfunctory reaction I was used to seeing from the powerful trying
to relate on some surface level. But then his whole body deflated.

“Don’t mind him,” I said. “He’s just talking weird again.” Nigel rolled
his eyes. For a brief second, he seemed like my son again, and I felt like his
father.

Eckstein leaned forward and gathered us in his arms. He smelled like
coconut oil and aftershave. I looked at Nigel, who looked at me as if to ask
what was happening.

“I’m so sorry.” Eckstein let us go. “It’s just I lost Beverley when Tyresha
was small.”

“Tyresha?” Nigel asked.
“Crown,” I said.
“I’m sorry—I’m not very comforting, I know.” He swatted away a tear.
I was jealous of him. I hadn’t cried. I was so tranqed at the funeral that I

felt nothing on my skin or in my soul. I recognized its presence that day, a
purple-brown whirlpool gurgling inside me. It needed to get out. Nigel
gushed like a busted hydrant though.

“Enough about us,” I said. “How are things at the hospital?”
“Terrible, to be honest. All this business with those protesters and

terrorists has the shareholders feeling quite nervous.” He blew his nose into



a napkin. I had seen the reports on the news. The mother corporation’s stock
was plummeting. They were considering selling the hospital or even
mothballing it if they couldn’t find a buyer. “You know my feelings about
the special procedures we offer now. And I get why some in the community
are upset. But it’s a slap in the face to have those charlatans leading the
charge. They’re not even the real ADZE.”

“They’re real.” Nigel said. “I’ve seen them.”
“Young man, the original ADZE was a community-minded group that

tried to build people up. Not kill them. They provided job training to the
underemployed, healthy breakfasts to kids who couldn’t get them even at
school. They even put on an annual pride festival called Visions of
Blackness. It was beautiful to see. My parents were heavily involved in all
of it. Until the government started sending in infiltrators.”

Sir would have disagreed. He thought old ADZE was a bunch of self-
centered radicals. It was one thing to organize and protest, but
grandstanding was almost always counterproductive, in his view. ADZE’s
tactics led to a whitelash, which led to the world Nigel and I lived in.

“Infiltrators?” Nigel asked.
“Sure,” Eckstein said. “The FBI made a task force that—”
Something in my head clicked. A slip of paper popped out of my mouth.

“That’s what you should do.”
“What?”
“Correction.” I bopped Eckstein’s shoulder. “That’s what we should do.

What if PHH threw a festival in the Tiko like back in the old days? Nothing
too crazy. Just a day-long thing. Your daughter could headline it.”

“But they hate her.”
That’s when I laid it out to him in jargon he could understand. The firm

would lead the charge leveraging its connections to various community
groups, including BEG, to shore up support. PHH would provide the real
money, including donations to those same organizations and free swag for
the festival. As for Crown—

“She just needs to say to the public what she told me when I first met her.
In fact, if she works for free, it might clear out her community service.”

“Gracious,” he said. “I don’t—”



“Go ahead,” I said. “Tell me it’s the best idea you’ve ever heard.”
“The corporation has been itching to greatly expand its community

medical services program.” Eckstein rubbed his chin. “Demel discounts and
that sort of thing, which I’m not particularly supportive of. Yet I’ve a
fiduciary duty to present ideas that could increase our stock value. I can’t
believe I’m saying this, but I think we should work together on this project.
I’ll need approval from the board, of course.”

“Of course.”
“But I think we have a deal.”
We shook hands, and Eckstein walked away, steering his basket with one

hand and calling someone on his device.
It took everything in me to keep from dropping to the floor and break-

dancing right there.
“What was that?” Nigel asked.
“That was the beginning of the next chapter of our life, son.”
The Sky Tower gym floated some twenty stories above the street. It was

fronted by a band of opaque silver windows that circled the superstructure.
From a mile away, the gym floor looked like a metallic belt that had been
cinched a little too tight. The crystal elevator that ran right of center down
the southeast side of the building formed the dangly part of the belt.

“Why are we here on a Sunday?” Nigel asked, as we stepped out of the
elevator.

“Because I’ll explode if I have to wait until tomorrow. Wait out here.”
Octavia was on one of the antigravity treadmills, chatting with someone

presumably through an earbud.
“Keep up with what you’re doing, Luna. Catch you later.” Octavia

seemed startled when she noticed us standing just a few feet away. “What
the dickens?”

“Eckstein is ready to close the deal.”
“Well, don’t just stand there looking pretty, sugar. Spill it.”
I told her.
Octavia tapped her earbud. “That’s great news. You should hear Dinah

shouting in my ear. She likes it too.”



“Dinah?” I asked. “But she’s with Armbruster now.”
“That was just a ruse. Dinah is reporting back every move they make. No

way Armbruster closes that deal with Darkblum with our girl throwing
monkey wrenches into the works.” Octavia stopped the machine, waited for
the lower chamber to decompress, and stepped off the platform. “Everyone
has a role to play.” She wiped her face with a towel. “Pavor’s going to win
mayor, and he’s already set to get federal funding for that demel clinic. Did
you know Pavor has family in D.C.? Between that and your smooth-talking
Eckstein, I’ll own that hospital four or five different ways. They’ll have to
sign up as my client. Now, don’t you feel useful?” Octavia went into the
ladies’ locker room.

I felt more than useful. I was rapidly approaching the fulfillment of my
life’s work.

Nigel stood outside the glass doors. I made a show of pointing at him,
then walloping a nearby punching bag with the only combination I recalled
from a long-ago summer camp. Hook. Uppercut. Cross.
OceanofPDF.com



28

Nigel sat on the examination table in Dr. Nzinga’s office, wearing a gray
hospital gown. The nurse had already drawn blood and taken his vitals.
Nigel and I were like those two theatrical masks, him all frowns, me all
smiles.

“Someone has a case of the pouts,” said the nurse, pumping the blood
pressure cuff.

“Girl trouble,” I said.
I was on cloud nine thousand, of course. When I explained the plan to

Octavia, she had immediately shifted into gear, throwing out the names of
production companies and other contacts I needed to get in touch with. We
met with Eckstein’s people just two days later and signed contracts. “You’ll
be a shareholder within twenty-four hours after the festival is over, sugar,”
she said. In the meantime, I was to get Nigel signed up for demelanization.
She would cover the consultation fees. She said I was a good father for
working so hard to improve my son’s life.

The nurse placed a hand over her heart. “Aw. It’ll get better,” she said.
“You just have to move on, sweetie.”

“I already have a new girlfriend,” Nigel said. His mark seemed darker
and more clearly defined under the fluorescents.

“That’s the spirit.” The nurse gathered her equipment and pinched his
arm. I smiled at her. She winked and left the room.

Nigel asked me how long would this take. Not very long, I said. Dr.
Nzinga had already explained the process to me. It was a six-month
procedure, similar in some ways to the cancer treatments they used to give.
The plan would play out in stages. A few weeks of primer treatments,
various markers and agents added to the body to prepare it for complete



demelanization. Then active reagents introduced. That was where the real
work began. Epigenetic restructuring that I only understood in the broadest
strokes. That was where the actual retoning of the skin occurred, among
other changes to the hair and visible membranes like the gums, etc. Of
course, Nigel’s procedure would leave his nose, lips, and other features
untouched. The changes would focus on getting out that damned spot.

But the process was also preventive and would keep him, or his once and
future children, from ever being black like me. Dr. Nzinga described it as
sending out millions of little demolition teams, each crashing a wrecking
ball through a ghetto facade. The final stage was the bum’s rush, when the
tiny crews attached bombs to the melanocytic pillars and brought down the
house. The procedure had been much improved with time. Crown’s process
had taken nearly two years.

“Let’s play a game,” Nigel said. I was startled when he spoke. He had
been on his device, flipping from screen to screen. But now he held a pair
of dice. “Double or nothing. If I win, we leave. If you win, I’ll do it and
never complain again.”

“That’s not necessary. You already promised.”
“But I didn’t promise to like it.”
We had left before daybreak. But not before Nigel threw a fit, wrapping

his arms around the porch pillars and refusing to move. He wanted that
nettlesome girl to come along. She was there by our door waiting, doing her
best impression of a darkened corner, when we exited. I wouldn’t have it, of
course. This was a private experience to be shared between father and son
—a cornerstone of our future relationship. It was only by convincing him
that he was making a small child of himself in front of Araminta that I was
able to pry his koala fingers from the wood. He exchanged words with her.
She seemed genuinely wounded.

“How do we play?” I asked. Nigel tossed the dice into the air and caught
one—and then the other.

I always found the game uncouth; the men who gathered in semicircles
on the streets of the Tiko were invariably society’s dregs: unemployed or
chronically underemployed, lacking imagination or premium insurance,
empty message bottles headed for the great recycling facility in the sky.



But the few times someone convinced me to roll, I had a lucky hand. In
fact, I often found favor in games of chance. Lady Fortuna knew the score
and sought to help dedicated, pure-hearted men like me carry out our
appointed rounds.

Nigel climbed off the examination table. I refastened the tie on the back
of his hospital gown. He tossed the dice, and a good number rolled up. I
tossed and a bad number rolled up. We agreed to best five out of seven, but
he won the first three. Then five out of six.

“Let me see those,” I said. He gave the dice to me. I eyed them and
shifted them in my palm. I actually had no idea what rigged dice looked or
felt like, but I had the feeling that maybe I could learn. I held one to the
light.

Nigel took them from me. “They’re fake, Dad.”
“What?” I asked.
“Loaded.”
I was astonished. My son was brilliant and wily, of course, but only a

child. I never imagined him using his intelligence against me, even if only
for a second. It was an inversion of our relationship. It was I who was
supposed to clobber him at chess or embarrass him with feats of manly
strength. It was my job to show him how cruel and uncaring the world
could be, so that he would toughen up. Not vice versa.

“Why did you tell me?” I asked.
Nigel turned the dice over in his hand and threw them into the

wastebasket. He shrugged.
“I don’t know,” he said.
Dr. Nzinga entered. “Ah,” she said. “Very well to see the happy family.

Are we ready to start?”
Nigel glanced at me. “Yes, ma’am.”

OceanofPDF.com



29

One Blue Geisha Backrub will take you to seventh heaven. Two Blue
Geisha Backrubs will reunite you with your maker. Three Blue Geisha
Backrubs will cause your maker to throw you out of heaven for degeneracy.

My wet knees vibrated against the bathroom tile. Many hands held me by
the shoulders and arms over a toilet full of expelled material. One would
think that finally getting Nigel the help he needed would have calmed my
nerves. Not so. If anything, since Nigel started his preliminary treatments
with Dr. Nzinga, I’d been more on edge, gulping pills like penny candies. I
couldn’t slow down no matter how hard I tried.

Someone slapped me. “Hey, guy,” the female voice said, “say
something.”

I glanced at the palm of my hand, which was empty. “God only knows.”
“Good,” a male voice said. “He’s still in one piece, I guess.” I

experienced the sensation of being lifted.
When I came to, it was the afternoon, although I couldn’t have bet on the

day. I slumped out of the bed and lay face-to-carpet for a few minutes. I
crawled to my feet and checked myself in the mirror. My hair was a mess,
and my pajamas smelled like actual shit, but otherwise I would survive.
Something crinkled in my hand. I unfurled an old to-do list with my wife’s
handwriting on it: call City about speeding van. Disgusted. I crumpled the
paper and tossed it to the floor.

“Hey, old guy.” It was the male from earlier, a youngish man, a ruddy,
thin boy, one of the tribe that had been camped out back in Jo Jo’s yard.
“He asked me to give you this.” The boy handed me a note. It was from Jo
Jo. Jo Jo’s yard was outside the window. I was in Jo Jo’s house. This was Jo
Jo’s bed.



Dear Buddy,
This is not me. I’ve got to get my life back on track. Making

designer whim whams and short videos was fun to do back in
my college days, but I’ve been stalling and hoping that Casey
would walk back in with the boys. But that’s not going to
happen, as you yourself have pointed out on more than one
occasion. I get that now. Plus, I think maybe the DEA is after
me. So I’m skating with Polaire. She’s good for me. She
believes in things. And I’m starting to believe, too. (Imagine
that!) So as nuts as it sounds we’re off to Oman to stand with
the revolution. I hope I don’t get myself killed.

Best regards,
Your Faithful Jo Jo

P.S. I didn’t leave any more geishas because we had to get an
ER doctor (the kid with the red cheeks, he’s a prodigy) to bring
you back to life. You probably don’t remember. Lay off the
Plums. Seriously.

Love and Rockets JJB

What of loyalty? What of brotherhood? What was friendship if a person
could check out on a whim? In every instance, I had been there for Jo Jo.
Held him up when his resolve turned to jelly. Acted as cheerleader,
counselor, and concierge. And that Polaire—I blamed her. In a selfish,
feminine display worthy of Yoko Ono, she was taking my man away just
when I needed him. How would I ever get my Plums now?

I sat up in bed.
“You shouldn’t sit up in bed,” the kid physician said.
“No, thanks. I gave at the office. I appreciate you saving me, though.”
“Don’t mention it.”
“Do you have anything for a splitting headache?”

OceanofPDF.com



30

I awoke to a synesthetic scenario: I somehow felt that I was being licked by
a dog, a whimpering old beagle. But when I opened my eyes, I found no
dog and no licking. Mama sat on a chair across the room from me, her
occipitals moist from a fresh watering. My bedroom. What was she even
doing in my bedroom?

“What are you even doing in my bedroom?” I asked, her banana bushel
earrings clattering as she stood. I realized the sun’s shadow was older than I
would have expected. “Where’s Nigel?”

“I brought him to school,” she said.
“You?”
She explained that he had called her for a ride.
I climbed out of bed, belatedly realizing I was naked. I clutched the sheet

around my body and grabbed my device. The date meant that it had been
days—no, weeks—since I woke up in Jo Jo’s bed, but that couldn’t be right.

“It’s a good thing I brought him. There was a government man here.”
“Why aren’t you at the Coop?” I stepped into the restroom suite to collect

myself. It was late. I would have to forgo a shower and shave, but at least I
could brush my grinners. I brushed vigorously. Where had I been last night?
I vaguely recalled taking a Chill Pill or Plum. Or a couple of both. The last
of a stash I had squirreled away in the pocket of an old suitcase we never
used. I would have to find a new supplier.

Mama wedged her way into the restroom. I gathered the sheet around my
body to ensure that I remained properly ensconced. My head really hurt.

“The City pulled the restaurant’s licenses. Too many violations, they said.
We’re closed.”



“Are you serious?”
“I been telling you they had it in for us for months.”
I recalled no such discussions. “Well, this won’t stand. I’ll make some

inquiries. Perhaps—”
“Don’t bother on that. You know how it is when they come after us. Even

if we fix this one thing, they’ll just find some other thing. They made that
fence, that Tiko fence, bigger, so now the Coop is inside the Tiko.”

“Inside the Tiko?”
“Least I still have my license for the Visions Festival. For now.” She sat

on the lip of the claw-footed tub. It had been a favorite relaxation of—I
never got into it anymore. I preferred the shower down the hall. I worried
that if I soaked in the tub waters, all my grease and grime would swirl down
the drain, leaving behind nothing of me other than a few kinky hairs.

“Oh. Don’t give up so easily,” I said.
Mama glared at me. I hadn’t seen her so angry since that time I left the

Coop freezer open, spoiling a month’s worth of food. “You know what you
shouldn’t give up on so easily? Your family.”

“My family is dead.”
Mama gripped her forearm and rotated her fingers around it in a

wrenching motion, a habit of hers ever since she was injured that one time.
I didn’t want to think about how she hurt it all those years ago because that
meant I’d have to think about what had happened to Sir.

“Still hurts from time to time?” I twisted the hot water handle to the max.
Steam escaped.

“It never stopped.”

—

Sir had enjoyed an early morning walk. Nothing too extravagant. Down the
front steps of our building. Circle the building. Back. I wasn’t an early riser,
and he, despite my requests, never called on me at the time he awoke,
before our neighbor’s rooster crowed. But occasionally, through great force
of will, I managed to rise from the depths of sleep, covered in clinging
seaweed, and throw my shoes on to join him.



That particular morning I was woken up by Ms. Wendy Woods’s adopted
son, Dee Soyinka, much later to be known as Supercargo, who moved in
with us following the killing of his mother. Specifically, Dee, younger and
smaller than my seven-year-old self, once again rotated in the bed we
shared until his feet were kicking me in the face. I shoved him off the bed.

What a strange morning it was. It was cold outside, but my internal
furnaces were lit by the Visions of Blackness Festival, a Tiko tradition filled
with arts, crafts, and music. It was a big deal during my parents’ childhood
but had been canceled in recent years due to permitting issues, which Sir
called newspeak for the City didn’t want thousands of us gathering in one
place.

There was a crackle in the air that abraded my skin and the smell of
lemon house cleaner from Sir’s early morning efforts. The tub had cracked
some time before, so I was responsible for washing off my face and armpits
and doing the same to Dee.

“Ow, quit it.” Dee pounded my arm, but his little fist didn’t hurt. He was
protesting the amount of force I used around the corners of his eyes. But
you had to get in there good, or he would spend the day looking crusty.
Mama would not be happy about that.

“Shut it, you clod,” I said.
Mama was in the kitchen doing something to our grits, the smell of butter

and salt overtaking the other house smells, the thoroughbreds of
nourishment outgalloping the quarterhorses of soaking pans and stale
potpourri. I forgot to brush my teeth, so my mouth tasted of sweat and
cotton from biting my pillow through the night.

“This food ain’t done, y’all,” she said. It sometimes seemed that
everything Mama made was in a state of coming but never arriving.

“Come on, Dee. We’ll just starve for now.”
“That’s right.” Mama stirred a small pot. Her face was fuller then.

Chipmunk cheeks that I didn’t inherit. “Y’all starve for ten more minutes.”
“What’s all this whining that’s happening?” Sir asked. “Tell me, Lil

Dee.” Dee was five—old enough to talk—but he didn’t. Not anymore. Sir
was always trying to get him to speak up.

“It’s a travesty,” I said. “An aberration.”



My recollection of what really happened—what I actually saw, that is—
is, and always has been, unreliable. Maybe it’s a defense mechanism, or
perhaps it’s just how my software operates. You could tell me that when we
stepped outside, my family left standard reality. You could say that Sir
became an animated boy, Mama a bird, Dee a cat, and me a dull duck,
following along a wooded path. You could say that we were followed,
hunted from the threshold of our door, by a creature made entirely of
yellowed eyeballs, tusks, and filthy fabric fragments. That would all be
perfectly fine and metaphorically true.

But I must think in terms of what I recall from this reality: that ripping
cold breeze; the vibration of big commercial trucks skirting the outer limits
of the Tiko for downtown; and the hand-drawn Tiko pride banners strung up
in trees, on light poles, and on fences. They weren’t allowed to build stands
and counters, so the festival was a rickety, bedraggled affair. Not the
products but the presentation. Women in head wraps sold earrings lovingly
laid on a hand-quilted blanket, which lay on the ground. Men in wide-
shouldered suits offered vials of perfume from the insides of their jackets. A
girl pulled a cooler full of foil-wrapped pies.

“Oh. What kind is this one, baby?” Mama asked. The pie looked like a
tiny moon pinched between her fingernails.

“Punkin,” the girl said.
“That’s different,” Mama said.
The girl smacked her lips. “My daddy say they ain’t have no sweet

potatoes at the food salvage.”
“Should we get any, Lil Dee?” Sir asked.
Dee smiled.
“Don’t just smile, kid,” I said. “Use your words.”
“You’ll hurt his feelings,” Sir said.
“Get two,” Dee said.
Mama gasped. Sir handed me a twenty-dollar bill. I told the girl to give

me change.
“Give me a second.” The girl unfurled a small roll of ones. Then she ran,

pulling her busted cooler.



“Hey!” I said.
“Let her go,” Sir said. “That’s Magic Mose’s daughter. I owe them.” Dee

pointed and began to cry. It was the City Police. Sir scooped up Dee, and
we got out of there. We were safe. Or so I thought.

“Hold it right there,” Douglas said. An electric current along my soft,
hairless forearms.

“I live here,” Sir said. “You know that.”
“Leave us alone, you big ape,” I said. Most of the people near us cleared

out.
“Quiet, boy,” Sir said. “Remember what I told you. Respect.”
What had he told me? I would have been lost in that moment to condense

it to a cohesive theory of the case. But it went something like this: You are
an angel. Fate, in the guise of ordinary people, conspires to pull the wings
from your body. To break your grasshopper limbs. To leave you crippled in
loam. To maniacally adjust the shape of your skull. To bleed your life’s
blood onto concrete. To destroy you, destroy your future, to destroy your
children’s future. Other peoples could rely on our nation’s fundamental
fairness as a starting point for any hopes or dreams they might have. But
you, Black Boy, were born weak but breathing and tossed into an open
grave. Three quarters of Fate’s work was done in our reaction to the world.
In attempting to back away from hissing fauna, a rattler, or a jaguar, we find
ourselves stepping off a mountaintop and falling to the jagged rocks below.
Never bow to anyone, Sir would say, but don’t let fools bring you down.
Respecting yourself means respecting even those who don’t deserve it.

“Officer Douglas,” Sir said. “How can I help you, my man?”
“I got a report of a stolen beach bike, and you’re the focus of our

investigation.”
“A beach bike,” I said. “My dad didn’t steal some stupid beach bike.”
“Shut him up, or I’ll shut him up.”
“Hush.” Sir squeezed my hand, hard.
The buildings of the Tiko emitted a special kind of energy. I couldn’t see

whether we were being watched by our fellow Tikosians up in their
apartments. But we were. A screen door slammed somewhere. The voices



of others far away, perhaps as far as three or four buildings over, hummed. I
squeezed Sir’s hand back. As soon as I did, he let go.

“Obviously, there’s a misunderstanding. You see. I don’t ride bikes. I
have this old track and field injury that absolutely—”

“Nigga. Shut your stinking trap.” Douglas’s baton slapped against his
palm, producing the sound of flesh on flesh, like a big happy kiss. “I know
you with your murse bags and funny shoes. You think this is a conversation,
but this a soliloquy.”

“You mean a monologue,” I said. “If it was a soliloquy, you’d be talking
to yourself, Mr. Douglas.”

Douglas shoved the tip of his club against my throat. Mama yelled. I
went to swat Douglas’s club out of my face, but I didn’t need to. Mama had
already pushed her way in.

There is a point of order that I’m sure you’re aware of regardless of
whether you are brown as mud or white as milk, that you’ve encountered
regardless of whether you’re male or female. In physical confrontations, a
woman can get away with a lot more than a man. A guy who flinches while
literally under the gun better be wearing a steel chest plate because he’s
going to take one to the heart. But in all but the most extreme
circumstances, a woman has some freedom of body. She can shout, dance,
and even attack without fear of reprisal.

This was what I believed. Of course, I was wrong.
In the scrum, Douglas pushed Mama to the ground. She fell awkwardly

on her arm and screeched. Sir shoved Douglas. But Douglas didn’t fall—he
was like a reed in the water. Douglas stretched the baton to its maximum
reach and pressed the tip tenderly against Sir’s chin, like he was reenacting
that painting where God touched naked Man. The baton flicked Sir’s fedora
from his head. Sir’s hat grazed my shoulder like a stricken sparrow on the
way down. I, like Sir, was frozen in time waiting for some music to tell me
I could move again.

“What?” Douglas said to Sir. “You going to cry now? Well, go ahead and
cry for me.”

Sir kept his chin up. I held Dee’s hand. He had the calmest head in the
bunch.



“What’s wrong with you?” Mama grimaced, clutched her arm. “This is
how you act. Terrorizing your own people?”

“You ain’t none of mine,” Douglas said. “And I’m just checking out
suspicious activity. Y’all the ones can’t fly right.”

A couple of other cops, one tall and white, the other tall and black, made
their way over. Their name tags were the opposite of what one would
expect.

“What’s this all about, Dougs?” White, the black cop, asked.
Sir knelt by Mama.
“He didn’t say you could move.” Black—the Caucasian one—pulled out

his gun.
“Don’t,” Mama said. I thought she was talking to the cop with the gun.

But it was my father she was talking to.
But Sir wasn’t listening. All the coolness and restraint he had exercised

throughout our lives was gone. His forehead was bright with sweat. All I
saw in his eyes was a lust. He stood up and went for Douglas, and it was a
dance. Someone knocked me down. I skinned the back of my hand. The
other two stepped in and grabbed Sir’s arms. Douglas brought his baton
down on Sir’s forehead. I was amazed. I didn’t know that beneath that skin
I knew so well was a river of blood, a river that had been freed to flow
down his forehead and onto his light brown blazer. Douglas cursed, but he
struck again. The other cops let go, and Sir slumped, a chunk of pink face
flesh exposed. A dollop of red collected at his chin, where it dangled.

“Tell me you’re sorry,” Douglas said. “ ’Less you want some more.”
“Say it,” Black said.
“I’m sorry,” Sir said.
Mama’s arm was broken. We spent the afternoon at St. Moritz Hospital.

The waiting room was crowded, and hours passed before she was seen by
anyone. It took Aunt Shirls coming over from her job at the Carnation
Room to threaten the intake nurse and cause some movement.

We wouldn’t find out for days whether Sir was alive. His apology echoed
in the empty cell of my brain, and I had a reminder of the event, my brown
hand scraped white before the blood came.



My father had been careless, an idiot! All his talk of respect and restraint.
When it counted, he became an animal just like a common street thug. If he
had contained himself, Douglas wouldn’t have gone at him. But he allowed
himself to be removed from our lives just when we needed him most.

I promised myself to be better, stronger, a more resilient man than he
ever was. I was almost to the promised land. I would never abandon my
son.

Mama nudged one of Penny’s shoes out of the way and stepped over to
me. “Your wife dead. That’s true. But you alive. Your boy alive. Your father
alive. I’m talking about the men in your life, your son and father. I see the
way Nigel mopes around these days. He was such a happy child, but he
slipping away. The same way you’re slipping away on that junk.”

“Everyone needs something to rebalance sometimes.”
“I know it’s been hard here since Penelope passed. I should move in here,

huh? Keep an eye on my two babies. That’s what I’ll do.”
“We’re fine. We’re working through some things. What can I do to prove

that to you?”
“Visit your father.”
“Anything but that.”
“Go see him today, or I’ll bring my bag in from the car.”

OceanofPDF.com



31

Liberia. The state’s oldest continuously operating prison lurked at the parish
line like a hitchhiker trying to thumb a ride out of town. Liberia had been
built during colonial times, during that brief period when Spaniards ruled
the City. The Spaniards were appalled at some of the rules in the American
Sector. Example: Under the American rules of racial categorization,
anybody thought to be less than white lacked legal process to sue based on
an injury to their land property rights. So while any of my lighter-skinned
ancestors could buy a small plot of land or even a townhouse, if they could
afford it, they couldn’t do anything against the whims of white men.

It was during my research for a high school genealogy project, about an
ancestor, in the bowels of the City Library’s historical collection, that I
came across certain documents (a deed and some arrest records) that
suggested that the man, listed as an octoroon (how fortunate for him!), was
the possessor of clear title to a 110 x 30 quadrant near the City’s St. Denis
Cemetery. That was in 1794. By 1795 he was a resident of Liberia (then
called the state reformatory) for some type of public assault. By 1796
another document, not a deed, listed a man with the curiously anonymous
name of John Michael Smith as the new property owner.

The great frustration with such historical documents was that they lacked
a narrative. There were no paragraphs or footnotes. No sensational news
clippings. Riley and the rest of the BEG would have said this was for the
best. Such unpleasant events during the many nadirs of race relations in the
history of our country were best forgotten. But I could never do that. I could
only use my imagination and certain societal tendencies to divine what had
become of this man, who was not my direct ancestor but who hung from a
long branch of the family tree the way a body might.



In other words, I had to do what a hack historian might do: make things
up. So I did. John Michael Smith worked for the City in some financial
capacity, perhaps as an assessor. Smith, who was apparently British by
birth, saw some value in the property. Maybe he discovered it and thought,
This place will change my life. I came to America searching for something
to fill the hole in me. And this is that something! Maybe he made an offer
that my ancestor should not have refused. Maybe he levied a heavy tax, and
when no payment was made, he called out the constable. Maybe my
ancestor, bearing some resemblance to Pushkin or Alessandro de’ Medici,
appeared at the door and challenged Smith to a duel. But by then duels were
illegal or going out of fashion. Maybe Smith had my man arrested and
purchased the house at a tax sale.

These types of incidents were common in the American Sector. The
Spaniards, having seen enough, shut down the American Sector jail, a
converted pharmacy off the avenue. So the Americans, in a classic game of
whack-a-mole, simply built a larger, nastier prison on the edge of town, in
an area where even the Spanish governor’s lieutenants felt unsafe. The big
nasty prison? Liberia née the state reformatory.

The strangest thing about Liberia didn’t occur to me until I was already
an adult and had traveled a bit. Its seat at the parish line meant that it was
the first thing tourists saw when they entered town from the suburban
airport. In my experience, while transiting from terminal to
accommodations, one might come across an ugly but productive industrial
area—perhaps a shipping container facility—or a placid body of water. Not
the place where that community warehoused its untouchables. But that’s
exactly what the City did. Upon entering the City from Schenectady or
Moose Factory, one came to know the bulky, sprawly prison complex
before the more benign landmarks of the various sporting stadia or even the
downtown skyscrapers. I knew the stats by heart. One out of ten citizens
had spent some time there. More than half of all City blacks had, and eight
out of ten black men. Liberia was a vacuum sucking up all the dark crumbs.

I drove to the initial guardhouse, where a round-faced brother in black
and gray fatigues operated a machine that scanned the Bug. As the wand
passed over the roof of the car in much the same way that the arm of an
automatic car wash does, I noted him shooting me the queerest looks, as if



to ask, in both confusion and derision, what the hell was I doing there.
Many lawyers visited the company. If not for the Liberian inmates,
thousands of industrious criminal attorneys would be out of work. The local
economy would crater.

But I admitted to being there on personal business. There had been
situations where black visitors got embroiled in incidents that led to their
arrest onsite. It was an extremely convenient transaction for all parties
involved, like having a heart attack while in an ER.

“I know,” I said to the guard as he gave me back my ID.
“What?” he asked.
“Nothing.”
There were three other checkpoints. And when I parked the Bug, a

spidery, youngish Latina swept the vehicle with a mirror on a stick. Can’t be
too careful. There’d been another terror attack just yesterday at the zoo. A
pack of hyenas got loose.

Children watched from a barbed-wire-enclosed playground as I clicked
through the stations for decent music. The guards walked me through a
metal detector at the entrance to the visiting center, a tin-roofed building.
The waiting area reminded me of both a hospital waiting room and the
waiting area at the DMV. A crush of people. An uncomfortable mix of
anticipation, dread, and hopelessness.

He would say things to me. I hadn’t heard Sir’s voice in decades, but I
would hear it soon. That syrupy, mellifluous, accusatory voice of his. He
would rant. A rant that would start with questions about why I’d never
come back to see him again, why I had waited so long, why today. What
right did I even have to be there? I’d thrown him away. I’d deleted him
from my personal history and banished his presence from my life. Penny
and I were almost married before I told her about him and even then in
muted, reticent tones. She probably learned most of what she knew about
him from Mama. Nigel too. But I was in the house. And I wasn’t deserving
of any calling out. It wasn’t my fault he blew his stack. He knew the rules.
He’d stepped out of bounds. Mama, me, and even Dee—Supercargo—paid
the price. We lost a man because he couldn’t gulp down his pride. Our
whole life suffered.



After an hour, I was let into the next pen, which felt like a fish tank with
its large windows and aquatic background music. Through the windows I
saw a gorgeous green, not unlike a golf course. The warden seemed to have
tended the lawn with meticulous detail, placing a single grain of fertilizer
with a single drop of water on each blade of grass. A group of men in
striped overalls straggled into view hauling shovels, picks, and
wheelbarrows. Behind them, a trio of guards in white shirts and slacks
followed on golf carts, short-muzzled shotguns bumping against their sides.

I went to the guard window, which was mirrored glass. I couldn’t see the
person behind it, but the person could see me. I was only certain that
someone was there because of the fidgety shadow emanating from the steel
pass-through beneath the window.

“Help?” the voice said.
“I was hoping you could tell me how much longer before my visit

begins.”
“Have a seat.”
I sat. After a few minutes, my name appeared on a hanging monitor. An

iron door opened, which I entered. The room was an antechamber.
Animation on another monitor told me to use the security drawer that jutted
from the wall. A pair of wafer-thin plastic sandals were in it. The screen
told me to swap them for my shoes.

A tall, white-haired man greeted me in the hallway. “My how you’ve
grown,” he said.

“Excuse me?” I asked.
“From last I saw you.”
“I’ve never been here before.”
“Of course you have. I had to check the records to be sure—my memory

isn’t what it was—but you visited with your mother, such a nice woman.
You wore a three-piece suit and bow tie. We don’t get much of that around
here.”

I studied the man’s face for a moment. His face was pale and pocked with
the scars of long-resolved pimples. His skin had wrinkled, and his teeth
were crooked at mildly bizarre angles. But what if I peeled back time?



Flushed some life back into those cheeks. Filled in the dry canals and
craters along the sides of his eyes and mouth.

“You used to have red hair,” I said. “You’re in charge now?”
“Assistant warden. Once upon a time I was a carrottop, but I haven’t seen

a scrap of red in about, oh, two decade, I reckon.”

—

This man had been a junior administrator at the time I visited as a child. He
had greeted me and Mama. The world must have been a cheerier place
when fresh-out-of-school wardinistas were sent out to coddle the families of
inmates. But here he was again, I reckoned. So maybe things had not
changed so much, if at all. And maybe I hadn’t changed as much since then
as I thought.

Mama and I had met Sir beneath the central tower of the prison
panopticon. The high ceiling was gray-tinted glass that made everything
seem overcast, even though I knew it was sunny outside. Dozens of other
prisoners walked beside us, circling the tower with their loved ones, as if
we were all on a giant lazy Susan. The door guard told us that we could talk
as much as we wanted, as long as we kept moving around the tower. In the
tower, thirty feet up, another guard swept the grounds with his rail gun,
which was mounted on a tripod. A red dot appeared wherever he pointed
the weapon.

I hung a few steps back from my parents, walking stiffly in my robin’s-
egg-blue suit that was already short around the ankles. I had refused to get
out of bed that morning. I didn’t move when Mama threatened to take away
my Internet privileges. But when she said the same thing about my books
and notebooks, I had no choice but to get dressed and come along.

I was in a foul mood because I didn’t want to see Sir. His trial came
quickly, and within months of his altercation with Douglas, he was
convicted of attempted murder of a peace officer. He would never get out.
Never help me with another book report or shoebox carnival float. He had
taught me how to brush my teeth and hold back the tears of a skinned knee.
What would I never learn from him because he was incarcerated? And I



kept thinking that if he’d been level-headed, we’d all be back at the
apartment eating fried chicken thigh sandwiches.

They made the inmates wear embarrassing skintight white uniforms so
they couldn’t hide contraband. The men on either side of us were worn,
deflated, pathetic. Their loved ones shuffled alongside. The high windows
squeaked from the wind. I smelled the rust from the windows’ hinges. With
his gaunt cheeks and thin limbs, Sir looked like he was doing Día de los
Muertos cosplay.

“The lawyer say you got a good chance on appeal,” Mama said, her voice
climbing. She wore a brown and gold pantsuit, the good luck outfit she
favored on important days. “A real good chance.”

“It’s his job to say that sort of thing,” Sir said. Mama absentmindedly
rubbed her forearm. She was out of the cast but wore a wrist brace. Sir’s
eyes got small.

“It’s better than it was,” Mama said, letting go of her arm.
“I’m glad.” Sir glanced back at me. “What’s his problem?”
I shrugged.
“Answer your father,” Mama said.
“Me?” I adjusted my bow tie, then jammed my fists into my pockets. “I

don’t have any problem at all. I’ve never been happier than right this
second, schlepping around this crummy rat hole.”

Sir seemed shocked.
I hadn’t really talked to anyone about him. I’d shut Mama out. I’d

attacked classmates who brought it up. Now my throat was hot, and I
couldn’t stop talking. The words spilled out of my mouth like spiders in a
horror movie. “Thanks a lot, Daddy. Now, I’m just another son of a convict
like most of the other kids in town. Maybe you should let me come back for
‘take your child to work’ day. I can help you dig ditches or make license
plates. I’ve always wanted to work on a chain gang. They say it builds
character. We’ll have a real great time.”

A woman with another family chuckled.
“Boy, how you going to say that to your own father who was trying to

protect us?” Mama asked. “What is wrong with you?”



Sir stopped walking and grabbed both my arms. “You think this is what I
wanted?” he said. “You believe I planned this?”

An intercom squawked overhead. A mechanical voice escaped it.
“Resident Poopy Pants. Keep it moving. Or else.” I had heard that they
assigned inmates humiliating names based on their initial inspection upon
arrival. But I didn’t think they could be so…cruel.

Sir continued walking. His face was covered in sweat. No, that wasn’t
sweat. “Do you even know what I’d give for a second chance?” he asked.

Mama got close to him like she wanted to put a hand on his back. But
we’d been instructed that physical contact was off limits.

“You could’ve kept your mouth closed. You told me to swallow my
feelings.”

Sir stopped walking again. “I was wrong. I shouldn’t have ever told you
that.”

“Keep walking, baby,” Mama said. She sent me a look of anger that
turned to alarm. A red number 10 appeared on Sir’s chest. It was the rail
gun’s laser sight. The number changed to a 9. “Come on.”

“Hey, brother,” an older prisoner with a beard shout-whispered. “Don’t
want to get caught out, my man.”

“Tell your father you’re sorry.” Mama said.
“We’re warning you, Poopy Pants,” the mechanical voice said.

“Noncompliance means there will be consequences and repercussions.”
“No,” Sir said, and hissed, “This is my fault.” The number on his chest

was down to 6. “You’ve got to own yourself.”
Some other inmates screamed for him to get moving as they walked by.

5.
“I ain’t trying to get zapped over here!” a man yelled, waving his arms.
“Great,” I said. “Just what I need. More advice from you. Well, fuck you,

Pop!” 4.
“Boy!” Mama said.
“Whatever happens, you can’t give in to them, because then you’ll have

nothing left,” Sir said. 3. His face was slick. It occurred to me that I’d never
seen my father cry. I’d never seen any man cry. The seriousness of the



situation finally struck me. 2. My face tingled. The corners of my eyes
moistened. I bit my tongue. I would not cry. I couldn’t give him that. He
didn’t deserve it.

Mama grabbed Sir’s arm and pulled him. Sir went along with her.

—

“You can’t tell me what to do from inside this place,” I said to myself.
“You’re just a ghost now.”

“What was that?” The assistant warden ran his hand through his white
hair in kind of an aw-shucks way. “Never mind. When I saw you pop up, I
had to come down and see how you turned out.”

“Well, that was kind of you.”
“Not kindness, I’m afraid. He hasn’t been well, your father. He’s fine in

body, but due to outbursts, he was transferred to psychological
confinement.”

“Oh.” My father in chains? The thought sent a crawl up my neck. “Well,
what did he do?”

“We don’t talk about inmates’ actions prior to adjudication as it’s a
violation of their rights under the Constitution to do so.”

“When did it happen?”
“Again. Specifics.” He held his palms up. “But sometime back. Almost a

year.”
“Let me see him then.”
“That’s what I’m trying to tell you. He can’t entertain visitors.”
“Entertain? Entertain! I’m not here to have tea.”
The man gave a sympathetic shrug of the shoulders.
“Do you realize how long it’s been since I’ve seen him? I have a right as

a tax-paying citizen.” Something clicked down the hallway. I glanced over
my shoulder to see several guards moving in our direction. The guards
nodded at the man. He nodded back.

“Don’t cause a scene. I was only saying that it would be best for his
recovery and your peace of mind not to see him. But if that’s what you



want.”
“That’s what I want.”
We took a corridor that hooked sharply down and to the left, passing

through several doors along the way. We’d entered another building, a
building where the workers wore soft-soled shoes instead of boots and
carried stun guns instead of rifles.

“Here, this is him.” The warden stopped at a door. Center door: a sign of
nonsense letters, a code of some kind. He shook his head as he punched a
keypad. As soon as I entered, he closed the door behind me. The door
clamped shut in a permanent-sounding way, causing my heart to jump. But
I had to focus.

My father sat on a stiff-backed chair facing away from the door. He
seemed impossibly small compared to the man of memory, small-
shouldered, small-bodied, small-boned, vulnerable, infinitely vulnerable,
like a child on a tricycle during an earthquake. The room was clean, the bed
made, and he watched a flat screen that was flush with the wall and encased
in clear plastic. That television played cartoons that had been old when
Grandpa was a boy. Animated creatures attacked each other with balls of
light, staffs composed of light, branches of light, and light twisted into the
form of a tornado. The sound was very low. My breath was louder than the
show.

“Sir?”
I walked around to him. But he didn’t seem to notice me. His hands were

on his knees, and his chest expanded, then contracted. His hair was
carbuncles of gray, his face full of parentheses, commas, and semicolons.
My father was a wizened old man now, prematurely so.

I sat on the low cot next to him. “I know it’s been a while,” I said. “My
fault for not coming sooner. But I’m here.”

The spikey-haired character on the screen flopped to the ground and
grunted. His clothes smoldering, he ripped off his shirt to reveal a scarred
torso.

I grabbed Sir’s leg. He did not look away from the television.
“Don’t be that way,” I said. “We have a lot to cover. Like why didn’t

Othello ever realize how much danger he was in?”



Something in me assumed my father was playing some kind of game by
ignoring me. Perhaps he wanted to get my full attention before speaking.
Maybe he was too pissed to form words. I didn’t need him to be eloquent.
My heart was quickening. I just wanted him to speak.

I put a hand on his cheek. The coarseness of the poorly shaved skin
surprised me. I realized with some discomfort that I hadn’t touched Sir’s
face since I was a child. His eyes swiveled toward me. They were wide
open but empty of the kindness I remembered even when he was upset with
me. There was no sign of recognition at all.

I stood and gestured wildly. “Sir!” I slapped the back of my hand against
my palm. “I need you to talk to me!” I paced from one side of the room to
the other. But he watched me with only mild interest, as if I were a random
pedestrian in a crowd. “Why didn’t you warn me how hard it was to be a
father? You could have told me what to expect. That was your one job. To
get me ready for the world.”

No reaction.
A small red light blinked above. A surveillance camera. I wondered if

whoever was on the other end of it was laughing at us.
I sat again. Sir’s chest moved slightly with his breath. “It’s not fair for me

to blame you, is it?” I grabbed his shoulder.
Sir blinked without recognition. I could have been a guard, a half-

consumed glass of water, the wall.
He wasn’t in there. The man who had earned a Ph.D. at age twenty-one,

who could recite Gwendolyn Brooks without a pause, who had given me
my words, was gone. I felt as though I were at his tombstone.

—

I exited the prison waiting area, with my hat in my hands, trying to wrap my
mind around the fact that my father had suffered a type of identity death
while off stage. No. He was on stage, but I had left the auditorium. Logic
told me that he had been this way for some time. That I could have grieved
for him yesterday, last week, months ago. But I was stunned by the
realization that I’d managed to lose the same man twice.



I removed a Plum from a nook in my jacket and crossed a grassy field
toward the visitor parking lot. I was acutely aware that the field was a
shooting gallery for prison snipers. If anyone tried to escape, they’d get
taken out real quick if they came this way. I wondered what it would feel
like, the impact of a hollow tip through my heart.

Mama never lost him. Not completely. Not like I did. Electronic
communication wasn’t allowed, but they wrote each other several times a
month. Over the years, she’d reported on his small victories, like becoming
a trustee in the prison learning center, and his state of mind, which rose and
fell on hopes of getting free. In fact, Mama must have known something
was going on with him, but you would think she would have told—

I stopped dead. The Plum rolled from my fingers and bounced onto the
parking lot pavement. Wearing a flowy floral blouse, my mother leaned
against the Bug. She opened her arms. I didn’t have to say anything. But I
did.

“Mama. I’m sorry.”
OceanofPDF.com



32

Shortly after I dropped Mama at Aunt Shirls’s, I sped along General J. S.
Beauregard Boulevard. The streetlights popped on in groups of three, as if
to say, Wake up you fool wake up you fool wake up. I needed to see my son
immediately. We had been drifting apart lately. But I was struck by the
notion that I needed to make a few things plain. Some things could not go
unsaid. He needed to hear that I loved him. He needed to know that I had
his best interests at heart. He needed to know I would never leave him to
fend for himself.

But where was Nigel? I sent him a message. It was time for his evening
salmagundi of pills. And the hour of his nightly denatured demelanizing
shot (auroxsorormab; Big Pharma name Erazamal—the stuff would settle
into the nooks and crannies of Nigel’s body so that Dr. Nzinga could
activate it when the final phase of treatment began) would follow shortly
thereafter.

I consulted Nigel’s schedule: a soccer practice due to end momentarily.
I descended upon the soccer field, where girls and boys in knee socks

swept across the green with the balletic grace of those who hadn’t yet had
their hearts broken. One of the volunteer coaches approached me.

“Nigel isn’t here. I wish he was. He’s a good player, even if he plays like
he’s afraid of his own shadow. We’ll pound that right out of him. Unlike
Karen.” The coach took a few steps into the field—and leaped straight up
into the air. “Kill it, Karen! You’ve got to beat it like a piñata!”

“Where did he go?” I asked.
He turned back to me but kept his eyes on Karen. “Oh, come on!” He

slapped his palm against his face, then rested his hands on his hips. “You
mean you don’t know?”



“Know what?”
The coach threw his arm over my shoulder and shook his head. “There’s

always one. Every season!”
“What are you saying?” I asked.
“We haven’t seen him in weeks. He said you didn’t want him playing

because you thought he’d get hurt. You need to have a talk with your boy.
Straighten him out.”

I tried calling Nigel’s device. He didn’t answer, but as fate would have it,
I was near the Pest’s neighborhood. Those two had become virtually
inseparable of late. It was all I could do to set limitations on when and
where they could see each other outside school. Chaperoned visits on the
weekends and occasionally during the week, if there was a class project.
But never at night, and certainly not without my permission. Araminta
seemed quite protective of Nigel. What did she, a short pitch-black wood
nymph, know about my son anyway? Yet Penny had always liked Araminta.
It was the main reason I didn’t forbid Nigel from seeing her.

A three-minute drive, and the duplex came into view. The house where
she lived was on the last residential block before the Tiko. Up the street, the
barbed Tiko gate flashed and rolled open. Security stanchions dropped into
the ground. The warning arm swung up and out of the way. A family of five
carried grocery bags stuffed with their belongings into the compound.

I parked the Bug in front of the duplex where Araminta lived. An old
brown dog, the worst kind of dog really, lifeless as a throw rug, sprawled
across the porch. A diapered brown boy, the worst kind of boy really, all
snails and tails, threw a ball at the dog. I passed a lopsided oak tree,
climbed the front steps, and stepped over the dog-rug. The porch was a
calamity. Empty alcohol bottles and discarded toys lay about. I stepped on
what could have been a shell casing.

The interior glowed with warmth, and an adult-size shadow lurked on the
other side of the semi-opaque curtain. When I picked Nigel up from here
long ago, the shadow had been in the same place. I rapped my knuckles
against the door. I noticed that one of my knuckles was bleeding. It didn’t
hurt. Araminta opened the door but left the chain on the rickety latch. I
asked about Nigel.



“Oh, hey, mister,” Araminta said. Only her big white eye was visible.
“Nigel’s not here. Did you check where they play that soccer?”

“Was he here earlier?” I asked.
She said something that I couldn’t hear because a trumpet in my brain

was going off. I could smell Nigel. Yes, my son, like everyone I loved, had
a signature scent. But it wasn’t so acute that I typically made note of it. I
mean, when he was an infant I used to kiss his baby-powder-scented feet
and nuzzle the spring-field-smelling crown of his skull. But the present
trace was linked to the way his room at home smelled lately. A sweet musk.

I lowered my shoulder. And the next thing I knew, I was inside the warm
embrace of the house, tasting the odd air.

“Why’d you do that?” Araminta yelled. “You broke the door, you big
crazy!” This was not true. I only terminated the functionality of the chain.

The shadow I had seen by the window wasn’t a person at all. It was a
cutout of the basketball player I’d seen with Nigel that night at the arena.
Several other cutouts were arranged around the room: a silhouette of a
woman, a full-color of the chocolate milk spokesman who dressed like a
crotchety old lady in those commercials, You bet not steal my good milks! A
medical dummy sat in a chair at the dinner table.

Another odd thing was the cleanliness of the den. The ping of pine oil,
freshly applied. Dewy flowers on an end table. Not a single nit on the
carpet. Not a single volume out of place on the bookshelf, where titles by
Du Bois and Nikki Giovanni reminded me that the intense study of these
problems did not mean a better future was on the way—

Nigel’s C-Troos, the fad transparent tennis shoes of the moment, sat, like
a pair of stone lions, on the floor at the far end of the couch. Araminta
grabbed the shoes and hid them behind her back.

I smacked my lips and handed her my hat. “Where is he?”
She lowered her head and pointed toward the back of the house. Just then

I noticed a hickey on the side of her neck.
Still following the ribbon of Nigel-scent, I passed an unoccupied room

and then looped back across my own path and entered the room where
Nigel had just slipped out of the closet and was trying to open the window,
which appeared to be painted shut.



“Nigel,” Araminta said.
He turned around with a hopeful expression that faded when he saw me.

“Oh, hey, Dad.” He did a little wave.
“Hello, Sonny Jim. I got you.”
“I guess I’m in trouble.”
“No trouble at all, other than being grounded for the rest of your ever-

loving natural life. What did you think you were doing? What am I
supposed to do with you?”

“I can explain.”
“We’ll talk when you get home. Just take your medicine.” I pulled a very

small water bottle and a plastic pouch from my blazer.
“I’m not going home, and I’m not swallowing more of that junk.”
“Don’t play. I don’t have time for foolishness.” I sprinkled Nigel’s pills

into my palm.
“He doesn’t want to take them,” Araminta said.
“Excuse me?” I said. “Who are you?”
“He doesn’t have to either.” She stepped in between us.
“This is family business, and it doesn’t concern you in the least.” I

pushed past her with my hand open, in offering to Nigel, but he swatted it
away, and the pills scattered through the air like fireworks. Araminta
stepped on one of the pills, the white one that encouraged the emolliation of
melanin within skin tissue. It had been worth several hundred dollars. Only
powder remained.

“Stop!” I grabbed Araminta’s arm.
“Leave her alone!” Nigel rammed my stomach—a soccer header,

ironically enough, so he had learned something after all—and I fell onto the
bed. I lay a moment. I wasn’t hurt, but I was shocked. My son was in love.
Dumb young puppy love. I stood up and held my palm at him. “Your own
father,” I said, not being sure what I meant or why I said it.

“What kind of father?” he said, his chest heaving.
“I didn’t mean to shove you,” I said to Araminta. I got up. “You live here

alone.”
“No.” She looked self-consciously to Nigel. “I don’t.”



“I could make a lot of trouble for you. I could call my law school
classmate who works for child services and have him ship you upstate. But
I wouldn’t do that. I have a better suggestion. You should come live with us.
You shouldn’t be here by yourself.”

Nigel’s eyebrows had shot up. At least two of us liked the idea.
“No way. I ain’t closing my eyes in any house you was in.”
“Mr. Moses next door looks out for her,” Nigel said.
I gathered my hat from the floor, but not before dabbing my wet pinky in

the powder and licking my finger. Bitter, bitter stuff. “Come on, Nigel.”
“No,” he said.
I told him I would call the services as soon as I stepped outside if he

didn’t fall in line. Nigel frowned, and Araminta nudged him.
In the Bug, I opened the glove compartment and removed a bottle with

the rest of Nigel’s medicine in it. I counted out the proper pills and added
one. A sedative that Penny had sometimes used for insomnia.
OceanofPDF.com



33

By the time we finally arrived home, Nigel was limp as a soiled dishrag. I
slung one of his arms over my shoulder and guided him up the back steps,
as if he and I were college roomies returning to our dorm after too much fun
down in the ville ancienne. I would have made a decent wingman for my
boy, swatting away the nappy-headed beasts and subtly singing his praises
to the angels among us.

We mumbled across the landing to the door. It’s not every day a father
sees his son high as a dirigible. Rarer still the father supplies the hydrogen.
What unimaginable Chutes and Ladders we encounter. What eddies and
whirlpools. What burned-out metal frames. I watched Nigel for a moment.
His dull eyes. The spittle collecting at the corner of his mouth. Those
reedlike arms. A helpless lamb in this world, but morally strong. Could he
muster the backbone to be the kind of father I was? I hoped not.

“Hnh,” I said.
“Wuh,” Nigel said. “Wub,” he said. “Ch—”
I pinched his cheek. “Articulation, son. You have to enunciate fiercely.”
“Can we…chocolate cake?”
“I’ll make one,” I said, leading him through the kitchen and into the

hallway. When he was small, Nigel would wander down into the valley of
the shadow of sleep in this way, and I would point out the sights, the
sweetmeat cabins and hairy-knuckled, ravenous accountants, until he made
the lowest point of the valley and slipped into faultless, dreamless sleep.
“We have everything we need to make a very good cake. We have the eggs
and the cocoa and the flour and the sprinkle berries.”

“No,” he said. “Pa, no sprinkle berries. I ain’t six.” And then he promptly
leaned forward and evacuated his stomach onto my shoes.



“I suppose you’re not, huh?” I asked. What his exchange lacked in
volume, it made up for in colorfulness. I wasn’t as repulsed as I would have
been if he were some stranger. I remember another habit of his, this one
from infancy. If he was in a particularly rotten mood, Nigel would wait until
just after you changed his diaper to deliver a fresh package.

I led Nigel to his bedroom, again bracing him against my body. When I
removed my arm, he fell face-first onto his bed, his arms awkwardly bent
beneath him. I straightened them out and prepped his shot. He had vomited
the pills I gave him not even thirty minutes ago. I couldn’t do anything
about that. But I could fill the syringe to nearly double the usual dose. A
bead of nacreous liquid pearled at the needle tip. “And I’ll churn some
vanilla ice cream.”

“No. No. No,” he said, drooling on the bedspread. “Can’t be vanilla.
Gotta be. Chocolate. Chocolate every day. Chocolate every nigh—” I
couldn’t be sure, but that last bit sounded like Crown lyrics.

In truth, I had always been a little squeamish. The sight of a firm needle
against soft skin raked an ice pick down my brittle spine. And the first time
I did it—that is, plunged a shiny two-inch needle into his left butt cheek—I
inhaled. I sucked my teeth as if his rampant, squealing pain were my own.
But when I thought of it logically, of the fact that I was doing something of
profound importance for Nigel’s future, all terror receded, and I was as
calm and confident as a coroner over a cadaver.

Nigel sat up on his elbow. “What are you doing with that needle, Dadzel
Azazel?”

“Just go to sleep, son,” I said, guiding his head back to his pillow. “You
have school in the morning.”

“Lots to learn.” His body relaxed again. I swabbed part of his skinny
rump with an alcoholic cotton and let it dry. I steadied the syringe. I aimed.
He popped up again. It took everything I had not to drop the syringe.
“Heard about a town that’s been burning underground for a hundred years.
But the people call it home.”

I should have anticipated that the effects of a powerful sedative on the
virgin cardiovascular system of a teenager would be unpredictable. His
system was on a roller-coaster ride between wakefulness and sleepfulness.



I went to the kitchen and rummaged for a drink and located a half-
consumed bottle of Grand Marnier that I uncorked. I sat on the wicker chair
that Penny had made during her wicker-chair-making phase and sipped my
drink. Penny was a maker. She was always making things. Wicker chairs,
ceramic bowls, our son. Did that make me a destroyer? The brandy tasted
like nail filings.

I heard the loveliest harp music. Like something you might encounter in
a fancy tea room. Or maybe in the garden of a Russian oligarch. The air felt
chilly.

“I understand now why you’re doing it.” Penny poured me more Marnier.
Her hair was shortened to a pixie cut, a style she’d given up after we
married. In the burgeoning light, she seemed to wear a red halo.

“You do?”
“Oh, I was a fool to stand in your way.” She tilted her head to the side

and batted her lashes. “It’s such a dangerous world for the great-great-great-
great-grandchildren of slaves. How could I ever hope to understand?”

“There’s no reason to be sarcastic,” I said.
She sauntered into the hallway.
“Wait, I’m sorry. Can we just talk?”
She continued into the dining room, sat on the table, and folded her legs

in front of her. She grabbed one of her old paintbrushes. Neither Nigel nor
myself ever touched that little shrine of arts and crafts materials, a shrine to
Penny.

She flicked the brush at me. “You didn’t want to become your father.
Hollowed out. Forgotten.” She twirled the brush like a baton. “What
happened to Sir changed him. But it changed you, too. Sent you right down
this water slide.” She motioned with her free hand. “You don’t really think
you’ll win, do you?”

“I’m winning!” I said. “We’re winning. All of us are this close—”
Penny grabbed my chin. “You can level with me, babe. I know you feel it

in here.” She patted my chest. “No matter how hard you fight to protect our
son, you keep going down down down and taking him with you.”

“I’m doing the best I can.”



“But the best isn’t good enough, is it? You’re making him worse.”
“I—”
“What’s that?” she asked.
“I know.”
Penny laughed, halfway between a giggle and snort. “Don’t cry, kiddo.”

She climbed off the table and padded toward Nigel’s room. The heel of her
bare foot receded into the darkness of the hallway. She peeked into Nigel’s
room. She tsked. Then she smiled at me in a way I can only describe as
malevolent.

“You’re not my Penny,” I said, suddenly fearful.
“Then what am I?” she asked, and entered Nigel’s darkened room.
I reached out. My throat was so tight, I could hardly talk. “Don’t go in

there.”
“Shut it. You wouldn’t want to scare our baby.” I dashed into the room

and turned on the light. The spirit was gone. Nigel slept quietly, his
comforter and pillows all on the floor. I went to the hall window that looked
out onto the driveway. Up above the roof of the house next door, a green
scarf spiraled on a current.

I woke up with a start and rubbed my face, which was clammy with
sweat. My device said it was around three A.M. Nigel was still asleep. The
syringe was on the dresser next to me. I grabbed it.
OceanofPDF.com



34

Nigel kept disappearing, and I didn’t know how to stop him from going to
wherever it was he went. The house had taken on a new aura. A quietude. A
somberosity. I swept the floors often to gather up the brittle leaves I
sometimes imagined clustered by the baseboards. I could sweep for half an
hour and come back with nothing more than a blouse button.

This dead hollowness was present even when both Nigel and I were
present. It was a kind of cold damp, like the feeling I had one time at
summer camp when I stepped into a stream while wearing socks and shoes.
Even after changing into dry replacements, phantom water crept between
my toes.

But as bad as home felt on any given day with Nigel in his room, talking
on the phone or jotting in his journal, it was a trillion percent worse when
he wasn’t home. In those off moments when I stopped home for lunch or
when Nigel stayed late at school to participate in one club or another (I
eventually requested a tracking protocol from the phone company, which
was expensive, but at least I knew exactly where he was), I had to force
myself to slow down and turn in to the driveway to keep from driving
through to the next part of town. A matching herculean effort was needed to
climb the short run of steps to the back door. I struggled up the path as
though ingots were strapped to my calves. Perversely I had to cling to my
mattress to keep from floating away through the kitchen transom in the
middle of the night.

These were necessary pains. If I had one duty on those days when I
didn’t drive Nigel home, it was to already be present when he showed up.
Someone had to warm the sarcophagus for him.



I’d walk the halls turning on as many lights as I could, trying my best to
eliminate the shadows and odd shapes at the edge of my vision that were
neither truly shadow nor object. It never worked.

Pictures of the three of us loomed over every room. Our past smiles
sneered at our present misfortune. Perhaps that was why Nigel began to
fade away.

Somewhere along the way, I lost my ability to read. When I sat on the
front room sofa, flipping through the pages of some recent bestseller on the
American Dream, my eyes darted to and fro. They locked on the light
fixture over the dining room table. The fixture was missing one of its three
bulbs. Although I stockpiled fresh ones in the utility closet, I couldn’t bring
myself to change it. My eyes locked on the low branches of the trees
outside the picture window. The branch ends were like fine hands brushing
against velvet, only to reject the diamonds on display. My eyes locked on
the faux-antique grandfather clock Penny had bought from a thrift store and
somehow carried in on her own.

I went to the door and scanned our block for any sign of Nigel. He was
over two hours late. That was his recent pattern, to show up five minutes,
ten minutes, thirty minutes after the promised time. The tracking app said
the service was temporarily unavailable, which happened too often for my
liking.

I shrugged on a jacket and trotted to the end of the block. Nigel was
approaching from a distance. A City bus rambled up the street, its
headlights throwing his body into relief, an afterimage burned into the air
following a nuclear catastrophe. He was still skinny as a pen refill, but
taller, ever taller. When he got to me, he gave a sheepish smile. I almost
grabbed his collar, but I was acutely aware of being watched by various
neighborly eyes through window shades and security cameras. Even though
everyone on our block knew me, had shaken my hand, quizzed me on the
elections (“You’re with Pavor, right?”), etc., there was always a chance one
or more of them would call the police because of two big strange black
guys up to no good on the street corner. Plotting evil. Threatening the
security of babe and grandmother alike. That same desk sergeant would get
the call. That same man would become enraged at the audacity. He’d call



the Special Ward Unit down and maybe strap on a bulletproof vest for his
first ride-along in twenty years.

These were trying times. Last month they’d arrested an entire family, in
one of the houses just outside the Tiko, for being a threat to the general
safety. A bulldozer flattened the house.

That’s why I hustled Nigel into the house and locked the deadbolt and
turned out the exterior lights before I grabbed the back of his bubble coat
collar.

“What do you think you’re doing?” I asked.
“Hey! Let go.”
“Do you know what time it is?”
“You know where I was and what I was doing.”
“I’ve been dying waiting here for you,” I said—or something similar.
“I wish,” he said. He looked tired. He always looked tired lately. The

bags under his eyes made him seem a little older, like the old soul he was.
“What’s that?”
“Nothing,” he mumbled. I tugged his collar. Nigel made a strange face, a

mixture of worry, defiance, and anger that was somehow adorable. It was
the same face he’d made the first time I fed him strained peas. Aircraft
control denied the second plane requesting permission to land. “You act like
it’s a big deal. I’m sure you had plenty to occupy yourself.”

“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“Just leave me alone.” He spun loose from my grip, leaving me with a

simian paw full of coat. He went into his room and slammed the door. “I
hate you.” Then the sound of that awful new Crown album he had taken to.
It sounded like cats yodeling into an oscillating fan. I could have simply
walked in—I had disabled the lock on his door a few days earlier. But I had
a different idea.

Hours later, after we both went to bed without dinner, I was startled
awake by the sound of a heavy book being knocked on its face. Just as I
planned. I had set the book upright outside his door. It fell when he walked
by.



Fully clothed, I climbed out of bed and opened my bedroom door. Just as
I did, I heard the front door shutting. I jogged to the den, past the
overturned volume one of that Proust book he was reading for school, and
watched from a window as he climbed into the back of a delivery van. It
took everything in me to keep from flinging the door open and running into
the street like a Viking warrior. But I stuck to the script. I hurriedly exited
the back of the house, started the Bug, and tailed the van. I would have
answers. Intrepid me.
OceanofPDF.com



35

I recognized the building as soon as I saw it. I’d passed it and ignored it a
thousand times: my old school, the school of my father, and the school of
his father.

If Booker T. Elementary was a dilapidated, second-rate public school
when I was enrolled, now it was a virtual no-go zone. All manner of goblins
stalked its vast grounds: the drug-addled homeless, the restless youth
looking for a bad time, the desperate fugitives running to the only place in
town law enforcement wouldn’t follow. And that was the state of play just
during school hours. Most of the students had been transferred from other
schools for misbehavior or for being black, depending on who you asked.
Some parents pulled their kids out to avoid the risk of getting the whole
kinship locked up for failure to comply. Others gave their kids bribe money
to ward off baddies or even pocket knives and mini-Tasers, if no deal could
be brokered. Schools like Booker T. were the reason Penny and I never
considered submitting Nigel to the public system.

It was after dark; the streetlights were on. My son was inside.
Some of the windows had been shot out and boarded over. Bullet holes

pocked the bricks. A chunk of the cornerstone was missing, as if some sea
monster had risen from the depths and taken a bite out of it. The naked
flagpoles on the roof gave it the profile of a three-masted whaler listing
toward the Antarctic.

During Sir’s youth, the campus had been both an educational center and a
hive of activity for so-called community activists. From that loading dock,
they had distributed pallets of food and leaflets on healthy eating. In that
dusty yard, children had gathered, Sir among them, for calisthenics. It was
the anti-Reinhardt, run by Grandpa’s cohort.



By the time I was enrolled at Booker T., the community activists had all
been shooed away, locked up, or killed. The fresh fruits and vegetables had
been replaced with bags of processed, genetically modified corn chips and
artificially colored candy, and the overeducated staff replaced with recruits
new to the profession of teaching. No one was crazy enough to drink the
light brown water that slurred from the water fountains. During recess, we
had to sit in the auditorium and watch films about physical fitness because
the gym was off limits—an inspector found the paint was full of lead.

I crossed through an area of the yard where bike frames and overturned
fifty-five-gallon drums had been discarded.

That’s why I wasn’t surprised when a voice called out to me as I peered
into what might have been the principal’s office, or a storage area for
mangled textbooks: “Yo, Dice.”

“Are you referring to me?” I expected to be robbed.
The voice came from a teenager. Older than Nigel, he wore a hoodie and

slouchy jeans. The old “get your attention and chat” setup was a time-
honored, traditional method of jacking someone. Score one for the old
ways.

“Sorry, sir. I thought you were my friend.” The boy took off toward a
nearby fence. He wiggled through a cutaway section and kept going.

The front entrance of the school was barred closed for the night, but
eventually I found a way in through one of the side windows. I used my
device for light but kept it pointed toward the floor, so as not to warn
anyone of my presence. I was vaguely aware of people lurking in the
shadowy classrooms. The stench of chemicals, familiar from Jo Jo’s house
—drugs being processed—assailed me. I focused on the unwashed floors
and followed the grid of tiles. I turned off the device and let my eyes adjust
to the gloom. The only sound was that of my shoes crunching on discarded
things: beakers, plastic rulers, pencil cases.

I opened a pair of double doors, and a cool, earthy breeze issued from
within. I couldn’t see very far into the space, which seemed to expand
infinitely into the darkness. It was the gym.

Like a fool, I entered.



—

Once, when I was small, Sir and Mama took me on a trip to Appalachia. It
was Sir’s idea, I think, to have me experience the kind of expansive and
beautiful nature that had been paved over in the City. We rented a cabin on
a hill and took short forays into the woods, Sir with a short knife concealed
in his sleeve. On the third day of the trip, we visited a historic cave, where
holdout rebels had barracked until only a few years earlier.

I was afraid of the cave and, as the story goes, clung to Sir’s pant leg. In a
surprise move, he carried me. I buried my face in his chest and entered an
almost hypnotic state as my body rocked to the sway of his gait. For quite
some time, I didn’t look up. But I smelled him: the wash detergent Mama
used on our clothes, his tangy aftershave, and that jumble of musky, manly
scents that all fathers carry.

Someone tugged the hem of my knee pants. “It’s sure beautiful, isn’t it?”
Mama asked.

I glanced up, my eyes blurry from having been squeezed shut for such a
long time. As they adjusted, shimmering lights, like falling spirits,
appeared.

—

In the vast room at the center of Booker T., a current flushed over my head
as though huge fans were churning a mile away. I dropped to one knee
behind a crate and peered toward what seemed like a platform around
which dozens of people gathered.

A man in an abstract African mask sat on the edge of the platform,
dangling his legs. He wore a white linen suit, which I had seen before. I had
seen him before. I had feared him before. He’d appeared in streamed news
items and as a featured player riding astride my middaymares. But I’d also
encountered him in real life without realizing it at the time.

He was the terrorist leader from the Myrtles attacks and the many other
incidents of past months. Of the fifty or so people in the room, a third were
children. Everyone wore those spooky, elaborate, coin-slot-eyed masks.

I shivered. This was ADZE.



They were loading small packages into the back of a moving van. A tall
masked woman videotaped the scene. Somehow the energy in the room was
like that of people preparing for a party. There was horsing around and
laughter. The movement of their limbs was loose, arbitrary. These people
liked each other. One of the children, a dark-skinned girl in a long pointed
mask, carried a tray of food to the platform where the leader sat. He looked
over it and nodded.

“Y’all try some of this first,” he said. The others gathered around and
began to remove their masks.

The leader was about to take his off when something happened behind
me. Two people entered, a masked man and a woman. “What are you
doing?” the man said to me, his voice muffled by his mask.

“Nothing,” I said. I stood up.
“Who is that?” the ADZE leader yelled. “Hold on to him!”
I ran past my potential jailers and back into the hallway. Soon at least ten

people crashed through the door after me. I ran full out. I ducked into the
room with the purple smell. Three white kids were cooking a brew. They
could have been the same kids from Jo Jo’s house.

“Hey, how are you?” I asked.
“It’s you,” one of the girls said with a smile.
“Do you have any, you know…”
“For one of Jo Jo’s boys?” one of the boys said. Movement in the hall.
“Never mind,” I said. “Help me through.”
They shoved me out the tight window. I landed awkwardly on my

shoulder. It occurred to me that my pursuers were people from all over
town. Cooks, hotel maids, sanitation workers. Some were kids who ran
track. My point is that I wasn’t going to get very far. Even if I escaped, they
would know me before I knew them. I was at the far end of the school’s
parking lot when I saw that same boy in the hoodie from earlier. He was
sitting on the trunk of an idling car.

“Give me a ride?”
“Ain’t my car.” My pursuers were only about twenty yards away and not

very happy that I was leading them on a wild me chase.



“Help me,” I said.
“Just step on that.” He pointed at a blanket lying behind the car.
“What? I’m not crazy. I—”
“You want to get killed, man?”
I stepped on the blanket and fell through a hole in the ground. I landed in

wet, stinky muck that splattered all around me. I climbed to my feet. I’d
pulled something in my leg, but in my purplized state, I didn’t feel much.

I whipped out a handkerchief, wiped off my device, and lit up the tunnel.
It was the sewer system. I had heard that the City’s criminal element used it
for transportation and communication purposes. Cables and pipes stretched
into the invisible distance. A cardboard sign even told me what street I was
under.

“Why did you let him go?” a voice overhead said.
“I don’t work for you, and I don’t work for him. I’m just minding my

own.” A gunshot.
There was a light at one end of the tunnel. Hobbling, I went the other

way.
OceanofPDF.com



36

It was Dr. King Day, and the Tiko never looked so good as it did that
morning. The main promenade had been cleared of cars and vagrants, all
trash swept away and concealed, every brick or siding—and the streets
themselves!—pressure-washed of grimy smudges, the bushes and shrubs
trimmed and pruned, fresh winter flowers planted, petunias and baby’s
breath, each streetlight bulb replaced, fire hydrants replugged and securely
fastened, overhead power cables reinstalled, broken windows fixed, trim
work touched up, eaves and gutters straightened, potholes filled, fences
mended, grass resodded, gutters unclogged, swarming and hive-minded
insects obliterated, lemon trees planted.

Banners as well as huge tethered balloons hung all around the quad
grounds, each one emblazoned with the Visions of Blackness Festival icon,
a black eye with the PHH and BEG symbols in the silver and bronze
positions.

Of course, the Tiko was close enough to home that I walked over in full
finery: my best brogues, a heavy velveteen coat that I’d only worn once,
and an ascot. My job would be easy. Just blend in but be seen. The
professionals had handled the main preparations. I was an ambassador or, as
Mama called me, a figurehead.

People, my people, walked toward the grounds and were in their finest
too: a sister in a slinky purple dress with her matching hat and matching
man, a brother in head-to-toe zebra skin, his woman likewise, pregnant
women carrying the unborn in their zeppelin-bellies, old women in boxy
floral dresses and old men in Kangols and gold rings, both groups swaying
to an old beat only they heard, a group of brothers in bejeweled football
jerseys and flat-billed caps, a flock of small children dressed in rainbow-



colored jumpers, a trio of teenage girls in feathers, a family reunion in all
white wearing shirts that prayed for a loved one to rest in peace, a woman
with hair styled to look like a fruit basket, another with braids that fell to
her ankles, a basketball team in black sweats cutting across the grounds and
towering over the rest of us, as if they were the only adults in an endless
rumpus room, politicians with primped hair and party pendants on their
lapels, a gaggle of cosplayers appearing as Japanese warriors with
humongous swords, fairies, human-animal hybrids, steampunks, comic
book super-types, and imaginary creatures I’d never imagined, sorors and
fraternities sporting windbreakers glowing with Greek letters, bodybuilders,
virtually naked in tank tops and short shorts despite the cold, and a woman
absolutely naked except for her piercings and body paint. And yes, even a
few white people.

I felt as one for a change. Not different. Not set off to one side. It was as
if a brother from another planet asked for samples of every kind of black
person the City could offer up before the world exploded, and the Tiko was
the site of our disembarkation.

I used the staff entrance to avoid the line, flashed my badge, and slipped
into the central quad. I passed a 444 field news truck. To my delight, I noted
representation from the national media all around. I wasn’t entirely
comfortable with their presence, as the media tended to focus on the
community’s negatives. But what could they detect here in the belly of
positivity? In the distance, the group Fate’s Rainbow performed. They were
too far away to see clearly, but I knew from the preparations that they were
the singing group Crown originally sang backup for. They swayed back and
forth in their skintight gray outfits belting a vaguely familiar song from my
college years. The lineup was posted on stakes here and there. First
Rainbow, then the rap duo the Chucks. Then Crown herself, appearing for
the first time in ages without her monitoring collar.

The open area near the stage was already crowded with those who
wanted a prime spot to see Crown. Nearer to me, tents were arranged in
lines that ran on for blocks. Every manner of art, craft, and penetralia was
being sold in these tents: ancient grains from the Motherland, perfumes and
gimcrack potions, colorful textiles, handcrafted comics, rings, necklaces,



and bracelets. One man offered to sell me a handful of “soul beans.” I
declined.

I followed the smells. There were as many food stands as craft tents.
Nigel had stayed with Mama overnight—I wondered whether the Booker T.
incident was my imagination running away because I found Nigel in his bed
asleep and snoring when I returned—and I knew that I could find them
somewhere around here. There they were. The booth matched the other
stands, white boards with blue lettering, but I couldn’t help but grin like a
monkey. In a coup, I’d pulled some strings with Octavia to get Mama a
prime position near a major pedestrian intersection. I couldn’t reopen the
Chicken Coop, but I could do this. It was a small thing but necessary. The
City had expanded the Tiko boundary lines to include the Chicken Coop,
Mama’s home. Since technically the City owned all property in the Tiko,
this put Mama at risk for being evicted. My string pulling was the opening
salvo in Operation Mama Protection.

They didn’t see me, so I hung back for a moment as festivalgoers flowed
around me. You can’t go back. I understood that. But for a moment, I felt
lucky enough to have been tossed back on a wave of time to when
lowercase Nigel worked Mama’s kitchen for the first time, smudged across
his small face with batter, but handling his end of the bargain.

Now they worked efficiently. That much hadn’t changed. But he was
taller than her, taller than Penny had been, streaking up like a bottle rocket
to meet me. Still scrawny of limb and awkwardly small around the
shoulders, but no one’s baby by any means. He prepped bundles of chicken,
and Mama dunked a basket into the fryer. Aunt Shirls and Araminta
handled the money. They all wore matching long-sleeved shirts with
CHICKEN COOP emblazoned across the front.

My mind had been playing the usual tricks on me. I knew what day of the
week it was (Saturday) and what the festival was all about (encouraging
pride in a community not allowed much). But as hard as I tried, I couldn’t
remember basic details, such as where I worked or who my son really was.
No, I wasn’t panicked, because I knew these were temporary effects. I
would regain my senses when I needed them. But there was something
about Araminta that I couldn’t place. The Pest seemed happy and smiley,
but I noticed an edge to her, like she was waiting for bad news.



“O, Lord, it’s gone rain.” Aunt Shirls lifted her glasses and squinted at
me. She took money from a customer and gave it to Araminta. “Look who
done showed up.”

I stepped behind the counter and hugged Aunt Shirls.
“You’re early for tomorrow,” Mama said.
“Early for next year,” Nigel said.
“Oh,” I said. “You two have yolks. Yuk.” I turned to Araminta. “Minty,

back me up here. I’m outnumbered.”
“Uh-huh,” she said.
“You look tired, son,” Mama said. “Did you sleep?”
The question was whether I ever woke up, but I wasn’t going to raise that

query with her. “What do you need me to do?” I asked. “Prep all this?” I
gestured to the folding table, which held various foodstuffs. “I came to get
down and fry some chicken.” I grabbed the pepper mill.

“Uh-uh,” she said. “Nigel and me got a good system going. You’re on
stocking.”

“You do appreciate that I’m not dressed for stocking.”
“I appreciate you better get to work, boy. Make sure we’re good to go on

serving plates and napkins. Then fetch me some ice for the cooler. Plus, get
those…”

Like that, I was in the fold of Mama’s restaurant again, displaced and
only built to last for a few hours on a not-too-chilly-to-enjoy February day.
Working with my hands. Carrying boxes. Sweating and loving every
moment of it.

I was some distance away from the booth, disposing of cardboard boxes,
when Nigel and Araminta ran by me wearing knapsacks. What were they up
to? I followed them through the crowded fairground, which had suddenly
become an obstacle course. I dodged festivalgoers, produce carts, and
garbage cans. They ran into an area behind the stage, near the fences.

I should have simply called my son’s name. Made my presence known.
But I couldn’t. I was fascinated.

They placed their knapsacks on the ground and removed sculptures. No
—masks. Wooden abstract masks like the ones I’d seen in Booker T. They



were ADZE masks. My son was a terrorist.
Nigel looked right at me as he raised the mask. He stopped, the mask just

above him. There was no flash of recognition, no sign of surprise. He
lowered the mask onto his head.

His mask was mostly white with dark indentations to represent features,
eyes, ears, hair. Araminta was already wearing her mask. Hers was oblong
and pointed with something like a smile carved into it. She tugged Nigel’s
arm.

“Wait,” I said. But the children ignored me.
They jimmied open the locked fence. ADZE came in through the opened

gate. Dozens of them, all in wooden masks. They rushed past me toward the
front of the stage. Crown ran off stage, even as her band and dancers
continued to perform.

One of the ADZE men threw a smoke grenade at the stage. The crowd
near the stage screamed.

I couldn’t find Nigel and Araminta, but I spotted a familiar figure
standing on the ground to the side of the stage. A man dressed in an all-
white suit wearing an all-black mask with magnificent dreads coming off
the back. There was an athleticism to the way he shifted from leg to leg and
flipped his cudgel from one hand to the other, like a tennis player might.
His muscularity. That hair. The police had shorn my cousin’s hair as if he
were a sheep. But that didn’t mean I wasn’t missing something.

He glanced at me, then followed the others into the open spaces. What I
saw next was hard to fathom. Hordes of terrified people running in different
directions. Closest to me, a scrum. Festivalgoers and ADZE fighting with
fists, flag posts, and clubs. The security personnel were mostly average
people in neon T-shirts hired to keep fans from the stage. They were as
terrified as everyone else. A couple of hundred yards away, a news
helicopter listed down sideways and slammed into the ground, unleashing a
plume of dirt and smoke. The helicopter didn’t explode, but there was a
squealing noise as the tail broke free and bounced across the ground.

My family, Araminta and Nigel, were in the middle of this hell. And
Supercargo was responsible for it all. I found him by the stage, beating the
face of a security staffer with his cudgel.



I came at him from an angle, shouting. He didn’t acknowledge me. I
would rip off that mask and shove it down his—

“Supercargo!” I said.
I grabbed a handful of dreads. He whirled toward me. But the mask, with

attached dreads, stayed in my hand. He wore a ski mask underneath. If I
pulled off the ski mask, would he have another mask beneath?

He watched me with what could have been bemusement. I didn’t need to
get the mask off to know that he wasn’t Supercargo. The eyes were all
wrong.

“Who are you?” I asked.
He drew back his cudgel.
“Dad,” Nigel yelled. I turned.
“Son?”
The Plums kept me conscious after the first blow. But others came.

OceanofPDF.com



37

The Punu mask on Octavia’s hope chest was turned facedown and filled
with candy corn. She was on her phone finalizing plans for some deal that I
wasn’t involved in. I waited on the orange couch, my knees together. The
lump on the back of my head throbbed. I watched the City through her high
window. The river was low that day, exposing muddy banks and detritus for
miles upstream.

My Nigel was somewhere down there, he and Araminta. Perhaps holed
up in a safe house. Perhaps wandering the streets and begging for change to
buy clean drinking water. I had dedicated my life to protecting him from the
myriad dangers of black boyhood, only to watch him succumb to the worst
dangers of black boyhood. Now my son was a suspect, a label that would
haunt him as long as he breathed. It was perfectly kosher to charge a
thirteen-year-old as an adult, and any adult who was accused of doing what
Nigel would be accused of would face death.

Octavia said a frustrated goodbye to the person on the phone and flopped
down into her chair. She pointed to the door, which I got up and closed
before returning to my seat.

“Sometimes I feel I’m talking to a rock with that one.” Octavia went to
the mini wet bar, poured two fingers’ worth of whiskey, and gave me a
glass. I could tell from the color and smell of the stuff that a bottle of it
could purchase a wedding dress or cover a semester of tuition at one of the
better City universities. She toasted, but I didn’t drink. “Listen, I’m sorry
your boy is missing. I’m sorry he was mixed up in all that crazy, too. But
know two things. One, he’s a smart kid and he’ll turn up. It’s just a matter
of time. He’ll realize he can’t survive underground, and he’ll give you a call
because he wants the new Crown album or a good slice of pizza.



“Two, you have my word that the firm will support your family with any
legal issues that may arise. We have an arrangement with the Bienville
Firm, who’ll do any criminal defense gratis. At that age, who knows what’s
right or wrong anyway?” She eyed my glass. “Not thirsty?” She tossed back
the rest of her drink. “Suit yourself,” she said. “Let’s make this official.”

She placed my glass on the edge of her desk and gestured to the abacus.
“This is a difficult time. I get it. But I can’t let the moment pass without

acknowledging the good work you’ve done for me, for this firm, and for the
whole town, really.” Reaching across, with thumb and forefinger, she slid
the final bead into position. “Everyone came through. Dinah, Pavor, even
you. The best team won!”

Octavia crossed to me and handed over a stack of stapled papers.
“What’s this?” I asked.
“PHH is delighted.”
I knew they were. Despite the debacle, PHH had gotten great press for

volunteering to treat the casualties at no cost, including the victims’ busted
noses and lips, which they would slim down if asked.

“This is the representation agreement between Seasons and PHH.” She
flipped a couple of pages into it. “Look at these rates! This is hands down
the biggest deal I’ve ever been lead on. Armbruster’s contingent—what’s
left of them—is eating crow.”

Armbruster’s right-hand man had been arrested by the feds for
embezzlement. I had the vague notion that somehow he had been set up, but
greedy lawyers weren’t unheard of. Either way, Armbruster’s entire team
was under federal investigation and an internal administrative review.

“The committee is going to bump me up to shareholder in charge next
quarter. But I’m interim SIC effective immediately. And you know this
means you’re with me. Everyone on my team gets a bump. Bumps for all of
us. An outbreak of bumps. But—” Octavia stared at the door and laughed.
“Jack, what are you doing here?”

Armbruster stepped into the room. His suit was wrinkled, and he looked
like he hadn’t slept in days.

“No games, Whitmore,” Armbruster said. “You called me.”
“Sugar, what possible use could I have for you?”



Armbruster tried to close the space between them, but I blocked him. He
was lighter—frailer—than he looked.

“My, my, Jack. Do calm down. A man your age has to be careful of his
blood pressure.” Octavia strolled back to her desk. “I remember why I had
them send you up.” She pulled her purse from one of the big lower drawers
and produced one of her sun pendants, which she placed on the desk. “Since
your group was dissolved, that means you’re one of mine now.”

Armbruster huffed and stomped out.
“I’ll have Strummer send it down to you!” Octavia called out.
She opened a checkbook and wrote. “As for you, I don’t want you to

have to wait another second for what you earned.” She pinched the check
out of the book and pressed it into my hand. “That’s your full bonus and
then some, right out of my personal business account. When the official
firm money comes down, you can just write that one over to me.”

My palm was numb. I glanced at the check, more to make sure I hadn’t
dropped it than to read it. But I did read it, and it was more than I could
have dreamed. Was this the value of my soul? I wouldn’t even have to use
the meager savings I’d set aside. I recognized that Octavia could have
always done this. She could have done it months ago, even on Elevation
Night. I’d fought so hard—for what? Nigel was gone. I would never see
him again. There would be no procedure. No conciliation to a better future.
I didn’t deserve the money. I never deserved it.

“Why are you doing this now?”
“You’re a good man,” she said. “Don’t ever think otherwise.”
“I quit,” I said.
Without missing a beat, she laughed. “You can check out, but you can’t

leave.”
I repeated myself. “I need to do something—anything. I can’t do this

anymore.”
She said my name and chuckled. “Sugar, I understand you’ve had a tough

time. But if you think I’m letting you do something stupid, you’re stupid.
And you and me both know you’re not stupid, genius.” She pointed at me.
“Go find your boy. Take some time off, as much as you can stand.
Recharge. You’re benched.”



OceanofPDF.com



38

Time passed. Every now and then I got a message through my device that
literally stopped me in my tracks. Was it every twenty-third message or
every thirty-second? It could have been every other. I’d get a text or email,
and something in the sender or subject line would trick my eye into thinking
it was a communiqué from Nigel. The message might say “Greetings, Dad,”
to my initial glance. But on closer inspection the letters would perform a
fire drill in which they rearranged themselves into an advertisement for the
City Metropolitan Museum of Art, where I was invited to “Come Say
Goodbye to the Dadaists.” Or maybe I’d get a social media note from “Your
Son” that resolved into an unsolicited holiday hello from a forgotten
someone named “Burson” I sat next to in third-grade typing.

Nigel disappeared years ago. I sold the house three years ago. The house
was too big for me alone, and suddenly, the market got red hot. I would
have been a fool to sleep on the opportunity, so I bought an overpriced but
tiny condo a three-minute walk from my office.

I hired a personal trainer and nutritionist to help me get healthier. I
purchased cookbooks but usually ordered out. I even dated occasionally, but
none of the women I met made an impression. It was nice to have someone
go with me to firm functions, but they weren’t Penny.

Work was fine. I was a shareholder, after all. I still worked most closely
with Octavia but also teamed up with Dinah and Riley, who actually came
back to the firm after leaving the School Without Walls and doing a brief
stint as executive counsel for Mayor Pavor. He seemed happier since he
returned. I’d even taken on a few small business clients of my own. Pavor
was in his second term, and some of the Black Safety Laws, as they came to
be called, had tightened statewide, such as the right to use public facilities



after dark. And the City condemned the Tiko. The whole neighborhood.
Eventually PHH bought the land and was nearly done building its
sprawling, state-of-the-art replacement for the ramshackle original.

But some of the old Tiko structures, including the Chicken Coop, were
spared the wrecking ball and converted to condos. The whole nastiness
disheartened Mama, who moved to Canada with Aunt Shirls. I visited them
twice a year, at summer solstice and Canadian Thanksgiving. None of us
could find Supercargo, who simply vanished without so much as a goodbye.

And then one day as I was pecking out a brief in my condo—it turned out
that condo living suited me—an email pinged through from Jo Jo, whom I
hadn’t heard from since he left town.

Such a strange aspect of our friends that we consider them constant. The
childhood pal we last see in grade school is still fundamentally the same
goofball we meet in middle age. Our college buddy who leads the ragers
and keggers remains the same insecure animal at his core. Our first love is
always our first love, even if she is in the arms of some barrel-chested child
oncologist.

But Jo Jo’s email was not from the same laconic brother I’d loved all my
adult life. His voice was unwrapped, loose, joyous. After their stint in the
war, he and Polaire moved to the Netherlands. They had triplets, age four.
They skied with the children in tow and lived in a cabin a short hike from a
mountain. They all, kids included, took pictures of the mountain, which the
family sold to collectors around the world. Polaire volunteered in a nearby
school. Jo Jo injured himself in a skiing accident—a tree ran right into him!
—but was almost completely recovered, except for recurring migraines. A
picture was attached to the email: his new family standing on a
mountaintop, Jo Jo and the others all in matching red sunglasses and gear—
one of the clone children noticeably smaller than her siblings—the colors of
the snow and tree leaves digitally enhanced to a level of ebullience
unattainable in nature.

He had been trying to contact me for months. But his calls to the firm
were fruitless, his emails bounced back. Of course, I should have known. I
had changed my name within the past eighteen months to break with the
past. To renew my life. When he called, the receptionist, a new girl from



Minnesota, had no idea who he was asking for. Only select persons had my
new email. The complications of being a transracial person.

In any event, he appended a note messaged to him. It was from Nigel.

Hi Dad,
I wanted to tell you not to worry. Don’t search for me. I’m doing fine. I’m sure
you are, too. Leave me be.

N

And in the second attachment, which was initially incomprehensible to
my eyes and, therefore, ignored: Nigel’s location, typed in by Jo Jo and laid
out by longitude and latitude as determined via the IP address Nigel had
used to send the original message.
OceanofPDF.com



OceanofPDF.com



39

The hills and mountains around my Appalachian destination, Carrier Falls,
made for a scenic journey. As I drove, my mind wandered to the ancient
Confederate battalions. The ones who a couple hundred years earlier
marched northward in defense of the Beneficent Institution. How many of
the very best young men were taken by conscription? How many sacred
Southern sons gave blood and spirit back to the earth for the Lost Cause of
the landowners?

Which reminded me. I checked the revolver in the glove compartment
and was comforted to see it there in all its snub-nosed glory. It had belonged
to my grandfather and was given to me on my eighteenth birthday by
Mama, who was a believer in armed self-defense. I’d never used it. I
brought it because there was no telling what I might come across in my
search for Nigel. One-handed, I removed the gun and tried to spin the
cylinder as I’d seen in films. It didn’t work.

I might encounter any variety of woodland creatures, hillbillies, or for
that matter, Nigel. There was no telling what level of brainwashing he had
experienced, or who held him captive. Force might be a necessity. I had no
intention of losing him again. Not after all that had happened. Not after all
the time that had passed.

One of the pleasurable aspects of driving the hidden highways and
byways—along State Route 342 at that point—was coming across raw
Americana. Advertisements painted on the sides of barns. Abandoned
wells. General stores cum military recruitment centers. The drive itself was
mostly unremarkable except for my mind’s tendency to conjure up
unpleasant daydreams. At a rest stop, I saw a kind of fata morgana—a



flickering image of Penny, Nigel, and me seated on a knoll, as if picnicking.
I continued through that stop without resting.

Later, after traveling through a particularly winding stretch of road, I
came across a delightful old-fashioned filling station—it only had one
pump. A handwritten sign promoted homemade blackberry winter pie. As I
stood at the pump feeling the current pulse through my fingers, I noticed
people inside staring at me, taking my measure. The observation wasn’t
violent, and I figured they were suitably impressed. Trusting that I was very
close to Nigel’s location, I had dressed that morning at a local motel, the
Magic Hound, and put on my very best seersucker—a darker tone to suit
my skin—and brogues. A pocket watch chain dangled from my vest pocket.
I had a new paper fedora from Paris. I wanted Nigel to see me at my
smartest.

A young couple came out of the station. A black woman and a ginger
man. They mistook me for a doctor who had given them free care at some
point in the past, a Dr. Holm. I insisted that I wasn’t who they thought I
was, but they seemed so happy in the assumption that I almost felt bad in
having to assert my real identity. The whole thing was very odd, and I
couldn’t help but feel that I was somehow in danger. They absolutely would
not accept payment from me. After getting assurances that I was heading in
the direction of my destination, I sped away.

When was the last time the gun had been fired? I had no idea. Had it ever
been cleaned? How did you even clean a gun? With dish soap?
Formaldehyde somehow seemed appropriate. But I couldn’t worry about
that. I put it back and slammed the glove compartment door shut.
Immediately, I heard a whapp, and the Bluebird, my new car, shook
violently. Flat. Damn. Tire. No spare.

A single mountaintop looked down on me from the near distance. I asked
my device to tell me where I was. But the search screen drooled in
response. We could send astronauts to Pluto, but we couldn’t make an
electronic device that got reliable reception in a gulch. A trio of eagles flew
by. No, two eagles and a military drone.

I waited for some time, leaning against the Bluebird’s trunk, but no
vehicles passed. Luckily, I had come prepared. My outrigger pack, which I
had ordered from a women’s home and garden company, included dried



meats, a coffee pot, a compass, a sexton, an altimeter, a duck-billed sun
visor—pink, so I kept it stowed—and most important, a custom
topographical map of the area. After some frustrating attempts to use the
materials to fix my location, I was fairly certain that I was less than three
miles from Nigel. It seemed like an easy trek except for a purported natural
gas field to the east. I could avoid it by simply walking straight thataway.

I wished I had just one Plum. Then I scolded myself for the thought,
using the litany my addiction counselor had taught me: You’re a good man
riding a bad road. Walk if you must.

I hadn’t taken one in three years.
At dusk, I lit off into the hills with my pack jauntily clanking in time to

my steps. To distract myself, I sang, although I stopped due to a splitting
headache. The smell of unseen furry animals reminded me that life went on
around me all the time without any difficulty whatsoever, so just relax. This
was nothing more than a leisurely hike through spindly trees and kudzu. But
about thirty minutes into the action, I was gasping for breath. A raindrop hit
my shoulder like the sky was saying, Hey, buddy, up here, don’t you forget
about me. Shortly thereafter the drizzle intensified to an even shower, to a
steady spew, to darting spikes that rebounded from every direction.

The rain let up as I crossed a small summit. It was there that I heard
voices nearby. I couldn’t quite place it. Was it a radio? Was I near a church?
I trotted in the direction of the voices, which sounded like the chant of
Native American people on a long, hard trail.

After a few minutes traveling in the direction of the sound, I found
nothing. I recalled what an expert psychiatrist once explained: If you start to
hear voices, stick your fingers in your ears; if the voices go away, you’re
sane.

I held my fingers in front of me as if that would help. Slowly, I brought
them to the sides of my head and plugged my ears. My heart beat. My
breath sounded distant, but clear enough to follow each draw and exhale.
No voices. I sighed and unstuffed my ears. The chanting came back, but
closer than before and greatly changed. I saw movement beyond the foliage.
It wasn’t chanting but vaguely gospel-style singing. Curious, I moved closer
still. The music shifted again—banjos. Radio! Had to be a radio. Who the
hell had a radio in the middle of a mountain wood? Suddenly the voices



sounded angry, drawling, questioning. The movement in the brush picked
up, and dogs barked. It wasn’t a radio, and I wasn’t tracking them. They
were tracking me. I ran.

My pack made too much noise. Whoever was out there could go
anywhere I went and maintain their distance just by listening. I might as
well have been under a spotlight. But I needed my provisions. What chance
did I have if I just dropped my stuff and ran for it?

They, whoever they were, closed in on me from the east. At one point, I
could have sworn that they were right on top of me. The foliage to my right
parted. In a lightning moment, I told myself to stay calm and see whether it
was friend or foe. But my body—in that same split second—made other
arrangements. I hopped, as if goosed, and slipped in the mud, careening
down a hill butt first, prickly branches stabbing me, berries bouncing off my
skin, my pack serving as a toboggan.

I came to rest maybe a hundred yards away, in a muddy ravine. Then the
gun tumbled away from me and went off. The muzzle flash was small, but
the blast was louder than I would have thought possible. Fearing that I’d
shot myself, I climbed to my feet slowly, checking the workings of my arms
and legs as if I were a marionette. But other than being wet down to my
underwear and covered in muck, I was fine. I also felt lighter. I reached
around and discovered that my pack had disintegrated during my fall to
earth. All that remained was the base and the straps. I rummaged through
the underbrush for my things, locating the compass and the gun, which I
tucked into my belt holster. It was impossible to find the other items in the
descending gloom.

Oh. And something was in the trees right above me.
At first, I thought it was nothing. Shadowy leaves and branches danced

on the breeze. A bird—a warbler, probably—chattered in the high dark
green. Its agitated, twittering melody brought Duke Ellington—conked hair
and all—to mind. Something crunched, and the song stopped abruptly.

Something moved in the upper branches, and my stomach shrank to the
size of a walnut. The thing in the trees was white-furred and about as big as
a large cat or small ape. I didn’t move, hoping it wouldn’t see me. Or at
least I tried not to move, but my body wouldn’t stop shaking. And the



animal was getting closer. I sprinted—forget the remains of my pack—
scanning the trees as I ran.

I stopped to catch my breath in a clearing. A branch fell, bruising my
shoulder. The creature climbed down toward me, its forelimbs scissoring,
its bill-like jaws mimicking the sound of the bird I’d just heard.

It followed me as I ran, jumping along the tree limbs as easily as I would
stroll down a street. I tripped on some kudzu and scrambled to my feet,
cursing. Then the animal flew, like a flying squirrel. I’d never be able to
outrun it. But I remembered: The gun, you idiot! The animal groaned above
me. My hands failed. I couldn’t make them stop vibrating long enough to
unholster the gun. Just then I noticed a shimmering surface beyond the edge
of the woods. The shimmering area was a small pond, black as a mirror. I
leaped in without even slowing down.

The water was cold! But once I was submerged, the bottom emerged into
view. Rock formations lurked. At the shore, that thing splashed into the
water. No way. Was it really swimming? Its head was submerged, and great
splashes of water shot out as it moved. My leg cramped from the coldness. I
struggled to the center of the pond and dove.

I found an opening, a smallish, phosphorescently glowing portal. I swam
along the tight, underwater corridor for a while. It was very narrow, and it
didn’t seem to lead anywhere. Worse yet, there wasn’t enough space to turn
around. I couldn’t go back if my life depended on it. In a panic, I exhaled,
and bubbles ran up my forehead, like a clutter of hairy spiders. I was
running out of air, and everything inside me said to turn back, fight, return
to the surface, you fool. But I kept going. Suddenly the rock ceiling above
me cleared away, and I was in a dim cavern. Gasping, I climbed onto a
muddy shelf and shivered with my back pressed against the rocks. I shook
out the gun from its holster and aimed it at the surface of the black water.

Eventually my eyes adjusted to the dark. The cavern was bounded by
high, smooth walls. My body was a phantom. My hands and feet came into
focus, reluctantly. One by one white specks appeared above me as if
answering a silent roll call. I couldn’t tell if I was watching the night sky
away from the lights of the City or minerals in a rock ceiling. Scar-chasm.

Funny how it made no difference. Vast cosmos or submerged tomb, the
space gave me, for the first time, a sense of how endless the big dark really



was. The stars were just punctuations within a blackness that went on in all
directions for eternity.

I stood with the gun pointed at the glimmering water for half the night. I
was freezing, wet, and I had no idea how to get out of my cocoon.
OceanofPDF.com



40

The next morning I woke up alive. I was stunned to find myself still in
something like a dark, airless tomb. Still lying, I yawned and rubbed my
eyes, taking note of the fact that I could only see the faintest outlines on my
fingers in the gloom. My lips tasted like dirt.

Not remembering where I was, I rolled my legs over the side of the rock
outcropping, as if to get out of bed, and slipped. Back in the chilly water, I
found myself fully awake in an instant. Splashing around and yelling, my
voice reverberated in the chamber. At least I wouldn’t need a bath.

I was in an optimistic mood. There was no creature. There were no
chanting ghosts. My dread had been purely manufactured by an overactive
pyloric valve or a cluster of long-fried synapses. I’d panicked in the dark
and conjured up the whole dumb nightmare. Typical. Now that I was back
in my right mental mind, I just needed to find a way out so that I could
reclaim my Nigel.

I got out of the water and leaned against the rock face—I really didn’t
want to jump back in—and felt something jab my shoulder blade. I turned
around. The wall was irregular. Some sections of the formation were big
enough to put my entire bare foot on. The gun lay on the ground where I’d
left it the previous night. I grabbed the gun and let water dribble out of it. I
didn’t know if it would ever fire again, but I stuffed it back into the holster.
Then I climbed. Near the cavern’s ceiling was a shelf, now clearly visible.
A stream of fresh air hit my face. Freedom.

I unfolded into a sun-dappled morning. I stretched my arms and admired
the freshness of the breeze. Green leaves goldened. Dew twinkled grass.
Floral scents. Dripping wet, I started in what I hoped was the right
direction. Rabbits and squirrels darted around the landscape. I came across



a log fence, which I clambered over, and entered a field of grazing cows. I
was never a big fan of the farming life, but had a measure of respect for the
people who brought forth the flora and fauna that conglomerates processed
into sluice and pulp for our consumption. But there were no megatractors
here, no skyscraper silos. What would my life have been like working to
bring forth goodness from the soil, coerced by a whip? I wasn’t hardy. I
would have died from cholera or consumption. Or been whipped to shreds
for the master’s amusement.

Quonset huts appeared at irregular intervals. Occasionally, I saw
someone hacking at the hard earth with a pickax or pulling chopped wood
on a rickety cart. The farther I walked, the more activity I came upon. I
arrived at an expanse where a group of folks of seemingly every race
plucked green beans. People in plain cotton clothes carried buckets of water
from a well. Was that a cotton field? Many of the women and girls wore
flowers in their hair or bell-sleeved dresses. Some of the men and boys, too.
Commune.

In the heart of the commune, it was an active morning. Newly planted
evergreens swayed in the breeze. Hens clucked across the dirt road. Who
could say why? People stood outside the huts talking about crop rotations
and an upcoming pageant. Children chased dogs. Dogs chased cats. How
big was the commune? The central road stretched beyond my sight. My son
was here, or he was nowhere.

I approached a Latina girl and asked after Nigel. She had a sable-tipped
paintbrush tucked in her hair, and feathery earrings dangled from her lobes.

“I don’t know anybody with that name,” she said. “Maybe try
Claremontville, thirty miles north.” She eyed me warily before walking off
with the easel and canvas she carried.

I noticed more and more of the locals dropping their conversations to
watch me. I had a feeling I was attracting too much attention. I kept my
head down and avoided eye contact.

“What happened to this guy?” A man in a faded yellow baseball cap
checked me out from head to toe. He was medium-brown and very tall, with
a reddish beard. Suddenly I felt severely outclassed. I hadn’t paused to take
stock of my condition, but it dawned on me that I had the psychotic drifter
look down pat. I wiggled my dirty toes, which had ripped through my



remaining ruined sock. Earth and grass stained my seersucker pants. My
shirtsleeve was ripped at the shoulder.

A crowd had gathered around me. I ran a hand through my hair. “What
kind of farm is this? Cotton? Peanut?”

“This is New Rosewood,” Artsy Latina reappeared sans canvas and easel.
But she gripped a pitchfork. “You should go back to where you came from,
mister.”

Yellow Baseball Cap carried a shovel, which he pointed at me.
“Who sent you?” a wild-eyed blond girl in overalls said. She had a hoe.
I held my hands up. “Listen. I just ran out of gas and—”
“Answer me,” the blonde said. “Where did you come from?”
“The City.”
“That’s almost six hundred miles from here,” Artsy Latina said. “Come

on. We’ll show you the road back.”
The blonde grabbed my arm. “Or we can bury you in the corn. Your

call.”
I twisted away. “Hold on. I’m just trying to find someone very important

to me.”
Then she raised her hoe.
“Easy, Dopey,” Yellow Baseball Cap said.
“Why?” Dopey asked. “First the government sends drones. Now they’re

sending snoopers. Next thing it’ll be troops, and then developers. Ain’t that
right, Doc?” Dopey nodded at Doctor Artsy Latina. They were using code
names.

Doc nodded back. “The last thing we need is fresh trouble.”
“You kids sure are rude,” I said. “You ever hear of the concept of

hospitality to strangers? I haven’t eaten in a day. And there are weirdos in
the wood.”

Yellow Baseball Cap had put his shovel down and was standing off to the
side watching me with arms tightly folded across his chest. He stepped
closer to the group of us and chuckled with a sheepish look of guilt. “I
almost didn’t recognize you.” He placed a hand on my shoulder.

“No way, Watchdog.” Dopey said. “This is that dude?”



Nod. Under the cap, beard, and black man’s skin was my boy. My Nigel.
OceanofPDF.com



41

Doc and the girl in the overalls, Dopey, forced me at the point of a pitchfork
into a partially curtained area where I was made to climb into a steel
washbasin—the kind you might use for a large, filthy, shaggy dog.

They dumped scalding-hot water on me, water that had a strong
medicinal punch to it that flared my nostrils. Something about delousing for
the protection of the community. I wasn’t sure where Nigel had gone, but it
occurred to me that he was likely not in control of his movements. He may
have been barred from coming to me by one of the others. Worse, he may
have been brainwashed into not wanting to see me. The thought made me
shiver even as steam rose from my skin.

Nigel.
It wasn’t too late. Yes, he was dark-skinned. And the mark—it had

darkened and spread beneath that beard. Where did it go, and where did it
stop? The overall blackening of his skin made the mark almost
unnoticeable…almost. But then again, his whole body was basically a mark
now.

I would get him back to the City for treatment. It wasn’t too late. It was
never too late as long as we were on this side of the void. Dr. Nzinga stood
ready to help. And if not her, then one of the other clinics that had popped
up across the nation. She’d licensed her techniques, and they were being
used from sea to shining sea. All over the world, even. Yes, some other
magician could cast their spells, and Nigel would rise. Even if he was now
almost as dark as me—well, as dark as I once was.

Out of the bath, I put on sandals and a belted, caftan-type garment they
called a tupa. Once I was fully dressed outside the little shack next to the
baths, Dopey came to me and picked through my hair with a comb.



“Can I help you?” I asked.
“Hush, man,” she said. “Can’t have you spreading bad luck. And keep

your hands where I can see them. I know you’re some kind of sicko.”
I winced. What had these people convinced my son to believe about me?

What false memories and manufactured fears? No doubt there had been
some sweat lodge session. Some dark guru presiding. That master would
have coerced Nigel to find the so-called source of his so-called pain. No
doubt they contorted my son against me, so that he would embrace them
and whatever their feeble ideology directed.

A dark-skinned and very pregnant girl in an empire top ambled over. She
looked like she would walk right through me if I didn’t get out of the way.
But she stopped just short of that and stared at my face. Her black features
were unmistakable. Araminta!

Unlike Nigel, and except for the obvious, she still looked like the
annoying girl who drove up my blood pressure every time she opened her
mouth. Something crashed inside me. I hadn’t realized how much I missed
her.

“That’s so weird, mister.” Araminta pulled my cheek, as if to test its
substance. “God damn.”

“Watch your mouth, young lady,” I said. “Need I remind you—”
“You really damn did it.” I swatted her hand away.
Her face slid from offense to softness. Then she gave me a warm hug,

pinning my arms against my body. It was the first act of kindness any of the
New Rosewoodians had shown me.

“Looks like you got into a little trouble,” I said.
“Looks like you got a lot white.” She grabbed my hand and turned it over

in hers. “What’s white and white and white all over?” She poked my chest.
“You are.”

I had almost forgotten about my demelanization. If there was anyone
crass enough to broach the issue of the work I had had done, it was
Araminta. To be honest, it wasn’t something I thought much about
anymore. Sure, when I was undergoing the process at Personal Hill, I
obsessed over my improving visage. It had taken several long months
(which felt like an eternity of visits to the DMV). And each week, after a



session, I would compare my retoned face in the mirror to the memory of
my darker self, fading into the grasslands of the past. Each time I smiled. I
smiled when I saw my reflection in storefront windows downtown or in the
winking waters of the Myrtles mall fountain. I smiled at the strange absence
of recognition of my otherness. When white men saw me, they shook my
hand as they would the hand of a brother or old college pal. When white
women saw me, there was no fake chumminess to compensate for their fear
that I might snatch their purse and run. I was just a man on a mezzanine
minding my matters. Uncle George. Mister Smith. Good old Norm from the
tavern. I marveled at this new sense of normalcy like a fish that suddenly
realized it could breathe out of water. But the novelty wore off eventually,
and I took on an unexpected but comfortable invisibility.

A pickup truck tore up the dirt road, trail pluming dust. It stopped hard.
The engine knocked as the driver rolled down the window.

Nigel sat in the driver’s seat. “It’s time to go, Dad.”
OceanofPDF.com



42

My son killed the engine of the dented pickup and leaned out the window
the way a train engineer might. This threw me. In my soul of souls, Nigel
was still an adolescent, younger even.

But even wrinkles in time get sorted out. And once free of the truck,
Nigel swaggered toward me and Araminta. My, he really was tall. Even
taller than I realized in our quick exchange earlier. His long stride cleared
the distance between us in a few steps. His green eyes—Penny’s eyes—
were unchanged, thankfully. Unfortunately, there was the issue of his skin,
which was fair-angel-fallen-into-the-mud-pit brown.

This Nigel was much darker than the boy I’d raised. He vaguely
reminded me of some of my lighter-skinned cousins on Sir’s side of the
family. These cousins had been older than me when I was a child, and I
hadn’t seen most of them since adulthood. But I had been jealous of their
worldliness, their masculine beauty, the hint of final assimilation into
whiteness they heralded. Still, it wasn’t my cousins, whose names I could
hardly remember, that I thought of when my son came to me just then. In
fact, it wasn’t really a thought that I experienced so much as a feeling that
caught me by the collar from behind.

Where is my gun?
The weapon had been tucked into my belt holster when I made it to the

commune entrance. But I must have lost it before my delousing. I glanced
around. Which one of these kleptos took it? One of the cotton pickers?
Doc? Dopey?

During my woodland journey and before my flight to the underwater
tunnel, I had raised the gun to eye level and pointed the muzzle at a grand
old evergreen. I had choked the trigger—pop—and relished the sight of



mottled bark exploding away from pearlescent flesh. I still smelled
gunpowder in my nostrils.

I worried that Nigel and Araminta saw my thoughts in a bubble over my
head. But now that I was paying attention to them, it was obvious they
weren’t paying attention to me. They were shouting at each other. She
kicked the wheel of the truck. He pounded the hood with his fist. What was
the fuss?

He wanted to take me somewhere right away, and she wanted to come
along. I pleaded for calm, and they told me to shut up, simultaneously. I
recognized the pattern of their argument as one I once knew well. This was
the exchange of two people who had been grievously in love for years. Two
souls who had been divided prior to their disposition on Earth and now
were angry at the effort of trying to fuse the jagged halves back together.
They wore wooden bands on their ring fingers. I wished Penny could see
them now.

These two new adults—so greatly changed from their larval stages when
they fed on the leaves of the garden Penny and I planted—frankly
astonished me. They were a family of two, soon to be three. And inside the
big swell of Araminta’s belly was a precious baby—my grandchild. A
person who would hopefully not take after me in any significant way, who
would favor my Penny, inside and out, if there were any justice in the
multiverse. But then again Araminta was still black as a meteorite—

“Look, Minty,” Nigel said. “I”—he shot a look my way—“have to do
this.”

“This ain’t what we talked about,” Araminta said.
Nigel placed his hands on her shoulders.
“Fine,” she said. He kissed her forehead. With that, Araminta tugged his

beard.
When I got into the truck, my door wouldn’t close. Nigel instructed me to

pull the handle when I shut it. We were already in motion before I fully
latched the thing. Crumpled notepaper and fallen leaves cluttered the
floorboard. The truck was a beater for sure. The tailpipe banged against the
bumper, adding to the noise that made the truck sound like a bundle of pots
and pans tumbling downhill. A jagged crack ran down the center of the



windshield. The passenger rearview mirror was missing so that the bracket
seemed like an empty eye socket, silently appraising my worth.

We hung a right and curled up the mountain road. Dark valleys and
wooded slopes all around us. Jackrabbits leaped along gravel, their eyes
glowing like diamonds.

“This is certainly in the middle of nowhere, isn’t it?” I asked.
“It sure is.”
I turned to Nigel. “You like this?”
He gave a small nod. “It’s quiet, and the air is clean.”
“I sold the house,” I said.
He nodded again. “Oh.”
“It was too big for just me.”
And again. “That makes sense.”
“That doesn’t mean you can’t come home, son.” Up to this point, Nigel

had been focusing on the shadowy road. His voice was flat, and his eyes
betrayed nothing more than vacant concentration. Whatever ideas they had
fed my son seemed to have turned him into a drone. But at my last
comment, something flickered across his face.

“Home?” He glanced at me.
“Yes. The condo is small, but I have a rollout, and wait till you see—”
Nigel opened his mouth to speak, then closed it. He took a half breath

and placed a hand on my forearm without looking away from the path.
“We’ll talk when we get up the mountain,” he said.
“But I really think we can—”
“Dad.” He smiled. I had been shushed by my own son, who now seemed

to be laughing at something foolish about me. I stared at my hands,
confused. We didn’t say a word for the rest of the ride. The rattletrap
cacophony of the truck was abrasive. The silence? That was worse.
OceanofPDF.com



43

The truck pulled onto a drive off the main road, which continued back down
the other side of the mountain. We were on a smooth expanse where the
curvature of the formation mimicked the Earth’s. Soon we came to a small
lodge with a tower attached to one side, so that the building looked like a
toy soldier shouldering a rifle.

Nigel got out, slammed his door, and grabbed a full cardboard box from
the back of the pickup. As he approached the building, he gestured with his
hand, as if to say, Come on, old man, don’t be afraid.

Inside, an ax and cords of wood lined the back wall as though the
occupants were prepping for a long, hard winter. A window opened onto the
back of the mountain, where leaves shone in the starlight. Below in the
valley, the commune firelights were Lilliputian, the faint rooftops benign as
mushroom caps.

I peeked into a side room. A mattress was pushed against the wall under
a dreamcatcher. On the mattress lay a partially wadded-up dress. The dress
was like what Araminta wore.

I stepped back into the main room. “You live here.”
Nigel rummaged through a hutch. “I spend most of my days up here on

lookout while Minty does her counselor thing. Unless it’s harvest time.
Then it’s all hands on deck. Or on field if we’re being particular.” He
paused and grunted to himself. “No one comes up here because it’s so far. I
guess that’s what I like about it most.”

The place was simply furnished but contained a certain warmth. There
was a potbellied stove, a rough-hewn table with benches, and a colorful
mandala-esque hemp rug. Rumpled papers, mechanical pencils, and old



textbooks—many by authors I remembered from my schooling like Nolan;
Shrumley and Aloise; and Hatter, Wang, and Jonson—were everywhere.

“Still reading, I see.”
“It gets pretty dead, so I go up in the tower.” Nigel pointed up.
A trio of rifles were propped on a rack near the fireplace. He had placed

the opened cardboard box next to the rifles. A familiar holstered weapon sat
on top of some linens.

“What’s with the insurrection?”
“I handle the guns and ammo because I’m in charge of security.

Sometimes we get unwanted visitors.” I furrowed my brow. “Anyway, most
of those books are Minty’s, though. She’s been studying extrapolational
humanism.”

“Is that my revolver?”
Nigel went over to the box and picked up the holstered gun. “Yeah. They

took if off you because they thought you were from the government.” He
unholstered it, went to the stove, and with his free hand flipped on a
propane burner to warm water. “We don’t keep much up here. I’m having
tea if you want some.” I nodded.

“Why’d you come?” Nigel placed the gun on the table.
I casually lifted the weapon and tried to spin the chamber. Again, it didn’t

work, but I saw it was still loaded. I gathered the holster and secured it and
the revolver around my waist.

“I was very worried about you after the festival,” I said. “I searched
everywhere. I almost went bankrupt paying a PI to find you. I searched
flophouses and under cold bridge overpasses. One freezing night, leaving a
mixer at the City Rail Station, I saw a boy sleeping on a mat by an exhaust
vent. I tried to wake the boy, who I quickly determined was dead. For a
moment, I thought he was you. It sickened me, that boy’s death, and the
idea that you might be as dead as him.”

“I’m sorry I didn’t tell you where I went,” Nigel said. “That wasn’t fair.
But I needed to protect myself.” He placed teabags in two mason jars on the
table and poured steaming water into them, one at a time.

“Protecting you was my job.”



“Dad.” He shook his head. “Are you sure that’s what you were doing?”
He handed me a jar of tea.

“How could you say that? When you ran off with those terrorists, I
thought I’d never see you again.”

“That’s all well and good, skip, but I wasn’t kidnapped. I enlisted.”
“Don’t play with me.” I had no idea what kind of charade Nigel was

playing at, but I wanted to shake some sense into him. I couldn’t let him see
my frustration. I was his father. I was in control.

“Who’s playing?” Nigel took a sip of tea. “I joined ADZE along with
some other kids. Not long after that mall attack, that was.”

“You wouldn’t join up with terrorists. Not willingly. They must have
gaslighted you into thinking it was right.”

Nigel looked me in the eye. “You were my hero. I thought you were
good. Whatever you said, I sopped it up with a biscuit. ‘Wear a stupid hat
for your own good, Nigel.’ ‘I know the needle hurts, but I would never hurt
you, Nigel.’ ‘I love you, Nigel, so grin and bear it, Nigel.’ ” He imitated my
voice so well that I was afraid to open my mouth, afraid of what might
come out. He pulled off his faded yellow cap and tousled his hair. “That’s
why I still keep this thing.”

He turned it over in his hands and sniffed it. “It’s a reminder, I guess. I
don’t want to forget you. I can’t afford to. Everything you did to me, I really
believed was for the best. Even the way you convinced me to lie to Mom
about what you were doing. But then I met Minty at school. Boy, did she
help me turn my head around. We had this long talk at that plantation you
went to for your job. She helped me see things that were right in front of my
nose. Better yet, she helped me see my nose. But I still remember what we
were like before I woke up.”

“Araminta wasn’t even with us at the plantation.”
Nigel leaned against the table and grinned in a way that made me squirm.

“Oh, sure she was. Her neighbor brought her along to babysit one of his
kids. You and Mom were sleeping when she threw a rock at my window
and told me to meet her in the woods.”

“No. That’s not true. Your mother and I found you splashing around that
dirty pond all by yourself.”



“Dad.” Nigel sighed and rubbed his hands together. “Minty was right
next to me. In the water. The whole strip-down-naked-and-free-yourself
thing was her idea. But that’s beside the point. The point is that she was the
first person who understood me. Her dad, her real dad who died before I
met her, had his own demons. Did bad things to her. She was the one who
told me that maybe you really meant well but couldn’t help yourself. She
was the one who said I couldn’t depend on Mom to shut you down. Minty
thought my plan to run away made all the sense in the world. But I had
always been too chicken to do it. She made me feel less crazy.”

“Because of her, you joined a group of killers.”
“I was wrong to join them.” Nigel stood up, his shoulders slumped. He

inhaled. “They were saying what I wanted to hear. The leader told me that
the people who died at the mall were an accident. He never even used
weapons! No guns. No bombs. People got so freaked out whenever we
showed up, they would stampede and hurt each other. But really, I didn’t
care. I thought if a few people got hurt, so what. Because I was selfish and
angry. One of the men did bring a bomb to the festival. I don’t think anyone
knew what he was up to. But it was too late. After, the adults abandoned us
outside town with nothing. A bunch of us hopped a train, but only a couple
of us got off near the commune.”

“Who took you from me?” I stepped toward him. “Franklin? Supercargo?
Your wife’s neighbor? Octavia? Just tell me.”

“No one took me, Dad.” Nigel folded his arms and exhaled in
exasperation. “As bad as things were with them, they were better than with
you. You were so afraid of everything. I mean, you wouldn’t even let me
call myself black.”

“You’re not black,” I said, a bit of spittle leaping from my mouth.
“You’re mixed. Two-fifths Irish, one-fifth German—”

“And you?” he asked. “What are you?”
I didn’t answer, and I certainly didn’t tell him about my new ID, which

listed me as “American White.”
“Remember the day you rubbed that max-strength bleach on me? It may

as well have been battery acid the way the stuff burned.” Nigel leaned
forward. “You left. But I didn’t tell Mom about it because I couldn’t. She



always knew you were up to something, but she would have been too hurt if
she knew about that. I mean, she might have gone after you with a frying
pan. Or way worse. She might have fussed for a while, cooled off, and
forgot about it like she did with everything else ’cause she felt helpless, too.
I mean, in the back of my head, even I kept thinking you might change.
And I knew better. Both of us did!”

“We had our disagreements, but—”
“She wanted out. She cried all the time when you weren’t there. Even

when she thought I couldn’t hear. One night she locked the bedroom door
and turned up the TV in there—that Unsafe Wherever You Go show was on
—but I heard her. She used to say nothing was wrong with crying, but she
couldn’t let me see that, I guess. I made dinner—enchiladas and churros.
When I called for her, she wouldn’t come out. So I wrote a note and slipped
it under her door. After a while, a letter popped out from her side.”

I grabbed Nigel’s arm. “I know you hate me, but this—this revisionist
history is foolish.”

He stepped around me and fumbled through piles of paper on the floor.
He grabbed a notebook and tossed it aside.

“Dammit.” He opened a narrow door by the fireplace that was
camouflaged to look like part of the back wall. The faux logs swung toward
me. There was a stairway behind the door. He entered without saying
anything.

I followed. The stairs were narrow and rickety. In the dull light, a lizard
crawled into a gap in the wood.

The bell tower’s ceiling was high, and at the top of the vaulted ceiling, a
massive yoke crossed from one side to the other, but there wasn’t any bell.
Nigel knelt by a chest, his arms plunged deep inside.

“I knew I had them.” He stood up. “What did you say you call it when
you’re trying to prove you’re right? You give the judge something for the
truth…”

“Truth of the matter asserted.”
“Yeah. That. I submit these for that.”
There were two slips of paper. One was a long rectangular strip with

pastel flowers and chickens around the border. We had a to-do list affixed to



our fridge by a magnet. This was one of those pages, faded by years. The
other paper was narrow and flimsy, a receipt. I glimpsed Penny’s
handwriting. I had wondered where all the things that had disappeared
around the house went. Nigel must have planned his own disappearance for
some time to make off with so many artifacts.

“No,” he said, “read this one first.” So I read the to-do list slip, which
was dated years earlier and scribbled in Nigel’s handwriting.

Dear Mom, Let’s go somewhere safe where he can’t find us.
We can drive to the ocean and float across.

Another note. This was the receipt. I touched the sunken paper where
Penny’s pen had creased the page. Her fingers had held that paper. Her palm
had brushed the edges. Some of the ink was blurred by the pressure of her
skin. She had always hated the tyranny of grammar and capitalization rules.

dear my favorite chef i know that your father and i must seem
pretty odd to you. there are problems in the adult world that
you will face when the time comes. but for now i need you to
understand that we both love you very much. food smells great.
i’ll have some tomorrow. p.s. i promise things won’t always be
this way and maybe we’ll go away, me and you

I sat on a low stool, covering my mouth with a hand. Nigel was trying to
convince me that he and his mother were plotting an escape. What a
ridiculous notion. Penny had been upset, for sure, but there’s no way she
would have ever left me. She loved me. She wouldn’t have left. Not for
good.

“She’s right to say I didn’t need to understand then. But I do now. I’ll ask
again, Dad. Why did you really come here?”

“You asked me that, and I told you—”
“You said it was because you were worried about me and my safety.”

Nigel lowered and shook his head. “But come on. If that was the case, this
would be a happy occasion. You would have hugged me and said how much
you missed me, and then you would leave. But look at you. Look at your



beady eyes and tense shoulders. Me and my friends used to follow you
around sometimes to see what you were really like. I know you. You
haven’t done what you came to do. You’re still on duty. That’s why you
brought this old gun.” He patted the gun at my waist.

“Don’t be ludicrous. This was for my protection. It was a long trip
through unfamiliar territory.” I didn’t make eye contact. I tried, but I
couldn’t.

“What’s that old story about the rabbit who saves the snake and is
surprised when the snake bites him, but shouldn’t be because snakes gonna
snake.”

“You have no right to look down on me. I’m your father! I always took
care of you. Did everything I could to make sure you believed in yourself
even when the other kids laughed at you. I stood up for you. I protected
your self-esteem, and I’d do it all again.”

“You can’t understand, can you? A little while ago you said that you
thought I hate you. But that’s not right. I forgave you a long time ago
because, you’re right, you’ll always be my father. But that doesn’t mean
you’re worthy of holding that kind of power over me. I never realized how
much I needed to tell you that to your face, to show you that I control my
life. And after tonight—”

“Enough!” I pulled my gun on him. “You’re so far gone, you don’t even
know it.”

Nigel glanced at the gun, which was a few inches from his heart.
“Dad,” he said quietly. “You’re my father.”
Nigel stared at me with a serenity that I’d never seen. For the first time, I

realized that his mind was a planet unto itself. During our years together, I’d
only caught brief glimpses of that distant world with my telescope. But I
suddenly understood that I couldn’t make him do anything now. To the
extent I’d ever had any influence over my son’s orbit, that influence was
gone. He was gone from me. He reached out and gently moved the gun
downward and to the side. I dropped it. My legs weakened. I found myself
on my knees, my arms wrapped around his legs.

“I’m not letting you stay here,” I said.
“Dad?”



“Stop talking and do as I say,” I whimpered. I couldn’t quite catch my
breath. I wasn’t even sure he could understand me. “You’re my boy. It’s my
job to take care of you. Is that so wrong? Just come with me. Please.”

Nigel held me back enough to sit down on the floor next to me. He put an
arm around my shoulder and lightly squeezed. For a moment, I felt the
movement of his chest against my side and his breath against my ear. He
made a sound something like a chuckle. Somehow this calmed me.

“Dad. You need to go home.”
I glanced up. His cheek was wet. He wiped it with his wrist. Then he

wiped my cheek, too.
I shook my head.
“I know you’re afraid,” he said. “But that’s something you’re going to

have to figure out how to deal with. I’m not leaving with you. This is where
I belong, and I love who I am.”

I pulled away from Nigel and placed my back against one of the wooden
table legs. “I know.” I rubbed my face. I was embarrassed to cry in front of
my son, but there was something else I felt, a feeling that rose up and
startled me. I was envious. I couldn’t say that I’d ever stood so firmly for
anything I believed in. But he had. “Why are you so stubborn?”

“I get it from Mom.”
“Who else?”
Outside, something backfired. An engine rumbled. Nigel went to the

window. He peered down the road.
“Minty?” He looked as if he had just seen a flying saucer crash-land. He

hurried downstairs. I went to the window. Araminta and Doc were
untangling themselves from a motorcycle and sidecar. Nigel entered the
field of the headlight. By the time I got downstairs, he and Araminta were
arguing again.

“Why would you come up here in your condition?” Nigel asked
Araminta. Then to Doc: “And why would you bring her?”

“As if I could stop her,” Doc said. “Her water broke as soon as you left.”
“Neither of you gonna tell me where to go,” Araminta said. “If you

thought I was going to have this baby alone while you picked your teeth



with your crazy old man, you a dumbass.”
“You could have just called me!”
“You mean on this?” Araminta pulled a walkie-talkie from Nigel’s pants

pocket and waved it in his face. “You had it off, goofus.”
“Oh. Sorry.”
“I had a mind to— Ooh.” Araminta grabbed the side of her stomach.
“Let’s get her back to the infirmary,” Doc said.
They brought Araminta to the back of the pickup and lowered the gate.

But once they had her situated in the truck bed, Doc turned to Nigel, who
had taken a seat next to Araminta, and said there was no way they would
get down the mountain before the baby came. Doc asked for blankets, hot
water, and a few other items.

“I’ll get it,” I said.
But Nigel raised a hand to stop me. “We don’t need your help.” He

attempted to get up, but Araminta squeezed his hand and told him to stay.
“Let him help,” Araminta said. “We’re short—unh—staffed.”
I went inside and collected all the things, and extras like pillows and a

canteen of drinking water. I found myself going back into the lodge for
more and more—towels, a flashlight, bug repellent—and circling the
pickup truck like a satellite on each trip, speed-walking, jogging, sprinting,
mentally cartwheeling in orbit around my son, his wife, and my arriving
descendant. Eventually, more people from the commune rolled up in a
busted green van. Others arrived on scooters. Suddenly, we were
surrounded by a dozen or so others who sat in a semicircle around the
impromptu delivery room, lighting candles and incense, playing music and
singing prayers in languages I didn’t know, and laughing in the breeze.

I worried for Araminta. Her screams made my fillings vibrate. What if
something went wrong? She lay on a cushion of blankets in the pickup bed,
and Nigel alternated between stroking her hair and wetting her forehead
with rags.

I was hovering over them when Dopey tapped my arm.
“Hey,” she said. “Sit with us.” Which I did. Dopey handed me two small

bundles of cloth tied in heavy twine.



“What are these?” I asked.
“He asked me to gift-wrap your weapon and ammo.”
I sighed. The moonlight intensified as clouds gave way to the infinite

vast above and stars spilled across the void like jewels across velvet.
“You ever feel as though there are questions you can’t answer?” Dopey

asked.
“Never,” I said.
The sound of crying from the back of the pickup. I scampered to my feet.

The musicians strummed and sang louder, and everyone cheered. The baby
was wrapped in beige swaddling. It’s a girl, someone said. She was a lovely
little gumdrop with a doll’s nose and eyes that seemed to ask what did I
think I was looking at. She was very dark, nearly Araminta’s color. But she
might lighten with time.

Dopey got behind the wheel of the truck.
Araminta’s and Nigel’s faces were both dripping wet. Nigel beckoned

me, and I leaned over the side of the pickup bed so he could speak into my
ear.

“Tell me something, Dad.” Nigel took his daughter’s chubby hand.
“Anything.”
“Do you honestly think you would ever be able to accept her looking the

way she does?”
“I—” I stopped myself from speaking and looked down.
“At least you’re really thinking about it. I appreciate that. But we don’t

need that in our lives. Go home. Enjoy what you’ve done to yourself. But
don’t haunt us anymore.”
OceanofPDF.com



44

I believe there are two states of being: living and living dead. This is the
division between moose and taxidermied moose, majestic oaks and the
hardwood floors of a Creole cottage, the curious man I was before I found
Nigel and the shadowy simulacrum I became thereafter.

The aforementioned minor events from a short period of my insignificant
life compelled me to jot down these notes in my Big Chief Bigboote
notebook. In retrospect, I realize that like Mary Magdalene and Dante
before me, I’ve suffered a kind of social death. I’ve been thrown off the
social step stool. I have a name and a country, but I’m no longer a husband
or father. And I no longer possess an identity I recognize. My fumbling
attempts to make sense of my absurd predicament—the iron bars persist
even with my eyes closed—have been less than successful, as you have
seen.

After my return to the City, I took a leave of absence from the firm and
set out with nothing more than my fedora and a surplus duffel. One day I
boarded a bus in Selma. The next, I disembarked from a monorail in
Gujarat, India. I rode a seaplane in Sri Lanka, a jitney in Jakarta, and a
pedicab in Perth. I lost my money and passport in a nightclub in
Antananarivo, Madagascar, so I was forced to stow away on a cargo ship
bound for the mainland.

But that vessel was attacked by pirates. The last thing I recall was men,
with machine guns on their backs, scampering up the side of the hull. When
I came to some days later, I opened my eyes in a hospital bed in a kingdom
by the shore. I’d been shot in the back. Or the front. The physicians were
unclear about that as the projectile traveled through my body, rendering the
point of breach an issue of semantics. I would live, but some nerve was



mutilated, making my left foot useless. I also had a deep slash wound on
my cheek. Still, I fared better than the half-dozen or so crew whose bodies
were never reclaimed from the Indian Ocean. After weeks in that
sanatorium, I was given what belongings they had found—notebook,
fedora, sun pendant—and pushed out to fend for myself.

The kingdom is an odd place. There’s a battle between civilizations being
fought nearby, and it’s caused untold numbers of people to seek refuge here.
In the shantytown where I live, we’re all stacked atop each other like
kindling, doing our best to survive. Pickpockets and confidence brothers
outnumber doctors and schoolmarms on this prairie. A man must keep his
head on a swivel if he wants to retain anything of himself. I suppose I could
try to make my way to the nearest U.S. consulate, which is in the middle of
that war, but I can’t bring myself to do so.

The question I get most often, only slightly more than Say, my friend,
what hyena mauled you?, is Why are you here? I don’t look like most of my
fellow displaced humans. My living space is a tiny lean-to in a cluster of a
thousand similar structures. I have a pot for cooking, a cot for sleeping, and
a pillow for my face in case some Othello wanders into my story and wants
to put me out of my misery.

One notable development bugs me whenever I happen to glance at the
hurt areas of my body. The skin over my wounds came back in my old
coloration. The healing slash on my cheek looks like a slowly expanding
brown crevasse. I hope Dr. Nzinga is able to correct this hiccup in her
otherwise excellent and—dare I say it—godly process. Nobody wants tar
babies coming out of the margaritaceous lady parts of recently demelanated
ex-welfare queens. But as has been so often the case during my tales of
tilting at windmills, I digress.

I mind an outdoor kiosk for a discredited expatriate reporter from Holly
Springs, selling old-fashioned newspapers. There are more Americans here
than I would have guessed. My boss was stripped of her citizenship and
deported to this place a decade ago. I trade shifts with a centenarian
moonbat who yammers on about missing his basement full of lights. My
neighbors in the flea market are lovely local women who take pity on me
and ply me with food and drink. One of them even devised a makeshift
brace for my extremity. Another gave me a puppy, an adorable mutt called



Laika. The women think I’m a shy, damaged man. I can’t argue. At night,
the women return to their families. I spider to my corner. Laika falls asleep
in the crook of my arm.

As often as I can, Laika and I hitchhike to the savanna, where we hunt for
old coins and other artifacts. Plumes of smoke billow on the horizon, and
it’s said that bandits roam the night searching for workers to use in their
forced labor camps. We never stay out past sunset.

Still, unrest notwithstanding, this is a beautiful land of swaying grass and
pristine watering holes. Giraffes frolic in the distance or nibble on tender
high leaves. Some days I lie under the Adansonia, which provide heavenly
shade. I jot in my notebook, which I keep on me at all times. Sometimes I
sketch. I’m not very good, but something about the movement of my hand
across a page tends to lessen the quivering of my fingers.

I’m resigned to the fact that I’ll never see my son again and that he’ll
never forgive me for my transgressions. For every practical purpose, I’m
dead, by his request, which fits the Oedipal scheme quite nicely. Elsewhere
in these scribblings, I believe I apologized. But here at the end of my revels,
where you, dear reader, must imagine my presence for me to exist at all, I
take it back.

A part of me believes that I wronged Nigel by interfering with his so-
called natural development. That I should have left him to his own devices,
to play in the killing sun, dally with darkies, and enjoy Nubian culture in all
its carcinogenic glory. I should have let my son’s voice merge with the
voices of his peers and listened to the harmony from a doting distance. The
inference is that I snatched something from the kid. But the truth of the
matter is that I was no normal father, Nigel was no normal son, and
America was no normal nation.

I sought to arm my boy with magic potions and enchanted swords, or at
the very least provide a sturdy wooden shield. I once believed my intent
was to never harm him. But that’s not true. I meant to hurt my child from
the first day I met him, when I was a giant and he was a papoose. I needed
to hurt Nigel the way a physician introduces a junior varsity version of a
virus so that the body knows what to do when the all-star team shows up.

In these shabby pages, I’ve obscured and dissembled for Nigel’s sake.
I’ve changed names and places. I’ve fiddled with time and space like some



punk demigod. Perhaps more than anything, I’ve tried to tell my life as I
experienced it at the time, without knowledge of things to come. I couldn’t
have known at the beginning of the narrative that I would end up in this
state. But it seems inevitable now.

As much as I hate the electronic world gaze that inspects and examines
with neither understanding nor empathy, I have placed Jo Jo in possession
of this text by sending it to him in the same way that he communicated
Nigel’s message to me. Estate lawyers use an old scheme for the
distribution of property to heirs. Roughly, for it’s not my specialty, if a
person dies, their child inherits the baggage. If the child dies, the
grandparents. If dead patriarchs and matriarchs, then distant relations.
When all kin have been wiped from the Earth, the People take all. Jo Jo will
forward this treatment to my son when I’m dead and gone. But if strangers
are reading these words, then neither he nor I remain.

In truth, I have no illusions that these jottings will ever be seen by anyone
who would be moved by my ravings, let alone my Nigel. But I can pretend
for just a moment, can’t I?

I need you, Nigel, to read this addendum to the foregoing narrative and
take some insight. These words are what’s left of my heart, and they’re for
your eyes only. Not to save you, because I realized long ago I could never
promise such salvation, but to give you access to my fractured psyche to
use the information as you will. Perhaps you will know me better than I
myself.

I can’t dwell on things over which I have no control. The past is a
shipwreck. I can only offer you some fatherly advice from my side of the
chasm. Be kind to your Minty. It took me too long to realize what a shining
soul she is. Show my granddaughter— Oh! I would give my good foot to
know her name, her favorite foods, the color and shape of the monsters
under her bed. Show my dear grandbabe how much you love her every day.
Shield her from poisonous influences, especially suspect texts. Keep her out
of the sun. But above all, teach her to think for herself. Provide the tools she
needs to prosper, given the limitations this conventional reality has placed
on her.

And if I could ask one small thing of you, Dear One, it would be that you
occasionally think of your father—even after my body has returned to



stardust, and I am nothing but the ghost of an angel in mossy chains,
haunting endless grasslands in search of a spear tip sharp enough to finally
cut this knot.
OceanofPDF.com



For Tanzanika, I bet you a fat man
OceanofPDF.com



Acknowledgments

Writing a novel is synonymous with living a life. I thank those who helped
me live a good life and write a good novel.

Tanzanika Ruffin: soulmate, genius, contrarian, North Star.
Ma and Dad—rest in peace: who gave me whimsy and a love of people.
Victory Matsui: editor, whose wisdom and grace brought this book to its

best form. Chris Jackson: publisher and editor in chief of One
World/Random House, who greenlit my dream. PJ Mark: agent, whose
competence, confidence, and optimism aligned planets.

Tad Bartlett, brother-in-arms, who has the soul of a poet, the mind of a
supercomputer, and the heart of a lion. Terri Shrum—rest in peace—sister-
in-arms, whose incredible kindness and talent continue to inspire me.
Emilie Staat, sister-in-arms, a gifted writer who read everything and gave
out gold stars.

Che Yuen, whose short stories and humane example inspired me to
ignore limitations. Jamey Hatley, who pushed me to tell honest stories and
who used tarot cards to predict this very moment. Mat Johnson, first reader,
wonderful mentor—a nicer guy could not happen to me. James Nolan,
fearless teacher and friend. Ben Morris, early reader and expert technical
editor. April Blevins Pejic, early reader and encourager.

Susan Kagan, Bryan Block, Sabrina Canfield, Amy Serrano, Emily
Choate, J.Ed. Marston, L. Kasimu Harris, Amy Connor, Cassie Pruyn,
Kelly Harris, Denise Moore, Janis Turk, Susan Bennett Vallee, Keri Rachal,
Zach Bartlett, Andrew Kooy, Alex Johnson, Larry Wormington, and all the
members of my writing group, the Peauxdunque Writers Alliance, for
providing safe harbor.



My writing community: Barb Johnson, Neal Walsh, Rick Barton,
Amanda Boyden, Joseph Boyden, Randy Bates, Kay Murphy, Joanna
Leake, Richard Goodman, Zachary Lazar, Jami Attenberg, Wells Tower,
Rodger Kamenetz, Moira Crone, Alexander Chee, Roxane Gay, Laila
Lalami, Kiese Laymon, ZZ Packer, Rachel Kushner, Charles Blackstone,
David Mura, Nicole Bartlett, Rosemary James, Joseph DeSalvo, Melissa
Remark, Cate Root, Chris Lawson, Willemijn Lamp, Joris Lindhout,
Maaike Gouwenberg, Loraine Despres, T. Geronimo Johnson, Naomi
Jackson, Sarah Broom, Garnette Cadogan, Tom Piazza, Robert McKee, Jim
Randels, Kurtis Clements, Danielle Pellegrin, jewel bush, Mary Jane Ryals,
and Ms. Pauline of the long-defunct Bookworm Comics in New Orleans
East, who encouraged all her young patrons to read as much as possible and
go to college.

Thanks to Read My World, Deltaworkers, VONA, and the Middlebury
Bread Loaf Writers’ Conference for institutional support.

To my family, who gave me a reason to tell stories: the Ruffins; my
brother, James, and the Alexanders; Ms. Claudia, Ernest M. Washington,
Jr., and the Washingtons; Auntie Edie and the Brandons; and the Jourdan
family.
OceanofPDF.com



About the Author

MAURICE CARLOS RUFFIN has been a recipient of an Iowa Review
Award in fiction and a winner of the William Faulkner–William
Wisdom Creative Writing Competition for Novel-in-Progress. His
work has appeared in Virginia Quarterly Review, AGNI, The Kenyon
Review, The Massachusetts Review, and Unfathomable City: A New
Orleans Atlas. A native of New Orleans, Ruffin is a graduate of the
University of New Orleans Creative Writing Workshop and a member
of the Peauxdunque Writers Alliance.

loweramericanson.com
Twitter: @MauriceRuffin

Facebook.com/​mauricecarlosruffin
OceanofPDF.com



What’s next on

your reading list?

Discover your next

great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.

OceanofPDF.com